The Commentaries of Messire Blaize de Montluc (Blaise de Monluc (Charles Cotton, trans.), 1592)
==========================================================
Monluc's Commentaires (1592) - the soldier's memoir of Henri II's wars; Henry IV called it 'the soldier's breviary.' Charles Cotton's 1674 English translation (1688 printing).

The Epiſtle Dedicatory.

others, as well as excuſe me to your ſelf: and in

v

truth ( my Lord) 1 am ſo mach your own, that you +
may juftifrably enough be a little partial in my fa- |

VOAr. | PR
My Lord, it may perhaps be expetedby thoſe

Who know your Lordſhip for the noble perſon you are,

that 1 ſhould here ſalnte you With a finer Epiitle

!
J

»
*;
#
4%
,

than peradventnre I can Write, or at leaft than this

7s either likely, or in truth intended to be: not that I +

world not. preſent you with the beſt I have, but know-

ing your Lordſhips averſion to ſuch impertinencies

ſhould not only willfully offend you, but moreover flep
ont of my own deſwn, which is very clear from the
vanity of thinking to advance your Honor or NC ame
by any teſtimony of mine, and only intended With all
ſubmif$10n to declare my ſelf,

MY LORD,
' Your Lordſhips moſt humble
L and moſt obedient Servant,
CHARLEs COTTON,

THE

as men ſometimes fluff their Dedications withall, T

THE -
French Printer
NOBLESS

GC ASUUMNTY:

GENTLEMEN,

i1S We ſee certain Countries yield particular fraits in
SER/ANEC || great abundance, which are elſewhere rarely to be

SEMEN REP! found; ſo it alſo ſeems that your Galcony does

Bl ordinarily produce an infinite number of great
| and valiant Captains., as a fruit that is natural
and peculiar to that (limate, and that compara-
| tively the other Provinces are in a manner bar-
ren. *Tis to ber Womb that the World ſtands oblig'd for thoſe noble
and illuſtrious Princes of the Honſe of Foix , Albret, Armagnac,
| Cominge,Candalle, and Captaux de Buch. *Tis to ber that we ſtand
| indebted for Pothon, and la Hire, two bappy Pillars, and fingular
Ornaments of the Arms of France. *Tis ſhe who in our dayes has ac-
quainted the remoteſt Nations with the names of de Termes , de
Bellegarde, de la Vallette, d' Auſlun, de Gondrin, Terride, Rome- |
' gas, Coflains, Gohas, Tilladet, Sarlabous, and divers other brave
Gentlemen of the pure and true Soil of Gaſcony, without mextioning
thoſe at this day living, who generouſly enflam'd with the Trophies
and Atchievments of their brave Predeceſſors, are emulons of their glo-
ry, and pt fair for an equal ſhare of renown. *Tis your Gaſcony
(Gentlemen) that is the Magazine of Soldiers, the Nurſery of Arms,
the Flower and Choice of the moſt warlike Nobleſs, of th: whole Barth,
and the Mother of ſo many renowned Leaders, as may diſpute the pre-
cedency of valour with the moſt celebrated Captains of the Greeks and
| Romans that ever were. =

a JN : A
Ma | 7
- /
| /
Tj F/ —<
of | "dy \ W
od
| nes

Een ES”
EV 41 "YIOZ Fa But

*
7

The French Printer to the Nobleſs of Gaſcony.

HMareſchal of France. That Preropative of Honor cannot be diſpu-
ted with him, no more than the gifts Heaven was pleaſed to conferre
upon bim of a prompt and marvelous yivacity of underſtanding , ' of a
preſent, and nevertheleſs a very reſerved prudence, Which he diſcover'd
upon the moſt ſudden and ſurprizing occaſions in the management of af-

fairs, of an admirable memory, and ſo rich, as thelike is rarely to be

found, of a great fadility of ſpeech, ſtrong, and bold, and full of incite-
ments of honor in the ardours of Battel, and in affairs of State
of a grave and temperate eloquence, heightned and illuſtrated with Pro-
poſitions, Reaſons, and Arguments, and all accompanied With ſo clear
and lively a judgment , that although he was deſtitute of Letters , the
beauty of his natural parts notwithſtanding darkned the ſplendor of
thoſe, Who to a long experience in affairs, bad joyn'd a perfe&t and ex-
aft knowledg of the profoundeſt Arts and MySteries, both of books and
men.

The greateſt part of you who knew him, and have often fought un-
der his Enſien, ſtand in need of no other teſtimony than your own knows
ledo : but the younger ſort, who never bad the good fortune to ſee this
great man , beſides what they may have gather d by report, will per-
feftly know and anderſtand him by his own ( ommentaries, the aftions
Þhereof you have ſeen him perform when living, and Which he diGated
when fick, and languiſhing of that great Harquebuze ſhot which ſhat-
ter'd his face at the Siege of Rabaſteins, where for a farewel to Arms
be ſerv'd his Prince in the quality of Pioneer, Soldier, Captain, and
General at once, after which from his Bed to his Grave this generous
ſoul could never find any reſt, which he was wont to ſay was bis capital
Enemy, and gave him occaſion towards his end to command this Diſtick
to be engrav'd upon his Tomb.

Cy deſlous repoſent les Os
De MonTLuc, qui neuſt onc repos.

Here with repoſe Montluc lies bleſt,
Who living never could find reſt.

Seeing then , that aſsiſted by your valours, be has ſo fortanately per-
form'd ſo many glorious feats of Arms ;, I conceiv'd it but reaſonable
that this Dedication ſhould addreſs it ſelf to you, that you might enjoy
the fruits, and bave the pleaſure of reading thoſe ations repeated in
his Writings, and of ſeeing the names of your noble Anceſtors recorded

by,
A
Ry
f. ”
* $-
x I
6. ht.
Y

But of all thoſe who (deſcended from your noble Families) have as
dorn'd the praftice of Arms, no one for Proweſs, Experience , or Re-
ſolution did ever excel this invincible Cavalier Blaize..de Montluc,

to

———— ee ty AA

The TRANSLATORs

p RF mA _

To THE

a EA DE

& Man that has had no better luck in Printing

JV

Books than I, and receiv'd from the world fo
little thanks for his labour, ſhould, one would
PN warning, and in ſome moderate time have ole
ven over (cribling . but notwithſtanding theſe
diſencouragements, I have hitherto, and do yet continue incor-
rigible, as, whoever will take the pains to read them, will ſee
by the following Commentaries : and ſeeing I acknowledg this
to be a fault, and that every fault requires ſome excuſe, I think
fic to give the Reader ſome account why I ftill perfift ſo obſtj-
nate to peſter the world with my writings.

It is notthen out of any ill natur'd defire I have to be trouble-
ſome, or any great ambition | have to be laught at, bur beeing,
by a perpetual confinement to the ſolitude of my own Houle,
put eternally upon reading, that reading, when I meet with any
thing that pleaſes my own fancy , inſpires me with a deſire to
communicate ſuch things as I conceive are worth knowing, and
are out of the common Road of ordinary Readers, to their ob-
ſervation, and to dedicate thoſe hours which I my ſelf have
ſpent with ſome delight in ſuch Tranſlations, to their vacancy
and diver{1on.

This is the true and only reaſon why I have, and ſome-
times do ſpend ſo much time about ſuch things as thele, and ir
ought the leſs to offend the generality of men, becauſe, though I
only pretend by it to oblige but a few perſons, and thoſe none
of the moſt conſiderable ; yet it can be prejudicial ro none, the
Author only excepted , and he can ſuffer by it, with none nei-
ther bur ſuch as will not take the painsto read him in his own
Language : for ſuch as cannot do it ought to reft ſatisfied, and
A 2 provided

& Fx7

—_ 1 OSD De oe oo—__

Py Gn

\EPoorrans man 1

The Tranſlator's Preface to the Reader.

provided the Subje&t be without reproach, are better with an ill 7

Tranſlation than none at all.

Such a one in plain truth is this ; not that 1 am willing to -

confels I have much miſſed the ſenſe of the Author , but though
elepanc enough for thoſe times, *tis a knotty piece 1n it ſelf, and
though wrapr up in very good ſenſe, yet writ by the rough
hand of a Soldier, and a rough one, and ſtuft up with old muſty
Proverbs (the mode of wit it ſeerns at that time) and ſuch as
we have not ſometimes Proverbs of our own to render them by,
and to Engliſh a Proverb without a Proverb, is to make thar
unpleaſant, and almoſt unintelligible in one Language , that is
queint and elegant in another, to repair which I have in ſome
places been necefſitated almoſt to create Proverbs, or atleaſt to
render his after a Proverbial way, to make them a little like the
Original.

But I could wiſh this was the worſt fault the Reader will
find in the Book; I am atraid it is not, and know alfo very
well there are ſome others, for which no man living could pro«
vide aremedy (unleſs upon. the Author's heads he would have
made a Hiſtory of his own) to wit, intolerable digreſſions, and
thoſe intolerably long, with ſo many , and ſo long-winded A-
paretithelics, included within tedious periods, as very much take
from the grace of his Style (of it ſelf a rude one) and ftrangely
perplex the Reader, for which whether I ſhould accuſe Monſient
de Montluc's want of Art ( which he himſelf confeſſes ) or the
luxuriency of his fancy (which often hurries him from his ſub-
je) lam yet to ſcek. FE,

I muſt alſo add, That though this Treatice have generally a
very good reputation in the world, yetthere are ſome, who are
men of yery great judgment , and who have no inclination to
diſcountenance eicher good writings, or good men , that decry
this Book for one of the vaineſt pieces that ever was writ, and
indeed they have reaſon on their fide, there being a continued
thread of vanity and oftentation throughout the whole work,
ou par tout 0n trouvera les Gaſconades a bon marche« But the Author
being a Gaſcon (to which Nation bragging is as natural, as bra-
very) and the things he relates of himſelf being undeniably true,
I conceive he ought to be excuſ'd, and the rather, becaulc it is
for the moſt part in vindication of himſelf from the ill offices
and ſanders of thoſe little Monſieurs of the Court, of whom he
ſo often complains, and gives himſelf the beſt deſcription : a
ſort of vermin, that in truth have evermore infinuated them-
{elves into all Courts of Princes, eſpecially that of France, where

the

#4. 4
#31. Sas
- >! IS

Mn.

_—

-

The Tranſlator's Preface to the Reader.

* the wotthieſt men in all Ages haye ever been ſubje& to the clan-
| deftine malice, and private calumny of ſuch as durſt not ſo much
| as bave lookt on, to have beheld the brave ations perform'd by
' thoſe they were not afraidto traduce, and beſpatter at the diſtance
of an hundred leagues, and under the prote&ion of their Ma-
| ſter's preſence and fayour, 2 Sn TT
After all theſe objeCtiotis which I have here ſet down, as well
to prevent others, as to excuſe my ſelf; 1 am now to tell you,
chit had I not for all this thought this Book a very good
ont, I ſhould have found my felt ſomething elſe todo; and I
may venture to declare I think it fo, ſince it has had fo great a
reputation, with almoſt all ſorts of men, chat the truth of it in
no one particular {that lever heard of ) was ever diſputed by any ;
and that it has been allowed by all co be the beſt Soldiers Book,
chatis, the beſt Book for the inſftrution of a Soldier that ever
was writ. Never certainly were Enterprizes delign'd with more
judgment and reſolution, nor ever carried on with greater bra-
very and condu&t than all his were; beſides the labour, hazard,
and diligence, with which they were ever executed, were ſuch as
perhaps had never been praCtis'd before;nor,for ought Lever heard
or read, ever imitated by any Frenchman fince : from whence I
am apt to conclude that either Monheur de Montluc was the great-
eſt Soldier of a Subje& that ever was in France , or that the Hi-
ſorians of that Kingdom have not been ſo juſt to thereſt, as he
has been to bimlſelt.
| cannot deny but that to an invincible ſpirit, and an inde-
fatigable conſtancy in ſuffering all the hardſhips of war, the fierce-
neſs of his nature, prompt, and perfe&tly Gaſcon, or elſe his zeal
to Religion, and the lervice of his Prince , or both, made him
ſometimes do things which ſeem'd bloody and cruel; bur the
necefiity of the time, and the growing faRion of the Hugon ots,
would have it ſo, neither doll think (I know not how diſcreet
Ll am 1n declaring ſo much) that Sacriledge and Rebellion can
be too roughly handled , and ſeverity muſt needs appear a virtue,
where clemency would evidently have been a vice. As to the
reſt, the Reader will find his Harangues well fitted to the ſeveral
occaſions, his Deliberations prudent, and well grounded, his In-
{tru&ions ſound, his Arguments rational, his Deſcriptions plain
and intelligible, and the whole well enough couch, from a hand
that was better acquainted with a Sword than a Pen, and by a
man whoſe deſign, as well as profeſſion, was rather to do
0p worthy to be writtet, than to write things worthy to be
read,

CO OEnrenamome,

To

The Tranſlator's Preface to the Reader.

—

To conclude, I ſhall beg of the Reader in the behalf of the
brave Author, to conſider him a poor Gentleman, bred up to
Arms, by which alone he puſht on his fortune to the higheſt
degree of honor, without any addition of Letters, or other ad-
vantages of education , the ordinary foundations of greatneſs,
than what he forg'd out of his own courage, and form'd out
of his own natural parts, which were notwithſtanding ſuch as

 approv'd him a Caprain of extraordinary valour and condu&,

and made him moreover allow'd to be a manof wir, Characters
which all the Hiſtorians do generally allow him, and particu-
larly Davila, though he only here and there glances upon his
name, For my ſelf, | have nothing to ſay, but this, that although
this be no elegant, it is nevertheleſs (if I miftake not) an uſeful
piece ; and though we have loſt the uſe of Bows and Targets,
yet deſign and diligence will be in faſhion, ſo long as the practice
of Arms ſhall endure. 1 expole my ſhare of ic then to every
ones mercy, and good nature; ſuch as will buy the Book, will
keep me in countenance; *tis no matter whether they take the
pains to read it or no, for by that means my Booklſzller's bu-
fineſs will be done, and as to the reſt I ſhall not be much diſap-
pointed, my deſign being in plain truth (though I ſhould be
glad, I confeſs, and proud it might take) chiefly to paſs away
my own time, and to pleale my felt.

THE

7x47
"$8

:

—__

OO OG 0, OT TIER Or Ry IE

————

The French Printer to the Nobleſs of Gaſcony,

_—
OO EE

to poſterity in a (hronicle of Honor. And, if I miſtake not, there
will hardly be found a Hiſtory more repleat with variety, more grate-
ful to the Reader, and more rich m mſtrufions for the conjuft and
direfion both of Peace and War than this, where (I fancy at leaſt )
the difference betwixt a Hiſtory compil d by a ſedentary man, bred up
tenderly and delicately in the duſt of old Studies and old Books, and
one Writ by an old ( aptain, and a Soldier bronght up in the duſt and
ſmoak of Armies and Battels will eafuly be diſcern d.

1 knw not what ancient Hiſtories have the vertue in a little ſpace
to render thoſe who read them with the greateſt diligence and obſeryas
tion very Wiſe and circumſpett Leaders : but if any ſuch therebe, this,
above all others, will eaſily obtein the precedence, and enform you ( ge-
nerous Nobleſs ) of all the good and evil events that attend the fortune,
or misfortune, the valour or the cowardize, the prudence or inconfide-
ration of him who is (hief or General of an Army, or who is Prince
or Sovereign of a mighty Kingdom, Non have bere wherewith to de-
light your fancy, to diſcretion your valour, to martialize your wiſdom,
and to form the true honor of a School of War. The Commentaries of
this ſecond Ceſar will make you Dofors in Military Diſcipline , and
will Jerve you for Model, Mirror, and Exemple, they have ns fifti-
tieusluftre, no affeBted artifice, no foreign ornament of borrowed beau-
ty. *Tis nothing bat fimple Truth that is nakedly preſented before

Jon.

Theſe are the conceptions of a ſtrong, ſound, and healthful digeſtion,
that relliſh of their original and native ſoil, bold, and vigarous concep -
tions, reteining yet the breath, vigour, and fierceneſs of the Author.
This is he, who baving the firſt arriv'd to the higheſt ſtep of all the
degrees and dignities of war , has highly promoted the honor of wour
Country both by his Sword and his Pen, and to ſuch a degree, that
the name of the Montluc's ſhall gloriouſly live in the memory of a long
and ſucceſsful poſterity, manifeſting without envy to ſucceeding Ages,
that your Captain and Hiſtorian, as he knew how prudently to enter-
prize, and bravely to execute What be had deſign d, Was no leſs good at
his Pen, but equally eminent in that faculty , to record with truth
and judgment, what he had afted before with che greateſt courage and
condutt,

b On

bt
vt $53

hed +

T 'S. NE RO
CE RO = SEISEeE IP
IDS AO «Ab I
-

it 4 ARE We IE WE OWE I TT IN Ce A Ver SR TE
5 4 Wen i S aa CHD. "a, CS es; *

FEISS BE

fy 2
NN

#74

Oe SINN. 4 =_
I

MELO ID a apron es
d ot RET Kata - »

>

hp
% > 202 RE IEIooe

ata. Gans

— — — — —
E——_ —_— — ——— —_—_  ———

On the brave eMareſchal de Montluc, and þi

s Commentaries Writ by his on hand.

ONTLUC, how far I am unfir
To praiſe thy valour, or thy wit,
Or give my ſuffrage to thy fame,
Who have my ſelf ſo little name,
And can ſoill thy worth expreſs,
I bluſhing modeſtly confeſs,
Yet when read their better lines,
Who to commend thy brave deſigns,
Their Panegyricks have ſet forth,
And do conlider thy great worth ; |
Though what they write may be more high,
They yet fall ſhort as well as I,

W hoſe is that Pen ſo well can write
As thou couldſt both command, and fight >
Or whilſt thou fought who durſt look on,
To makea true deſcription ?
None but thy ſelf had heart to view
Thoſe Ads thou hadſt the heart to do,
Thy (elf muſt thy own deeds commend,
By thy own hand they muſt be pen'd,
W hich skill'd alike in Pen and Sword,
At once muſt a&, and muſt record,

Thus Ceſar in his Tent at night,
The Actions of the day did write,
And viewing what lvad done before,
Emulous of himſelf, yet more,
And greater things perform'd, until
His arm had overdone his will,
So as to make him almoſt fit
To doubt the truth of what he writ,
Yet what he did, and writ, though more,
Than «re was done, or writ before ;
Montluc by thee, and thee alone,
Are parallel'd, if not outdone,
And France in Ages yet to come,
Shall ſhew as great a man as Rome,

Hadfſt thou been living, and a man,
When that great Ceſar overran
The antient Gals, though in a time,
W hen Soldiery was in its prime
When the whole world in plumes were curl'd,
And he the Soldier of the world,

His conqu'ring Legions doubtleſs had

. By thy as conqu'ring arms been ſtayd :

O

And his proud Eagle that did ſoar
To dare the trembling world before,

b 2. W hoſe

+
%
* £
05 <4 L
+
2 BR
pe FF
TR.
: Ly
»þ.
3D
_. A *
WE”:
oP
A FI
4
"4.
MT; ey -

W hoſe Quarry Crowns and Kingdoms were,
Had met another Eagle here,
As much as ſhe diſdain'd the Lure,
Could fly as high, and ſtoop as ſure.
Then to diſpute the worlds Command
You two had fought it hand to hand,
And there the Aquitanick Gaul
Maintain'd one glorious day for all.
But for one Age 't had been roo much
T'have had two Leaders, and two ſuch;
Two for one world are ſure enow,
And thole at diſtant Ages too.
If to a Macedonian Boy
One world too little ſeem'd: Venjoy ;
One world for certain could not brook
Art once a C#ſar, and Montluc,
But muſt give time for either's birth,
Nature had {uffer'd elſe, and th' Earth
T hat truckled under each alone,
Under them both had ſunk and gone.
Yet though their noble Names, alike
With wonder, and with terror ſtrike ;
Ceſar's, though greater in Command,
Muſt give cMontluc's the better hand;
Who though a younger Son of Fame, ;
A greater has, and better Name, |
With equal courage, but worſe cauſe,
That trampled on his Country's Laws,
And like a bold, but treacherous friend,
Enflaved thoſe he ſhould defend:
W hilſt this by no ambition {way'd
But what the love of glory made,
With equal bravery, and more true
Maintain'd the right that overthrew.
His Vid'ries as th' encreaſt, his power
Laid thoſe for whom he fought ſtill lower;
Abroad with their victorious Bands,
He conquer'd Provinces and Lands,
W hilſt the world's conqu'ring Princeſs Rome
Was her own Servants flave at home.
Thy courage brave Montluc we find
To be of a more generous kind,
Thy ſpirit, loyal, as't was brave,
W as evermore employ'd to ſave,
Or to enlarge thy Country's bounds,
Thine were the (wear, the blood, the wounds,
The toy], the danger, and the pain;
Burt hers, and only. hers the gain.
His wars were to oppreſs and grieve,
Thine todefend, or to relieve :
Yet each to glory had pretence,
Though ſuch as ſhew'd the difference,

By their advantages, and harms
*Twixt Infidel and Chriſtian Arms,
France, Piedmont, Tuſcany, and Rome,
Have each a Trophy for thy Tomb :
Sienna too, that nature ſtrain'd,
Only to honor thy command,
Proud of thy name will be content,
Ic ſelf to be thy monument :
But thine own Gazienne will den
Thoſe noble Relicks elſewhere lye :
But there enſhrin'd now thou art dead,
W here / to its glory) thou wert bred,
O fruitful Gaſcony! whoſe fields
Produce what ever Nature yields,
Fertile in valour as in fruit,
And more than fruitful in repute,
How do I honor thy great Name,
For all thoſe glorious Sons of Fame,
W hich from thy fair womb taking birth,
Have overſpread the ſpacious Earth.
Yer ſtands the world oblig'd for none,
Nor all thy Heroes more than one;
One brave Mertluc had crown'd thee Queen,
Though all the reſt had never been,
Paſt times admir'd this General,
The preſent do, and future ſhall ;
Nay whilſt their ſhall be men to read
The glorious ations of the dead,
Thy Book in Ages yet unborn
Themobleſt Archives ſhall adorn,
And with his Annals equal be.
Who fought, and writ the beſt but thee.

C harles Cotton.

— = 7 A — —_— _w__—— HWcr——
Wwe F S > te T

On the Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize
Montluc,

To the Worthy Tranſlator,

T 7 E that would aptly write of Warlike Men,
ou mike his Ink of bloud, a Sword his Pen -

At leaſt he muſt Their Memories abuſe

W ho writes with leſs than cMaro's mighty Muſe ;
All (Sir) that I could ſay on this great Theme
(The brave Montlhuc) would leſſen his eſteem,
Whoſe Laurels too much native Verdure have,
To need the praiſes vulgar Chaplets crave :

1

W

d | |
Q q

A

His

——_— - — Thats we A&M ated... IG
eee en as WES oo A etl Io

. _ --- w- SL -
N_ - 9 mn regen og yr
- ad en Rogen er we —_— 7

His own bold hand, what it durſt write, durſt do,
Grappled with Enemies, and Oblivion too z
Hew'd its own Monument, and grav'd thereon
It's deep and durable Inſcription,

To you (Sir) to whom the valiant Author owes
His ſecond Life and Conqueſt ore his Foes,
Ill natur'd Foes, Time and Detradction ,

W hat 1s a Strangers Contribution !

Who has not ſucha ſhare of Vanit

"To dream that one, who with ſuch Induſtr
Obliges all the world, can beoblig'd by me,

T homas Flatman.

——— TT IT TIT TOTO mw _ XY, TR IRR

On the (,ommentaries of Montluc; tranſlated.

Never yet the French Tongue underſtood,
[| W hich may (what e're their Faſhions are) be good;

Yer ſuch as I, by your induſtrious hand,

Come now them and their State to underſtand.
This, and your well-tranſlated Eſpernon , |
Make thote brave Hiſtories of Frazce our own.

Sir, theſe are noble Works, and ſuch as do

Name you Tranſlator, and the Author too.

You are our Author, and out thanks to you

(As yours to their Hiſtorians) are due.

Nay ev'n the French themſelves muſt thank you too:
For we (and we are the major part) who know
Nothing of them, but what is noiſe and ſhew,

Hard names for damn'd courſe Stuffs, ſtinking Meat,
Adulterate Wine, ſtrange Habits, Legs and Faces,
Might juſtly look on Fraxce, (not to ſpeak worſe)

To be of theſe the Mother, or the Nurſe.

Burt us you undeceive, and do them right,

By theſe exact Tranſlations which you write,

And we whounderſtand no French, now find

You are both juſt ro them, and to us kind.

R. N(evcoonrt,

ERRAT 4,

4

Fo
FLY
A
©
FT
Us
&
s
&.
1
Wn
7
'S
"%

ERRAT A.

I. 7, x. not for. p. 8.1. 32.7. andthe, p.11. 1.51.1, in, in, p. 12. |. penult, r, a fugitive,
p. 15.1. 47.7. they. p.19« 1.4.7. dine aboard. P. 22. 1.6, r. not deign. 'P+ 34, 1. 17, r, by
burning. p. 28. 1. 43. r. de MontpeRdt. P- 29. I, 22, r,at that time. 1, 38. r. de Tende. p. 31.1. 25,r.
de Montpexat. P- 32. 1. 29, I. de F onterailles. P. 39. le 23. r. and me to Savillan, p. 41. 1. 24,
r. Monfeur d' Auſſun. 1. 59. r, knew the. p. 42, 1.14. I. could auoid, p. 45. 1.16. r, Reconjs p. 51.
1. 41.r. enough ro doto. p. 54. 1. 23.7. if they were. p. 56. I. 48. r, weary. P« 57. 1. 11,r, fought, Ib
1, 14. r. fault, p- 59.1. 38. r, they advance, p. 61s I. 31. for © Auſſun, r. d Anguien. p. 63. 1.10, for
for now r. new. Þ. 65. 1. 49. r. the Mareſchal, p. 66,1, 11. r. the feaſt. p. 67. 1. 46.7. when you aroſe.
P. £881, 10; 7x, took notice. P. $5.1. 57.Y. We are. P. 92. ]. 39.'Tr: if they P. £26. |, 39, re T0 ſcoure.
P. 130. 1.29, F. and that Captain St. Anban, P. 133, L239-T, which was d. P. 143: I. 35. r. went 4-
bout to. p. 150.1. 27. r. in their, p. 159. 1. 12.r, inconfiderable, p. 161,1, 20. r. hateful word. p. 173.
1.59. and 60, r. a Trooper, p. 174. 1.32. r,the plain. p. 175. 1.40. aud 41.r. had moor'd them in the
Ditch. p. 176.1. 15. r. and that would make. p. 177. 1, 19. r. ſtop ſhort. p. 184.1. 16. r, no body elſe,
Ps 193.1. 6. r. Cremona. p. 197.1. 36. r. du Tillest, p. 209, 1, 48. r, Quails. P. 213. I, 56. dele all.
P. 232. 1.5. I, Commands. p. 233. 1-2. I. t0, p. 242. 1. 25, r. deliver'd to him. p. 246, 1.9.r.
Coral. p. 281. 1. 49. r. Ia Maſquere. pe 289.1, 54. r, Cabinet, 1. 58. r.the Children. p. 290.1. 45. r,
yepulſt. p. 312. 1. 40, Te beſt Curtall. p. 313. 1. 28. dele that. p. 314. \. ulr. r. Chaloſſe, p. 320.1, 3,
r. ſuffering him. 1. 34. r, t0 the friendſhip. Þ. 331.1, 23,r. There, p. 322, |. 2, Comma after Field. 1. 29.
r. bid nold. p. 323-1. 19.r-Uifle p. 325.1, 40, r. hey and p. 340.1. 48. r. we fhould. p. 344. 1. 9. r.
ve the wife. P. 345.1. 26, r. and would never. p. 348. 1.13.r.Clergy would I. 32. r, of which. p.35 5.
1.47. r. and bad they. 1.49.7. they bad had. p-357.1.45. r. one near unto Tholouze. p.358. L12,r, the beſi
friends 1 bad. p.359 1.25. r. He has indeed. p.363. 1-3. r. the Coins were broken. P-364. 1.53.7, tothe
Hole of the wall. p. 365+ I. 35. 7. and that in caſe T ſhould. p. 376. 1. 15.r. Tam ſure mine never 41d.
p. 382, 1.32. r. ſubjcs, 1, 53. I. your blood. p.389. 1.13. r. all other employnents. P-391.), 49. r, 2:
Lord. p.395+ 1. 44, r. than to Bourdeaux. P.403. 1.44, r, It was.

P Ape r, line 20. r, to juſtifie. p. 2.1. 24, r. and yet. p. 41, 50. r. the charge and howr. p. 5.

gn ITED TN TE ITT RIOT _='

_— ——— —  — RC OMEN bo oo ire

no. Y —_ —_
— «

A Catalogue of ſome Books Printed for Henry
* Brome, ſince the dreadful Fire of London.

HE Hiſtory of the Life of the Duke Eſpernon, the great Fa-
pourite of France; wherein the Hiſtory of France is conti-
nued from 1598, Where D' Avila leaves of, down toour times,

1642 in fol, price 16s. |

Horace, a French Tragedy Engliſhed, with a Song at the end of

every At: price 1 5.

Scarronides or Virgil Traveſty, a Mock-Poem on the firſt and

fourth Book of Virgil, in Engliſh Burleſque : price 1 s. 6d. all three

by Charles Cotton Eſq;

Elvira, a Comedy, or The worſt not alwaies trae : by the Earl of
Briſtol : price 1 s.

Mr. Simpſon's Diviſion Viol , in fol. prices s.

His Conmpendium of Pratical Muſuk, Oftavo : price bound 2. s.

A Treatiſe wherein is demonſtrated , that the Church and State of
England are in equal danger with the Trade, in quarto : price 1 s, 6d.
By Roger Cook E{q,

Eraſmus Cofloquies in Engliſh,

The Vindication of the Clergy.

The Pair one of Tuis , or the Generous Miſtreſs, a new piece of
Gallantry.

Elkons 4rt Military, in folio.

Brome's Songs and Poems, in oftayo : price 3 s.

His Tranſlation of Horace, with ether worthy perſons : price & s.

Sir Kenelm Digby's two excellent Books of Receipts . one of Phy-
fick and Chirurgery : the other of Cookery and Drinks, with other Cu-
riofities * price 3 $. 6d,

The Exa&t Conſtable : price 8 d. uſeful for all Gentlemen.

Leybourtf® Arithmetical Recreations : price 1.

Toleration diſcuſſed : price 2 s. 6d. by Mr. VEſtrange

Centum Fabulz : price 1 s. nſeful for Schools.

The Lord Coke's Inſtitutes, in four parts.

Sir James Dyar's Reports, in fol, price 18s.

Dr. Heylin on the Creed, in fol. price 15s.

Dr. Gliflon de Fita Nature.

Dr, Skinner's Lexicon, in fol.

THE

Sb 2

PI me RARE I 0; eto —_ 3 SS
Ia LO Os; rn SES. $2 %
NT. FETs a Capi Non er ew SS

Lv
Re —— —— — —  _ uo —_—— * AO OO OO} CCC ——- Mott her Et ET

THE

COMMENTARIES

FMeſoire Blaixe de Montluc ,
MazESCHAL of

FRANCE.

The Firſt Book.

WD Eing at the Age of threeſcore and httecn retir'd home to my own
SQ \\ Houſe, there to ſeek ſome little Repole after the infinite Pains
os 2nd Labours I had undergone, during the ſpace of above hity
LAY” years, that I bore Arms tor the (ſeveral Kings my Maſters, in
which Servicel paſt all the Degrees and through all the Orders
of Soldier , Entign, Lieutenant , Captain, Camp-Maſter, Go-
vernour of Places, his Majclties Lieutenant in the Provinces of
Tuſcany and Guienne, and Mareſchal of France: finding my
{:]t maimed in almoſt all my Limbs, with Harquebuz-Shots,
Cuts and Thruſits with Pikes and Swords, and by that means rendred almoſt uſeleſs
and good for nothing, without ſtrength or hope ever to be cured of that great Har-
quebuz-Shot in my Face, and after having relign'd my Government of Gene into his
Majcſties hands : 1 thought fit to employ the Remainder of my Life in a Deſcription
of the ſeveral Combats, wherein I have been perſonally engag'd in the ſpace of two
and fifty years, that T had the Honour to command : affuring, my ſelf, that the Ca-
Ptains whoſhall take the pains to read my Lite, will therein. meet with Paſſages, that
may be uſcful to them in the like Occaſions, and of which ſome Advantage may be
made to the acquiring of Honour and Renown. Andalthough I have in the ſeveral En-
gagements I have undertaken(and (ome of them perhaps without great Reaſon on my fide
juſtifie my Proceedings) been excceding]y fortunate, and ſucceſsful beyond all humane
Aim; I would not yet any one ſhould conceive that I attribute the Succeſs or the
Glory thereof to any other, than to God alone 3 and indeed whoever ſhall conſider the
Dangers and Difficulties I have gone through and overcome , cannot but therein ac-
knowledge his: Almighty and immediate Arm. Neither have I ever faiPd to implore
his Aſſiſtance in all my Undertakings, and that with great Confidence in his Grace and
Mercy, and Aſſurance of it; wherein his Divine Majeſty has been pleaſed fo far to be
gratiouſly aſſiſting to me, that I have never been defeated nor ſurpriz'd in any Exploit
of War, where I have been m command 3 but on the contrary have ever carried away
Victory and Honour. And it is very neceſſary and hit, that all we who bear Arms, ſhould
ever conſider and always confels, that we, of our ſelves, ca do nothing without his
Divine Bounty, which inſpires us with Courage. and fupplies us with Strength to
attempt and execute thoſe great and hazardous Enterpriſes which pretent themſelves to
our Undertaking, '

And becauſe lome of thoſe who ſhall read theſe Commentaries (for it will be very
hard to pleafe all, though ſome will ſet a juſt value upon my Book) may perhaps think
it range, and accuſe me of Vain-Glory tor writing my own Actions and fay, that
I ought in Modeſty to have transferred that Work to another Hand ; I ſhall tell fuch
once for all, that in writing the Truth, and attributing to God the Glory thereof, there

will

—_—

2 The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book l.

—_— — _— + —_— OT OE EIT

will be no harm done: Neither ( belides thar the Teſtimonies of feveral Men of
Honour yet living will juſtihe the Truth ot what I ſhall deliver) can any one IVE a
better Account of the Detigns, Enterprizes, and Exccutions, and the Actions ha Pen= «
ing thereupon, than my (elf, who was an Eye-witncls, and an Actor in them all ;
and who alſo deſign not herein to deprive any one of his due and particular Honour.
Ceſar. The greateſt Captain that ever liv'd was Ceſar, and he has led me the way, havin
himſelf writ his own Commentaries, and being caretul to record by Night the Actions
he perform'd by Day. I would theretore by his Exemple contrive mine, how rude
and impoliſht ſoever (as coming from the hand of a Soldicr, and moreover 2 Ga con,
who has ever been more {olicitous to do, than to write or to {peak well) Wherein ſhall
be comprehended all the Exploits of War, in which 1 have either been perſonally chga-
ged, or that have bren performed by my Direction 3 and thoſe beginning from my
greener years, when I firſt came into the World, to tignific to ſuch as I ſhall leave be- F
hind me, how reſtle(s I (who am at this day the oldeſt Captain in France) have ever been F
in the Search and Acquiſition of Honour, in performing Services tor the Kings my Z
Maſters, which was my ole and only end, cver flying all the Pleaſures and Delights, f.
which uſually divert young men whom God has endowed with any commendable Qua- Y
lities, and who are upon the point of their Advancement, trom the Paths of true Virtue
and undiſputed Greatneſs. A Book not intended however tor the Learned Men of the
World, they have Hiſtorians'enough of their own, but for a Soldier, and wherein a
Captain, and perhapsa Lieutenant of a Province may hnd ſomething that may be worth
his Obſervation. At the leaſt I can afhrm that I have written the Truth; having my
| Memory as good and entire at this inſtant as ever, and being as perict in the Names
both of Men and Places, as if all things had paſt but yeſterday, as yet I never committed
| any thing to Paper, tor I never thought at ſuch an Age as this, to undertake any thing
| of this kind : which whether I have well or ill pertoxmed, I refer my {cl to tuch, as [2
ſhall do me the Honour to read my Book, which is properly an Account of my own F
Lite.

To you therefore (Captains my Companions) it 1s, that this Treatiſe does princi-
pally addreſs itſelf, to whom peradventure it may in ſome meaſure be uſeful. And
you ought to believe that having ſo many years been in the ſame Command wherein
you now are, and having (ſo long diſcharg'd the Office of a Captain of Foot, and
thrice that of Camp Matter and Colonel, I muſt needs have retein'd ſomething of that
Condition, and that in a long Experiencc I have ſcen great Henours confer'd upon
ſome, and great Diſgraces betal others of that Degrec. There have been ſome who
| in my time have been caſhicr'd and degraded their Nobility, others who have loſt their
| Lives upon a Scaffold, others difhonoured and diſmiſt 'to their own Houſes, without
ever having been more regarded either by the King or any other : And on the contrary,
if T have ſeen others who have traiPd a Pike at fix Francs pay, zrrive at great Preterments,

performing things ſo brave, and manifeſting themſclves men of fo great Capacity,
that ſeveral who in their Original have been no better than the Sons of poor labouring
Men, have rais'd themſclves above many of the Nobility by their Prowcls and Virtue.
Of all which having my (elf been an Eyc-Witneſs, I am able to give a preciſe and a |
true Account. And although I my elf am a Gentleman by Birth, yet have I not-
withſtanding been rais'd to that degree of Honour wherein I now ſtand, as leiſurcly, |
lf and as much ſtep by ſtep, as any the pooreſt Soldier who has (erv'd in this Kingdoin |
Hh theſe many years. For being born into the World the Son of a Gentleman, whoſe
i Father had made fale of all his Eſtate, to only eight hundred or a thouſand Livres
| yearly Revenue, andbcing the eldeſt of fix Brothers that we were, 1 thought it prin -
| cipally concern'd me to illuſtrate the Name of Moxzlzc (which is that of our Famil
| as I have alſo done with as much Peri], and as many Hazards of my Life, as Soldier or
14 Captainever did 3 and that without ever having the leaſt Reproach trom thoſe by whom
1 T was commanded ; but on the contrary with as much Favour and Eſteem as ever
| | | any Captain had who bore Arms in the Armies , wherein I had the Honour to ſerve.
= | Inſomuch that whenever there happened any Enterpriſe of Importance, or Danger , the
4 Kings Lieutenants, and Collonels , would as ſcon , or ſooner , put meupon it , as any
| other Captain of the Army 3 of which the cnſuing pages will give you ſufficient Teſti-
| mony-. | |
| Play, Drink, A the time therefore that I was firſt adyanc'd to the Degree of an Enſign , I made
Mt and Avarice it my buſine(s to underſtand the Duty of an Officer, and to learn to be wiſe by the Ex-
pernicious t0 ample of ſuch as committed Overlights, or were otherwiſe negligent in their Command.

» | _ oo Com To which purpoſe I rſt totally wean'd my (elf from Ply, Drink, and Avarice; as
.

knowing

#”
Kh s
$a.
$-
of ot+
DE EP
I
Woe &
aA YN
de #t
Ix 5
Wet
SH
TREAT,
AA
4.3731
Th. 3 4
WE oF;
4 *
CLOGS.
"ed
CS -
pores
SK
bp ets
Ro
w
4+F..
| .
.

4 ado? 4.1 ne os
pk Tr Tort ASE STENT. 4
od Poe 0 AB fe eee lie

hs. aaa 7

Vo ing? io 0 UE ge Tone

TEORee : a as ,
By -#it" SS ; a> & 1
4a EONS SE OSA. $6 Eat Ye; | Vo ae ERS.
= EA LE ay. bore 3d, oo ISA 36370 46.21

—— wwe

—
—— —

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

— cy

—— a

— An——— tt ME 9
_ - —— —
— — _ —— 4 — W—

knowing well, that all Captains of that Complexion, are {0 unfit ever to arrive at any
thing of Great, as to be much more likely to tall into rhe bctore-nam'd Mistortunes.
That Knowledge it was that made me politively refolve againſt all theſe three things,
which Yourh is very prone unto, and which are very prejudicial to the Reputation of
2 Chick, Of theſe Play is of ſuch a Nature, that it tubjc&s a man, neither to do nor
intend any other thing, and that whether he win or loſe 3 tor it you win, you are ever-
morc ſolicitous to tind out new Gamelters, bcing prepoſſeſt with an Opinion, that you
ſhall (fill win more, and continue in that Error until all be Jok. Bcing reduc'd to this
point you run almolt into Deſpair, and mcditate nothing day nor night, but where and
how to get more money to play again, and to try to recover your Lofles by a better
Hand. In which Condition how can you think toacquit your {clt of the Charge the
King has put into your hands, when you ſhall wholly bend your Study, and employ
your wholc time in another thing, and inſtead of contriving how to over-reach your
Enemy by laudable Stratagems ot War, you plot nothing cl{e, but how to rain your
Camrade and Friend by an intamous Cheat at Cards or Vice? This muſt of neceflity
wholly divert you from your Dutyz whereas you ought to be continually amongſt
your Soldiers, and ſo frequent, as if poſſible to know every man by his dittinct Name 3
and that for theſe two Ends, firſt to prevent any Acts of Infolence tn their Quarters, for
which you may expc& and fear a jutt Reproach from the Lieutenant of the Province or
your own immediate Colonel : And in the next place to take care that there happen no
Mutiny amongſt themznothing being more pernicious to a Company,nor of more dange=
rous Conſequence to an Army.,than mutinous Spirits. And how can you potlbly havean
Eye to {uch Diſorders, or give any tolerable Account of the Trult rcpoſed in you, when
your Heart ſhall be wholly bent upon Play 3 that will alarm you a hundred and a hun-
dred times a day, and put you belides your felt. Fly then (my dear Companions)
fly I beſeech you this hateful Vice, which I have often known to be the Ruine of many,
not only in their Fortunesz but which 1s more, and that ought to be dearer, in their
Honour and Reputation.

Now tor what concerns Wine 3 if you be ſubject to debauch, you cannot avoid
falling into as many and as great Inconveniences as he that Plays z for nothing in the
World ſo much ſtupehes the underſtanding of a Man, and that inclincs him ſo much
to ſleep, as Wine. If you drink but little you will conſequently not eat too- much z
for Wine calls upon the Appetite to cat, that you may the longer enjoy the Pleaſure
of Drinking : So that in the end being full of Meat and Drink betore you rife from
Table, it will be neceſfary to go ſleep, and perhaps at ſuch a time when you ought to
be amongſt your Soldicrs and Companions, near your Colonel and Camp-Maſter, to
enquire what News or Orders they have received from the Kings Lieutenant, that you
may know when any Occahion 1s preſented, wherein you may employ your Valour and
Wildom. To this; Exceſs in Wine brings along with it another and extreme Dan-
ger, Which 1s, that a Captain being drunk knows not how himſclf to command, and leſs
how to permit others to do itz but will fall to ſiriking and beating his Soldiers without
all Senſe or Reaſon whereas, if there were a juſt Occation, he ought firſt to chaſtiſe
his Soldjer with Remonſtrances, mixt with ſome tart Menaces and Reproots, giving
him to underſtand, that it he relapſe into the fame Offence, he 1s to expect nothing
but an exemplary Puniſhment. And 1s it not better to chaſtiſe your Soldier with
Words and Threats, than with Baſtinadoes, Cuts and Thruſts, killing him or maim-
ing of his Limbs which Wine will prompt you to do? Neither mult you expect to
be the more tear'd for fuch Uſage of your men, but on the contrary mortally hated by
all your Soldiers. And what rare Exploits can you think to pertorm with men that
hateyou ? Ibelcech you believe me, for I have ſeen the Experience of it, as much
as another of my Age, I have (cen no lets than four Captains die by the hands of their
own Soldiers, who have afſaflnated them behind, for the 11] Uſage they have recay*d
at their hands. They are Mcn as we are, not Beaſts, it we be Gentlemen, they are
Soldiets 3 they have Arms 1n their Hands, which inſpire Mettle into any man's Breſt,
that bears thcm. Wine is apt ro make you unreaſonable and bloody for the leatt Of-
tence, and that without all manner of Diſcretion, tor you are not your {clves. More-
over, neither the Kings Licutcnant, nor your own Colonel, nor Camp-Maſter will
ever put you upon any Enterprize of Honour , that might perhaps procure your
Advancement but will fay, Shall we cntruft au Execution of this importance to ſuch
an one as will be drunk, when hc ought to have his Wits about him to know and dif-
cern what he has to do? He will do nothing but throw away ſo many men, and
by his ill Conduct bring upon us Lofs and Contutton. O the vile Repute that this

B 2 Wing

i

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book I

Wine will brand you withal, when nothing of good ſhall be expected from you ! Hy

theu (my Companions) fly then this Vice, cqually hatctul, and more beaſtly, and ſcan»
dalous, than the former. |

A Captain likewiſe ſhould in no manner be covetous3 for though Wine and Pla
may molt aptly be term*d Companions, yct Avarice is allo one of the Gang that occa-

ions a million of Miſchiets, and brings as great or greater Inconveniences upon a

Leader, as any othcr Vice whatever. For 1n the tuſt place, it you fuffer your (cf to
be carried away by this inſatiate Thirſt of getting, it is moſt certain, that you ſhall
ne ver have a Soldicr worth any thing under your Command 3 all the gocd Men will
avoid you, and report of you, that you value a French Crown more than a valiant Man
ſo that you ſhall never have men ot any Reſolution about you, but ſach as upon the
tixſt Occaſion wherein you ought to give a Teltimony of your Valour and Conduct,
w1ll leave you in the Jurch, where you mult cither fly to your cternal Infamy, or ſtay
to loſe your Life, and that without any hopes notwithlianding, whether you live or
die, ever to recover your Reputation. For it yon be kild, though you have done
bravely in your own perſon, every one will be apt to fay, that your great Avarice
brought you to your Ruine, for want of good men to ſtand taithfully by you; and if
you fave your {elf by running away, be you ſure you will imprint ſuch a mark in
your Fore-hcads, as it will be hard ever to walth away 3 at leaſt you will be oblip*d to
hazard your Life upon all Occalions more than another man, to clear the Prejudice that
all men will have againſt you, and to wipe away the Blemiſh wherewith you have

ſpotted your Reputations wherein 'tis great odds you will loſe either Life or Limb,

A brave Man
15 never to de-
{pair of his
Fertune,

And after all (as it is the ordinary Recompence of men who are more than common!
adventurous upon ſuch occalions) for the Reward of your Merit it ſhall be ſaid, that
the Deſpair of your former Milcarriage, has puſh'd you upon the Execution you ſhall
have perform'd, and not your own Bravery and Reſolution. O how many more
Misfortunes could I here reckon, that have befaln, and do daily befal Commandets, who
have bcen and are taiuted with this avaritious humor ? ;

I know you will ask me now, what ſhall we do, it we do not lay up money, and
clip the Soldiers Pay? When the War is at an cnd, we mult go to the Hoſpital,
for neither the King nor any one elſe will regard us, and we are poor of our (elves.
But can you imagine that a wiſe and valiant Captain, a man of great Attempt and Ex-
ecution ſhall be {ent to ſtarve in an Hoſpital, as if ſuch men flutter'd in a Camp by
hundreds; It were well for the King and the whole Kingdom, if there were but
a dozen ſuch in an Army. Put forward then to get but a Leg amongſt this dozen,
and try to get in by your Valour, Wiſdom, and Virtue. For theſe twelve cannot live
for ever, and one being dead, though you cannot skrew in your whole Body at that
time, yct you may edge 1 the one halt, and the next that dies, you are in. And
can you then believe, that either the King or any of the Princes, who have taken
cognizance of your Valour, will luffer you to go to the Hoſpital? This is an Appre-
henfion ſo unbccoming a wiſe and valiant Captain, that it is only ſutable to Drun-
kards, Gzmeſicrs, and mcan hide-bound fcllows of no Value nor Account. And
whoever applies him{clt to great and generous Actions, and hasa care with Diligence
and virtuous Reſulution to exclude and baniſh trom his Thoughts all the fore-mention'd
Vices, nothing can be wanting to him, LThave faid that it were a great deal, if there
were a dozen only fuch men in an Army; but it there were an hundred, yet the Kin
is rich enough to provide that men of that Mezit necd not be ſent to the Hoſpital.
Or (uppoſe that the King could not ſuddenly provide for the ſupport of (ſuch deſerving
men z there is notwithſtanding no Prince, nor any other great Perſon, who has been
engag d in the War, where you ſhall have fignaliz'd your ſclves fox men of Honour,
who will not be proud to receive and take {ume one into his Care and Protection,
and that will not take hold of all occalions of doing you a good Office to the King, and
of advancing you into ſome degree, and thcn on the other fide, can you think the Kin
will always continue you 1n the ſame Condition, or leave you in the ſame Command ?
Do not believe it, but aſſure your ſelves, that ſuch men will be lookt after, on whom
to confer the Care and Honour of greater Employments, who have honourably dif-
charged thoſe of leſs moment and account. |

I pray what wasI, but a poor Soldier like one of you? What were, or what yet
are ſo many valiant Captains yet living, for whom the King and all Mankind have a
ſingular Eſteem? Have we who are yct in bcing enrich'd our ſelves by nimming/from
our Soldjers Pay ? Have we purchas'd any great Eſtates out of the Thefts of our Com-
mands? I could name ſome of our own Country of Gaiexue (who could get nothing

but

GH wor. SIT Hog. > 6 : Lo vi

YE OS. at AN OT v, ded
8 peo 7, pe > EN ARR OST IE.

Boos l. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

but I muſt know it, no more than I could unknown to them) who have never got tive
hundred Crowns by their Service 3 and yet are thoſe inen deſpis'd ? Are they lent to
the Hoſpital ? The King, the Queen, the Montficur, all the Princes of the Bloud,
and all the Lords of the Court have ſo great a Reſpect for theſe men, out of the eſteem

. very one has of their Valour, that they have got the ſtart of many great men in the

Kingdom. Nay when they are in their own Country (where a0 man Is a Prophet)
t hey are there honour'd by mcn ot all ſorts and conditions, not from the Families trom
whence they are deſcended, nor for the Pofleiſions they cnjoy 3 but upon the {ſingle
account of their own Merit. Now tnere are ſome who perhaps will ſay, If I do not
purloin trom the King, and poll from the Soldicr, now whilſt I am in Cominand,
how ſhall I make Provition tor my Children ? To wh'ch I ſhall return, Would you
enrich your Children with an 11] Keputation and an infamous Name? A pretious In-
heritance you will leave them, when for ſhame of your Miſcarriages and Miſdemeca-
nours, they ſhall be forced to hang down their heads amongſi the Great ones, from
whom they ſhould derive their Fortunes and receive honourable Commands. What
Difference will there then be betwixt the Reception and Eſteem the King and all the
Princes will then make of the Sons of ſuch Fathers as I have mentioned. and of yours,
who will not dare to appear before Men of Honour, having their Faces covered with
their Fathers Shame ? -But perhaps ſome one may ſay, that Itor my part, by the Pla-
ccs and CommandsI have been inveſted withal by the King, have rais'd great Profits
and got agreat Eſtate, and therefore may talk at my caſe ; But I protett before Al-
mighty God, and call him to witneſs, that in my whole Lite I never had thirty
Crowns more than my Pay and what Condition ſoever I have been in, or what
honourable Commithons focver I have had, whether in Traly, or in Fraxce, I have
ever been neceſſitated to borrow moncy to carry me home.

At my Retuin trom Sienna, where I had the Honour to command in the quality of
the Kings Licutenant, Monſieur the Mareſehal de Stroſſy gave me tive hundred Crowns.
When 1 returned a ſecond time from Montalfin, Monficur Beauclair, who was our Trea-
ſurcr, was fain to examine all the Purſes in Town to provide ms three hundred and
fifty Crowns to carry me to Ferrara, and yet I had no leſs than ten Gentlemen in my
Company. The Duke of Ferrara furniſh'd me with a ſupply when I put my (elf into
Verſel, and afterwards to carry me to Lious, where | found in Catheriz Tcan the Polt-
Maſters hand, two or three thouſand Francs that Martizeau had there depoſited for
me, of my Pay, with which I defrayed my Charges to Court. To a worthy ana a
brave man, nothing can ever be wanting. Now would I fain know, if for all this
E ever went to the Hoſpital, and whether I have not advantaged my ſelf a hundred
times more in ſerving my Kings and Maſters, in all Integrity and Loyalty, than by all
the Tricks and Shifts 1 could have ? Oh (my Companions) take exemple by thoſe who
for having been loyal in their Charges, can walk with thcir Faces cre& before all the
World, and are theretore honoured and eftcemed by all forts of menz and not by
{uch who by the Conſcience of their Crimes are conſtrained to hide their heads in their
houſes, or that make their Poſterity bluſh for them. Wealth will fall upon you
when you leaſt dream on 't, or expect itz and one Reward or Bounty trom the
King, is worth more than all the ſharking Tricks, Thefts, and Larccnies of your
whole Liic.

O how happy are thole Soldiers, who follow Leaders, that for their Proweſs and
Virtue are eſigem'd by all the World ! How ſecure arc their Lives and Honours under
ſuch Captains, and into what Dilaſtcrs and Diſgraces do thole frequently fall , who
follow the more unworthy ſort of men. For with the formcr you ſhall learn and
acquire Honour and Renown, that will raiſe you to an equal degree with your Chiefs,
and on the contrary following the latter, you ſhall learn nothing, but Vices, or at leaſt
things of very little Value, and they will rather lead you on to the ruine of your Lives,
than to the Advancement ot yuur Honour and the Improverment of your Name, there
being nothing elle to be learn'd of ſuch as have no Valour nor Virtue in themſelves.
A man may {crve along Apprenticcſhip under a bad Matter, and perhaps, not be much
the wiſer when he has done: but provided you be free from the three fore-men-
tioned Vices, and that you have Honour in your Proſpe&, it is impoſſible bur
that all things muſt ſucceed with you 3 at lealt you will have the Satisfation of
a noble End, it you propole to your fclves to die like men of Honour, which is
we ordinary Recompcence of War, and what every brave Man ſhould heartily
wiſh.

There yet remains a fourth, which if you cannot wholly avoid z yet go to it as fel-

| dom;

_ —- O.  _ non

——_

PN ec ena

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book I.

Monſieur
Montluc's
Education,

Tis firſt Sally.

dom, and as ſoberly as you can, and without Joſing your felves in the Labyrinth; and:
that is, the Love of Women. Imbark not by any means in that Aﬀair, tor it is utterly
an Encmy to an heroick Spirit. Leave Love at home whileſt Mars is m the held 3 you
will afterwards have but too much leiſure for thole Delights. 1 can fatcly fay, that
never any fond Aﬀection, or aftcectionate Folly of that kind could ever divert me trom
undertaking and executing what was given me in command. Such little Amoroſo's 2s
theſe are fitter to handle a Diltaft than a Sword. Love 15 « great Eneniy to a Soldicr,and
beſides the debauch and the time lolt in thoſe little latrigues, it is an Occupation that
begcts a numberleſs number of Quarrels, and ſometimes cven with your deareſt
Friends. TI have known more People hght even upon this account, than upon the (core
of Honour. And what a horrid thing it 15, that a man ſhould torteit his Reputation,
and very oftcn loſe his Litc for the Love ofa Woman! As tor you Soldiers, above all
things I recommend to you the Obedicnce that you owe to your Commanders, to the
end that you may one day learn how to command: for it is impoſlible that Soldier
ſhould ever know how to command, who has not hrſt learn'd to obey: And take
notice, that the Virtues and Diſcretion of a Soldicr are chietly maniteſtcd in his Obe-
diencc, and in his Dilobedience lies the Ruin of his Lite and Henour. A reſty Horſe
never yet made good Froot. The Proverb will ſerve, and you ought not to light the
Advice Igive you, it but in reſpect to my Experience, who have ſeen a greac deal 3
and I mulſtneeds be a very ignorant and ſenſelc(s fellow, it in all this time of my Life,
I have made no Obſervations of the Succeſſes and Mistortunes both of the one and the
other. But I have committed ſome to memory, and that 1s it which has given me
occaſion to write this Book in the latter end of my days.

Having in my greener years been bred up in the Family of Anthony Duke of Lorain,
and now grown up towards a Man, 1 was preſently preferred to an Archer's Place in
the Dukes own Company, Monſieur Bayard being at that time Lieutenant to the ſame.
Not long after being entlan'd with the Report of the noble Feats of Arms every da
pertorm'd in Ttaly, which in thoſe days was the Scene of Action, 1 was poſle(s*d with
a longing dclire to vilit that Country. To this end making a Journey into Gaſcony,
I made ſhitt to procure of my Father a little Money and a Spaniſh Horle, and without
further delay began my Journey in order to my Dcfign, leaving to Fortune the hopes
of my future Advancement and Honour. About a days Journey from my: Fathers
houſe, and near unto Leitoxre, T turn'd a little out of my way to viſit the Steur de
Caſtttnar, an antient Gentleman who had lorg trequented Ttaly, of him to inform
my felt at large of the State, Condition, Manners and Cuſtoms of that Country in
order to my future Conduct, This Gentleman told me lo many things, and related
to me {o many brave Exploits which were there every day pertornvd, that without
longer abode, or [taying any where longer than to refreſh my felt and my Horle; I paſt
over the Alpes, and took my way directly to Milay. Being come to Mitaz, I there
found two Uncles of mine by my Mothers fide, calld the $rillatts, both of them men
of great Reputation and Eſteem, of which the one terv*'d under Monheur de Leſcut,
Brother to Monſieur de Lautrec (the ſame who was afterwards Mareſchal of France,
and then known by the Name of the Mareſchal de Foix ) by whom I was preſently put
into an Archers place in his own Company, a Place of great Repute in thole days,
there being in thoſe times ſeveral Lords and great Perlons who rode in Troeps, and
two or three who were Archers in this; but tince that Diſcipline 1s loſt and grown
degenerate, and all things are turn'd uptide down, without hopes that any man now
alive ſhall ever ſee them reftor'd to their former Eſtate. | -

At this time the War betwixt Francis the Firſt and the Emperour Charles the Fifth
broke out again with greater Fury than betore, the later to drive us out of Traly, and
we to maintain our Footing there, though it was only to make it a place of Sepulture
to a world of brave and valiant French. God Almighty rais'd up thele two great
Princes {worn Enemies to one another, and emulous of one anothers Greatneſs z an
Emulation that has coſt the Lives of two hundred thouſand Perſons, and brought a
million of Families to utter Ruin 3 when after all neither the one nor the other ob-
tein'd any other advantage by the Diſpute, than the bare Repentance of having been
the cauſers of ſo many Miſerics, and of the Effuſion of ſo much Chriſtian Bloud, It
God had pleas'd that theſe two Monarchs might have underſtood one another, the
whole Earth had trembled under their Armsz and S4lyman who was contemporary
with them, and who during their Conteſts enlarg'd his Empire on every fide, would
have had cnough to do to defend his own. The Emperour was, *t1s true, a great and
a magnanimous Prince, yct innothing ſuperiour to our Maſter, during his Lite, laving

Mm

—

As

Book [. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France, 7

he

in a little bettcr Succeſs, and in that God gave him the Grace to bewail his Sins in a
Convent, into which he retir'd himſelf two or three years before his Death. During
the ſpace of twoand twenty months that this War continued, I had the good fortune
to be an Eye-witneſs of ſeveral very brave Actions, which were very fit to ſeaſon a
raw Soldicr 3 neither did I fail continually to preſcnt my felt in all places and upon all
occations, whereI thought Honour was to be purchas d at what price foeverz and it
15 to bz imagin'd 1 had my ſharc of tighting, when I had no lefs than five horſes
111 d under me in the ſhort continuance of that Service , and of thoſe two in two days, _.
which Monſieur de Roquelazre , who was Colen Germain to my Mother , was plea- 4:1 rhe
ſed to give rac. For in this beginning of my armes I had the good fortune to gain yqgngeur
{o far upon the afte&tions of the whole Company , that my horſes being loft , eve- aonrtuc.
ry one was willing to help to remount me, and being moreover taken pritoner in
Battcl, I was (ſoon after delivered by the procurement ot my friends.
Let ſuch therctore as intend to acquire honour by feats of Arms, refvulve to ſhut
their &yes to alt hazards, and dangers whatevcr , im the fi{t encounter where they
ſhall happen to be prefent 3 tor that's the time when every one has his eycs tix*d upon
them, to obſerve their behaviour , and thence to form a judgment of their future
hopes. If in the beginning they ſhall, by any handfom adion, fignalize their courage,
and boldneſs , it ſets a good mark upon them for ever, and not only makes them
noted , and regarded by all : but moreover inſpires them themſelves with mettle, and
vigour to perform more, and greater things. Now you mutt know that in this War The loſs of
we loſt the Dutchy of Millay. Of which ( though I do not pretend to be any great the Dutchy of
Clerk ) I could write the truc Hiftory , and ſhould his Majetty command me, 1 would 2fillan.
deliver the truth, and Iam able to give as good an account (though I was my (elf ve-
ry young at that time ) as any man whatever in Fraxce, I mean cf thoſe paſſages where
T had the fortune to be preſent , and no other; for I will write nothing by hearfay.
But TI intend not to bufie my (elf with a Relation of other mens ations , and lefs of
the faults, and overlights by them committed, though they are yet as freſh in my me-
mory , asat that moment; and fecing that what I my felt pertorm'd in that Coun-
try, at that time, was in the quality of a private Souldier only, I being not as yet
ſtep d into Command : I ſhall no longer infift upon this melancholy Subject , which
; has alfo bcen writ before by others : only this 1 ſhall make bold to athrm , thar
| Monſieur de Lautrec was by no means to be blam d, he having there pertotmed all
the parts of a good, and prudent General; and, who indeed was in himlelt one of
the greateſt men I ever knew. Neither ſhall 1 trouble my {eli to give a narration of
the Battel of the Bicoque , in which tought on foot, as alſo did Monlieur de Moxt-
morancy, fince Conſtable of France 3 A Battcl that Monhicur de Lawtrec was compel-
|cd to confent unto , through the obftinacy of the Swifſe, quite contrary to his own
judgment. A. Nation whoſe wiltulneſs I have {cen occation the lots of feveral pla-
cs, & cauſe great inconveniences in his Majetties aftairs. They are, to ſpeak the
trute, a very warlike people, and {crve as it were tor Bullwarks to an Army : but
then they muſt never want, either money, or victuals 3 tor they are not to be paid with
words.

After the unfortunate loſs of this fair Dutchy of Mzllax , all the forces returned
back into France, and with them the Company of the {aid Mareſchal de Foix, wherein
F then had not only the place of a Man at armcs but moreover an Affignation of an
Archers pay. Sometime after the Emperour fet another Army on toot to recover
Fontarabie z whereupon our Company , and leveral others were ordercd to repair to
Bayonne to Monſieur de Lantrec, who was bis Majefties Lieutenant in Gziennue. The
{aid Sicur de Lautrec, that he might the better make head againſt the enemy, (who
made a ſhew of attempting ſomething upon the Frontier) made a ſuddain leavy of
folirteen or fifteen Enſigns of Foot 3 which was the occation thatI ( who ever had an
inclination for foot ſervice) entreated leave of Captain Sayas (who carryed the Cornette
1n the abſence of Captain Carbox his brother) tor three months only 3 that-T might ac-
cept of an Enfign offex*d to me by Captain Clotte 3 who at laſt very unwillingly gran-
ted my ſuite, although he himſclt had nrſt ſent to Captain Carbon to (ollicite it 1n
my behalf. Suddainly after this ( the Enemy being dayly reinforced. with freſh fup-
lies ) la Clotte was commanded away to Bayonne, &a tew days after that, Captain Cary- PIT TS
box took the Companies of Monhieur de Lautrec , and the Marcſchal his brother, with tn fien ap”
two Companies of Foot , to wit, that of Megrix Comenge, and la Clotte to conduct us foot.
thorough the Woods firaight to St. Fear de yz, where the enemies Camp at that
time lay. So ſoon as we were arrived at the top ot a little Hill about half a quarter

of

A CharaQ.t
of rhe Swiſſe.

> x2 att s . , 4 —_— " n 7 IE Ro 3 2% eb: : | « a : Cd 1
q SY FDI TT” ates, Eat a i ER he . ls 3 AE Eladang earths 2 BN . ER nn .
L a7: D : % ERS 7 ST l OS bee NOR no Ants Wants. > . On I OO Ee, 0 NaF AL p
hr. 5, PI Ky add $2 OI ID Ing ONT ES b ON IO y : -

a ww a —— gr—_— w—_=+_ —_—
.

Nat le A —_— 2, —-
- - hen” = Mo. vE .

"EE ITT ne

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book Y

The A&jon at
Ft. Fean de
Luz.

Erencn

of a League diſtant from | Las Chaving already pals'd a little River by a wooden bridge,

another half quarter of a League behind this little hill, at the foot whereot, and before

us, there ran a rivolet of fifteen, or twenty paces broad, and deep to a mans pirdle ,
joyning to which there is alſo a plain which extends it felf in an eafie deſcent,
down to the (aid Rivolet , from whence one may eaſily diſcover St. fean de Lug, , one
of the fineſt Bourgs in all France, and ſeated upon the Margent of the Ocean Sea )
Captain Carbon who commanded the Party, leaving two Cornets upon this lit-
tle hill, the one whereof was carried by Captain Sayas , which was ours, and
the other by Captain 4' Andonins , which was that of Monfieur de Laxtrec ( but both
of them onely in the abſence , the one of Captain Carbon , the other of Captain Ap-
2:quiloabe,) and only twenty horſe with each,together with our two Companies of foot,
took the reſt of the Gens-d? armes, and with them Monhieur Gramont , the fame who
afterwards dyed in the Kingdom of Naples, and who was at this time Licutcnant to
the Company belonging to Monſicur de Laxtrec.

With this Party Captain Carbox paſs'd over the little River,and having divided his
men into three ſquadrons ( as one might eaſily diſcern from the Hill where we
ſtood ) trotted along the plain dire&ly towards St. Fear de Luze Being come to the
middle of the plain, he there made a halt for an hour , or more, whillt a Trumpet
went twice, and ſounded the' Fayfare to the Enemy , after which being about to re-
treat, as nct believing any one would ſtir out of the Enemies Camp, the torlorn which
he had ſent out towards the utmoſt skirts of the plain , return'd back upon the ſpur ,
to acquaint him that all the Enemies Camp began to move 3 and ſuddenly after we be-
gan to diſcover three of their Squadrons of Horſe, appearing upon their march, one
upon the heels of another , and making direaly towards Monheur de Carboy. Of
theſe the firſt that came up, preſently, and ſmartly charg'd the foremoſt of ours, where
there were many Launces broken on both fides 3 but more of ours, than theirs, for
as much as in thoſe times the Spaniards carried but few Launces, and thole very ſlender,
long, and pointed at both ends. During this charge Captain Carbon was leilurely
drawing oft the other two Squadrons towards the place where we were, when the
ſecond of the Enemies ſquadrons coming up, and uniting with the firſt, beat up our
firft to our ſecond (quadron , commanded by Monſieur Gramont , where the skirmiſh
was very hot , and a great many men thrown to ground both on the one fide , and
other, 2mongſt whom were the Seigneurs de Gramont, who had his horlc kill'd under
him , de Lwppe Standard-bearer to Monſieur de Lantrec, de Poigreff, who is fince turn'd
Hugonot, Te Fay de Xaintonge, who is yet living, and divers others. At the ſame
inſtant we diſcover*d another great Party of Horſe advancing towards us a little on
our left hand, at the fight of which the Captains who carried our Colours came both
of them running to me, and ſaying we are all loſt, whereupon I told them , that it
were better, than fo to conclude, to hazard fourſcore, or an hundred Foot, to bring off
our Horſe who were engag'd. To which la Clotte, and Megriz made anſwer, that that
venture would only occation a greater loſs , and that moreover they very much doubted
the Souldiers would hardly be perſwaded to go down , ſeeing death ſo manifelt before
their eyes. Now you muſt underſtand there was no one preſent at this diſcourſe, ſay-
ing the two forementioned Captains, and my ſelf , our Foot ſtanding drawn up tour-
teen,or fifteen paces behind 3 and it was not amiſs z for I make a great queſtion had they
heard what we ſaid, and ſeeing the Gens- d' armes in maniteſt danger to be loſt, whe-
ther I ſhould have been fo cheartully followed, as I was. And it1s a good rule, as much
asA Man can to conceal from the Souldicr the danger of any enterprize, if you intend
to have them go briskly to their work. To this laſt objection of the two Captains, I
made anſwer that I would run the hazard to lead themon, and that loſt, or loſt not, it
was better to hazard , and to loſe fourſcore, or an hundred Foot, than all our Gezs- d*-
armes. And thereupon without further deliberation (for long conſultations are often
the ruine of brave attempts ) I return'd back to the Souldicrs, and the Captains with
me ( for the buſineſs requir'd haſt ) ſaying to them only theſe few words , Come
on , come on Comrades, let us go , and relieve our Gens- 4 armes, and was thereupon
follow'd by an hundred Foot of our own Company , who with very great reſolution
deſcended with me to the fout of the Hill, where at the head of my men I paſſed over
the brook , and there deliver'd twenty of my men to be led by the Baſtard of Auzar,
a Gentleman who has nothing blemiſh'd the legitimate Sons ot his race 3 though all of
them men of ſingular bravery, and remarkeable valour.

Now you muſt know that 1 the Company 1 commanded , was no other than Croſs-

©roſs-bows. bews, for at this time the uſe of the Harquebuze, had not as yet been introduc d a-
mongſt

|

Book l[. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fratice.

TT —  ————— © — —— — ——

— — - ——

bo —— S———_— 0 —_ . V—O—— —

mongſt us 3 only three, or four days before fix Gafcoy Harquebuſters catne over to us
from the Enemy., which Thad rcceived into my Company , having by good tortune
\ been that day upon the Guard, at the great Gate of the City; and of thoſe fix, one
- was a native of the Territory of Moxtluc. Would to heaven that this accurſcd engine
had never been invented , I had not then receiv'd thole wounds which I now languiſh
k under,ncither had ſo many valiant men been flain for the molt part by the moſt pitiful
# fellows , and the greatelt Cowards; Poltrons that had not dar'd to look thoſe men
in the face at hand, which at diſtance they laid dead with their confounded bullets :

# |

but it was the DeviPs invention to make us murther one another. Being thus paſt
X the Rivcr, I oxdcr'd the Baſtard 4 Auzay not to ſutter his men to ſhoot, but only to
; preſent as if they intended to doit, to the end that he might tavour mine, and give
Z them time to dilcharge and retire again into their order, Now when I was under
: the foot of the Hill , I could not pollibly ſee what our men aid; but being advanc'd
f. a little further into the plain , 1 ſaw all the Enemics three Squadrons drawn up into

one body, and the great party on the Jett hand , marching upon a good round trot di-
realy towards ours, who were rallyed, and ſtood firm , without being able either
to advance forwards, or to retire back , by reaſon of ſome great ſtones that lay
{catter'd in their Rear. Here 1t was that Captain Carboy ( who had no Arms on,
having before been wounded in his left arm by an Arquebuze ſhot ) ſeeing me ſo near
him, came up to me , and faid , Oh Moxtluc, my dear friend , charge up boldly , I
will never forſake thee: Captain, faid I, take you only care to fave your {clt, and your
Gens- d* Armes, at the ſame inſtant crymg out , ſhoot, Comrades, at the head of theſe
y Horſe. I was not: above a dozen paces diſtant from the Enemy when I gave them this
$I Volley, by which (as it appear'd by the teſtimony of the Priſoners, who were taken a
/ | few days aftcr ) above fifty Horſes were kil'd , and wounded , and two Troopers
F ſlain, an exccution that a little cooPd their courage, and caus'd their Troops to make
: a halt. In the mean time Captain Carbox had leiſure with his party to retirc full
: gallop towards the brook I had paſs'd over to relieve him; where ſuch as had their
= horſes loſt , taking hold of the others horſe tayls ſav'd themſelves alſo, and all toge-
2 ther paſs*d over the River. Which haſt they were neceflitated to make , or otherwiſe +
the great party of horſe on theleft hand , had charg'd them in the Flank, had they
drawn more leiſurely off. In the mean time under favour of the twenty Croſs-bows
of 4 Augzan , who ſaftain'd us , we rallied again , and gave another volley. Soſfoon
as Captain Carbox had paſſed the River with his Horſe , remounted Monhieur de Gra-
mont, on another horſe , and mounted the reſt ex Crouppe , he commanded the {aid
Sicur de Gramont to ride to the top of the hill, and 1n all haſt to draw off the Enfigns |
both of horſe and foot, at a round trot, directly to the other River, where the bridg |
was, that leads towards Bayozne. Which order being given he ſuddenly turned back |
again towards me, having in his company an Traliax calPd Signior Diemede , and the
Sieur de Mainabant , where he found me retreating towards a ditch, upon the cdg, of a
Mariſh, and of which I might be within ſome twelve , or fourteen paces, which not
| only hindred him from getting up to me , but moreover gave him enough to do to
: fave himſelf. 1 notwithſtanding in ſpite of the Encmy recovered the ditch of the -
Mariſh, being {till ſheltred by 4' Arzan, whom Icommanded to climb over in great di- Hes
ligence, and there to make head, which he accordingly performed. |
The Spaniards in the mean time made a ſhcw , as if they meant to charge , but they
durli not attempt to break into me 3 neither were my fix Harquebuhiers idle all this
while, but did wonders, with their ſhot , when having at laſt retreated my men with-
c in five or {ix paces of the ditch, I cauſed them all in an inftant to throw themſelves in-

to it, and under favour of d* Axzan , almolt as {uddainly to mount the ditch bank

on the other fide , over which we all got fate and ſound, ſaving three Soldicrs, who

were flain with Harquebuze ſhot, for not having bcen fo nimble as the reſt; and here

it was that, as ina little fort, I made head againtt the Enemy. Now you muſt know,

that that party of the Enemy which came up on the left hand, made a halt ac the

bank of the River , whcn they faw our Horfe were already got halt way up the hill ;

and thoſe who had fought, and to whom LI had given a ſtop at the ditch bank .

+ were now upon their retreat home , when ſecing three Squadrons of Harquebuſiers
coming, along the plain, and making towards them with all the ſpecd they could ,
; it reviy'd their ſpirits, and inſpir'd them with new courage to face about again. I,
; in the mean time ( having allo diſcover'd thele freſh ſuccours ) began to fhitt along
| by the ditch, till being by the return of a corner of it , ſlipt out of their fight, 1
drew my men into a very narrow meadow , from whence at full tpced I gain'd the
C toot

moor Ee

PETTY = orptoo-nagremm on AP" neOr -

na” my a) a.

1

——

© The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book I.

ANT IE. 1. -

A brave ref(>-
Jution 11 a
Captain,

PPT TT ER CET DE 'Y Foe

—c_ ©

foot of the hill I had deſcended betore, and having repals'd the River , {oon recove-
xcd the top of the mountain. The danger wherein I ſaw my {clt tobe, as well of
the Horſe I had preſſing upon my Rear, as of the Battaillon of Intantry which 1
ſaw faſt advancing towards me , did not however make me Joole my Judgment in
a time of ſo great need nor hinder me trom dilccrning and taking this opportunity

tor wy retreat , during which I made the little handtul of men I had march very cloſe.

together 3 and by turnes encouraging, and ſpeaking to them, made them often face
about and falute the Cavalry , who purltucd me both with Crofs-bow, and Harque-
buzc (hot 3 when having gain'd the top of the hill, I'drew into an Orchard , ma-
king faft the Gate on the inkde , that the Horſe might not lo {uddainly enter, and
by the favour of that, and ſcveral others planted with Apples, {irll made on towards
the Bridge , till I came to a little Church call'd Haitee, tiom whence I perceived the
preat road to be all covercd over with the Encmies Horſc, there being, nevertheleſs
a great ditch betwixt them and me, trom whence I bettow'd upon iam ſome Ar-
quebuze , and Croſs-bow ſhot , which allo very {ldom fail'd ot their effect , and
compelPd them ( ſeeing they could not come up to me ) ſome to advance forwards,
and others to rctire. I then put ſome of my men into the Church yard, thinking
there again to make hcad 3 the greateſt tolly I committed throughout the whole aGi-
on; for in the mean time a good number of their Horſe gliding along by the
meadow {traight towards the Bridge , were already advanc'd lo tar, that 1 faw
my ſelf totally enclos'd , without all manner of hope to eſcape, and to fave my (e«.
Now fo foon as Captain Carber: had recover'd the Bridg , and that the Horſe, and
Foot were all paſs*d over, he cormandcd Monſieur Gramort to hatt away , not only
a trot, but a full gallop; for he alrcady diſcover'd the Enemies Infantry in the
Orchards, which 1 could not do 3 neither did I ever perceive them , till they began
to ſhoot at me; and then I made a fign to my Soldiers in the Churh yard to come,
and draw up to mc in the great high way. Captain Caybox in the interim , being
he ſaw nothing of me, half concluded us all tor kill d, or taken, and yet fecing all
the Enemics Troops of horſe both on the right hand, and on the left , making
directly towards the Bridg , would leave Captain Campai (an admirable good
Soldier ) at the nd of the Bridg with five and rwcnty horſe, and thirty Croſs-
bows of Captain Megrin*'s Company , to try it there were any poſſible means to
relicve me, were I yet alive, caufing the Bridg in the mean time to be broken
down- Now becauſe that Troop of the Encmies horſe which march*d on the
right hand , made a great deal more halt towards the Bridge, than that of the leff,
I quittcd the great high way , and under favour of a hedg made ftraight towards
the River, where I was again to encounter the Horle, which notwithſtanding I
made my way thorow , chiopt into the River, and in defpite of them all, paſſed 0-
vcr to the other fide: whercin, the banks of the River being high, favour'd me ver
much , they being too fteep tor the horſe to get down , neither was our ſhot of both
(orts idle in the mcan time. At laſt I recover'd the end of the Bridg , where I found
Captain Campai vcry bulic at work to break it , and who fo ſoon as he ſaw me, was
very importunate with me to lave my f(clf, at the fame time preſenting me the Crup-
pcr of his horlc to that cnd: but he had no other anſwer from me, but this , that
God had hitherto preſerved me , and my Soldicrs allo, whom I was likewiſe reſo]-
ved never to abandon, till I had tirtt brought them into a place of ſafety. Whil
we were in this diſpute we were aware of the Spaniſh Intantry coming dire&ly to-
wards the Bridg,, when finding our ſelves too weak to ſtend the thock., Campat
with the Croſs-bows of Captain Megria took the Van in ordcr to a retreat .
and 1 remain'd in the Rcar, having gaind a ditch that enclos'd a little meadow ,
which was ſufficicnt to defend me from the horſe, it being fo high , that they could
not come to charge.

I had now nothing left me but my fix Harquebulicrs , my Crofs-bows having ak
rcady ſpent all their Arrows ncverthelels to thew that their hearts werenot down,
| caus d them to hold their Swords ready drawn in the one hand, and their Bows in the
other to ſerve inſtead of a Buckler. Now Captain Campai's men had broken down
the greateſt part of the Bridg betore they went away , by reaſon of which impedi-
ment the Cavalry could not {o ſoon . ome up to us , having been conſtrain'd to toord
the River two Harquebuzc ſhot on the right hand , whilſt the Foot in the mean
time with great difhculty hFd it over one by one by the rails of the Bridg , a po-
ſture whercin it had been a very cafic matter to defeat them, had I not foreſeen that
then the Cavalry would have come up to cnclole me, and our honor depended

upon

hy ng De i il”
TO OI AERIE

Zoadact ef : rt De! ,
£3,955» -_ $3.5 +44 oa þ PEST, e
RD ee FR 8 SIM F wo AX Fre; Tn Mes $4, @
TH ERIC. » = * 0 OST 593,
Bs x US BY 2 FO 36 i oY IST

»
og ONS”
PO $a Oleg

Book |. _ & Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

—_

-

a

o—_— — —<—_ —
L ———

upon our Ictrcat. Wheretore fiill getting ground , and from ditch to ditch , ha-

ving, gain'd about halt a quartcr of a Icague of way, I made a halt, that my mn
might not be out of breath , when looking back 1 percav'd the Encmy had done
{o too , and law by his countcnance that he grew weary of the purluit, a thing at
which I was very muci alionifh'd and not alittle glad , for in plam truth we were

able to do no more having taken a little Water and Cider, and forme Maijz

bread out of a tew ſmall houtcs we mct upon the way. In the mean time Captain
Campai {ent out ſome Horſe to fee what was become of us , believing me
to be cither dead , or taken, And now behold us arriv'd in a place of latety,
with thc loſs of only three men in the firſt ditch 3 and the brave Baltard d* Auzan,
who by loytcring fomcthing too long i a little houle by the Church was untortunately
lolt.

In the interim of this buftle which continued pretty long, , the alarm was carricd
tc Monlicur de Lawtrec to Bayonne , together with the news, that we were all total-
ly defeated , at which he was excecdingly troubled , in regard of the ill conſequen-
ccs that uſually attend the flcſhing and giving an Enemy blood in the beginning of
a War, However he drew out preſently into the field , and was advanc*d but a
very little way , when hedilcover'd our Enligns of Foot conducted by the Sicur de
Gramont , maxching, upon the Road towares him , who ſo foon as he came up , pre-
(ently gave him an account of what had happened, and did me the honor to tell him,
that 1 was the cauſe of their preſervation : but that withall 1 was loſt jn the ſervice.
Captain Carboy was not yct arrivd, foraſmuch as he had made a halt to tay tor
Captain Campai , trom him to lcarn the iſſue of the bulincls : but in the end he came
upalſo, to whom Monſicur de Lawtrec ſpake theſe words. JYell, Carbon , w- this
a time wherein to commit ſuch a piece of folly as this * which I do aſſure you is not of 9
little moment , but that you have thereby endangered the making me loſe this City of Bay-
onne, which you know to be a place of ſo great importance. To which Carbay made an-
{wer. Sir, I have committed a very great fault, and the greateſt folly that ever T was guil-
ty of in my whole life : to this hour the like diſgrace has never befallen we, but ſecing it
has pleaſed God to preſerve us from being defeated , T ſhall be wiſer for the time to come.
Monficur de Lawtrec then demanded of him, it there was any news ot me, to which
he made anſwer, that he thought I was loſt: but as they were returning tottly to-
wards the City in expcctation of further news , Captain Campat ailo arriv'd, who
affured thum that T was come fſatcly vff, relating withal the handſom retreat I had
made, in deſpite, and in the very tecth of the Enemy , with the lofs of four men only,
and that it was not poſſible, but that the Enemy muſt have loft a great number of
mcn. 1 was no fooner come to my Quarters , but that a Gentleman was ſent trom
Monficur de Lautrec, to bring me to him, who entertained me with as much kindneſs,
and relpc&, as he could have done any Gentleman in the Kingdom , ſaying to
me theſe words in Gaſcou > Montluc mou amic yow @ oublideray jamai lou ſervice
or abes fait au Roy, & men ſevicra tant que you vivrats Whuch 1s, Montluc, my fricnd,
1 will acver forget the ſervice you have this day performed for the King : ' ut will be mind-
ful of it ſo long as I lzve. There js as much honor in an handlom retreat , as
there is in good hghting , and this was a Lord who was not wont to carcls many
people; a fault that I have otten obſcrv*d in him 3 neverthelels he was pleas'd to cx
preſs an extravidinary favour to me all the time we late at ſupper , which he alfo

continued to me cover alter , mlomuch that calling me to mind tour or hve years at- -

ter, he diſpatch'd an expreſs Courricr to me trom Paris 1nto Gaſcony with a Cem-
miſſion to raiſe a Company of Foot , entreating me to bear him company mi his expe-
dition to Naples, and has ever fince put a greater value upon me, than I dulerved. Chis
was the firſt action 1 was ever in the quality of a Commander, and trom whence L bee
gan to derive my reputation.

You Captains (my Camrades) who ſhall do me the honor co read my Lite, take
notice, that the thing in the world , which you ought moſt to dune, is to meet
with a fair occaltion whercin to maniteſt your courage in the tirti Sally ot your Arms;
for jt in the beginning you ſhall prove luccefsful , you do ( amonglt others ) two
things. Firlt you caule your ſclves to be praiſcd , and eftecmed by the grear ones ,
by whoſe report you ſhall be recommended to the knowledy of the Ring himfelt ,
trom whom we arc to expect the recompence ol all our Services, and -Labours: And
in the next place, when the Soldier ſhall fee a Captain who has bchav d himlclt
well, and performed any notable thing at his firlt trial; all the vahant men will
{txive to be under hjs command , believing that fo auſpicious a beginning, cannot tail

2 ot

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book I.

OG nn eos MG CE Dd er<m.oc
RR w -_ _— - -

£3 aun + nes LERIS — an ems
L222; _
«nom _— _—__ a = o - Ho_

wc  ac@ix @#1»- ——— 4 a a——

of a proſperous ifſue 3 but that all things will ſuceced well with him, and that
under ſuch a man they ſhall never fail to be employ'd 3 tor nothing can more fpite
a man of courage, than to be lett at home to burn his ſhins by the hre, whillt other
men are employ'd abroad in honorable action. So that by this means you ſhall be
{ure always to be tollow'd by brave men, with which you ſhall continue to get
more honor, and proceed to greater reputation 3 and on the contrary , it you chance
to be baffled in the beginaing , whether through your Cowardiſe , or want of
Condu&, all the good men will avoid you, and you will have none to lead, but
the Lees, and Canaille of the Ariny, with whom (though you were the Heroe of the
world ) there will be no good to be done nor other, than an ill repute to be ac-
quird. My Excmple upon this occaſion, may ſerve for ſomething, wherein though
perhaps there were no great matters pertorni'd , yet {o it is, that of little exploits
of War, great uſes are ſometimes to be made. And remember , whenever you
hnd your (elves overmatch'd with an Enemy, that yon can bridle, and hold at
bay with the loſs of a few men, not to fear to hazard them. Fortune may be
favourable to you. as ſhe was to me; for 1 dare confidently fay , that had
not I preſented my (elf to lead on theſe hundred Foot ( which all play'd their
parts admirably well |) we had certainly had all the Enemies Cavalry upon our
hands , which had been a power too great, for fo tew as we were to with-
(tand,

The Enemies Camp {oon after retir'd into Navarre , whereupon Monſieur de
Lantrec disbanded the one halt of his Companies, rcferving only the two Enligns of
Monlſicur de Canna, and that of the Baron Fean de Canna, conhifting each of on-
ly three hundred men ( the hrſt time they had ever been reduc'd to that number)
they having formerly confiſted of tive hundred, or a thouſand; a device whereby
the King's Treaſury was very much relieved , as it fav'd the pay of ſo many Licu-
tenants , Enfigns , Serjcants , and other Officers: but withall the command of a
good number of men, uſually invited men of Condition, and Eſtates into the Service .
who at preſent diſdain to accept of Commiſſions, where they ſee fo many pitiful
Captainetts, who are admitted into Command, without ever having firook a
ſiroke.

At this time you muſt know Monlicur de Laxtrec beſtow'd my Captains Company up-
on me, though I was then but twenty years ot age, and leaving tour Companies in Bay-
one, took Poſt, and went away to Court : which departure of his encouraged the
Encmy to renew his Camp ,, and to lay Siege to Foxtarabie, which they alſo took be-
fore his return. The loſs of this place was occalioned , either through the indiſcre.
tion, or the treachery of a Nephew to the Conſtable of Navarre, and Son to the late
Marcſchal de Navarre , who having becn baniſh'd from Spain, for liding with Hex-
ry King of Navarre, was, together with a Garriſon of four hundred men (Exiles likes
himſelt ) put into this City , where he was at this time fo w4ll ſolicited by his Uncle,
that he rcvolted to his fide, by which means this place was loit, which otherwiſe
had becn impregnable , though the Enemy had made two great breaches in it : but
being I was not there preſent, and that | will deliver nothing upon report, I ſhall
ſay. £o more but this, that Captain Fraxgett who ſurrendred it up to the Spaniard,
and who for ſo doing laid the blame to the ſaid Don Pedro, was afterwards for his
pains degraded at Lyons. Thelols of this placedepriv'd us of very good footing we
had in Spain. It was here that ſome years before, Monficur de Lade won immor-
tal glory , by enduring a whole years Sicge in all the extremities that mankind can
undergo, and he for ſo doing carried away honor , and reward, but Frangett infa-
my and ruine thus goes the world, and fortune. In the mean time, if any of the
Princes, or the Kings Lieutenants ſhall youchſafe to peruſe this Book of mine ( and
perhaps they may read worle ) let them take notice by this exemple , and others that
I have ſecn , and that I may perchance make mention of hercafter , that it is very
dangerous to make uſe of a man , that has once abandon'd his own Prince, and na-
tural Soveraign 3 not that he is to bexcjeRed,when he flies into a mans arms for refuge,
and protection z but he ought not by any means to haveca place entruſted to him ,
with which he may at any time make his own peace, and reſtore himſelt to his Princes
favour. Or if they ſhall think fit to truſt him, it ought not to be however till af-
ter by along tryal, he ſhall have ſo manifeſted his fidelity , that there is no more
queſtion to be made of his Faith 3 and then in ſucha proceſs of time, the Country,
into which he hall come ar hrft a ſtranger , or tugitive, and an Exile , will be
grown natural and familiar to him, and he will have received benefits, and acquir'd

(uch

EB on en {ogy L. 6
. LE ed Ae ant IE 08

Book [. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

13

ſuch intercts, and poſſeſſions, as may tix him there: and yet even then let it be at a
ſufficient diſtance from ſuch as he may have had any private corrc{pondencics , or ſe-
crct practices withal: For by what I have heard from ſcveral of the Emperour's
Captains , had Charles of Bourbou taken Marſelles , and Provence , the Emperor
would never have committed ſo great an error , as to have entrulted them in his
hands, though he had faithfully promis'd ſo to do. But let us proceed.

All theſe Foot Companies being disbanded , excepting thole which were lett in
Garriſon , 1 who had no mind to be immur'd within the walls of a City, again put my
ſclt into the Company of Monficur Le Mareſchal de Foix, wherein I continued till
\ueh time as King Francis went his expedition againſt Monhicur de Bourbon , who,
togcther with the Marqueſs of Peſcara laid Siege to Marſelles ( which Sieur de Bouy-
box , tor an aftront that had been oftcr'd to him , was revolted to the Emperor
(there is nothing a great heart will not do in order to revenge) where ſeeing the
King would permit the Marcſchal de Fozx to carry no more, than twenty men at
arms of his own Company along with him , and hnding my felt at my arrival to
be excluded that cle&tion, and none of the number, I took ſuch ſnuff at it , that I
went with five or ſix Gentlenien, who did me the honor to bear me company , to
be preſent at the Battel, with a refoſution to tight volunteer amongſt the Foot.
But Monlicur de Bowrbon after having lain fix weeks only before the City, rais'd
the Siegc. The Signior Raxco de Cera, a Gentleman of Rome, a brave, and expe-
ricnc'd Captain , together with the Sicur de Briou were within , with a ſufficient Gar=
riſon, his Majelty had thither ſent for the defence of the Town3 So that Monfieur
de Bourbon found himſclf to be decciv d in his intelligence, and that he had reckon'd
without his Hoſt. The French did not as yet know what it was to rebell apainft
their Prince ; for ſo ſoon as he had notice of the Kings approach, he retir'd himſelf
over the Mountains, and deſcended into Piedmoxt , by the Marquilate of Saluzgzo ,
and Piguerol , and not without very great lols, fled away to Milan, which allo both
he, and the Viceroy of Naples, were conſtrain'd to abandon, and to fly out at one gate,
whilſt weentred in at another.

Signior Don Antonio de Leva ( who was one of the greateſt Captains the Emperor
had, and who I do believe had he not been hindred by the Gout (with which he
was infinitely tormented ) would have ſurpaſs'd all others of his time ) was choſen
in this poſture of affairs to be put into Pavie, with a ſtrong Garriſon of German Soldi-
ers , ſuppoſing that the King would infallibly tall upon that place, as in effect he did
The Siege continucd for the {pace of cight months, in which time Monhieux de Boury-
bon went into Germany , where he fo beſtirr'd himſelt with the money he had bor-
rowed from the Duke of Savoy, that he thence brought along with him ten thouſand
German foot , together with tour or tive hundred men at armes from the Kingdom
of Naples, with which Forces encamping himſelf at Lode, he came to offer the King
Battail upon a St. Matthias day , our army being very much weakened as well by the
length ot the Siege , as by Sickneſs, with which 1t had been miſerably infeQed. To
which diſadvantages the Ring had moreover unluckily disbauded three thouſand
Griſons commanded by a Collonel of their own called Je graxd Diart, I (uppoſe, to
contra& the charges of the War. Oh that theſc little pieces of good Husbandry do
very often occaſion notable loſſes! Alſo a few days betore Monſieur d' Albaine was, by
the King's command , departed with great Forces towards Rome, from thence to
fall into the Kingdom ot Naples: but in the end all vaniſh'd away in ſmoke
for, to our great misfortune, we loſt the Battail, and all chele enterprizes came to: no-
thing.

The Deſcription of this Battail 1s already publiſh'd in ſo many places , that it
would be labour loſt therein to waſt my paper 3 I ſhall therefore only ſay, that the
buſinels was not well carricd in ſeveral places on our fide, which occationed their
ruine , who bchav'd themſelves beſt upon that occafion. The King was taken priſo-
ner, Monlicur the Marelchal de Foix , both taken and wounded with an Arquebuze
ſhot in his thigh , which morcover cnter'd into his belly, Moufteur de St. Pol taken,
and woundcd with thirteen wounds, with which he had been left for dead upon the
place,and was ſtript to his ſhirt ; but a Spaniard coming to cut off his Finger, for a Ring
he could not otherwile pull off, he cried out, and being known, was carried with
the faid Mareſchal into Pawie, to the lodging of the Marqueſs 4e Scadalfol ; ſeveral
other great Lords lolt their Lives, as the Brother to the Duke of Lorrazz, the Admi-
ral de Chabaxes, and many others taken, amongſt whom were the King of Navarre ,
Mclteurs de Nevers, de Montmorency , de Brion , and others ; but I ſhall not taxe the

Ncmory

gy #0 Ic - ut > Ta a Dt

—

i
l
|
|
al

+ 4
— —_— ——— * 4A —

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book I,

The Chara-
ter of Cap-
tain Carbon,

I ——

memory of any one for the loſs of this Battcl 3 nor {et a mark upon thoſe who bcha-
ved themſelves ill cnough, even in the preſence of their Ring. During all the tinic
of my abode in the Army , 1 was continually with a Captain call'd Caſtille de Navarre,
without any pay , which Captain having the tortune to command the torlorn hope in
the day of Battel, intreated me to bear him Company , which accordingly I did, as
alſo the five Gentlemen who came in company with me. I was takcn priſoner by
two Gentlemen of the Company of Don Antoni» de Leva , who upon the Saturday
morning let me go, together with two of my Camrades tor they law thy were
Ikely to get no great trcalure of me, the othcr three were killed in the Battel. Be-
ing now at liberty I retird my (elt into the houle of the Marqucls, where Monfieur Je
Mareſchal lay wounded. Lfound him with Monficur de $t.Po!,both together in one bed,
and Monſicur de Montcjan lodg, d in the fame Chamber, who was allo wounded in his
leg. There Lheard the diſcourtc and diſpute betwixt Sieur Frederick de Bege, who was
priſoner,and Captain $xcra who belong'd to the Empcror upon the loſs of this Battel ,
who accuſed our French of many great overſights, particularly nominating leveral pex-
{ons,whoſe names I am willing to forbear : but I udg'd their opinions to be very good ,
being both of them very great Soldicrs, and what Ithen heard has tince buen lervice-
able to me upon ſeveral occaſions an ule that every one ought to make of 111ch contro-
verſies, who intends to arrive at any degree of pertection in the practice of Aris. A
man mult ſeck not only all occations of preſenting himiclt at all rencounters, and Bat-
tels; but muſt moreover be curious to hear , and carctul to. retein the opinions,
and arguments of cxpericenc d men, concerning the faults, and overſights committed
by Commanders , and the lols, or advantages to the one lide and the other cnfuing
thereupon 3 for it is good to learn to be wite and to become a good Maſter at another
mans expence. The Kingdom of France has long bewailed this untortunate day, wirh
the loſſes we have ſ{uſtain'd , beſides the captivity of this brave Prince, who thought to
have found fortune as favourable to him here, asſhe was at his Batte) with tie Srwiſſe «
but ſhe play'd the baggage, and turn'd her tail making him to know how mconvent-
ent, and of how dangerous conſcquence it 15, to have the perſon of a King expos'd
to the uncertain event of Battel 3 conſidering that his lots brings along with it the ru-
ine of his Kingdem. Almighty God nevertheleſs was plcas'd to look upon this with
an cye of pity , and to preſerve itz for the Conquerors dazled with rhe rayes of victo-
ry loſt their underſtanding,and knew not how to follow their blow; othcrwiſc had Mons
fieur de Bourbon turn'd his Forces towards France, he would have put us all to our
Trumps. | |

The Munday following Monſicur de Bourbon gave order that fuch as were taken pri-
Concrs, and had not wherewithal to pay thcir ranſom , ſhould avoid the Camp, and
rcturn home to their own houfes. Of which number I was one; tor I had no great
treaſure : he gave us indecd a Troop of horles, and a Company ot Foot tor our fafe
conduc : but the Devil a penny ot money, or a bit of bread : infomuch that not one
of us, had any thing but Turnips , and Cabbage-ftalks , which we broyl d upon the
coals, to cat , *till wecame to Ambrun. Bcetore our departure Monticur le Mareſchal
commanded me to commend him to Captain Carbox, and the reti ot his triends, whom
he cntreated not to be dejeded at this misfortune 3 but to rouſe up thar ſpirits, and
endeavour to do better than ever, and that they thould go, and joyn themſelves to
Monſieur de Lautrec his Brother. After which he made me a very notable remon-
{trance , which was not ended without many teazs, and yet dcliver'd with a firon
accent, and an aſſured coutenance, though he was very forc wounded, and ſo much
that the Friday following he dicd, 1 traycll'd on toot as far as Redorte in Lanwedoc,
where his Company then lay 3 whereof Monſicur 4 Lawtrec, attcr his death, gave one
Tertia to Captain Carhon, a command that he did not long cnjoy 3 tor ſoon after a
Villain native of Moxtpellicr , who had favour'd the Camp of Monficur de Bourboy ,
kill'd him behind, as he was riding poſt upon the Road ncar unto Lymel. As great
a loſs as has been of any Captain, who has dicd theſe hundred years 3 and one that
I do believe had he lived to the Wars, that we have fince ſccn, would have perfor-
med wonders , and many would have been made good Captains under his cemmand:
For ſomething, was every day to be lcarn'd by following him, he being one of the moſt
vigilant, and diligent Commanders , that I ever knew, a great undertaker, and very
reſolute in the execution of what he undertook. Another Tertia was given to Cap-
tain i.ignac of Auvergne , who alſo did not keep it keep it long , for he ſhortly after
fell blind and died. The third Tertia he gave to Monficur de Negrepeliſſe, the Father to
him now living, of which a Coſen German of mine called Captain Serillae carried the
Enſign, In

4 - 2 4 a ST. hbt AT 5 OW di CL Mt Ds. —_—

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. | iP:

In the mean time Madame the Queen Regent, Mother to the King , and with her
all the confederate Princes of the Crown , had ſet (cveral Treatics on toot , and labou-
red on all hands the Kings deliverance , with great integrity , and vigour, and to fo
good cffe& , that inthe end thismighty Emperor , who in his imagination had ſ{wal-
low'd up the whole Kingdom of France , gain'd not ſo mich as one inch of earth by
his victory, and the King had the good fortune in his attliCtion to derive affiltance even
from tholc who at other times were his Encmies, yet to whom tic Emperors greatneſs
ſtood highly {uſpc&tcd. His Majelty being at laſt returned home ,, and mindtul of the
injurics , and midignities, had bcen offer'd to him during his captivity, having in vain
trycd all other ways to recover his two Sons out of the Emperors hands, was in the
end conſirain'd to have recourle to Arms, and to recommence the War. And then it
was that the expedition ot Naples was (et on foot under the command of Monticar de
Lautrec , who (as I have already ſaid ) diſpatch'd a Courrier to me into Gaſeony to
raiſe a Company of Foot , which I alſo in a tew days pertorm'd , and brought him be -
twixt ſeven and cight hundred men, of which, tour or hve hundred were Harque-
buſicrs , though at that time there was but very few of them in Fraxce. Ot thele
Monticur de Aruſiu cntreated of me the one balt, for the compleating of his Company,
which 1 granted to him, and we made our divifion near to Alexandria, which at Alexand7iz
this time was ſurrcendred to the (aid Monticur de Laxtrec , who from thence ſent Mef {urrendres.
fieurs de Gramont, and de Montpezat to bclicge the Caſtle de Vigene 3 betore which place,
as we wcre making our approaches , and caiting up trenches to plant the Artillcry , I
was hurt with a Harquebuze ſhot in my right leg, of which ſhot I remain'd lame a
long time after  infomuch that 1 could not beat the tiorming of Pave , which was $04 rake.
carricd by aſſzult , and halt burnt down to the ground. Neverthelcls I cauſed my.},, ke io
(elf to be carricd in a Litter after the Camp , and before Monlieur de Laz- half burnt
zree departed from Plaiſance to march away to Boxlongne , I again began to down.
walk.

Now ncar unto Aſcoly ,therc is a little town called Capiſtrano , ſeated upon the top
of a Mountain, of fo difficult acceſs , that the aſcent is very ſtcep on all ſides, fay-
ing on thoſe of the two Gates , into which a great number of the Soldicrs of the
Country had withdrawn , and fortincd them{elves. The Count Pedro de Navarre ,
who was our Colloncl, commanded: our Gaſcon Companics-to atraque this Pot .
which we accordingly did , and aſſaulted the place. We caus'd ſome * Mantelctts to * Moving
be made wherewith to approach the Wall, in which we made two holes , of capaci- Pent-houles
ty ſufficient for a man catily tv enter in , about fifty or threeſcore paces diſtant the one ene me .
from the other : whercot I having made the one, I would my {c1t needs be the tirlt to HT
enter at that place. The Enemy on the other tide had jn the mean time pulPd up ers uſe to ap-
theplanks, and removed the boards , and tables from the roof of a Parlour into proach a wall.
which this hole was made, and where they had plac'd a great tub full of ſtones. One
of the Companics of Montieur de Lippe our Licutcnant Colonel , and mine pre-
par'd to cnter at this place, and now God had grantcd me the thing , that I had ever
deſfir d , which was to be preſent at an aſlault, there to enter the frit man, or to loſe
my life : I therefore threw my lelf headlong into the Parlour , having on a Coat of
Mail, ſuch as the Germans uſed in thoſe days,a Sword in my hand,a Targuette upon
my arm , and a orrion upon my heads but as thoſe who were at my heels were
preliing to get inaftcr me . the Encmy pour'd the great tub ot ſtones upon their heads ,
and trapt them in the hole, by reaſon whercot the could not poflibly follow. I therefore
rcmain d all alone within tighting at a door that went out into the ſtrect : but from the
root of the Parlo:ir , which was unplank'd, and laid open for that purpoſe , they The Sieur ge
pepper d me in the mean time with an infinite number of Harquebuze ſhot, one of Montluc woun-
which piered my Targuctte, and jthot my arm quite through , within four fingers ge WR. bw
of my hand, and another fo battcr*d the bone at rhe knitting of my arm and ſhoul- For ag BOY
der , that 1 lott all manner of fecling , fo that letting my Targnette fall, I was ©,
conftrain'd to retire towards my hole , againft which 1 was born over by thoſe who
fought at the door of the Parlour : but ſo fortunately neverthelc(s tor me, that my Sol-
diers had, by that micans, opportunity to draw me out by the legs, but ſo leiſurely withal, And the ſame
that they very courtcoully made me tumble hecls over head trom the very top to the Arm at the
bottom of the Graffe , wherein rowling over the ruines of the Stones, I again broke {ame time
my already wounded 21m in two places. So ſoon as my men had gathercd me up, wigs wy
I told them, that I thought I had Icft my arm behind me in the Town, when one of my bd oma
Soldiers lifting it up from whence it hung, as in a Scart, dangling upon my buttocks,
and laying it over the other, put me 1ntoa little heart 3 after which , ſeeing the Sol-

Aiers

3=6, <h

=—Y -* oo
* 4 0 OBA tc 4 6 te. 11 0s A I A SOA £14 AM PR ee roma

Boor't

Capiſtrano ta-
xct1 by allaulr,

Burnt to the
ground,

The Commentaries of Mefſire Blaize

dicrs of my own Company gathcr*d round about me, Oh my Camrades ( ſaid I)
have I always us'd you fo kindly , and ever loved you fo well, to forfake me in fuch
a time as this? which I ſaid, not knowing how they had been hindred trom tollowing
MC Ne

Upon this my Licutenant , who had almoſt been ſtifled to death in the hole , call'd
ls Baſtide ( Father tothe Savillans now living, and one of the bravett Gentlemen in
our Army) propos'd to two Baſque Captains calPd Martiy and Ramonet, who al-
ways quartcr'd near unto my Company 3 that it they would with Ladders ftorm by a
Canton ofthe wall hard by , he would undertake, at the ſame time, to enter by the
hole it (elf, and cither force his entry that way, or loſe his lite 11 the attempt. To
which Ialſo encouraged them , as much as my weakneſs would permit. The Ladders
being theretore preſently brought, and tyed together , becauſe they proved too ſhort,
la Baſtide made towards the hole , having ſent to the other Captains to do as much to
the other.3 but they did no great feats. In the interim that /a Baftide was fighting
within, having alrcady gained the hole , Martin and Ramonet gave a brave Scalado to
the Canton , and with fo good ſucceſs , that they beat the Enemy ixom the wall, and
entred the Town. Of this being preſently advertis'd , I ſent to 1; Bajtide to conjure
him to ſave me as many women and maids as he poſſibly could , that they might not
be violated (having that in devotion for a vow I had made to our Lady of Lorerta, hop-
ing that God, for this good a&t , would pleaſe to be afliſting to me) which he did;
bringing fifteen or twenty , which were alſo all that were faved 3 the Soldiers being
{o animated to revenge the wounds I had receiv'd , and to expreſs their aftection to
me, that they killed all before them , ſo much as to the very children , and moreover
{ct the Town on fire. And although the Biſhop of Aſcoly (this being a member of his
Dioceſs) was very importunate with Monſieur de Lazrec in behalt of the Town , the
Soldiers could notwithſtanding never be made to leave it, till they ſaw it reduced to
Aſhes. Thenext day I was carryed to Aſeoly , where Monſieur de Lantrec ſent Meſ-
ſicurs de Gramont, aud de Montpezat to ſee how I did, with whom he morcover ſent
two Chirurgeons the King had given him at his departure, the one called Maſter Ale/wme,
and the other Mafter George 3 who, after they had ſeen how miſerably wy arm was
mangled, and ſhattcr'd, poſitively pronounced , that there was no other way to fave
my lite, but to cut it off, the execution whereot was deterr'd till the next morning.
Monſieur de Lawutrec thereupon commanded the ſaid Sieurs de Moxtpezat and de Gramont
to be preſent at the work, which they promiſed they would, but not without ſome
difficulty , out of the friendſhip they both had for me, eſpecially the Sicur de Gramont.
Now you mult underſtand that my Soldiers had , a few days before , taken priſoner
a young man, a Chirurgion , who had formerly belong d to Monhicur de Boxrbog.
This young fellow having underſtood the determination to cut oft my arm ( for I had
entertan'd him into my {crvice) never ceaſed to importune me, by no means to endure
it; repreſenting to me . that I was not, as yet, arrived to the one halt of my age, and
that 1 would wiſh my ſelf dead an hundred times a day , when 1 ſhould come to be ſen«
ible of the want of an arm. The morning being come , the torementioned Lords,
and the two Chirurgions, and Phyſicians, came into my chamber with all their inſtru-
mcnts, and plaiſters , without more ceremony , or giving me ſo much as leiſure to re-
pent, to cut off my arm , having in command from Monſieur de Lawtrec to tell me,
that T ſhould not conlider the Joſs of an Arm, to fave my lite 3 nor deſpair of my fpr-
tune for although his Majeſty ſhould not regard my ſervice , nor take 1t into confi-
dcration to ſettle a ſubſiſtence for me , yet that nevertheleſs his wite , and himſelf, had
forty thouſand Livers a year revenue, wherewith to recompence my valour, and to
provide that I ſhould never want 3 only he wiſhed me to have patience , and to mani=-
tcſt my courage upon this occation. Every thing being now rcady , and my arm
going to be opened to be cut oft; the young Chirurgeon ſtanding behind my bed's head,
ncver deliſted preaching to me by no means to ſuffer it, infomuch that (as God would
have it) though I was prepared, and rclolved to letthem do what they would with me,
he made me to alter my determination 3 whereupon, without doing any thing more,
both the Lords, and the Chirurgeons return'd back to Monſicur de Lamntree to give him
an account of the buſineſs , who (as they have all of them (everal times fince aſſured
me) {aid theſe words. TI am glad to hear he # ſo reſolved, and ſhould alſo my ſelf have
repented the caufing of it tobe done 3 for bad be dyed, T ſhould ever have ſuſpeed my ſelf to
have been the occaſion of his death and had he lived without an arm, I ſhould never have look-
ed upon bim, but with exceeding great trouble , to ſee him in ſuch a condition let God there-
fore work hs will.

Immediately

F »
*
$a
*£
S ;
»e
i
4>&
3,
Fo
S,
Y
.
:

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

Immediatcly after the two torenamed Chirurgions came to examine mine , whether
or no he was {uſhcient to undertake the cure 3 for otherwiſe it was order'd, that one
of them ſhould remain with me 3 but they tound him capable enough , to which the
alfo added ſome inſtructions , what was to be done upon fuch accidents as might hap-
pen. Thenext day , which was the fourth after my hurt, Monhicur de Lawutree cauſed
me to be carried after him to Termes de Breſſs, where he Ictt me in his own quartcrs, to
the care of the man of the houſe , who was a Gentleman, and for the farther afltirance
of my perſon, carrycd Hoſtages with him, two of the moſt conſiderable men of the
Town, whcrcot one was brother to the Gentleman oi the houle , afturing them, that
it any the Jeatt foul play was oficr d tome, thoſe two men ſhould intallibF be hang'd.
In this place Lremain'd two months and a half, lying continually upon my reins, in-
ſomuch that my very back bone picrced thorough my sKkin, which is doubtl(5 the grea-
teſt torment, that any one 1n the world can pollivly endure 3 and although I have writ-
ten in this narrative of my tte, that I have been one of the moſt fortunate men, that have
born arms thele many years, in that T have cver been victorious wherever I comman-
ded 5 yet have not been exempt from great wounds, and dangerous tickneſſes, of
which I have had as many, and as great, as any man ever had , who outliv'd them.
God being till pleaſed to curb my pride, that I might know my felt, and acknow-
ledg all good, and cvil to depend npon his pleaſure: but all this notwithſtanding a
(curvy, four, morolec, and cholerick nature of my own (which favours a little, and
too much of my native Soul ) has cvermore made me play one trick, or another of a
Gaſcon , which alſo 1 have no great reaton to--repent. - So ſoon as my arm was come
toa peric& {uppuration, they began to raiſe me ont of Bed, having a little cathion
under my arm , and both that, and my arm {watly'd up clole to my body In this
polturel continucd a tew days longer , until mounting a little Mule that I had, I
cauſed my {clt to be carried betore Naples , where our Camp was already fate down,
having firſt {cnt away a Gentleman of mine on foot to our Lady of Lyozetta to accompliſh
my vow , Imy felt being in no condition to perform it. The pain I had tufter'd,,
was ncither ſo inſupportable, nor ſo great, as the atfl:tion I had, not to have been pre-
{cnt at the taking of Malphe, and other places 3 nor at the deteating of the Prince of
Orange ,, who aiter the death of Monfieur de Bourbox (Jain at the Sack of Rowe) com-
manded the Imperial Army. Had not this valiant Prince (ot deplorable mcmory ,
for the foulncſs of his revolt from his Lord, and Maſter) dyed in the very heighe
of his Victories, I do bclicvc he had {cnt us back the Popes into Avigney once again,

At.my arrival at the Camp, Monheur de Lautree, and all the other great pcrlons
of the Army, received me with great demonttrations of kindnels, and eltcem, and par-
ticularly Count Pedro de Navarre, who cauted a confiſcation to be fertled upon me of
the value of twelve hundred Duckets yearly revenue callPd 12 Torr dela Nunciade, one
of the fairctt Caſiles in all the Tertitory of Labor , and thc tirft Barony of Naples
belonging to a rich Spaniard call d Do Ferdizo. 1 then thought my felt the greateſt
Lord in all ©. Arwy : but Itound my fclt the pooreti Rouge in the end,as you ſhall ſee
by the contiuuation of this dilcourle. I could here dilate at tull how the Kingdom
of Naples was Ioit, after it was almolt wholly conquer'd 3 a ftory that has been writ
by many : but it is great pity they would not, or durſt not rclate the truth, being that
Kings and Princes might have been taught to be ſo wary by this Excmple, as not to ſuffer
themſclves to be impoſed upon, and abulcd, as they very often are: but no body would
have the great oncs lcarn to be too wile , for then they could not play their own Games
with them ſo well, as they commonly do. I ſhall theretore lct it alone.jboth tor that I do
not pretend to record the faults of other men , as alſo becauſe I had no hand in theſe
tranſactions , and ſhall only write my own Fortancs to ſcrve tor inſtruction to {uch as
ſhall follow aftcr, that the little Montlzcs my {ons have left me, may look with fome
kind of Glory into the lite of their Graudtather, and aim at honorable things by his Ex-
emple. :

There were no preat matters perform'd after my ceming to the Camp neither did
they buſie themſelves about any thing but the City of Naples , Which allo they inten-
ded to overcome by Famine , and it mult ſuddainly have tallen into our hands, had it
not been for the revolt of Andrea d Auria, who lent to Count Philippin his Nephew

to bring back his Gallics to Geoz , with which he kept the City of Naples fo cloſe +

——  —— — ——
=2- <5. oe i —_———

17

Tae revolt of

block*d up by Seca, that a Cat could not have got in 3 which he immediately did, and 424rc 4 4
thereupon an infinite of provition was put into the Town by Sca, whillt our Gallies 44.

dclay'd to come. God torgive him who was the caule thereof , without which acci-
dent the Town had bcen our own, and conſcquently the whole Kingdom. This
Philipbin

—
$ L s

_—_

_—

= _ 4 0 Ls ” & - wg - WY =
GONE 59 * —_ — O—_ Pay er as
——T penn S_—L ER ——_— 4 — _ RE
Ce LE _ — =. ; ANNIE 42. " £2 In I _ mIEW
- on ern «2 —--.. Zoe. EE REL = ne ne ns
* ao 2 .$- be w _ 0m - . i d— o MARC 4 -
<3 SONY, 0 DE re nc EE era

CLAOPR”
_

— OE oo rr—_
* IB —_
=y

> 2 IB
=O, => me -t

a 0 —— we _——_—

PT, EE ee aa «as x - _—_ -
Sao
0 OY ny a II OY :
: .. 1 4 ie : WI?
L »

9 OOO

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize

Book I.

va

The death of
Signior G10-
wanni de ME-

dicis,

—_— _—— —_— — —— —— _ ——— T_T OS OT TO 4 thn ns & eG

Agreat Na- Philippin Licutenant or Vice-Admiral to Andrea d' Auria, ncar unto Capo-dorſo obtai-
victory

obtein'd by
Philippin d'
Auria,

ncd a famous Naval Vidtory over Hugo de Moncada, and the Marquets de Gui , who
came to the reliet of Naples 3 but from this Victory proccecd.d our ruine: tor Philippin
having ſcnt his priſoners to his Uncle to Gexo.z, and the Ring being importurate to
have them deliver'd over to him, Axdrea 4” Auria would by no means part with them,
complaining that he had already dclivercd up the Prince of Orange to the King, with-
out any recompence 3 upon which occation the Marquels de Grt.z{t ( a man of as gre
dextcrity, and cunning as any of his time, and a great Warriour) knew f{o well how
to manage Andrea d' Auria's diſcontent, that in the end he turn'd his coat , and with
twelve Gallies went over to the Emperor's fide. The King our Malter was well e-
nough informcd of all his practices, and might cafily enough have prevented the miſ-
chiet 3 but his heart was {o great, and he was fo higly oftended with Aria, that he
would never ſeek to: him , whereot he repented at leiſure : tor he has tince been
the cauſe of many loſſes that have bcetall'n the Ring, and particularly of the King-
dom of Naples, Genoa, and other misfortunes, It fecnvd as it the Sea ttood in aw
of this man 3 wherefore without a very great, and morc than ordinary occation , he
was not tit to have been provoked, or diſguſicd : but perhaps the Ring might have
{orc other reaſon.

In the end our Gallies arriv'd, and brought with them the Prince of Navarre ,
Brother to King Henry, with ſome tew Gentlemen only of his train , who lived but
three weeks after 3 for he came mn the beginning of our ſickneſs. At his landing Mon-
ficur de Laxtrec {cnt Michael Antonio Marqueſs of Saluzz» tor his Convoy ( tor he
landed alittle below 1a Magd4aleine within halt a mile of Naples) and with bim a great
part of the Gezs d' Armes, with the black Italian Regiments, which were commanded
by Count Hugues de Gennes , finice the death of Signior Horatio Bailhoxe, and had been
the Companies of Signior Gzovanni de Medicis, Father to the Duke of Florence that
now is, who had been wounded 1m his leg, with a Harquebuze ſhot before Parie,
being then inthe Kings Service, and was thence carried to Plaiſance , where he had his
leg cut off,and thereot ſoon atter dyed, and after his death the (aid Signior Horatio took
upon him the command of his Companies. It ſeem'd that God would at that time
{ome evil to the King , when he lay before Pavie. For in the firſt place ſome one
advis'd him to ſend away the Griſos, ſecondly to ſend Monlicur 4' A!bain to Rome
with another part of the Army , and for the (um of all misfortunes God ſent this mi{-
chance to Signior Gzovannz , who ( to ſpeak the truth ) underſtood more of the at-
fairs of War , than all therett , who were about the King , having three chouland
Foot under his command, the beſt that ever were in Ttaly, with three Corncets of horſe,
and I do verily believe ( and there are ſeveral others of the fame opinion _) that, had
he been well at the Battel, matters had not gone lo ill as they did. Signior Horatio
afterwards cncreas'd the number a thouſand men , which made up four thouſand foot,
who carricd black Enfigns tor the death of the faid Signior Giovannt, and were more-
over all put into mourning , from whence they deriv'd the name of the Black Regi-
ments , and afterwards affociated themſelves to the Marquels of Saluzzo , who tem-

poriz'd for about two years 11 Tzaly,and about Florence, and afterwards join'd with our

Army at Troyes, or ellc at Nocera, I am not certain which, for that Ilay at the fame time
wounded at Termes en Breſſee

But to retarn to the landing of the Prince 0f Navarre, becauſe there was ſomething
of Action there pertormed wherein 1 had a ſharc, I ſhall give an account of that bulinels.
Captain Artigzelaube( who was Colonel of tive Gaſcon Enfigns waich were wont to
be under Monficur de Lwppee, and of tive othcrs commanded by the Baron 4e Bear )
was commanded, as alſo was Captau de Buch, eJdeft fon of the Family of Caxdale, to
draw down to that place, and I alſo (poor wretch as I was) was one of the num-
ber. So ſoon as we were got down to the ſhore , the Marqueſs left all our Pikes
behind a great Rampire , which the Count Pedro de Navarre had cauſcd to be caſt up,
and that extended on the right hand, and on the let, for about halfa mile in length.
Cloſe 2djoyning to this was a great Portal of Stone, through which tcn, or twelvemen
might march a brealt, and that I do bclieve had been a Gate in former times , for the
Arch,and other marks thereof were ſtill remaining 3 to the checks of which Portal , our
Rampire was brought up, both on the one fide, and the other. Our Battaillon was
drawn up about an hundred paces diſtant from this Portal, the Black Regiments ſome
three hundred paces behind ours, and the greateſt part of the Horſe yet further behind
thcm. Monficur le Margais, Monlicur Je Captan, the Count Hugaes, Captain Artigues.
laabe, and almoſt all the Captains as well Tralians as Gaſcons along with them , went

doiv n

_-

Book |. Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

- 2 CS CR —— ———— —S— ——+——
_ ——— -.- — , _ _ _ - — "5

down as well to facilitate, as to be preſent at the Princes Landing 3 which (aid Sergneur
Captan had fix Enligns , three of Piedmontoiſe , atid three of Gaſcons. They were {6
long about their landing, that they there ſtaid three long hours 3 for they made the
Prince to ſtay and dine abroad, before he came out of the Galley : a little delay ſome-
+ times occaſions a great miſchief, and it had been better, that both he, and all the com-
pany with him had madea good ſober faſt 3 but the vanity of the world is ſuch, that
they think themſelves undervalued it they do not move in all the formalities of State,
and in ſo doing commit very often very great errors. It were more convenient to move
in the Equipage of a ſimple Gentleman only,and not to Prince it at that rate, but to do
well, than to ſtand upon ſuch frivolous pundillios, and be the cauſe of any miſadven-
ture, or diſorder.

Captain Artiguelaube in the mean time had plac'd me with threcſ{core or fourſcore
Harquebuticrs upon the croſs of a high way very near to the Magdalcine, which is a
great Church ſome hundred, or two hundred paces diſtant from the Gates of Naples ;
and upon another crols of the high way, onthe left hand of me , where there ltood
a little Oratory , two or three hundred Harquebulters of the black Regiments, with
an Enſign of Pikes 3 In the ſame place alſo, and a little on the one fide, was plac'd
£ the Company of Scigneur de Candale, conlifting of two or three hundted Harque-
2 buſicrs, about two hundred paces diſtant from, and juſt over againſt the place where
I food. Being thus upon my Guard Ifaw both horlc and foot iſſuing out of Naples,
and coming full drive to gain the Magdaleine ; whereupon mounting a little Mule that
| I had, I gallop'd firaight down to the water ſide. All the Lotds and Gentlemen were
| as yct on board, carefſing, and complementing one another, to whom by certain Skip-
| pers that were plying too and again betwixt the Gallies, and the Shoar, I caugs'd it to

be cry d out , that the Enemy was fallying out of the Town by whole Troops to in-

tercept them , and to recover the blind of the Magdaleine , and that they ſhould think
| of tighting, it they ſo pleaſed; an intelligence at which ſome were baſely down in| the
| mouth , tor every one that ſets a good face on the matter has no great ſtomach to

tight. I preſently return*d back to my men, and went up ſtraight to the Magdalcine ,
from whence I ditcover'd the Enemics Horſe fallying out diſmounted , with the bri-
dlcs in the one hand, and their Launces in the other , ſtooping as much as they could,
to avoid being, ſeen, as alſo did the Foot, who crept on all four behind the walls
E that encloſed the backſide of the Church : I then preſently gave my Muleto a Soldi-
: er, bidding him ride 1n all haſt to acquaint Monſieur de Candale , and Captain Artigue-
laube therewith , whom he found already got on ſhore , and who upon my tirſt adver-
7 tiſement, had caus'd a Galley to put out to Sea, from whence they diſcover'd all that
3 I had told them, which being in the Port they could not poſſibly do. This Galley up-
on the ſight preſently began to let fly whole broad-fides of Canon at us, one whereot
kill'd two mcn of my Company cloſe by me,and ſo near that the bratas both of the one,
and the other flew into my face. There was very great danger in that place, for all the
bullets, as well of this Galley , as of the others, which did the {ame, play'd directly
; into the place where I was, inſomuch that ſeeing them till to continue their ſhot (tor
thoſe of the Gallies took us for the Enemy) I was conſtrain'd todraw off my men in-
to the ditches to lecure them.
| In the mean time they mounted the Prince in all haſt on horſeback, and made him to
{ave himſelf full ſpecd towards the Camp, all his Gentlemen running after on foot.
They had no great leilure to ſtay with us, for I believe being fo lately come,they had
no mind to dye. Their haſt was fo great that they had no time to land,cither the Princes
Baggage, or his Bed, and there were ſome, who were wiſe enough to keep themlelves
aboard the Gallies. But the Seigneur de Candale, and Count Hugues were men of ano-
ther ſort of mettle, and fiaid upon the croſs high way where their men had been
plac'd bctorc; and Captain Artigzelaube went to the Battaillon, that was drawn up
behind the Rampire, The Game began with me, and 1 do not know whether it be my
3 good or my cvil fortune but fo it is that in all places where I have been, that I
1 have evermore tound my {ſelf in the thickeſt of the blows, and there where the buſi-
[2 nels ever firſt began. Now a Band of Harquebuſiers came direatly towards me, run-
3 ning : and that becauſe I had plac d one part of my Harquebufiers behind a ditch bank
| that borders all along upon the high way, and thereſt on the right and left hand in
the ditches in file Cwhich I did more for fear of the Artillery, that plaid from our own
Gallies, than for any apprehenlion of the Enemy) and came within twenty paces of
us, where we entertein'd them with a (mart volly of all our ſhot , by which hve or fix
of their men fell dead upon the ground , and the reſt took their heels, and fled, we

D 2 tok-

— —
__ — CO ao» - OT x

The Fizfit.

ITO

20

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaizs Book [;

Captain de
Buch, Count
A? Candalle
ain,

foilowing after as far as the Magdalcine. There they rallycd, and withdrew from the
high way on their 1jght hand, and on that fide where Monheur de Lavall of Danphine
ficod with his Company of Gens- & Armes, he was Nephew to Montkur de Bayard, and
Father to Madame de Gordes, who is at this time living, and a very valiant Gentleman.
Monſieur de Candalle , who had (cen my Charge , and ſaw that the Enemy now all
diſcover d themſelves, and that both Horſe and Foot drew into a great Meadow ,
where Montieur de Laval! ſtood 3, fearing they might charge me again , he ſent me a
(upply of fifty Harquebuſters, juſt at the time when a Battaillon ot G:rman Foot pre-
ſented themſelves within twenty paces on my right hand. The Spaniſh Harquebutiers
in the mean time fhr'd with great fury upon our Gens- d' Armes, who began to draw
off at a good round trot towards the high way poſſeſſed by Monlicur de Candalle,
where there was a great overſight committed , which 1 will allo give an account of,
that ſuch as ſhall read it , may make uſe of the exemple , when the chance of War
( as at one time or another it may )) ſhall perhaps reduce them to the {ame condi-
t10N. |

Count FHgues, and Monſieur de Candalle had drawn up their Pikes upon the great
Road, without leaving room for the Cavalry to retire , and there was a neceſſity
that Monſieur de Lavall muſt, in ſpite of his heart, paſs that way; for betwixt
Monſhiefir de Candalle and me there wasa great ditch, that Horſe could not poſſibly
get over. Had they left the Road open , and drawn themſelves up in Battalia behind
the ditch , they might have givena ſtop to the Enemies fury 3 and by that means Mon-
fieur de Lavall , might at great caſe have got oft along by the high way , and have
made an honorable retreat. So ſoon as the Enemy ſaw that Monſieur de Lavall was
forced to his Trot they preſently charg'd him both in flank , and rear, with both
Horſe and Foot at once, when having thrown himſelf into the Road to get clear of
this ſtorm, he encountred theſe Pikes upon his way , where he was conltrained a-
gaintt his will to force his way thorough, and in ſo doing bore down, and trampled
under foot all that ſtood before him 3 for our Pikes were drawn up (o cloſe that they
had no room to open. This put all into confuſion, and I was ready to run mad to
ſee ſo great an abſurdity committed 3 yet is not the blame juſtly to be laid upon Mon-
fieur de Candalle, he being very young , and having never been upon ſuch a ſervice
before: but Count Huges is highly to be condemned, who was an old Soldier, and
underſtood the diſcipline of War 3 yet I will not ſay but that he behaved himſelf with
very great bravery in his own perſon: but it is not encugh to be bold, and hardy,
a man muſt alſo be wiſe, and foreſee all that can happen, toraſmuch as overlights are
Irreparable in matters of Arms, and {mal faults are oftentimes the occaſion of very
great loſſes , as it happened here to him , who had not provided againſt all adven-
tures : For he was himlſclt taken priſoner, as alſo Monſieur de Cazdalle, being woun-
ded inhis arm with a Harquebuze ſhot. Three days aftcr, the Enemy ſeeing he was
not likely to live, ſent him back to Monſieur de Laztrec, who was his Kinſman, and the
next day he dicd, and was buried at Þreſſe.

He was a brave, and a worthy young man as ever came out of the houſe of Foix,
and would in time doubtleſs have been a great Soldicr, had he lived to hold on as he
had begun, I never knew man ſo induſtrious , and defirous to learn the practice of
arms of the old Captains, as this Lord was. To which efte& he rendred himſelf as
obſequious to the Count Pedro de Navarre, as the meaneſt of his Servants. He was in-
quiſitive into the reaſons of things , and informed himlclt of all, without fooling away
his time about trifles , that other young men covet and love: and was more frequent at
the Quarters of the Count Pedro de Navarre , than at thoſe of Monſieur de Laxtrec 3 in-
Comuch that the Count would always ſay, he was there training up a great Captain.
And in truth when he was brought back into the Camp, the ſaid Count kiſsd him
with tcarsin his eyes. It was a very great loſs of him, All who were at the ſame poſt
were Cither kill'd, or taken, ſome excepted, who ſaved themſeſves by the ditches .,
leaping from ditch to ditch, but thoſe were very few, for the Enemy purſued
their victory on that fide very well.

I on my fide began to march along by the fide of a hedg, with my face ſtill towards
the German Foot , the lefler evil of the two, and by good fortune both for me, and
my Company the Enemy jn my rear purſued us coldly enough. At my coming to the
Portal 1ſpoke of before, I there found a great Troop of the Enemies Horſe , comman-
ded by Don Ferdinando de Gonzaga (tor it was he who gave the charge ) ſo that to
recover the Portal I muſt of neceſfity fight with a reſolution either to paſs thorough ,

or die. I made my men therefore to give them a volly of Harquebuze ſhot , for I for

my

M40

Book [. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

21

my part had nothing wherewith to hight , but my voice 3 upon which volly they made
me way, fo that having paſs'd the portal, I tac'd about, and ftood firm. At which
time their Harquebuſiers allo came up, who at once altogether charged upon us, with
all their united power both of Horſe and Foot 3 when ſeeing this torrent coming upon
' me, I recover'd the back fide of the Trench, with my Harquebnhiers only , who had
ſaved themſelves from the firſt encounter 3 which. the Marqueſs ſeeing , he was in fo
great a perplexity, that he gave us all over for lolt. I there diſputed the portal a long

halt hour from the back ſide of the Trench, for it remained tree, as well on their fide, -

a5 on ours 3 they durſt not attempt to paſs, neither did we dare to approach it. It e-
ver Soldiers plaid the men , theſe did it at this time 3 for all that I had with me could

not ariſe to above an hundred and htty men. The Marqueſsthen came up to Captain
Artegnelanbe , to make him rilc, they being all couched upon one knee, tor had they

ſtood upright , the Spaniſh Foot had had them in their aim , and cryed to him, Cap-
tain Arteawelaube , I beſcech you rife, and charge, tor we mult of necellity paſs the
Portal : But he returned him an{wer , that he could not do it without loting the beſt
of our men , as it was very true, for all the Spaxzſ} Foot were then come up. I was
cloſe by the Portal, and heard all; but the Marquels not fatished with this anſwer ,
ſpurred up to the black Regiments, commanding them to march up towards the Portal,
which they accordingly did. Iknew by the manner of their motion , what command
they had received , which was the reaſon that I ftept out, and cried to Captain Arte-
guelanbe, Camrade, you are about to be diſgraced for ever, for here are the Black Re-
giments, that, upon my life, are making towards the Portal, to carry away the honor
of the ſervice z at which words he ſtarted up (for the man wanted no courage) and ran
full drive towards the Portal, when ſeeing him come, 1 ſuddenly threw my ſelf before
the Portal, and paſſed with all thole who followed me, marching fſiraight towards
the Enemy , who were not above a hundred paces diſtant from usz we were imme-
_ diately followed by the Foot, ſent by the Marqueſs : but as we were halt paſſed tho-
rough, the Marqueſs gave the word from hand to hand, to make a halt, and to advance
no turther. The Enemy ſeeing us come on with ſuch reſolution, and the Cavalry
following in our Rear, thought it the wiſeſt courſe to retire, I was by this time ad-
vanced wherewe were plying one another , with good round vollies of ſhot, at fifty
paces diſtance, and we had a good mind to fall on to the Sword , when the Marquels,
and another Gentleman with him, came himfelt on horfeback to ſtay me. I think he
did illinit for had weall paſſed thorough, we had certainly purlued them fighting
upto the very Gates of Naples. There was in this place very many on both fides bea-
ten to the ground, that never roſe again, andI admire how 1 eſcaped, but my hour was
not come.

That which occaſioned the Marqueſs to retire , was the fear he had of tempting for-
tune a ſecond time 3 he was contented with what he had already lott , without being
willing to hazard any more 3 fo that tired out, and over ſpent, we return'd to re-
paſs the Portal , that had been fo long diſputed , where a great many good men lay
dead upon the place. There it was that the Gentleman who was with the Marqueſs,
when he came to command me to retire , I have forgot his name, faid to him (for I
heard him very well) Monſter, I now ſee that the antient proverb is true , which ſays,
that one man is wortb an hundred , and an hundred are not ſo good as one : I ſpeak it by this
Captain who bas his arm in a ſcarf, and leans to the Rampire ( for in truth I was quite
. (pent) for it muſt needs be wp nn, that be is the only cauſe of our preſervation. I

heard likewiſe well enough, though I took no notice of it, the Marqueſs make him
this anſwer. That man will always do well wherever he is. A paſſage, that although it be
to my honor, and my own commendation , I would however inſert it here, without
bragging neverthelc(s, or vainglory. I have acquir'd honor enough beſides: but this
may. perhaps ſerve to excite the other Captains, who ſhall read my Lite, to do the

fame upon the like occafion. And I mult needs confeſs that I was then better pleaſed

with this Character, that this Gentleman, and the ſaid Marqueſs were pleaſed to give

of me, than if he had given me the beſt Mannor in his poſſeſſion 3 though I was at
that time very poor. This commendation made my heart to (well with courage, and
yet more when I was told , that ſome one had entertained Monheur de Laxtrec, and
the Prince with the ſame diſcourſe, all the time they fate at Supper. Thele little points of
honor ſerve very much in matters of War,and are the cauſe that when a man ſhall again
happen to be in the like ſervice, he fears nothing : ic is very true that men are ſome-
fimes miſtaken, and gain nothing but blows : but there 15 no remedy for that, we muft
give and take.

| | You

 ———

22 The Commentaries of Meſſre Blaize Book I.

You Captains, and Lords who lead men on to death (tor War 15 nothing cl{c) when
you ſhall (ee a brave a& performed by any of your followers , commend hin in pub-
| lick, and morcover relate it to others who were not preſent at the ſervice : it his heart
| fitina right place , he will value ſuch a teſtimony more than all the treaſure of the
world , and upon the next occaſion will ſtrive to do ſtill better. But if (as too ma-
ny do) you ſhall not dclign to regard, or to take notice of the braveli exploit can by
man be performed, and look upon all things withan eye of diſdain, you will tind that
you mult recompence them by effets, tince you would not vouchſate to do it by
word of mouth. I have ever treated the Captains ſo, who have been under m
command, and even the meaneſt of my Soldiers 3 by which they thought them-
l {elves ſo obliged, that I could have made them run their heads againti a wall, and
| - rnd ſtood firm in the moſt dangerous poſt in the world, as ( for exemple ) I
| id here.

This was the firſt misfortune , and the firſt diſgrace , that had yet befallen us in
all this Expedition. It ſeemed to all the world that the Prince of Navarre brought
Al us all miladventure and miſhap : would to God he had ſtaid in Gaſcony 3 neither had
| it been the worſe for him, who came only to end his days a great way from home ,

| The death of Witho:t doing any thing but taking a view of Naples. He dycd three weeks, or there
1 the Prince of abouts, after his arrival, and was the occaſion of the death of this brave young Lord
\ Navarre. (which I ſhall ever lament) who alſo had the honor to be his Kinſman. Yet was not
| this all, for ſo ſoon as it was known that ſuch a Prince was arrived, every one pre-
þ ſently concludedthat he had brought ſome confiderable ſuccours,and relict,at leaſt mone
| for the pay of the Army: but there was nothing of all this 3 for neither he, nor the
= Gallics brought us one man of recruit 3 nor any other thing, but his own retinue, and
| | | {ome few Gentlemen Voluntiers 3 which was a great diſcouragement to our diſtreſſed

|
|
| SS
|

Army , and the Enemy, who were very well informed of all, took new heart at it,

|
'f knowing very well by that, that the Waters of France were very low , when a Prince of
| his condition, cane to ſuch a Siege as this, in an equipage, as if he had only come a-
| broad to (ee the world : but the fault ought not to lie at his door, they were too blame
' that ſent him.
*Ts a great fault in Kings and Princes , who put men upon great attempts, to take
ſo little care of thoſe whom they know to be engaged in an enterprize of ſo great im-
portance,as was this of the Sieur de Laztrec : for the taking of Naples had very much af
| ſured the State of France , which by that means would have had its arms at liberty
Pt tor many years, and we ſhould have diſputed it long , had it once been ours, for we
|; ſhould have been made wiſe by our precedent loſſes. The King committed yet ano-
fi ther overſight innot ſending ſome handſom Troop of Gentlemen, and ſome conſide-
| G Table Body of Foot with this young Prince , the neglect of which (as I have already
[ ' faid ) made our people believe , either that he did not much regard us; or that his
}
|

RE  G Le _G=___C_.C@CR' ST” TR TT CO
DC us VI EL eros aye > on Iron er tree
> —_ —_

ba... 4 COT IIS
s

hands were full, and that he had el{ewhere cnough to do. Wherein Monſieur de Lawu-
} trec was by no means to be blam'd , who never ceaſed to ſend diſpatch after diſpatch ,
"UF and poſt after poſt, to give his Majeſtic an account of all; but I return to my (elf; for
if (as I have always declar'd) I will by no means play the Hiſtorian: 1t I ſhould, I ſhould
[! have enough to do, and ſcarce know at which end to begin.
F

| This was the laſt engagement where I had any thing to do, wherein though I did
lid not command in chief , yet had I notwithſtanding the command of a very good Com-
Fl pany of Foot , and had my full ſhare of the hight that was very handiom ; but not
i | for all z which | have ſet down to acquit my (<lt of my promiſe, to wit, that I would
| give a particular account of all thoſe paſſages, wherein I had the honor to command :
paſſing the ret lightly over , as I do the remainder ofthis unfortunate Siege , which we

The deach of Were at laſt conſirained to raiſe , Monſieur de Lawtrec being dead, to the great misfor-

| w Monſficur 4z tune of all France, which never had a Captain endowed with better qualities than he
bi Lautrec, was: but he was unhappy, and ill afſiſied by the King, after His Majeſty had enga-
rt ged him, as he did firſi at Millan, and now laſtly betore Naples. For my part with
by | that little that was ſaved , which was almoſt nothing, I return'd the greateſt part of
L | my Journey on foot, with my armina ſcarf ( having above thirty Ells of Taffeta a-
ll ard bout me, foraſmuch as they had bound my arm and my body together with a cuſhion

| between ) wiſhing a thouſand times rather to die, than to live; for I had loſt all my
j Maſters and Friends, who knew, and lov'd me, being all dead , excepting Monſicar

a. de Montpezat (the Father of this now living) and poor Dox Pedro our Colonel taken, and
j

h Of Don Pedro carricd priſoner into the Rock of Naples, where they put him to death , the Emperor
j | de Navarre. having commanded, that for the reward of his revolt, they ſhould cut off his head. He

WAS

LIP 4,
b : ks 6 NE
4 VE © -
RES RE > 5

DE
x

© 6 I
IT EAST © oe or
= nt ie
EET GED

x. id, WT he
CS He EG
NS nd, Bra F — et
Se Er roo OR Wie
Tet GS bf Boer

Dom

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

was a man of great underttanding, in whom Monticur de Laxtrec ( who conhded in
few perſons ) had a very great conhdence. 1 do allo believe (and am not fingle in
that opinion) that he counſelled him ill in this War 3 but what! we only judg by
Events. |

In this handſom cquipage , I came home to my Fathers houſe, where, poor Gentlc-
man , Ifound him engag?*d in too many neceflities of his own , to be in any capacity of
much aſſiſting me3 foraſmuch as his Father had ſold three parts of tour of the Ettate of
the Family, and had left the remainder charg'd with tive children , by a kccond venture,
beſides us of my Fathers,who were no lets than ten. By which any one may judg,in what
neceſſities we whoare come out of the Family of Montluc have been conlirained to fol-
low the fortuncs of the world. And yet our houſe was not {o contemptible , but that
it had near upon five thouſand Livers ycarly revenue bclonging to 1t , betore it was
ſold. To fit my {lf in all points 1 was conſtrained to ſtay three years at home, with-
aut being able to get any cure for my arm, and after I was cur'd I was to begin the
world again, as I.did the firſt day 1 came out from a Page, and as a perſon une
known {eek my fortune in all forts of necefſiities , and with extream peril of my
life. I praiſe God for all, who in all the traverſes of my lite, has ever been af
liſting to me.

Upon the firſt motions of War King Francis inſtituted his Legionatres , which ' he Legion-
was a very fine invention , had it been well purſued ( tor a ſtart all our Laws, and ®ires 1nftitu-

Ordinances are obſerved , and kept, but after a while negle&ed, and let down ) tor ©
it is the true and only way to have always 2 good Army on Foot ( as the Romans did)
and to train up the peopleto War , though I know not whether that b2 good or evil. It
has been much controverted, though l tor my part had rather truſt to my own people ,
than to ſtrangers.

Of theſe the King gave one thouſaud to the Seneſchal of Thoulouſe, Seigneur de Fauds-
24s , Who made me his Licutenant Colonel , and although 1t was the Langnedoc Le-
gion, aud that he was Colonel, 1 neverthele(s raiſed him all his Regiment in Grienne,
and appointed him all his Captains , Lieutcnants , Enfigns, Serjeants , and Corpo-
rals. A great rumor was at that time ſpread over all Fraxce, that the Emperor turough
the great intelligences he had within, was, for the conqueſt of ſuch, and fo great a
Kingdom,coming up with vaſt, and invincible Forces thinking at unawarcs to turprize
the King; and in effet he did advance as far as Provence. The King to oppole {©
mighty, and (o powerful an Enemy , {ſummon'd in all his Forces trom all parts : in or-
der to which ſummons, we uſed fo extraordinary diligence (neither was I ever flothtul)
that our Regiment was the firft that arrived at Marſelles , where we found Monticurx
de Barbegieux (which was de 1s Rochcfoucant)) and Monhicur de Montpczat, whom the
King had made his joynt Licutenants there (the one having as much authority as the
other) and the Seigneurs de Boitzeres and de Villebon (Provott of Paris) the Regiments
of Monſieur le Grand Eſcuyer Gallot, and of the (aid Seigneur de Moxtpez.at, who came
from Foſſan all diſmounted, having each of them a * Curtal only ; tor by Article at the
ſurrender of the faid Foſſan ( which was loſt through the enormous, and perhaps unheard

ed,

L574.

* Or pad
Nag.

of Treachery of the Marquels of Saluzzo J they were oblig d to leave their great hox- The treache-
ſes behind. The Emperor being ſoon atter come to Aix, the Legionary Regiments "? of the Mars

(confiſting of a thouſand men cach) of Monlieur de Foxtrailles (the Father of theſe now
living) and of Monlicur 4 Awbigeons, came preſently up to us, as alfo thole of Chriſtophle
de Goaſt , with ſeven Itz1ian Companies. I am not certain whether the Regiments of
Montieur de Boitteres, and de Villebon were there, or no : but I very well remember that
of the ſaid Seigneur de Barbeziexx; and folong as the Emperor continued at Aix, we
remain'd at Marſclies, where nothing however of Action palt, but what Iam now going
torclate.

Whilſt the Emperor lay very long at Aix, in expcCtation of his great Canon, where-
with to come. and batter the walls of Marſelles, his proviſions did every day more, and
more waſt,and diminiſh. In which point of time the Kingfarriv'd at Avignon, where His
Majeſty was advertiſed, that if means could be made to deſtroy ſome Mills the Empe-
ror had ſeiz'd into his hands towards Arles, and cſpecially one within tour Leagues of
Aix, called the Mill of Auriolle, the Enemics Camp would {oon (uffter for want ot bread.
Upon which advice the King commited the execution of the burning of thoſe Mills a-
bout Arles , to the Baron dels Garde, who had a Company of Foot, to Captain Thorines

quels of $4-
LuJR0-

Standard-bearer to the Count de Tandzs, and ſome others, who accordingly executed Mills burne
the delign. Which notwithſtanding the Spics (till brought word to the King , that he by the French,

muſtalto burn thoſe of Azriolke z torifmuch as they alone ordinarily nouriſh d not the
| Emperors

" , —_—— — ———
L—_ oo no oy + ok 2 4 RGUe ” - "——

The Commentaries of Mcfhhre Blaize _ Book I.

Captain Goaſy
retulcs to un-
demake rhe
Enterprize,

Alſo Non ſicur
deFoite allles.

It is underta-
ken by the

dievr de Mont:
Lic.

OD OED DAG OOO: oo ooo, oo oo—_— _—— ——

Empcrors whole houſkold only: but morcover the tix thouland old Sp:ifþ Foot, which
he always kept about his own perſon. His Majcly lent therctore feveral times to Met-
heurs de Barbczicux, and de Montpezat tO hazard a Regiment of mon, to go, and burn the
{aid Mills of Azriolle.

The firtt to whom they recommended the exccution thercot , was to the torcſaid
Chriſtephle le Goaſt , who poſitively refuſed to undertake 1t , alleging that it was five
Leagucs to the atorcſaid Mills , where they were to hght threckceore Guards, that were
within it, , and an cntire Company that were quartercd in the Fulvn, ft: that he ſhould
have five Leagues to go, and as many to rcturn, by means whercot hc thould going or

coming be intallibly detcatcd upon tie way, for the Empcror could not fail of igtelli-
7ence, it bcing no more than four l.agucs only trom the ſaid Azriole to 4ix 3 and on the
ther fide the Soldicrs would ncver be ablc to travel tcn long leagues without baiting by
the way. This anſiver was ſent back to the King, who notwithitanding would uot rake
it for cuxrant pay > but on the contrary {ent another more politive order, than the for -
mcr, that it ſhould be propoſcd to ſome others, and that though a thouſand men ſhould
be loſt in the Enterprize, yet let them not concern themſelves, tor the benefit that would
accrue burning the Mills, would countervail the loſs (fuch catic Mearkcts Princes make
of the lives of men, )

Whercupon it was offer*d to Monſicur de Fonterailles, who was once 1n mind to un-
dertake it ; but ſome of his friends repreſenting to him his certain ruine in the attempt,
he piſs'd backwards, and would by no means touch. All which being {cit word of to
His Majeſty (who continually had the maniteſt advantage the dcttroying of the other
Mills had brought to His Majeſtics affaires, reminded to him) he till pertiſied to preſs
the aforclajd Lords, to ſend ſome one, or another to demoliſh theſe. Now one day, after
I had hcard how diſcontcented the King was,and the excuſes that had been alledg'd by
thoſe to whom it had hitherto been recommended (which 1n truth were very rational,
and juſt) I bepan to meditate with my {elf , which way I might execute this deſign.
and toconfider, that if God would give me the grace to bring it about, it would be a
means to bring me to the knowledg, of the King, and to rcltore me to the lame reputa-
tion and acquaintance , I had formerly acquir'd 3 and that now by three years idleneſs,
and the Jength of my cure,was as good as vanifh'd and lot: tor it is nothing to get a good
repute, if a man donot uphold, and improve it. Having therctorc taken with my {et a
rcfolution to execute this delignz orto dic in the attempt : I entorn'd my {clt at full
of my Landlord of the ſcituation, and condition of the place where thele Mills were :
who told me that Anriolle was a little Town enclos'd with high walls, where there was
2 Caſtile well tortificd, and a Bourg compoſed ot many houlcs , with a tair ſ{treet tho-
rough the middle of it , and at the end of the faid Bourg, which led trom the Town
towards the Mill, was alittle on the left hand the Mill it (clt. That at the Gate of the
(aid Town there was a Towcr,which look'd directly down the great lirect towards the
Mill, before which no man could ſtand, without running great hazard of being either
lain, or wounded; and that beyond the Mill was a little Church at the diſtance
of about thirty, or forty paces. He told mc moreover, that I was to go to Am-
bairue, two Leagues from Marſclies , and that from thence to Auriolle, it was
three more, if we went by by the Mountains which the Horſc could not pollibly do);
but mult be conſtraincd to go near upon a League about, where thcy were moreover to
pals a River that was deep to the Saddleskirts, by reaſon that the Bridges had been bro-
ken down.

My Landlord having told me all this, I conſider'd, that if I ſhould undertake this af-
fair with a great party, I ſhould be defcatcd 3 tor the place being only tour Leagues di-
ſtant from the Emperor's Camp, he would have preſent intelligence, and would ſend
out his Hor(c to intercept me in my return, as it alſo tcl] out 3 for immediately upon
our coming to the Mill, the Captain of the Caſtle diſpatch'd away in all haſt to the
Empcror, So that I concciv*d ic much better tor me to undertake it with a imall number
of mcn.and thoſe light and active fellows 3 tothe cnd that 3f 1did the work I went for,
I might cither have means to retire by one way or another or at the worlt 1f I ſhould
throw my ſclf away, and thoſe who were with me, yct thcy being but a tew, the City
of Marſclles would by that miſcarriage be in nomanner ot danger to be loſt , which
was thc thing moſt dilputed in the. Councilz whereas by loking, a thouland or twelve
hundred men, which were thought a neceſſary proportion tor luch an Enterprize , the
ſaid City might be expos'd to fome danger , lpccially in a time when they expected
a SICEE-

+ I hen defir'd my Landlord to provide me three tellows , who were expert in the
| Ways,

Br. ad -

ON—

Book I. BE Montluc, Mareſchal of France. -20

ways, to guide me by night to the fatd Auriolle, and fo that, as near as could be gueſs'd,
they ſhould bring me to the Mills two hours before day 3 which he accordingly did,
when after having ſome time conſulted with them, I found the men were feartul , and
Joth to go + but at laſt mine Hoſt ſo encourag'd them , that they were all refolved ;
whereupon I gave tacach of them a brace of Crowns, and cauſed them to be kept up in
my lodging, which was about Noon and having computed with my Landlord how
many hours the nights were then long, we found, that provided Iſhould fet ont about
the twilight , I ſhould have time enough to do my bulinels.
All this being done, that my defign might not be known, 1 went my ſelf firſt
to Monſicur de Montpezat , to acquaint him with what I intended todoz and more-
over that I was rcſolved to take with me no more, than tix (core men only ; which
I would chooſe out of the Senclchall's Regiment, to which I was Lieutenant Colonel.
In all places wherever I have been, I have {till made it my fiudy to diſcern betwixt
the good men, and the bad, and to judg what they were able to do 3 tor all menare not
proper for all uſes. |
 Theſaid Sicur de Montpegzat thought my re{olution very ftrange ; and out of friend-
ſhip adviſ*'d me not to do ſo ridiculous a thing, as to hazard my (elf with fo few men
telling me , that I might as well have hive hundred if I would. To which 1 made an-
(wer, that I would never demand five hundred men tor the execution of an Enter-
prize, that Icould better perform with fix core, and tormented him fo, that in the
end he was conſtrained to go along with me to Monhieur de Barbezzerux, who yet
thought it more ſtrange, than the other, and would needs know of me my reafons and
by what means I would execute this deſign with fo tew people. Te whom 1 made
an{wer, that I would not declare to any one living, which way L intended to proceed :
but that neverthelels (if they fo pleaſed) I would undertake it. Whereupon Monhieur
de Montpezat (aid to him, let him go 3 for though he ſhould be loſt, and all thoſe with
him, the City willnot for that be in the more danger to be loft, and it will give His
Majeſty content. Monſieur de Villebou who was preſcnt at the deliberation,laugh'd,and
jeer'd at me, ſaying to Monhienr de Barbeziexx, let him go, he will infallibly take the
Emperor,and we ſhall all be aſhamed, when we ſee him bring him into the City to mor-
row morning. Now this man did not love me;tor ſome words that had paſſed betwixt us
at the Port Royal; ncither could I torbear to tell him,that he was like a dog ina manger,
that would neither eat himſelf nor ſuffer others. All was paſs'd over in jeſt though in
plain truth, I was halt angry, for a little ſpurring would ſerve to make me ſtart. , The
Seneſchal de Tholouſe, my Colonel, adhear'd to my opinion, whereupon I had iminediate
leave granted me to go choolc out my fix [core men, and no more , which I did, taking
only one * Centenier, and a Corporal, the reſt were all Gentlemen, and fo brave a Com- * Or Centus
pany, that they were better than five hundred others. It is not all to have a great nume rion,a term uz
ber of men, they ſomtimes do more hurt than good , which made me entreat Monſieur fed as fuiting
de Barbezienx to cauſe the Gate of the City to be ſhut, being well afſur*d that otherwile that of Legiz
T ſhould have had more company than I defir'd z which he alſo did, and it hapned well *"*
for another reaſon,for in leſs than an hour my deſign was fpread all over the whole City.
Juſt at Sun-ſet, I, with my fix ſcore men, repair'd to the Gate, the wicket whereof
was only open : but the fircet was (o tullot Soldiers, ready to go out with me, that
I had much ado to diſtinguiſh my own, and was therefore conftrained to make them all
take hands, forl very well knew them every one. As I was going, out of the Gate,
Monficur de Tavannes (who was {ince Mareichal of France, and at this time Standard-
bearer to the Grand Eſcuyer Gallzot) cameto me with hfteen, ortwenty Gentlemen of
their own Company, telling me, that he , with thoſe friends of his were come to
offex themſelves , reſolved to run all hazards with me in the execution of my
delign. I uſed all the arguments I could to divert him from that reſoluti-
on: but it was time , and labour loſt; for both he, and thoſe with him were
all politively refolv'd. Meſlicurs de Barbezieux, de Montpezat , de Boitieres , de Vil-
lebon, and the Seneſchal de Tholouſe , were all without the Gate, and betore the wicket. :
drawing us out oneby one, when Monfieur de Tavannes offering to paſs, Monhieur de Tavantee;
Barbezieux would not permit him, telling him, that he ſhould be none of the party ,
and there ſome words, and a little anger paſſed, both on fide and the other : but Mon-
fieur de Tavannes overcame at laſt, and paſs'd the wicket 3 for which cauſe they detain'd
from me hftecn or twenty men of thole I had choſen: but I loſt nothing by the ex-
change, only theſe diſputes deferr'd the time {o long, that the night was ſhut up, before
we began to march. Monhieur de Caſtelpers Lieutenant to Monſieur de Montpezat (who
was my very particular friend) having heard how I had been raill'd, aud jeer'd amongſt Cafte!pers?
E them;

The Commentaries of Mefhre Blaize Book I.

i.

The order of
the Enter=
prize,

them, determin'd to get to horſe, with tome hfteen, or twenty men at arms of the ſaid þ
Company , being all very well mounted , and to that end had (poken to Monlicur de
Montpezat at his going out of the Gate , to entreat him, that he would not be diſplea- 2
(ed it he made one in the Enterprize; telling him that I was a Gaſcon , and that if T E
fail'd in the attempt, it would beget matter of {port tor the French, and they would
laugh us to ſcorn. Monſieur de Montpezat was at tirſt unwilling to it, but ſeein ba
him begin to grow into a little heat, at laſt conſented , whercupon he preſently ran to (:
mount to horſe, and there might be nineteen or twenty of the party.

Now to give a full account of this Enterprize, (which although it was not the con«
quelt of Millan, may nevertheleſs be of ſome uſe to ſuch as will make their advan- 7
tage of it) (o ſoon as we came to the Play St Michel, 1 gave to Captain Belſole;l |
(Centenicr to our Company) three{core men and threeſcore I kept tor my ſelf  Mon-
fieur de Tavannes, and his followers being compriz'd in that number) to whom I alſo
deliver'd a good Guide, telling him withal , that he was not to come near me by a Y
hundred paces, and that we would continually march at a good round rate. Which |
order being given, and Monſieur de Tavannes, and I beginning to let forward, up comes
Monſieur de Caftelpers , of whoſe deliberation we till then knew nothing , foralmuch |
as it had been reſolved upon at the very moment of our going out at the wicket, which :
hindred us another long half hour : but in the end we agreed, that he ſhould go the
Horſe way , and gave him another of my Guides, which he mounted behind one of
his men 3 ſo that we had three parties, and to every party a Guide. At our parting
I gave him inſtructions, that ſo ſoon as he ſhould arrive at the end of the Bourg , he
ſhould draw up behind the Church, for ſhould they enter into the freet, the \Compa-
ny quarter d in the Town, would either kill them, or their horſes 3 and that therefore
he was not to appear, till firſt he heard us engag'd.

We now began to ſet forward, and marched all night, where as far as Aubaigne, we
found the way to be exceeding good : but from thence to Aurivlle we were fain to
crawl over the ſides of Mountains, where, I believe, never any thing but Goats had
gone before : by which abominable way, having got within half a quarter of a league
of Auriolle, 1 made a halt, bidding Monſieur de Tavannes, to ſiay there for me , for I
muſt go ſpeak with Belſolezl. I therefore went back, and met him within a hundred
paces of us, orleſs 3 where ſpeaking to him, and his Guide, I told him, that when he
ſhould arrive at the Bourg, he was by no means to follow me: but to march directly
to the Gate of the Town , betwixt the Bourg and theſaid Town, and' there make a
ſand at the Gate , it being neceſſary that he ſhould gain twohouſes next adjoyning to
the ſaid Gate , which he mut ſuddainly break into , to keep the Enemy from (allying
out to diſturb us3 and that there he was to ſtay, and fight , wichout taking any care
to relieve usat all; after which order given to him, I morcover paſi the word*from
hand to-hand, to all the Soldiers, that no one was to abandon the tight at the Gate, to
come to us to the Mill but that they were punQually to obſerve whatever Captain
Belſoleil ſhould command them.

Returning then back to Monſicur de Tavannes , We again began to march, when
being come near to the Caſile , under which, and cloſe by the walls of the Town, we
were of neceſſity to paſs , their Centinels twice call'd out to us, Who goes there ? to
which we made no anſwer at all, but ſtill went on our way , till coming cloſe to the
Bourg, we left the way that Captain Belſolezl was to take, and ſlipt behind the houſes
of the ſaid Bourg , when being come to the further end where the Mill ſtood, we were
to deſcend two or three ſtone ſteps to enter into the ſtreet, where we found a Centi-
nel, that never diſcover*d us, till we were within a Pikes length of him, and then he
cry.d Duirlve? to which I made anſwer in Spaniſh, Eſpague , (wherein I was miſta-
ken, for the word was not then Eſpagye, but Impery) whereupon, without more cere-
mony he gave fire 3 but hit nothing,

The alarm beingby this means given, Monſieur de Tavannes.and I threw our ſelves de-
ſperately into the tircet, and were bravely follow'd 3 where we found three or four of the
Enemy without the door of the Mill: but they immediately ran in, The door of this Mill
was made with two folding leaves, both which were to be bolted faſt with a great Iron
Bar on the infidez one of theſe had a great Cheſt behind it, and the other the fore-
(aid Bar held more than haltſhut , and had theſe fellows behind it. The Mill was full
of men., both above ſtairs and below ( for there was threeſcore men in it, with
the Captain, who had no - - pendence upon the Governor of the Town, each of them
having his command aparr ) and we were one by one to enter this place.

Monſicur de Tavannes would very fain firſ have entred, and preſs'd forward with

that

_— EE. _— at. 2
- Les on As WOES FOE ED TW --x >

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

that intent 3 but pulling him back by the arm , withheld him and puſt'd in a Sol-

dicr that was bchind me: the Enemy made but two Harqueburze ſhot , having leiſure
to do no more , being all faſt aſlecp, excepting thele three, or tour, who had been pla-
ced as Centinels before the Mill door in the firect. So ſoon as the Soldier was got in,
I ſaid to Monſieur de Tavannes, now enter 1f you will ; which he preſently did, and
I after him, where we began to lay about us to ſome purpoſe , there being no more
but one light only to tight by within. In this buſtle the Enemy by a pair of ſtone
ſtairs of indifferent widenels, recover*d the uppcr Room , where they (ſtoutly defen-
ded the ſaid ſtairs from the floor above, whillt I in the mean time ſent a Soldier to
tell the reſt, that were without , that they ſhould ger up upon the outſide of the
Mill, and uncovering the root, ſhoot down upon their heads, which was immediately
perform'd 3 ſo that the Enemy perceiving our men to be got upon the roof, and that
they already let fly amongſt them, they began to throw themlclves into the water out of
2a window on the backſide of the Mill: but we neverthele(s mounted the ſtairs, and kilPd
all thoſe that remain'd, the Captain excepted, who with two wounds, and ſeven others
all wounded, were taken priſoners. Hereupon I preſently ſent one away to Captain Bel-
ſoleil, to bid him take courage, and ſtoutly to diſpute the Gate of the Town, for the Mill
Was Our OWN.

The Alarm in the mean time, in the Town was very great , and thoſe within
three times attempted to Sally : but our men held them ſo ſhort, that they durſi never
open their Gatcs. 1 (ent Captain Belſolez} morcover moſt of my men to afliſt him, and
iN the mean time, with the reſt, fell to burning the Mill , taking away all the Iron
work , eſpecially the Spindles, and Rinds, that it might not be repair'd again, never
leaving it till it was entirely burnt down to the ground, and the Mill-ftones rowPd
into the River. Now you muſt know that Captain Tavaxxes took it a little to
heart, that I had pull'd him back by the arm, and ask'd me afterwards upon our
returtie , why 1 would not permit him to enter the firſt , (uſpecting 1 had more
mind to give the honor of it, to the Soldjers: to whom I made anſwer, that F
knew he was not yet lo crafty to ſave himſelt, as thoſe old Soldiers were and thar
moreover, that was not a place conſiderable enough for a man of his worth, and con-
dition to dyc in; but that he was to relerve himlclt for a noble breach, and not to looſe
his life in a paltry Mill. |

Whilſt theſe things were in doing, Monſieur de Caftelpers arriv'd, and leaving his
party behind the Church , came up to us on foot, and upon this the day began to
appear : Wherefore I entreated Monticur de Tavannes, and de Caſtelpers to retire behind
the Church (for the ſhot flew very thick in the fireet, where they could ſee any one
pa(s ) telling them, that I would go draw off Belſolei} z whereupon they both ac-
cordingly retir'd , and as I was drawing off our: men one after another running down
on both ſides the ſtreet , Monſieur de Caftelpers preſented himfelf with his twenty
Horle at the end of the ſtreet by the Church , wherein he did us very great (ervice ,
for the Enemy might otherwiſe have fallyed out upon us. I had only (even,
or cight men hurt, who neverthelels were all able to march , one Gentleman only
excepted, called Vigaux , whom we ct upon an Aſs of thoſe we had found in the
Mill , and preſently began to retire towards the top of a mountain, which was al-
molt the ſame way by which Monſieur de Caftelpers had come, when the Enemy
diſcovering us to be fo few , they all fallyed out in our Rear; but we had alread
gain'd the top of the Hill, when they arriv'd but at the foot of it, and before
they recovered the heighth, we were got into the valley on the other fide , rea-
dy to climb another ( there being many little hills in that place ) and: yet we ne«
ver marched faſter than a foot pace 3 and fo went ſtraight on to eAubaizne.

I had given order to the Soldiers that went along with us, that every one ſhould take
with him a loaf of Bread, which they eat by the way, and I alſo had caus'd ſome few to
be brought , which I divided amongti the Gens- & Armes of Monficur de Tavannes ,
and we our {elves eat as we went ; which I here ſet down, to the end, that when any
Captain ſhall go upon an Enterprize, where he 15 to have a long march, he ma
take exemple to cauſe ſomething to be brought along to cat, wherewith to refreſh
the Soldiers , that they may be the better able to hold out; tor mien are not made of

Iron, |
_ Soſconas we were come to Awubaigne, two leagues from Marſelles, where we had
thought to have halted , and to have taken ſome refreſhment , we heard the Artillery
of the Gallies, and of the Town , whichat that diſtance feem'd to be yolleys of Har-
quebuze ſhot 3 an Alaxm that conſtrain d us without further delay, or taking, any

E 2 other

The Mill of
Auriclle ta-
ken, 7

24

y The Imperti-

alliſts maks a
Sally,

28

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book Is

—_—C .._ ww

The Emperor
Charles before
Marſelles.

Retreat,

Injuſtice of
Monheur de
Barbez3 reux
rowards the
Sjeur de Mont-

lic,

xz. Comes ey

1 ki. PB os CAE Ca

other rctreſhment , than what we had brought along with us, to march torwards, and
to enter into conſultation amongſt our ſelves what courſe we were beſt to take 3 we al-
ready took it for granted , that the Empcror was arriv'd before the Town, and that

he would certainly ſit down before it 3 and thence concluded it impoſlible tor us to

pet in again , which made us often repent, and curſe the enterprize that had ſhut us
out , the misfortune whereof was wholly laid to my charge, as the Author of all. jn
this uncertainty what courle to ſteer, Monlicur de Caftelpers was once reſolved to go
charge deſperately thorough the Enemy s Camp, to get into the Cicy 3 but when he
came to acquaint us with his determination, we remonſtrated to him, that that would
be to throw himſelf away out of an humor , and that fince we had together pertor-
med fo brave a fervice, and with which the King would be fo highly pleaſcd , we
ought hkewiſe together either to periſh, or to fave our ſelves. Captain Trehous Gui-
don to the Company of Monticur de Mmrpezat , told him the fame, fo that we conclu-
ded in the end to leave the great high way , and croſling the Mountains on the lett
hand, to fall down behind Noſtre Damede 1a Garde , making account , that in caſe we
could not enter into the City , the Captain of the {aid Cittade] would receive us 1n
there. Sowe turn'd out of the way,and it was well tor us that we did fo, for Vignaux,
and les Bleres keeping on the great Road ſtraight to Marſelles, had not gone on five
hundred paces, but they met with four or hve hundred Horſe, which the Emperor
(having had intelligence from thoſe of Arriolle of what had been done ) had (cnt
out to meet, and fight us upon the way and had not the Emperor parted irom
Aix by night to go before Marſelles , ſo that the Meflengers of a long time could meet
with no body to whom todeliver their errand , I do believe we had certainly been de-
feated : but the Emperor knew nothing of it, till break of day , whereupon he pre-
{ently (ent out thoſe four or five hundred Horſe upon the Road to Arbaizre, who did
no other harm to Vignazzx,and thoſe who were with him, but only took away their Arms.

In this manner we travaiPd all day from mountain to mountain in the exceſhve hear,
without finding one drop of watcr,inſomach that we were all ready to dye for thirſtz al-
ways within fight of the Emperor's Camp.,and ever within hearing of the Skirmiſhes that
were made betore the Town, Monſieur de Caftelpers, and his Gens- d' Armes march-
ing all the way on foot, as we did, and leading their horſes in their hands , till com-
1ng near to Noſtre Dame de la Garde, the Captain of the Caflle taking us tor the Enemy,
let fly three or four pieces of Canon at us, which forc'd us to ſhift behind the Rocks.
From thence we made figns with our hats 3 but for all that he ceas*d not to ſhoot, till in
the end , having ſcent out a Soldier to make a fign, fo foon as he underſicod who
we were, he gave over ſhooting 3 and as we came before Noſtre Dame de la Garde, we
{aw the Emperor, who was retiring by the way he came, and Chriftophle Goaſt, who
had all day maintain'd the Skirmiſh , beginning alſo to retreat towards the City. We
then began to deſcend the Mountain , when ſo ſoon as Monſicur de Barbezicux , and
Monheur de Moxtpezat (who, with ſome other Captains, were ſtanding without the
Gatesot the City) had diſcover'd us, they would have gone in again, takiny us tor
the Enemy 3 but ſome body ſaying, that then thoſe of the Cattle would have ſhot
at us , the ſaid Sicur Montpezat preſently knew Monticur de Caftelpers and we thcre-
upon arriv'd at the Gate of the City, where we were mightily carefſed, clpecially
when they heard of the good ſuccels of our enterprize , and they talk*d with the Cap-
tain of the Mill, who was wounded in the arm, and in the head, and after cvery one
xctir'd to his own Quarters.

I made no manner of queſtion, but that Monſieur de Parbezieux, fo foon as the
King ſhould come to Marſe!les, would have preſented me to His Majeſty, and have told
him, that 1 was the man who had perform*d this exploit, that His Majcfiy might
have taken notice of me: but he was ſo far from doing me that friendſhip, that
on the contrary he attributed all the honor to himlelt, ſaying that it was he, who
had laid the defign of this Enterprize, and had only deliver'd it tous to execute >
and Monficur de Moxtpezat was by ill ftortuneat that time very fick , and could fay
nothing in my behalf, ſo that I remain'd as much a ſtranger to the King, as ever. I
came to know al) this by the means of Hexry King of Navarre, who told me that
he himſelf had ſeen the Letters which the faid Sicur de Barbezieux had writ to the
King to that effect , wherein he attributed to himſelf the whole honor of that atti-
on. Monſieur de Lantrec would not have {erv'd me ſo; neither is it handſom to
rob another man of his honorz and there 1s nothing that docs more diſcourage a
brave heart : but Monſieur de Tavannes , who 1s now living, can teltifie the truth.
So it is, that the defixoying of theſe Mills , both the one , and the other, eſpe

cially
thole

FE tgk xd Oe PHI al$

TED;

G—

Boox I. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 29

choſe of Auriolle , reduced the Emperors Camp to ſo great neceſlity , that they were
fain to eat the Corn pounded in a Mortar , after the manner of the Tzrks 3 and the
Grapes they ate put their Camp into fo great a diſorder, and brought fo great a
Mortality amongſt them, eſpecially the Germays, that 1 verily beheve there never re-
turn'd a thouſand of them into their own Country, and this was the iffue of this mighty
preparation. | | | ws fy

The Captains who (hall read this relation , may perhaps obſcrve, that in this En-
terprize there was more of Fortune , than of Realon, and that I went upon it as it
were in the dark, though it was happily brought abqut : but I do not ſuſpe&t how-
ever, that any one Will conclude it to be wholly an effc& of my good fortune, but
will alſo take notice, that I forgot nothing of what was neceſſary to make the de-
ſign ſucceed 3 and on the other lide they may obſerve, that my principal ſecurity was,
that the Enemy within the Town by the Rule of War, ought not to (ally out of their
Garriſon, till they ſhould firſt diſcover what our Forces were , a thing in the obſcuri-
ty of the night, which they could very hardly do all which notwithſtanding , 1 did
not yet ſo much rely upon their diſcretion, but that I moreover put a bridle in their
mouths , which was Felſoleil, and his Company. A man muſt often hzzzard ſothe-
thing , for no one can be certain of the event. I concluded the corgquclti of the Mill
for certain : but Lever thought it would be a matter of great difficulty, and danger
to retreat.

Thus did the Emperor Charles, both with ſhame and lols, retire, where that great
Leader Ayne de Montmorency ( all that time Grand Maiſtre , and ſince Connettable of
France )) obtein'd renown. It was one of the greateſt baffles the Emperor ever re- 1. 2 a
ceived , and for grief whereof his great Captain Antonio de * eva (as was reported) Antonio Je Le-
afterwards dyed. I have ſometimes heard the Marquis de Guaſt {ay , that this ex- vs, ;
pedition was the ſole contrivance of the fail Antonio de Leva, aid yer both heand
his Maſter very well knew, what it was to attaque a Ring of Fraxce in his own
Kingdom.

The Emperor being with his Forces retird , I would no longer continue Licute-
nant to the SeneſchaPs Regiment 3 who, had it lain in his power , would have re-
fign'd it wholly into my hands. Monſieur de Boitzeres then did me the honor to
make me an offer of his Guidon, which I likewiſe retus'd to accept , having fet my
heart more upon the Foot, than upon Horſe ſervice. I had moreover an opinion ,
that I ſhould ſooner riſe to advancement by the Infantry, which was the reaſon that
I again return'd home, where having made {ome little ſtay, I would go into Piedmont
there to ſerve under Monſieur de Foitieres, who was the Kings Lieutenant in that Pro-
vince, and in order thereunto went firſt to Marſelles, where 1 was fix or ſeven months
detain'd by Monſieur de Taude. |

Some time after the Emperor rais'd an Army therewith to go and lay ſiege to The-
yoaue, and the King, at the ſame time, rais d another to rehieve it: whercupon I im-
mediately took poſt , and went to Court, where Monſieur Le Grand Maiſtre gave me
a Foot Company , and another to Captain Gwerre, which we prelently rais*d in, and
about Paris, and were both of us receiv'd into the Guards of Monſieur le Danphin,
who was afterwards Heyry the Second of France. The Army march*d preſently away
to Heſdin, and to Anchi le Chaſtear, both which places were taken by the (aid Grand
Maire , as alſo Saint Venant 3 neither could the Imperialiſts do any good upon The-
roane, which Monſieur de Aynebaut reliev'd in the very face of the Enemy , though
there wasa diſaſter happened upon that occaſion , thorough the heat ., and vanity of
ſome young Gentlemen , who becauſe they had a mind to break their Launces, would
needs indiſcreetly ſeek the Encmy, by whom they were defeated , and all taken, both
Monfieur d* Annebart, and all the reſt.

Soon after which the Imperalifis retir'd and the King's Arrny alſo : As for me,
ſceing there was no great matters to be done thereabouts, I return'd preſently after
into Provence, where I had left my great Horſes, and my Armes: and where about ten
or fifteen days after, Ireccived a Packet from the ſaid Monficur le Grand Maiſtre, where-
in there was a Commiſſion to raiſe two Enfigns of Foot , and to march them away
into Piedmont, whither the King himſelf was alſo going in perſon to relieve Turin,
Monticur de /oitieres being ſhut up within it. I thereupon preſently took Poſt to 20
into Gaſeony , and made ſo good haſt, that in eight days I had rajs'd the two Compa-
nies , of which I made Captain Merens my Lieutenant 3 when, being about Tholouſe,
I teft the men with him, and went away Poſt , having heard that Monfieur le Grand
Maiſtre was already arriv'd at Lyoxs, aud that he march'd in great diligence to gain

the

Fa
hd

.————_—

30 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book [.

A. mt.

the Pas de Suze, wherein he (hew'd himſelt to be no novice 1n War ; So that ſeeing
I could not bring up my Companies time cnough to be with him at that Engagement,
I was reſolved to be there alone : I could not however make ſo great haſt, bur that
I found the King got before me to Sorges , and Monhieur le Grand Maiſtre two days
march further advanc'd : where His Majcliy commanded me to rcturn to my command,
and te'come up with Ambres and Dampons , who had cach of thcem two Companies
more, telling me morcover, that we were to be commanded by Monlicur de Chavignz ,
and piving me further inſtructions that we were to fit down before Barſellonette, and
to ſeize all the Towns thereabout into our hands.
So ſoon as I came to Marſelles, 1 had news brought me, that my two Companies
had disbanded themſelves 3 tor (as the ambition of the world is great ) Monſieur de
Lieux my Brother had ſent to my Lieutenant to defire him , that he would loyter a
Mr tf; while in expectation of him up and down the Country thereabouts, foraſmuch as he
ir. Lieux 5 | X : , TO Te
brother to Was raiſing a Foot Company , which he intended {pcedily to march away under the
Mr. Montluc, ſhadow of my Commiſſion 3 to which my Lieutenant very indilcreetly conſented , not-
withſtanding the promiſe he had made me to march tive leagues a day. But as my
Lieutenant had quitted the great Road , and turn'd afide towards Albigeoss to ſpin out
the time, he came at laſt toa Town calPd P Iſle, where the Inhabitants ſhut theix
Gates againſt him, which forc'd him to give an aſſault, as he did, and carried the place,
with ſo ſuddain an exccution , that although my ſaid Brother was then within a days
' march of him with his Company , yet would he not come up, till the buſineſs was
done, where his Soldiers having ſack d the Town, and being by that means loaden
with booty , they were afterwards ino great fear to march, that they all disbanded ,
and every one run home with his {poil to his own houſe. By whxch you may under-
A Captain ſtand, that an officer ought very {eldom to leave his command , If not upon extraor-
ought as ſel- dinary occaſion , for the great dcfire 1 had tobe one of the fixſt , made me to aban-
dom as he can don mine, which was the cauſe of this diſorder. I was therefore conſtrain'd to-raiſe
to leave his two other Companies in Provence, wherein the Count favour'd me very much. (6
ET that T had ſoon diſpatch'd, muſter'd at Villeuenfve d' Avignon, and made ſo great haſt,
that (notwithſtanding this accident ) I yet arriv'd at the Valleys two days ſooner than
Ambres, and Dampons, and took the Caſtle, and the Town of Mzexlan, where I made
a halt in expectation of Monſicur de Chavignz, and the Companies of the (aid Ambres,
and Dampons , who diſputed the paſſage of Lauzet , which they could never have ob-
tained, tor all the people of the Country were there gather'd together to defend it : bur
that the Spaniards who were at Barſelonette, and thoſe who were gone to defend the
paſſage, hearing that I had taken Mela, retir'd by the Mountains ( for I was poſ-
feſſed of the great Road towards Barſelontte ) and the common people ſeeing the ſaid
Spaniards to retire, quitted the paſſe by night , by means whereof they cntred in-
tolt.
The Sieur de We then went to belicge Barſelonette, before which place we lay three weeks, where
Monilus ſhot, F receiv'd a Harquebuze ſhot through my left arm, but it never touch*d the bone, (0
that I was preſently cured after which the King having relieved Twrin, His Majeſty
rcturn'd, and we for not having been preſcnt at the ſervice, wereall three commanded
back ; upon which order Monſicur d' Ambres went away Pot to his ſaid Majclty, with
whom he prevailed ſo far, that he was pleaſed to leave him one of his Ccmpanics :
which when I underſtood with what difficulty he had obtain'd, I carried mine back
into Provence, where having diſmiſſed them, I retixr'd my {elf to my own houſe. Ac
which time there was alſo a ceſſation ( ſeeing no peace was to be made ) concluded for
ten years.
ribonght fit to commit this to writing (though there be no great mattcr in it) to
let the world ſee, that I never reſted long in a place 3 but was always ready at the
firſt beat of Drum 3 for the days of Peace were whole years to me, fo impatient I
was of lying idle. At the end of this War, the King was pleaſed to honor Monſieur
le Grand Maiſtre with the Office of Conneſtable of France an employment that has
ever been vacant (as it is at this day) after the death of Monlicur de Montmorency. A
thing that I conceive our Kings have purpoſely ſo ordered, as well to take away all oc-
The daroer cation of Jealouſic amongſt the Princes , as alſo for the danger of entruliing fo great
-” bekbion 1 4 power in one mans hands, Witneſs St. Pol, and Bourbon , the Jaſt of which indeed
Conneſtable was very faithful, and dycd in his Majeſties. ſervice, ever approving himlſclt a great, and
ofFrance. prudent Captain : whichteftimony Iam conſtrain'd by truth to give of ham, and by
no other obligation that I have 3 tor neither he, nor any of his were ever any friends
of mine.

During

FIY * 0 93,” 2% 0 TS WT. Oe;
es ERIE. 4 DAT 3. ">" Lk I Weg
> SG < .. 6 ET ob ES
ASS Ye ONES on ot Legs 2 .

__—

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 21

—___

During the time of this Truce, 1 tryed (torſooth) to be a Courticr , but in vain, fot
L was never cut out for that employment, I have ever becu too free, and too open "28
hcarted to live at Court , and I ſucceeded there accordingly, Now after the foul, and
deteſted aſſallinate committed upon the perſons of the Scigneurs Fregoze and Rzncon,
Embaſſadours tor the Ring our Maſter, his Majelty incens'd at fuch an outrage, and The Truce
for which he could obtain no manner of fatisfaCtion 3 he rc{olv'd to break the Truce, proken by
and to that end fet two Armies on foot, one of which he gave to Montteur /e Duc 4 reaſon of the
Orleans , which was delign'd for Luxemburg , and the other to Monhicur le Dauphin, Murther of
who came into the County of Rowſillon to reduce 1t to his Fathers obedience , havin at MOeet
Monſieur d' Aunebant (who fince was Admira] ) in company with him. I therefore = Embails-
hearing thar the ſaid Mareſchal was to take with him the Companies of Piedmont , gors for the
which were commanded by Monſieur de Briſſac, and alſo an Engineer called Hhjeroni- Chriſtian
mo Marini , reputed the greateſt man of Italy , for the belieging of places, I had a King:
grcat defire togo to the Camp, to learn ſomething of this famous Engineer. Where
being accordingly come, I put my {elf under Monhieur 4 Affer, who commanded the
Artillery in the abſence of his Father, and who never ftirrd from the ſaid Hie-
. ronimo Marini z by which means I happened to be at the approaches that were made
before the City of Perpignan to which we had laid tiege : but in two nights I perceiv*d
that all he did fignihed nothing 3 for he begun the Trenches ſo far off, that in eight
days the Canon could not be mounted, as he himſelt declared ; to which I made an-
(wer, that in that time the Enemy would have fortihed their City, four times as ſtrong
2 1t was on that ide. | |
The King had for this Enterprize rais'd the braveſt Army that cver my eycs beheld : it
conlilted of forty thouſand Foot, two thouſand men at Armes, and two thouſand Light
horſe, with all neceſſary cquipage for fo confiderabe a Body. Monſieur Montpezat had
been the Author of the detign: though not fo ſecretly , but that Spain was before
hand wholly poſſeſſed with the expectation of it : which notwithſtanding,and that the
Town was exccllently well fortihied 3 yet I dare boldly affirm that if the Mareſchal 4?
Annebaut would have given credit to my words, he had infallibly done his bufineſs.
I had taken a private view of it : for ſome years before this, Monſieur Je Conneſtuble
being gone to Lexcate to treat a Peace with the Emperor's Depaty Grazvelle, had ſent
me with General Bayard, and Prefident Poyer (who was ſince Chancellor) to whom
the Emperor's Deputy ( at the inſtance of Monkieur de Veli Embaſſador for the King )
gave permiſſion to go , and recreate themſelves three or four days at the faid Perpignan:
At which time the ſaid Conneſtable made me put my felt into the habit of a Cook CS
belonging to Monſieur de Poyct, to the end, that under that diſguiſe 1 might diſcover The Seu. of
the place 3 and yet I once thought my lelf to bedifcovered: however I found oppor- Spycinto
tunity by the means of a Fleming ſervant to the faid de eli, which he had left be- Perpignan,
hind him, to take an exact view of the place, for he had led me quite round the Town
both without, and within , ſo that I was able to make a report to the Conneſtable
of all the ſirength , and defects of the (aid City ; who was pleaſed to tell me there-
npon, that Thad madea pertect diſcovery , as by ſeveral others, who had long been in-
habitants there, he had been credibly intormed.
Now you muſt know this was only a pretended divertifement of Poyet, and Bayard,
who durſt by no means take the Kings Engineer 1n their company, as the Conneſtable
would have had them, fearing he might be diſcovered, and themielves, by that means,
detained Priſoners: neither did they fail to relate to him afterwards the fright they
were in when a Spaniſh Captain challeng d me by my name : but I faced him out of
the buſineſs , counterteiting both ray Country, and Language, and difſembling better
ro underſtand how to handle a larding-pin , than a ſword, and Gying that I was a
Cook to Monſieur le Preſident Poyet , who himſelf had not a word to fay, for the ter-
rible fear he was in leaft Ifſhould be diſcover'd: but General Bayard laugh'd the Spa-
iſh Captain out of his conceit , 1n private telling him, that he was not the firſt who
had been fo deceiv'd : but that the man he took me for, was one of the beſt Captains
the King of France had. At all this ftory the Conftable did only laugh 3 but I very (e-
riouſly told him, that he ſhould never make me play the Spye again ſo long as he liv'd.
'Tis an employment of too great danger, and that I have ever abhorred: but ſo it was,
that' at that time I plaid the Cook to diſcover the place; which I did exaftly well,
and that is the reaſon why I have (aid , that had Monſicur 4 Annebaxt given credit to
me, he had eafily taken the Town : but he would rather belizye a ſuborned Gaſcon Ma-
{on (which the Enemy had thruft out of Town on purpoſe, and had order'd to give
bimſclt up , only to amuſz2 the Marzeſchal , and to perſuade him to aſſault that part,

whick

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book I.

The Siege
raiſed from
before Per-
degnan,

which+he did affault ) and his Engineer , than any thing I could lay Infomuch that
wedid nothing cither worth writing,or rclating,which fell out fo much the worſe, as it
was the Dauphin's firſt tryal of Armes, who had a mind to do as well, as Monlieur @
Orleans his Brother, who took Luxemburg : but it was no tault of his. . Two days
before the Camp diſlodg d, the ſaid Marelchal went round about the Town, where I
ſhew*d Monſieur 4 Eftree who 1s yct living, th: place where I would have had them
to have made their Attaque, and that very near at hand, though the Canon,
and Harqucbuze ſhot they liberally beftow'd upon us, mighr reafonably have made us
ſtand aloot: which after he had {cen he cryed out, Good God, what an error have
we committed ! but it was then too late to rcpunt, for the relict was already entred
in, and the time of the Rains was at hand, which would have dammni'd up our retreat
and yct we had enough to do as it was to draw off our Artillery, fo 11I a place is that
Country. i-r an Army to move in.

During the time of this Siege the Company of Monſieur Boleves became vacant,
which Monſieur le Dauphin ſent to cntreat for Boqual (who fince 15 turn'd Hugonot) and
T alſo writ to Monſieur de Valence my Brother, who was then at the Court at Salers;
where the King was ſo diſcontented, by reaſon of the 11] ſucceſs of this enterprize, both
with the Dauphin , and Monſieur de Aunebaut (who had allo ſent to ſollicite it in the
behalf of another ) taat His Majeſty would neither grant it to the one, nor the other ;
but was pleaſed to confer it upon me. The Camp being raiſed , Monſieur de Briſſac
had Capeftaing alſign'd him tor Garriſon, and Monſieur de P Orge ( Colonel of the
Legjonaries) Twchant (the place to which they had drawn off all the ammunitions ok
Corn that had been left in the Camp.) afſigned him for his, Where three days after
all the ſaid Legionarics forſook him , nothing but their Captains remaining behind
who thereupon ſent to Monſieur Briſſzc, that it he did not come ſpeedily to his relief ,
he ſhould be conftram'd to abandon the ſaid provitions, and to ſhitt for himſelt: which
made us march with all poſſible diligence , without being more then half a night only
upon our way, and found him totally left alone, (aving for Mellicurs de Denes, , and
Fonterailles, and thor lervants. |
| Now there was a Catile upon the Mountain towards Perpignan, about a League from
Tuchant, and on the left hand of Milaz, and the ſaid Seigneurs de Briſſac and de 1' Orge
being gone out of the ſaid Tuchaut to hear Mals at a little Chappel about a Croſs-bow
ſhot from thence at our coming out from Mafs we heard very many Harquebuze
ſhot at the ſaid Caſtle, and diſcover'd a great many men about it, with a great ſmoak
of Powder, whereupon I ask*d Monficur de Briſac , it he were pleas'd that I ſhould
20 thither with thirty or forty of my men, to ſee what the matter was who
preſently gave me leave ſo to do; wherctore without any more dclay , I preſently ſent
{a Moyenne my Lieutenant, to get them together, and to bring me a horſe, which be-
ing ſuddainly brought, I march'd direGtly towards the Caſtle, Le Pclowx wo was Lieu»
tenant to Monſieur de Brifſac had a delire to follow after, as had alſo Monbaſin, St.
Laurens (a Breton ) and Fabrice, bcing all Launce-paſſades belonging to the Company
of the ſaid Seigneur, together with fifty or threeſcore Soldiers of the fame. Imade ve-
Ty great haſt, when (o foon as the Enemy had diſcovered me,as I was beginning to climb
che Mountain, they retreated down the other {fide into a plain which lies below Tanta-
vel, where they clapt themſclves down under the Olive trees, to ſtay for the reſt of
their fellows, that they had left behind them at Milau, The Captain of the Caſtle was
Barcynes, an Archer of the Kings Guard, who had been placed there by Monficur de
Montpezat , and whilſt the ſaid Bareaves was ſhewing me the Enemy , appear'd
Peloux with his Soldiers, and with them a Gentleman called Chamayt , a very brave
man, ſo that although we knew the Enemy to be above four hundred men ( as
we were alſo affured by Berennes ) we nevertheleſs concluded to go, and fight
them.

This place was all Rock tufted over with a little Cople, thorough which we were
to paſs to get to them wherefore we agreed, that Pelowx ſhould take a little path on
the right hand, and I another on the lett, and that the firſt which came up to them ,
in the plain, ſhouid fall upon them , the one mn the Front, and the other in the
Rear z which we had no ſooncr concluded, but that the Enemy roſe up , and we diſco-
vcred ther all plainly at our caſc. Monbaſin, Chamant, St, Laurens, and Fabrice who
were all oh hox{cback, would nc: ds £© along with me, at which Peloux was a little dif-
contented, foraſmuch as they z!] belong to Monſieur Briſſac, as he himlelf did, excep-
ting Chamant, who belonged to Monſicur le Danphin. Artignedieu, and Barennes likewiſe
went 1n my Company. -

From

6 5 ”_ * c 7 : Ru ages 5 _ _ 5 FI
mw—_o OS 5

I Eg

Is, 7 4, : Ls -
Ke RS EDS Mey
Ee ey HE es

-- wh

cs a IIS abate aps
P P - Sr Wa 7 OE en

aides woott hneg RE PI 3 Be ih 2 WG 2A Ibid 00

be Rs . 7 0 ” bo TIS 8 rs BF fo gt OE I
Warp W-- FN REY. < Ba. v 23-4 _

Booxl. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Franice: 4 33

di as

© — ———— OS Erna nt Con IO een, _
L —

Als. apa
—_ PEER "

From the very beginning of our deſcent, the Enemy loft tight of us, arid we
of them , by reaſon of the wood, and of the Valley , which was pretty large 3 Le
Pel»ux with his Guide took his way, and 1 mine, when fo ſoon as I came into the
Plain, I was as good as my word, for I charg d the Enemy thorough and thorough ;
breaking in after ſuch a manner amongſt them, that above twenty ot them at this en-
counter were left dead upon the place, and we purſued them hghting, as tar as the
bank of the River, which might be ſome tour hundred paces or more : But when they
ſaw us tobe ſo few, thcy rallied, and as I was about to rctire, march'd dire&ly up to
mc, whereupon I made a halt, as they did allo at the diſtance of four or five Pikes
Icngth only from one another, a thing that I never ſaw done bctore. As for Peloux ,
when he was got to the middle of the Mountain, he began to think that T had taken
the better way , which made him ſuddainly to turn oft, and to follow my Reps: and
fortune alſo turn'd fo well tor me, that as we were Pike to Pike, and Harquebuze to
Harquebuze , at the diſtance I have alrcady faid, grinning and fnarling at one another, pris <Lic2
like two Maſtiffs when they are going to tight , Peloxx and his Company appear in mith. :
the plain 3 which ſo ſoon as the Enemy ſaw, they turn'd the point of their Pikes
towards us, and their faces towards the River, and lo fell to marching off, whilſt
we purſued pricking them forward with our Pikes, and pelting them with our Har-
quebuze fhot in their Rear : but they march*d ſo very cloſe, that we could no more
break into them as before 3 and when they came to the bank of the River they made
2 halt, facing about and charging their Pikes againſt us, ſo that although Peloux, and
his Company made all the haſt they could to come in to our relic , we were never-
theleſs conſtrain'd to retire fifteen or twenty paces from the Enemy, who immedi-
ately all on a thrump leapt into the River, and through water middle deep, paſs'd
over to the other ſide. Monbaſin in this engagement was hurt with a Harquebuze
ſhot in his hand, of which he remain'd lame ever after , St Laurens and Fabrice had
their horſes kilPd under them, and mine was wounded with two thrutts of a Pike;
la Moyenne, my Licutenant,was wounded with two Harquebuze ſhots in one arm, Cha-
mant, who was lighted off his horſe, had three thruſts of Fikes in his two thighs, and
Artiguediex one Harquebuze ſhot, and one thruſt of a Pike 1n one thigh; to be ſhort,
of betwixt thirty and hve and thirty that we were, there remain*d only five or fix un»
burt, and only three dead upon the place. The Enemy loſt one Serjcant of great re-
pute among{t them, together with twenty or five and twenty others kill d , and a-
bove thirty wounded, as we were told the next day by two Gaſcox Soldiers who came
over to us. In the mean time Meſlicurs de Briſſec and de P Orge doubting it would fall
out as it did, mounted to horſe, and came ſo opportunely to the: Caſtile of Tantavel ,
that they ſaw all the fight, and were in (o great delpair at the Charge I had made,
that they gave us twice or thrice for loſt: an | very ſorely rebuked Peloux, for not ha-
ving obſerv'd the agreement we had concluded amongſt us 3 which it he had done, we
had intallibly cut them all to picees, and brought away their two Colours z'yet I
am apt to believe it might not be altogether his fault (for he was a very brave Gen-
tleman) but his Guides that led him the worſe way, as Peloux himlelf tince told me.
However ſo it fell out, that the field was mine, with the loſs of three men only, and not
one of the Gentlemen dyed.

Soon after the Baron de la Garde came to Nice with the Turkiſh Army , conducted by
Barbaroſſz , which conſiſted of an hundred or fix ſcore Gallies, a thing that all the Chrt-
ſtian Princes who took part with the Emperor, made a hainous butineſs of , that the
King our Maſter thould call in the Tzrk to his afliſtance 3 though I am of opinion that
towards an Enemy all advantages are good 3 and for my part (God forgive me) if K
could call all the Devils in Hell to beat out the brains of an Enemy , that would beat
out mine, I would do it with all my heart. Upon this occation Monſieur de Falence,
my Brother, was diſpatchd away to Venice,to palliate and exculc this proceeding of ours
to the Republick, who of all others ſcem'd to be moſt offended at it, and the King would
by no means loſe their Alliance 3 who made them an Oration in [talian, which I have
thought fit to inſert here, until he ſhall think fit to oblige us with his own Hiſtory ;
for I cannot bcleve that a man of ſo great learning, as he is reputed to be, will dye
without writing ſomething 3 ſince L who know nothing at all, take upon me to ſcribbles
The Oration was this.

34

bo —_—

Oration of

the Biſhop of
Valence te the

Senate of Ve-
mice

The Commentaries of Meſtire Blaize Book I.

He Emperor having been the cauſe of all the ruines , miſeries, and calamities, which

bave befallen Chriſtendom for theſe many years it is a thing (moſt illuſtrious Princes )
which to every one ought to appear exceeding ſtrange , that bis Miniſters ſhould be ſo zmpu-
dent, and frontleſs, as to lay the blame thereof to the ivrice Chritian King my Loyd and Ma-
fter, and unjuſtly condemn him for keeping an Ambaſſador reſident in the Court of Conlianti-
nople : lut ] would fain ask thoſe people, whether they can imagine that the praCizes winch
have been ſet on foot by the Command of the Emperor , and the King of the Ronuws with
the Grand Signior for tex years paſt, have bee kept ſo ſecret, that the greateſt part of Chri-
ſftendom are not fully enformed thereof. Does not every one know what Truces, and what
zreatics of Peace( wat general, but particular ) bave been concluded, and wh.t offers have been
ſeveral times made to pay yearly a vaſt Tribute to ihe Great Turks for the Kinzdowm of Hun -
gary ? and yet he makes it acaſe of Conſcience to endure, that a little King ſhould hold that
Kingdom under the favour and protection of the Turk, as a thing inconfiltcat 1th  hriftia-
nity, and unbeſeeming a Chriſtian Prince To which T could traly add, it at the time when ©
the Peace was concluded betwixt your moſt Serene Republick, and the Turk, the King of the
Romans, by the ſecret practices of his Agents, did all that in bim lay , to binder that Treaty,
as by the ſeveral Letters and Diſpatches that have been intercepted , does moſt manifeſtly
appear.

i” he ſame Minifters of the Emperor do think alſo, that they diſcharges themſeloes from all
blame, in keeping a clutter , and farcing their Poſts and Gazetts, ( as their manner is ) with
obſervations of the loug abode that the Naval Army of the Grand Signior has, for force months,
made in the Ports of France, and under that pretence would, by their paſſionate calumnies ,
zmpoſe upon the world a new Article of Faith, to wit, that no Prince, for his own defence, eithcr
can or ought to derive ſuceours fromſuch, as are of a Religion contrary to his wa nat takin
otice, that in condemning the King, my Lord and Maſter, they at the f« ame time accnſe David
a valiant King,and a boly Prophet, who ſeeing bimſelf perſecuted by Saul, fled away to Achiſh,
who was an Idolater, and a profeſs'd Enemy to the Law of God, and not oaly ſo, but ſome
zime after, morcover raak'd himſelf in the Squadrons of the Infidels, even then , when they
went to fight with the people of bis own Religion. They alſo condemn Ala King of Juda , who
called into his aid the King of Syr1a, to deliver him from the oppreſſion of the King of Iſrael.
They moreover reproa: h Conſtantine, a moſt Chriſtian Prince, and he, who of all the
Emperors, bas beſt deſerved of the Chriſtian Commonweal , who in moſt of his expeditions ,
carried along with bim a great number of Idolatrous Goths in his Army. They likewiſe taxe
Boniface, ſo highly commended by St. Auguſtine in bis Epiſtles , who, for his own defence,
and perhaps torevenge ſome injury receiv'd, called into Aﬀerick the Vandals, profeſs d enemies
20 our Religion.

They calumniate Narſes (the ſlave of Juſtinian, a very valiant, but, above all, a very re-
Figious Captain, as may be concluded from the teſtimony of Saint Gregory, aud alſo by the
Churches he bas built , both in thu illuſtrious City, aud that of Ravenna,,) who valled in
the Lumbards to bis aid, a people, at that time, abborring the name of Chriſtizu. Arcadius

Emperor of Conſtantinople ( allowed by all Hiſtorians for a Prince equally religious , and
wiſe) having in the latter end of bis days a defire to ſubſtitute ſome Governor, and Protedtor ,
that might be ſufficieut to preſcrvethe Dignity and Authority of the Empire, turn'd his thoughts
zowards the King of Perſia, au Idolater, aud entreated bim in bis lat Will to accept the Tu-
3tion , and Prote@jion both of his Son, and the Empire. .A choice that was ſingularly appro-
zed by all the Chriſtian Princes of that time, and ſy much the more, for that the King of Perſia
20t only accepted the charge , but moreover worthily acquitted himſelf of his truſt to the bour
of bis death- Before Heraclius ſuffer'd bimſilf to be infelted with the poyſon of Hereſy , be
ſerved bimſelf in an infinite number of Wars with Saxacen Soldiers. Balile,and Conſiantine
ſons to John Emperor of Conſtantinople , took Apulia , and Calabria , by the means and
aſſiſtance of a great number of Saracens , which themſelves bad firſt driven out of the Iſle of
Candice. Teould ſay as much of Frederick, who by the belp of the Saracens, Lorded it over
the greateſt part of Italy. I could preſent before you the Example of Henry , and Frederick.
brothers to the King of Caſtile , who i the time of Pope Clement the fourth, accompanied with
Conradin, called the Saracens, both by land and ſea, nt for the ſecurity and defence of -
their own Country, but to drive the FExcnch oat of Italy, and with the ſame Army of Bar-
barians, i a. ſhort time, made themſelves Maſters of a great part of Sicily. I conld peak.
of Ludovico Storza , who with ſeveral other Princes of Italy , made uſe of the Forces of
Bajazet.

IVbat ſhall Tſay of Maximilian of the bouſe of Auſiria , who not to defend bimſelf, but
to rtine your ſtate (moſt illuſtrious Senators ) tryed to nettle, and incite the Turk againſt

You >

*

Book I: de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 'F

<= —__ O——_—  — ———_—

you, to your great prejudice and ruine ? as it is faithfully recorded by Signior Andrea Moce-
nigo, one of your own Hiſtorians, together with the remedies you were fain to oppoſe in that exi-
gency, and diſtreſs. If yet neither natural reaſon , nor exemples drawn from holy Scripture,
and Chriſtian Hiſtory were ſufficient to confirm you in, or to perſwade you into the truth of this
cauſe, I could accompany them with ſeveral others, which I am willing to omit, both becauſe I
would not tire your Lordſhips patience , and alſo for that I believe there can remain no man*
ner of ſcruple in you, conſidering, that, by the Exemples before alledged, I have already diſco-
ver'd the weak foundation of that Article of Faith, lately forged by the Imperialiſts, to ſere for
their own ends, And which is more, Tdo ſay, and will maintain, that the moſt Chrittian King
my Lord and Soveraign, by the Exemple of ſo many renowned and religions Princes, may ,
without any prejudice ts the place he bolds,or to the Title of molt Chriſtian,which be bears, ſerve
himſelf in all affairs and neceſſities, with the aid and aſſiſtance of the Grand Signior. And
if this with truth and reaſon may be underſtood of all bis neceſſary affairs 3 how much more
ought bis moſt Chriſtian Majcſty , not only be excuſed, but highly applauded, who for no need,
how great ſoever he has to defend bimſelf , for no ſingle revenge His Majefty might defire for
ſo many injuries done, and ſo many wrongs received, ſo many aſſaſſinations, and ſlaughters exe-
cuted upon his people, by the Empcror , or by his procurement , world accept of no other ſuc
cours, but only thoſe which we by experieace ſee are to all Chriſtians, of greater utility, tha
diſadvantage ? Ad if any one of thoſe who adhere to the Emperor”s party ſhould demand how
the Turkiſh Army cax remain in our Ports , no leſs for the benefit of Italy, than for our ow
Particular convenience TI could ash, him by way of anſwer , which way he can prove that
Chriſtendom has received any detriment by our having received, and refreſh 4 this Naval Ar-
my in our Havens ? To which T am certain the wiſejt, and moſt affeGionate of the Imperiat:
party could return me #9 anſwer, unleſs it were ſyme one, who delights to argue for controver-
fies ſake , and takes more pleaſure in bearing bimſelf talk,, than that he has really a
deſire to enter into a ſerious examination of things , to underſtand the negotiation , and
to be enfomed of the reaſons thereof» But that we may not leave any thing, that may beget the
leaſt imazinable doubt in the minds of ſuch, as are not perfefaly inform'd of this Affair, I ſhall
handle the point as ſuccinfly, and with as much brevity, as T cans |
So oft as your Serenity has, by the Emperor's Embaſſadors, been applyed #nto, for leave to
paſs thorough the Territories of any of your Seigniory , with his Alman, Italian, or Spaniſh
Forces, immediately thereupon there have been beard a thouſand outcries, and complaints of
Rapes, Aſſaſſinations, and other Riots and diſorders of their Soldiers , and it is but a few
months ſince, that the Germans, who pretended to go to Carignan to keep their Eaſter, ts outds
the villany of thoſe, who before had ſo barbaraouſly treated your ſubjects in they perſons, and ſo
lewdly fpoiled them of their Eſtates , diſplaid part of their rage, and Inſolence againſt the
Church, to the great diſgrace , and contempt of Chriſtian Religion , cutting off the ears ,
aſe,and arms of the Crucifix,and 'other Images repreſenting the Saints who are in Heaven.
This AUMCYONS aud mighty Army( moſt Serene Prince Jdeparted from Conſtantinople, beizg
compoſed of Soldiers who were ſtrangers to our Religion, and being deſigned, and accordingly
ſent for the relief of the King, my Lord and Mafter, ſailed thorough the midjt of your Iſlands,
landed in the Dominions of the Church, paſi'd thorough the Territories of the Sictinois, and
Genoeſes ( people both of them, greater favourers of the Emperor's Greatueſs , than friends to
their own proper liberty ) yet is it #0t to be perceiv'd , nor can any man be found to complain of
any inſolence offer d to him : but on the contrary, all men have been treated with all humaniy,
and free paſſage granted to all thoſe they met upon the Stas, and juſt payment made for all the
proviſions they were neceſſitated to take for the ſupport of the Army upon their March. Az
effeft of moderation in that rough ſort of men, which muſt chiefly be attributed to the preſence ,
and dexterity of Captain Polin, the King's Embaſſador > and with ſo great advantage to him,
that never in times paſt, did cizber Turkiſh or Chriftian Army behave themſelves ſo modeſtly
upon ſuch an occaſions | |
IWho is be (moſt Serene Prince) that can, or will deny, but that had not this Army been en-
tertain'd by the King, my Maſter, for the defence of his Frontiers, Chriſtendom had been af-
ſaultcd by it to their infinite damage * TWWho us he that will wot judge, that this Army (its
pmiſſunce conſidered) muſt have triumph'd over ani infinite number of Chriſtian Souls, together
with ſome City of great importance,had not we converted that porver to our own advantage,which
otherwiſe muſt neceſſarily have ſucceeded to the general advancement of the Grand Signior*s
aff airs , and to the private benefit of bis Captains, who are Enemies to our Faith? This Ar-
my then being a Body diſpoſed to Enterprize,and capable of performing high exploits, any man
. of aſound judgment will confeſs, that it has been of much greater advantage to Chriſtendom ,
that it bas been employed in the ſervice of bis Majeſty, my King aud Maſter, than that they had
march d to invade the Chriſtian borders upon their own accozint, 3o that beſides that it was.
| | F 2 | Acedful;

| The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book I,

He means

acedful, and neceſſary for the King, my Maſter, to ſerve himſelf with this Army, therewith to
corre@ the inſolence of the Emperor's people, who had already ſeized upon four of his Gallies at
Toulon, it may moreover be affirmed without reply, that to this private benefit of ours, is con-
Joyned the publick utility of all Chriſtendom.
T flatter my ſelf (moſt Serene Prince) clearly to have demonſtrated to you, and to have con-
firm'd by evident reaſons , and infallible Arguments, theſe two principal things. Fivjt that
the King without prejudice to bis title of moſi Chriſtian,bgs accepted the ſucconrs that have been
ſent him by the Grand Signior : and in the ſecond place, that theſe ſuccours ſo ſent bave been
of greater profit,than diſadvantage to the Chrijtian Common-weal : to which I ſhall add a third,
and that with as much brevity, as the importance of the ſubject will permit ; and that #, that the
Kings Majeſty has not accepted theſe forces,cither out of any ambition of Rule, oy out of revenge
for injuries received, neither to enrich himſel with the ſpoils of others 3 nor to recover what
has been unjuſtly uſurped from himſelf, but has only entertained them for his own defence,
that is ( Tlluſtrious Senators) ſor the defence of his Kingdom, which the Emperor both by open
violence,and clandeſtine pradiice,by all ſorts of intelligences,and treacheries,contrary to all rea>
ſox and juſtice, has evermore Iabour'd to overthrow ; and yet bis Miniſters are not aſhamed to
ſay, that his Czfarcan Majeſty has had no other motive to i2vade the Kingdom of France, but
only to break the friendſhip that was ſaid to be contraffed betwixt the Kings Majeſty, and the
Grand Signior. O tender Conſcicuces! O holy pretences) fit indeed to delude the credulous,and
#norant, but that will hardly paſs (uftrious Senators ) with your, whoin your admirable and
celebrated wiſdom, even before Tcould open my lips , muſt necds be ſatisfied in your own boſoms
of the contrary, and in your prudence eaſily diſcern the foundation of this War to bave been n0
ether than a defign to ruine that Kingdom, which for theſe thouſand years paſt has approved it
ſelf the true and williag refuge of the oppreſſed, and the only SanGuary of all ſorts of affiifted
perſons. T would fain know of theſe men, who invent theſe ſubtil Arguments, what holy mo-
tive of Faith fpurr'd on the Emperor, combined with the King of England, to ixvade France on
the ſide of Champagne and Picardy , an expedition that only ended in the burning of ſome
few inconſiderable Villages, and the Siege of Meziexes, very diſhonorable for him ? What de-
votion prick.d him on, at a time when Italy liv din peace,and aſſurance, by reaſon that Naples,
Millan, Florence, aud Genoa were poſſeſſed by ſeveral Princes, to come and ſhuflle all things
znto diſcord and confuſion ? What Religion (I ſay) moved him to league and combine himſelf
with Pope Leo, to raviſh away the ſtate of Millan, which iz a dire@ line of ſucceſſion appertai-
ned to to the Children of my King and Maſter « What mighty zeal for Religion prompted him
to cauſe our King to be murthered by means of a Prince of France , whom, to that end, he had
ſuborned with prayers and tears ? when ſeeing his execrable pradfice, (before it came to exccuti-
on.) to be wholly detefted, be ſent the Seigneur de Bourbon, with an infinite aumber of people
71120 France, in hope to effed that by open force, which (the bounty and providence of God not
permitting him.) by ſecret treacheries he could not bring to paſs ? What inſpiration of the boly
Ghoſt might it be,that ſeven years ſince condudted the Emperor,with ſeventeen thouſand Foot,aud
tc thouſand Horſe, to invade the Kingdom of France, then, when he entred by Picardy, aud
Provence? What command of the Goſpel can ever be feund out, ſuch as theſe men have found,
who make a ſhew of ſo great devotion to the Chriſtian Name, that can juſtifie to the world the con-
federacy betwixt the Emperor aud the King of England, eſpecially the ſaid King by the proper
ſolicitations,and purſuit of by Czlarcan Majeſty being at that time by the Pope declared a
Schiſmatich ,a Heretick, , and a Rebel ? A conſpiracy that cannot be baptiz*d by the name of a
neceſſary ſuccour ; but an unjuſt, wicked, and deteftable confederacy complatied betwixt them
zwo, tothe end that they might divide betwixt them a Chriſtian, and a Chatholick, Kingdom 3
which in all times , when any occaſion has preſented it ſelf for the propagation of our F aith, bas
ever ſhew'dit ſelf prodigal, both of its Blood, aud Treaſure.
But the whole world ( moſt Serene Princes ) were too little to ſatisfie bis appetite of
Rule ſo precipitouſly is be burried on by bis Ambition and Revenge. TYould be not have been

when Henry ſenſible of the ſhanu-Ful affront put upon bim by the Engliſh King in the perſon of bis Aunt, had
the cighth re- wot the deſign to ſubjugate all Chriſtendom tranſported him to forget that outrage ? How often,

Queen Katha-

to frufirare the Turkiſh atrempts, and to prevent the manifeſt ruine of Hungary and Germa-=
ny, have means been tryed, and endeavours uſed, to procure a peace and union amongſt theſe
Princes, aud till in vain £ Whereas now all particular animoſities, and private intereſts, the
reſpect to Religion , the common defire of liberty , the obligation of ſo many benefits anci-
ently received from our borefathers , and of late from us, laid afide, and forgot; they are, to
our great prejudice, confederated, and u#1t54 like Herod and Pilate , who from mortal Enc-
mies that they were, became friends, and Aſſoc.ates only in order to the perſecution of Feſus
Chriſt.

Shall then this Emperor (moſt Serene Priuce) go about to poſſeſs bimſelf of the Kingdom of

France

Boox 1. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

SE.

France, and to offend this King , who, after ſo many injuries recetv'd, ſo amicably and ſq free-
ly conſented to the ten years Truce £ ſhall the Emperor go about to ruiue thy P race, who after
having been ſo many times undeſervedly invaded in his own Kingdom , and as it were coming
from the Obſcquies of that moſt Iliuſtrious and Serene Dauphin, his Sort (ſo baſely by the Em-
perors corruptions poyſoned ) neverthelcſs with the reſt of bis Children, and Princes of the Blood,
at the peril of his life, went even into the Emperors own Gally, by that ſecurity to manifeſt to him,
how much the peace, ſo neceſſary to all Chriſtendom,was by bis Majeſty coveted and deſired? Shall
the Emperor go about to ruine, burn, and put to ſpoil this Kingdom , in hs paſſage thorough
which, be was ſo welcom'd, treated, honored and careſſed, as if be had been an Angel deſcen-
ded from Heaven? Shall he attempt, b y all undue and all violent ways , to make himſelf $0-
zereign of this Kingdom wherein for fifty days together , by the courteſie , and bounty of the
King my Lord and Maſter, he ſaw himſelf more highly honoured, and reſpeted, than their own
natural Prixce, with a power to command all things more abſ)lute , than if be had been in
his own Palace? Shall the Almans go about to make Hinds, and $1laves of thoſe, who for the
conſervation of the German liberty , have ſo liberally expoſed themſelves, at the vaſt expence,
and loſs of their ſubſtance , and the effuſion of their own blyad ? Shall the Germans and the
Engliſh go about to ruinethe Religion, that we with our valiant Armies, and by the Dofrine
of an infinite number of men, eminent for pacty and learning, have aſſerted and publiſh'd to all
the world ? Shall the Spaniards a people whom ſo often, and by dint of Arms we have redu-
ced to the Chriſtian Faith, go about in revenge to compel w to forſake that Religion , which (6
long, and with ſo great honor to the name of Chriſt , we have maintained and upheld ? If it

mnſt be ſo that ( contrary to all duty and right ) we muſt be abandoned by the reſt of the Chri-

ſtian world (mwbich God avert ) we who are the Subjcas of the King, my Lord and Maſter, may
with great reaſon and juſtice, cry unto God for vengeance againſt them all, for ſo foul an in-

ratitude.

: Theſe are returns, by no means ſuitableto the merits of our Forefathers, for. having by the di-
vine aſſiſtance )gain'd ſo many ſignal vittories for Chriſtendom under the conduF of Charles Mar-
tel 31: thoſe times when they fought with, and cut in pieces fifty thouſand Saracens, that were
come into Spain. Theſe are by ao means fit rewards for the deſert of our Anceſtors, who (by
the favour of the Almighty) acquir'd great advantages for Chriſtendom, at the time, when by
their Forces under the condud} of Charlemain the Tafidels and Saracens were driven both out
of Spain, and a great part of Alia. Theſe are by no means acknowledgments proportionable t9
the reputation our people (by the Grace of God ) acquir'd in the time of Urban the ſecond, who

without any difficulty, or the heaſt contradiction, diſpoſed our King, his Princes, Nobility,Gentry,
and generally the whole body of the Kingdom, againſt the adverſaries of our Faith \ inſomuch
that altogether, and through aur aſſiſtance , they conquer d the Kingdom of Jeruſalem , and
the Holy Laud. Theſe are by no means fit recompences for the deſcrt of ſo many expeditions
agaiaſt the enemies of our Faith , fortunately undertaken by our Progenitors , under the
Reigns of Fhilip and Charles of Valois. And when bis Holineſs ſhall ſte ſo many Nations
 confederated, with a miſchievous intent to ruine the reſt of Chriſtendom, and reſolved to oppreſs
this Kingdom, which of all others has bift merited of the Chriſtian Common-weal , T cannot
doubt, but that he willlend us ſach ſucconrs, and aſſiſtance as he ſhall judge neceſiary fo our pro-
reftion, aud defence. And ſhould his Holineſs do otherwiſe, be would do very much againſt
himſelf, and contrary to the duty of an Italian, a Chriſtian, and a Prelate. Of an Ian :
foraſmuch as our Holy Father does very well underſtand , that the ſervitude, and calamity 0

Italy, can proceed from no other accident, than from the ruine and deſolation of the Kingdom of
France - Of a Chriſtian foraſmuch as the name of Chriſt having in all Ages been defended and
propagated by this Kingdom, and it being at this time invaded by the means and ambition of
the Emperor , anda ſo many Nations ſtrangers to our Religion, it cannot in this exigency be de-
ſerted by any but ſuch, as are no very good friends tothe Chriſtian Faith : Of a Prelate foraſ-
much as it were contrary t» the duty of bis Holineſs, being, as he is, thoroughly informed, and
very well in bs own knowledg aſſured, that the Emperor, obſtiate in his own will, and reſolute to
ſubjugate both the French, Italians, and all other Chriſtians, would never hearken to axy over-
ture of accommodation.that has by his Holineſs been  propeende to bim-Whereas on the contrary
the King, my Maſter (cqually defirows of bis own, and the pablick quiet) has often offered to ſub-
mit all by intercjts , and differences to the judgment of our Holy Father. To diſcharge then
the office of a true Prelate, and a true Fudg, may he not take arms againſt him, who has not the
confidence to deny, but that he 1s the ſole perturbator of the publick, peace, and the aniverſal
good? TWhich though bis Holineſs ſhould forbear to do, yet to reprove his gratitude in this re-
ſpect, the very bones of Gregory the third, Stephen the ſecond, Adrian the firſt, Stephen the
fourth, Gregory the ninth, Gelaſius the ſecond, Innocent the ſecond, Eugentus the firſt, Inuo -

cent the fourth, Urban, aud ſeveral other Popes world ſtart up 7 wha being perſecuted, partly by
; ft —_

—_

—_

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book I.

the Enemies of the Faith, and partly by the Emperors, have be relicued by the Forces
of this moſt Chriſtian Kingd1m, and by the Treaſure of this Crown, as the ſacred Anchor of all
Chriſtendom, and have been proteted, and reſtored to the holy Chair. The bones and aſhes of
Pope Clement would riſe up, who being, contrary to all reaſon, and equity, reduced to the ex-
treameſt calamity by the Emperor (who at this very time, allyed and confederated with Here-
ticks, prepares, and ſtirrs up ſo many Tragedies, for good, and true Chriſtians ) was delive*
red from all his oppreſſions by the arms of the King my Maſtcr, and that at the price of a great
number of his people.

T do not believe ( Tiluſtrious Senators ) that you have in the leaſt forgot the Union, and Ally-
ance,which for ſeven years paſthas been jo inviolably objerved betwint your 11ſuſtrions Republick,
and the Crown of France. Can you forget the ſtridt league that was maintazned betwint you
and us in thelateWars ? Neither can you have forgot that Enterprize wherein you, and we. in
Jo ſhort time, conquered Conſtantinople. Can you then cr:dure, that 2 N-tion your foreſa-
thers have ſo loved, honored, and efteemed, ſhould be weakened by the means of your Enemies a
people with whom (either you, nor we being degenerated from the vertue of our Predeceſſors )
you may yct expe to perform more exploits, and ſuch as may be for the cxlargement of your
own Dominions, and the univerſal benefit of all Chriſtendom. T hope you corrfider (Tlluſtrious
Senators) with your wonted prudence, that if ( as God forbid ) any ſiniſter accident ſhould be-
fall the King, my Lord and Maſter, the liberty of your moſt ſerene Republick, would be with-
out all manner of Remedy, expoſed as a prey to him, who aims at nothing leſs, than toſubjeft
ws both to the ſame ſervile Toke , as thiſe who have cver been united for the defence of the com-
mon liberty. Thich though you ſhould not do, yet the very boncs of our forefathers would riſe
þ in our favour, thoſe Anceſtors who ſecing Philip Maria Viſconti to have ſubducd Genoa,
and already to bave reduced all Tuſcany to a deplorable condition, not able to ſuffer ſo great
an injuſtice , nor to permit the Territorics of ſo gre.at Princes to be invironed by ſo dangerous
an Enemy , with the Aſſiſtance of the Floxcntines, rerook Genoa, and by this means, not only
fruſtrated and repelled the Ambition of that Tyrant, but moreover with the ſingular applanſe ,

and obligation of all Italy, recovered Breſcia, Bergamo, and Cremona.

1flatter my ſelf by the remembrance of ſo many glorious aGiions, and by ſo many great exem-

ples of the French fidelity,piety and honor,to bave been ſo happy,as to have removed all difficul-
es,and impediments, wherewith by the calumnies of th:ſe of the Imperial party your Lordſhips
may have been prepaſſeſſed, and as a moſt humble ſervant to you all, do beſeech, aud conjure you
(anoft i1luftrious Senators) to confider the miſerable eftate of Italy, and generally of all Chriſten-
dom, aud before you reſolve or declare for cither party, not only to hear the moſt Reverend, and
Illuſtrious Cardinal of Ferrara : but alſo thoroughly to weigh, and examine what be ſhall pro-
Poſe to you in the behalf of the King my Maſter. And once more moſt humbly beſeech your
Serene Highneſs with your accuſtomed Prudence to conſider the Emperor, #ot only as the cauſe
of the ruine, and miſery of Italy : but moreover to look upon him as the Inſidiator of the li-
berty of this moſt Serene Republick, Acknowledg, acknowledg, I beſeech you, the houſe of Au-
ſiria for your Capital Enemy, and ſuch a one, as þas at all times uſed all ſorts of endeavour to
encroach upon, and to uſurp the Territories and Dominions of others, and eſpecially thoſe of your
moſt Serene Republick. And on the contrary that moſt Chriſtian King, my Lord and Maſter ,
for your ancient, faithful, and affefionate fricud, and remember with what promptitude, and
alacrity,he bas ever divided bis Forces with you, for the recovery of your places unjuſtly poſſeſſed
by thoſe of the Houſe of Auſtria, of which the recovery of Brelciazand Verona may ſerve for 4
ſufficient proof. Neither 1s there any cauſe to fear, that ſuch afriendſhip can by any means
ſuffer it ſelf to be violated, or diſſolved 3 foraſmuch as there having been betwixt that Crown
of France, and this Tlluſtrious Scignenry no kind of difference, eitycr ancient, or of later date,
and the one bolding nothing of the other, the occaſions muſt conſequently be wanting upon which
the amities of Princes de ordinarily diſſolve : but on the other ſide, their Unity, Allyance, and
Conformities are ſuch that the rnine of the one does threaten , and almoſt aſſure the calami-
ty, and diſſolution of the other,

What opinion the Senate might retain of ſo nice an affair, I am not able to ſay,
neither do I know whether my Brothers eloquence made them approve of a thing,
at which they had before been ſo highly ſcandalizcd : but this I know, that Lhave ever
heard that action highly cenſured both then and fince: and in plain truth, I do believe
our affairs were not much bctter'd by it, but it is not for me to meddle with ſo great

affairs. . So ſoon as theſe mighty ſuccours of the Turk arrived , every one thought the

whole Earth had not becn capable to receive them, ſuch judgrnents men make of things
before they come to be tryed.

Monfieur 4 Anguien who was at that time the Kings Licutcnant in Provence, baris
gathere

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. TT 39 .
gathered together ſome Enſiyns of Provengals, came tO tt down betore TR. _ OT TG
ater a great Battery had been made, the aflault was given by the T ures, and Provengats * ti
together : but try were repulſed. In the end the Town {urrcyared, but not the Vw
(ic. In the mcon time the Duke of Savey ſolicited the Marquis de Gaſt for relict, who
accordingly with a good Army put himſelf into the Ficldd, The Tarky very much de-
ſpiſcd our people, yet 1 do not belicve they could beat us number for number : they are >
*tis truc, {tronger men, MOre obcdient and more patient of any hardihip, than we are
bar 1 cannot allow them to be more valiant 3 they have indeed one advantage over us :
which is, that they ſtudy nothing but War. Farvareſſa at this Siege was very much
diſplcaſed, and caſt out very tart and paſſionate language, cfpecially when We Were con-
{train'd to borrow of him powder, and bullct , mlomuch that he reimbarked himſclt, Y
avd departed,without doing any great tcats, as allo the winter indeed drew on butthey Br! oroſſi 0:8
behaved themſelves very civilly cowards all our conftcderates in their retreat , ana the guſted.
Provengals likewiſe disbanded. _ ER
I had forgot to tell you, that aftcr the 31] ſnccels at Puypignan + the King ſent us or-
ders to march ſtraight away into Piedmont, and Monſicur 4” Axncbaut (who was Admi- | |
ral) went to belicge Cony, where we (ped as ill as at Perpignan , and were very well Siege of Cory)
drub'd in giving the aſſault, for not having well diſcover'd the breachz and where 1
(aw the brave and valiant Captain Santo Pedro Corſo behave himfſzH admirably well , $anto Pers
who was almoſt woundcd to death. The (ſaid Adnural having taken fome fery little Corſo.
places, and ſeeing the winter at hand , returned back into France, Jeaving Montieur de
Boiticres in the quality of the Kings Lieutcnant there, whom he ſent to Garriſon at Ga-
varctz and we to Savillan, where Monlicur de Termes was Governor , who was very
glad of our coming, tor he ſtood in nced of us. During our abode there, {cycral at-
tempts were made both upon Twxrix, and upon us, and we Iikewile attempted ſfome-
thing upon the Enemy,whercin our tortune was ſometimes butter and ſometimes worſe :
but there being nothing that particularly concerned me, I ſhall pats them over, and in-
deed ſhaggld I give a relation of all the Actions wherein Ihave been engaged,I ſhould ne-
VEr havfone |
After that the Turks were retir'd, as has bcen (aid, the Duke of Savoy, and th: Mar-
quis de Gaſt laid Sicge tO Montdevi, wiicre the Seigneur de Dros a Piedmontois was Go-
vernor, having with him four T:a/zan Companies, and two of Swiſſe,who there behaved The Swiſſe
themſelves exceedingly well, though it be none of their trade to keep places, and there SY ant we
were given two or three Scalados- Monſicur 'de 7 oiticres, had no pofſible means to re- os BE
licve it,for the King had at that time very few Soldiers in Piedmont; and the Snifſe, who
had loſt their Captains and Lieutcnants with Canon ſhots, began to mutiny againſt the
Sejgneur de Dros the Governor, inſfomuch that he was conftrain'd to capitulate. Now
you muſt know, that the Marquels de Graft (who was one of the moſt cautclous and þ 4; of
lubtle Captains of his time) to take from him all hopes of relict, had counterteited Let- the Marquis
ters from Monficur de Foitieres, wherein he writ him word to ſhift the beſt he coald de Galt.
tor himſelf, there being no pollibility to relieve him : which coming to the Governors
hands, and the cheat not bcing to be difcover'd, and the Siſſe at the fame time begin-
ning to mutiny, hc ſurrcendred the Town upon condition, to march away with Bag, and
Baggage. However the Articles (to the great difhonor of the Marquis de Guaſt ) were Mount Devt
very ill obſcrved, and the Seigneur de Dros purſued, who lav'd himſelf upon a Spaniſh Inrrenared.
Horſc,and it was well for him that he did ſo, tor all the Gold in Exrope would not have
ſav'd his lite, for the hatred the Duke of Savoy had conceived againit him, being that
he, who was his Subject, had revolted to the Eencmies tide. *T'was faid that he made his
elcape in the habit of a Prictt by the means of an Ttzlian Soldicr, who had formerly
(erv'd him: but I believe it was after the manner I have related ; but this I car fay
without lying, that he was one of the braveſt men , and the greatett Wits, that evex Commenda=
came out of Piedmont , and dycd atterwards very honorably at the Battcl of Seri tions of the
Zolles. oo ae
The fame day that Montdevi was ſurrendred, I had departed fiotn Savillan (to the FN
great regret of Monhicur de Termes) with hive and twenty Foot, to try if Þ could find
means to put my {clt into itz tor with a great party it would be a matter of extra-
ordinary dithculty z and took with me a Guide, who would undertake to conduct me
by the deep vallics, and by a River that runs by Monrdevi, in which we were to march
a great way together, the water being but knee deep, and I do believe by that way 1
mght have got in,though it would have fignitied nothing, it I had, foraſmuch as I muſt
have done as the rett did; confidering that the ſtrangers by their number gave the Law :
but they dearly paid tort, many ot them being maſſecred at their marching out of

the

4O

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book I.

A combat
neat Maupas.

the Town. I had moreover drawn out ten Soldicrs, over and above my tive and twen-
ty, to convoy me over the Maypas, a place fo call'd, and within halt a mile of Marennes ,
where a man ſhould hardly cver fail of mecting ſome of the Garriſon of Fofſay. And
above, and on the right hand of Maxpas, there ftood an empty Inn, trom whence one
might diſcover all that came trom S$avillan ſtraight to Cairas, and from Cairas to the

| faid Savillan. As 1 deſcended therefore 1nto the plain that leads dircCtly to Manpas ,

I was there aware of threeſcore Tralian Soldiers of Foſſan, that were [couting towards
that Inn, which ſtands upon an eminence, and preſently ſaw the Party move,who made
haft to gain the Mavpas on that fide towards Cairas, to fight me in that ſiratght, which
w-41: me turn off on the right hand with intent to tall upon their Rear, ſo ſoon as I
ſhould arrive at the Inn 3 when they perceiving my dclign , endeavour'd to recover the
road of Foſſas to rctire : but I purſued them fo cloſe, that I con:Irain'd them to take a
houſc, which had a ſtable dircCtly oppolite to it, to which I ſet tire; who thereupon
{ceing themſelves loſt, they began to cry out for Quarter, caſting themſelves headlong,
{ome out of the Windows, and ſome by the door,ot which my Soldicrs diſpatch*d ſome
in revenge of one of their companions , very much beloved by them, who was kill'd,
and two more wounded, the reft I ſent back to Savillau bound together with match, for-
almuch as they were more in number , than we that took them, I went thence
ſtaight to Cairas, and at the Mill below Cairas found Monthicur de Cental, Governor of
the ſaid Cairas, who told me that Montdevi was {urrcndred, having yet the Letters in his
hand, that had been ſent him to that effe&. I then preſently turned about to recover
Savillaz, and to carry the news to Monſieur de Termes, that he might ſend it to Mon-
fieur de Boitieres : but as I was on this fide Cairas, and upon the skirts of the plain near
unto ſome houſes there called Jes Rodics, looking behind mell ſaw a Troop of Horſe,
chat came fromwards Foſſan,along by the meadow leading towards Albe which they then
held : which made me to halt at thoſe houſes, toſee what they would doz in which po-
ſture, they drawing nearer, diſcover'd me 3 and attempted to come up to me by a little
aſcent there was, encloſed with hedges on cither fide ; but when ſaw themgdvanced
half up the Aſcent, I ſent out four or hve Harquebuſters, who, tiring upon then ſhot one
of their Horſes, whereupon they very fairly faced about. Which I ſeeing, and conclu-
ding it was for fear, advanced boldly into the plain, where I had not march'd five hun-
dred paces, but I diſcovered them again in the ſaid plain (for they had paſſed a little
lower out of ſight ) being fourteen Launcers, and eight Harquebutters on horſeback ,
with another who came after leading the wounded horſe, I had in all but five and
twenty Soldiers, of which ſcven were Pikes, and Captain Favas and my ſelf each of us
a Halbert on our necks : Their Harquebuſiers came up at a good round trot to charge
us, firing all the way as they came, as ſome of ours alſo did at them, and their Laun-
Ces made a ſhew as it they would charge in amongit usz but it was very faintly; for
upon the firing of our Harquebuliers they made a halt, and gave way, at which we took
heart, and march'd boldly up tothem with good {matt claps of Harquebuze ſhot, upon
which one of their men falling dead to the ground,they very tairly left him behind them,
and deſcending once more into the plain retreated directly towards Albe. And thus I
Tetird to Savillay,it being two hours within night before I got thither, which 1 thought
fit to commit to writing, to the cnd, that other Captains may take exemple whenever
Horſe comes to charge the Foot, never to ſpend more than half of their ſhot, and reſerve
the other half tor the laſt extream , which being obſerv d, they can very hardly be defea-
ted without killing a great number of the Enemy, who will never venture to break in
whilſt they ſce the Harquebuſicrs ready preſented to fire upon them who bein
reſolute men, by the favour of any little buſh, or brake, will hold the Cavalry long in
play, the oneſtill firing whilſt the other is charging again. For our parts we were all
reſolv*d never to yield 3 but rather to fight it out with the {word , fearing they would
revenge What we had done in the morning, for the four horſe that efcap'd to Foſſar
had carried back the news of their defeat.

So ſoon as Monſieur de Termes underſtood that Montdevi was taken, he reſolved in the
morning to put himſelf into Beme,which he accordingly did,where being arriv'd he there
found two companics ot Swiſſe, which were there in Garriſon (having recetv'd alſo the
others of Montdevi) who immediately abandoned Beme, and went to Cairas, leaving on-
ly the Count's own Corrpany, another of Italians, and that of Captam Removare. From
thence Monficur de Termes diſpatch'd away a Meſſenger to me on horſeback, writing me
word, that it ever I would do the King a timely ſervice, I ſhould immediately come a-
way, and this was the next day after the ſaid Seigneur arrived at Beme, which was Su-
day, and we were but juſt come from Mals.

After

Book I; de Montluc, Mareſchal of Frarice. _ 41

—
— — .——_—_—_—

— OTE on os GOO EO
.
hk —_—

Atcer cherefore having eaten a ſnap or ewo , I immediacely pur my ſelf into the ficld
to go thicher 5 yer cou'd I nor make ſo much halt z our cthac it was above three hours
within night before I got rhicher : jr being neceſſary tor me ro paſs thorongh uncalie val -
leys , foraſmuch as we believ'd che Town already to be beſieged, all the Enemies Camp
being at Carrs, bur three lictle miles from Beme , and they having skirmiſh'd all che
day bctore the Town. By good fortune Monſieur de St. Jalan Colonel of the SWiſſe,
was at the ſaid Beme, ic being his Garriſon, and Monſieur d' Aufſun allo, who was come to
give hima viſit, and co ſee what would be the 1flne of che Steve or Montdevi : but 1t was The Sieur 4
impoſſible for che ſaid St, Julien to detain the Swiſſe, tor I mer all che four Companies Fear att
already within half a mile of Cairas, I had fo much honor done me, that borl. che hjmſel£ ints
Count, and the Counteſs his Mother,together with ſeveral other grear perfons,came to meet Beme,
me at the Garesof the City, who were very glad of my coming, cxpecting im the morning
to be beſieged ; bur two daysafcer my arrival their Camp march'd away toward Trinitat;
having caſt a Bridge over che River, near ro Foſſan ; and the morning char the Camp rea
moy*dsfive or fix light horſe of Monſieur de Termes, and four or five Genc!emen belonging
to the Count de Berze (who ſerv'd for Guides) with five or {fix Harquebafiers on horſeback
of mine, went in purſuit of their Camp. Ir was fo great a miſt chac they conld ſcarce
ſee one another, which was the reaſon that they went to the very head of their Arcillery ,
and took the Commiſſary (whom they call che Capra of che Arcllery;) and the day be-
fore Meſſicurs de Termes, d' Aufſun, and de St. Jalian were gone away, having had intelli-
gence thar the Enemy were making this Bridge ; whereot Monticur de Sr, Jxlien went
ſtraight ro Cairas, where the Swiſſe likewiſe would not abide, bur went thence to Carig-
nan 5 Monſieur de Termes who doubted alſo chey might goto Savillan, of which he was
Governor, went thicher z and Mcfſicur d' Aufſun went n great hoſt dircHtly to Turin ; In
ſhorc every one was in fear of his own charge.

The ſaid Bridge was furcher advanc?d than was imagin'd, for thoſe of Fofſan made it in
three or four days, that their Camp lay at Carr#, and ar che ime char the Commiſlary
was taken, the greaczſt yarc of che Army was al-eady paſs'd over, and was encamp'd to=
wards Marennes: particularly the Batcaillon of theGermans,wno were quarter'd in the Ca-
file, and the out-houſes of the Palace of Meſſire Phillibert Canebons,a Gentleman of Savillan,

Monſicur de Termes had brought with him co Beme Monſieur de Caillac, the Commit
fary of the Artillery , who would needs ſtay with me out of reſpe& ro the great friend-
ſhip berwixr us ( which does yer continue ) and we were in deſpair of ever getting any
ching our of che ſaid Commiſlary priſoner, till it grew to be very Iace, and then he cold,
and aſſured us, that the Army was gone to befiege Savillan: Ar which Monheur de
Caillac and I were almoſt at our wits end 5 for the (aid Sieur de Caillac had his reſidence
morear the ſaid Savillan, than ar any ocher place, and I allo, being it was my Garriſon,
and where I had continued for ſeven or eight months before, In the end we both of us
reſoly*d to go put our {elves into ir at all hazards and advencures thar mighe befall. I
had five and twenty Soldiers of mine own on horſeback , which. I crook rogether wich
four or five more of Monſieur de Termes , which he had letr ar Beme (to the great
orief of the Count, who would never be perſuaded co permic Captain Favar, and
the reſt of che Company to depart ) and abouc rwo hours within night, we arriv'd ac
Cairas, where we ſpoke with Monfieur Cental, whom we found in a very great chafe, for
chat the Swifſe had thar day forſook him, and he told us char it was very great odds we
ſhould find the Camp lodg'd in the Councrey houſes belonging to Savillan, the Germans
excepced, who were quarcer'd as I have ſaid z and toox up all che ſpace berwixc char and
Marennes , thorough which we were to paſs; for my other way ic was all ditches and
Rivolers very troubleſom to paſs, eſpecially having no Guide with us, which we had nor
provided our ſelves of, by reaſon we all of us very well know the ordinary way. How-
ever we paſs'd thorough the middle of the Village of Marennes, without any encounter
at all (foraſmuch as che Enemies Cavalry was yer abour Foſſan) and ſo came to Savillan,
abour two hours afcer midnight, where ar the Gare of che Town we found Captain Cha-
reze, Brother to Bequemar , whom Monſieur de Termes ſent co Monſieur Boitieres, de-
firing him to aſſure him, that we were all reſolv'd ro dye, or to preſerve che place.

Monſieur de Caillac,and I hen wentto find out Monfieur de Terms at his Quarters, where
ſtealing upon him before he heard any thing of us, we tound him wricing down the order
of the Siege, with his back towards the door, which being open, he never heard nor ſaw
us, *ll I coming behind him, and taking him in my arms faid ro him:, Did yo think
to pliy this Farce without us ? ac which he {uddainly ſtart up, and leap'd abour my neck,
being ſcarce able to ntter a word for joy, and likewiſe embrac'd Monheur de Cailac,
telling me, char he wiſh'd he had given half his eſtate, my Company was there alſo wich

mez

4 _— —— dr www AAf@as

” a
Ya er een
:

4t

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize - Book I.

me ; to which I made anſwer, chat I would make chem to fly , provided he would ſud-
dainly find a meſſenger to carry a Letter ro my. Lieutenant Czprain Faves ; and im-
mediately hereupon we diſparch'd chither a Foo:man of his, who before noon got to Beme,
where ſo ſoon as the (aid Captain Favas had read my Letter, he preſently went to acquaint
the Count, that he muſt of neceſſity deparr. The Count was again very importunate with
him to ſtay ; bur nevercheleſs he march'd out about three of the Clock in the atcernoon ,
and lefc the Flag of my Enſign as he paſs'd by Cairas with Monſeur Cental, who plainly
rold him that he muſt not expe& co paſs withour fighting, to which he made anſwer, rhar
it wasalſo all he did deſire. We had given inſtructions to the Footman,that ſo ſoon as he
ſhould come to the end of the plain, he ſhould lead him ſtraight cowards the Mill of the
ſaid Meſſer Philibeyt , which was abouc a Harquebuze ſhot diſtant from his Palace, and
that then he ſhould follow on along the fide of the River, preparing himſelf co fight at the
{aid Mill, not doubting but that he would there certainly meer with the Germans : but
that nevertheleſs if he wonld avoid fighting , he ſhould by all means do it, and make it
his only buſineſs roget into the Town. A caution that was very much in ſeaſon, for the
Germans had diſlodg'd the very morning thacwe paſs'd by , and were encamp'd at Ma-
rewnes + but about two hours after midnight he ſafely arriv'd , which redoubled the joy,
not of Monſieur de Terms only ; but moreover of all the other Captains and Soldiers,
and the Inhabiranrs of che Town ; for ro ſay the truth, I had one of the beſt, and the
fulleſt Companies m all Piedwwont, And indeed I would never have other than the beſt
men I could chooſe, for when once I perceiv'd any one not to be right, Iever found one
pretence or another to be rid of him.
Two hours before day, Monſieur de Termes had news brought him that the Duke of
Savoy, and the Marquis de Gmaft were come that very night to Cavillimer, two miles from
Savillan ; which made us ſtill more confident that the Camp was advancing with a

reſolution to befiege us, becaule they planted themſelves upon the way by which we were

ro receive our relief;and ſo ſoon as the day began to appear there came ſome from Marennes
to give us notice, thar all che Infantry was upon the Road towards Afontiren, and deſcen-
ded into the plain of St. Fre, raking the way rather cowards Carignan, than Savillan, of

- which we had ſtill more and more ntelligence.

I then begg'd of Monſieur de Termes to give meleave to go out towards Cavillemer, to
follow inthe Rear of cheir Horſe, which he preſently granted , cauſing Captain eMons
his Enſiga with fifry Launces ro mount to horſe, Now in che cime that I was pone to
Beme, our Colenel Monſieur de Tais had ſent the Companies of Bognedemar and the
Baron de Nicola in greatdiligence co Savillan, and my own men being weary , I took
only Captain Favas, and thoſe who had come in with me, who were pretty well re-
freſh'd , and ſome forty of the others, that were come overnight, Captain Lienard at
chat time Lieutenant to Gabarret with thirty or forty of his Company, and Captain Bre#-
;lche Baron's Enſign, who (as I was very lately affur*d) is yerliving, and has fince
been ſhor in theleg of which he is lame(as 1 am told) with as many of the Company of
the {aid Baron, and went ſtraight to Cavillemur , along the banks of a great Rivoler, lea-
ding to the ſaid Cavillewwor , and on the letr hand the great high way, when being ad-
yanc'd within halt a mile of the Town , I was overtaken by one of Captain Gabarret's
men, whom he had ſent to me, to defire I would ſtay a little for him, he being moun-
ting © horſe to come after me with all poſſible ſpeed, I therefore made a hal, bar
(as he was ever very redious and flow) he made us there ro rarry for him above a long
quarter of an hour, and ſo unhappily for me, that had Theld on my way wichour ſtay-
ing for him, I had mec with the Duke of Savoy at alittle Chappel withour Cavillemor,
cowards Savillan, where he wasat Maſs, with only five and twenty Horſe for his Guard,
che Marquis being gone away with all the Cavahy towards Roxy, and already advanc'd
above a long mile from thence upon his way, Thus a little delay oftentimes cauſes a
ercat inconvenience , otherwiſe we had: at this time perhaps light of a good booty :
but ſo ſoon as the ſaid Gabarret came up to us, I went on, and came preſently to Ca-
villew'r, where the people of the Town enform'd me , thar che ſaid Duke could nor

c- be above half a m''- from thence , which made both Captain Mons, me and
all the Soldiers ready © ear our own fleth, ro think whar a prize we had loſt
through the neglizence of Gabarret , whom to his face we curs'd to all the Devilsof
Hell. |

Afcer we had hereſtaid a pretty ſpace , not knowing what we ſhonld reſolve to do,
we ar laſt began ro pur our ſclves upon our return home, when the intelligence we
had from Marennes coming into my head, I preſently alter*d thar reſolution , and took
the way thervngh che Meadows that leads cowards thee plain , ſtill hearing the Drums

of

— —  —  ——

BooxI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. ;

—O—_  - a Io—_—

—

of che Enemies Camp both before and behind us ar the ſame time ; for it 1s not aboye
half a mile from Cavillemor to the fight of che plain, and ſo ſoon as we came
within fight of it, we diſcover'd three or four Lacquais that follow?d the Camp. Two
or three of cur light horſe ſparr'd out to rake them , and accordingly brought them
in, by whom we learn'd chat after them follow'd two Enſigns of Foor, and a Troop
of Horſe commanded by Monſieur de 14 Trinitat : the faid two Companies of Foot were
thoſe of the Connrt Pedro d' Apperta Governor of Fofſan, which were conducted by a
Lieurenant of his call'd Captain 44/canio , and the Horſe were commanded by the ſaid
Sejgneur de T rinitat , together with the aminunition, bread , and a good part of the bag=
gage of the Camp, whereof a great deal belong'd co the Germans and Spaniards, and
was guarded by fifcy Soldiers of the one nation, and as mciny of the crhicr; fo thar
they might be ſome four hundred horſes of carriage, or more, and fourſcore and ren wa-
gons laden with Provifion, and the equipage belonging to the Artillet y.

Captain Mons thereupon went out to diſcover Monheur de 1a Trinitat, and went ſo
near, thac he had his horſe ſhot under him, who preſently returning back ſaid theſe
words to me ; Captain Montluc, yondey is enough for ns both to giv*, and to take. Where-
upon I ſuddainly leap*d upon a little Mare of one of my Souldiers, aud taking one of
my Serjeants with ewenty Harquebufiers along with me, went my felt co diſcover the
Enemy , who making no reckoniag of thoſe few H-rſe they had ſeen, (till with Drums
bearing , held on their Marchs when being come pretty near, I ſaw a mulcj:ude of men
and horſes marching along the plain , which was the Bagaage, and che Waggons, and
afterwards upon rhe eminence on thar ſide where I was, perceiv'd the two Entigns and
the Horſe upon their march, and counted the Foot to be berwixc three and four hun-
dred men, and likewiſe the Horſe to be berwixc thirty , and five and thirty Launces 3
which having done I preſently recurn'd back to Captain Afonr, and told him, thar
having miff*d one great good fortune, we were now to attempt another , to which he
made anſwer thathe was ready to do whatever I would command him. Whereupon
I defir'd him to ſtay for me , whilſt T went to ſpeak to my Soldiers, which he did,
and I ſpurr*d away to them, Caprain Gabarret was with the ſaid Captain ons on
horſeback, and Captain Favas, Lyenard, and le Brexil conducted the Foot , when
coming up to them, I ſpoke both ro them, and to the Soldiers, telling them, that
as God had deprived us of one good fortune, he had put anocher into our hands, and
chat alchough che Enemy were at this time three times as many as we were, yet if we re»
fus'd to fight them upon ſo fair an occaſion , we were unworthy che name of Soldiers,
as well our of reſpe& to the honor we ſhould acquire thereby, as 1n regard to rhe Riches
we ſaw expoſed before us, which was no contemprivle prize, To which all che three Cap=-
tains made anſwer, thatic was their opinion we ought to fight, whereupon, raiſing my
voice,I ſpake to rhe Soldiers, ſaying, Pell, fellow Soldiers, ire not you of the ſame opinion with
tbeſe Captains ? [ for my part have already told you mine, that we ought Z0 fight 5 and aſſure
yorr ſelves we ſhall beat them, for my mindtells meſo, which has never fail'd me in any
thing 1 have ever undertaken, therefore 1 pray Gentlemen conclude them already as good as
OY OWN,

Now it was a cuſtom I always had, to make the Soldiers believe, that 1 had a certain
kind of preſage, which whenever ir came upon me, I was ſure to overcome: a thing that L
only pretended to amuſe the Soldiers , that they might think chemſelves ſecure of che vi-
ory, and have ever found an advantage by it ; for my confidence often emboldned
the moſt timorous, and ſimple fellows, nay ſometimes the moſt crafty knaves amongſt
them arecafie ro be gulÞPd, as theſe were, who thereupon with one voice cry'd out, Let as
feb ( aptain, let ws fight, I chen declar'd ro them , that 1 would place four of my Pikes
in the Rear, to keep every one from flinching back , which if any one fhould offer to do,
they ſhould kill him , with which they were very well content; buc I had much ado
to make the ſaid Pikes to tay behind , according to that agreemenc, ſo ardenily for-
ward was eyery one to be the firſt to fight, though ic was very neceſlary chey ſhould do
ſo, for that evermore diforders are moſt likely ro happen in the Rear. |

Ithen began to march, when ſo ſoon as the Enemy diſcover'd che Foot, rhey made
a halt upon che edg of a great hollow , char had in rhe proceſs of cime been worn by the
land floads, which ſtretch'd it ſelf in length till ic ended under the Hill where we
were. I ſaw them 3n the plain with their Launces all advanc'd , nor offering to move ,
and ſaw alſo Captain eAſcanio upon a lirtle gray Nag , who plac'd his Pikes all in file
along the hollow, and then ſpurr'd up tothe Waggons to draw them up at the end of the
hollow, and then to the Baggage placing them behind, and afterwards to the Horſe, by
which order and diligence, I knew him tobe a brave man, and fell to confider with
my ſelf, what would be che jflue of the fight, of which I now began to be jn ſome doubr,

G-'3 chorough

44

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book [,

The Imperi-
aliſts defea=
ted.

thorough whe good order of this Chief. T nevertheleſs nothing alter'd my refolurion ;
but whilſt Capcain Aſcanio was buſie ordering his Bacrail, I was as diligent to order mine,
giving the Harquebuſiers ro Captain Gabarret , who was on horſeback. And you muſt
rake notice, that the Enemies Foot was upon the top of the hollow dircaly over againſt
us. I took then the three Captains with the Pikes, and left order with the Harquebus«
fiers by no means to ſhoot till they came within the diſtance of four Pikes, and to Cap-
tain Gabarret by all means to ſee this order obſerv'd , which he alſo did. 1 then defir'd
Captain Aſoss tolend me five and ewenty of his Launceers to help me ro kill 3 for the
were ſo many that in a whole day, though they had had one hand ryed behind them,
we ſhould have had much ado to diſpatch them, and with che reſt he was to fighr their
Cayalry , though they werea great many more chen ours. To which he readily conſented,
and gave five and twenty of his Launces to the younger Tilades (the fame who 1s now
call'd Monſieur de Sainforens ) and moreover to Captain Ydrow ſome light horſe of the
ſaid Company, who are both of them yer living , asalſo ſeveral others , who were of che
{ame Troop.

Theſe orders being given , all of us both Foot and Horſe march'd direly towards the
Enemy, and when I expected their Ha: quebnfiers ſhould have thrown themſelves into the
hollow, fo ſoon as they ſhould ſee or men come fall drive upon them, they quite contrary
march & ſtraight up to our men, and all at a clap gave fire within leſs than four Pikes
length of one another. Now I had given order to our men,thar ſo ſoon as they had powr*'d
in their ſhot , without ſtanding to charge again, they ſhould run up to them , and fall
to the Sword , which they alſo did, and I with the Pikes ran to the end of the hollow,
and fell in deſperately amongſt them. In the mean time Ydrow and Tiladet charg'd
Monfieur de Trinitat , and put him co rout , and our Harquebuficrs and theirs threw
themſelves altogether into the hollow : bur ours had the upper hand, and our Pike men
had thrown away their Pikes, and were fallen to'c with the Sword, and fo couragiouſly
fighting we came allup tothe Wagons, Captain AZons, and all, which were all overturn'd
in 2 moment , and all their men put to flight towards two houſes which ſtood in the
bottom of the plain , where, ſtill pur fuing our ViRory, and the Horſe ſtill firing amongſt
them , very tew of themreach'd che houſes. At che houſes ſome particular men were ta=
ken ro Quarter : but of the reſt very few were ſav'd, and thoſe who were left alive
were ſo grievoufly wounded , that I do verily believe they had little benefit of their mer-
cy. Our Gensd «Armes in thoſe days wore great cutting Fauchions, wherewith to lop
off armes of Male, and to cleave Morions , and indeed in my life I never ſaw ſuch blows
given. As for the Cavalry they were all caken running away towards Foſſan , Mon-
fieur de Trinitat excepted, and five others, who being better mounted than the reſt, eſca-
ped ; though young Tilladet wich two others only purſu'd him within two Harquebuze
ſhort of Poſſan, and took one who artended one of che Colours, which the Enfign that car-=

ried it, had throv/n upon the neck of him who carried off his horſe,

| Preſently after
we began to march , leading oft che Wagons z and Baggage, which were of ncceſſity to

return by the ſame way they had come from ZZarennes , foraſmuch as the Car-
riages could paſs no other way, and there I ſaw fo great a diſorder amongſt our people ,
that had twenty of the Enemies horſe tarn'd back upon us, we had certainly been defca-
ted; forall the Soldiers both Foot and Horſe were ſo laden with Baggage, and with
horſes chey had taken, thar ic had been impoſſible for Captain Mons to have rallyed (o
much as one Launce, or I two Harquebufiers: 1nfomuch thac we left all the dead un-
rifled and untouch'd 3 but the Country people of Afarennes came chither preſently after,
and performed that office for them, and have ſince ſeveral rimesrold us, char they gor there
above two thouſand Crowns; for not above three or four days before , <1 ſe two Cap-
rains had muſter'd for three months. The booty is very ofcen che occaſion of ruine,where«
fore Captains ought to be exceeding careful, eſpecially when they know there are enemies
Garriſons ncar at hand, that may ſally our upon them 3 rhough it is a very hard thing
ro take order in, for the avarice of the Soldier is ſach, that he oftentimes
his burthen, and no reaſon will ſerve his curne,

After this defeat we return'd to Savillan , where we found chat two Country fellows
had given an Alarm to Monſieur de Termes, having bronghe him news chat we were
all defeated, and indeed we found him almoſt at his wits end, bur afterwards he was
the moſt overjoy'd man, that ever he had been in his life. There a man might have had
fleſh enough good cheap; for we took above forty German Whores and more than twen-
ty Spaniſh , which kind of Cattel was the greateſt cauſc of our diſorder. We had an in-
rention to have ſhar'd all the ſpoil equally amongſt us, and found chat-we were but an
hundred forty and five men, and fifty horſe, buc every one begg'd chat he might keep

quails under

what

D—_———

Book I. "MW Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

43

what he had gotten, promifing upon that condition to make me a preſent , foraſmach as
I had not made it my buſineſsto look after ſpoyl, which I conſented to, ſeeing every one
was content, and they gave me fix hundred Crowns , as alſo che horſe preſented Cap-
rain Mons , but how much I am not able to ſay , and this we did chat day in the Rear
of their Camp. Of our people there was {lain upon the place one Soldier only belonging
ro Captain Baron, with five or {1x more hurt, and one Corporal of mine, who all recove-
red, There are agreat many both of the Horſe and Foot yecliving,who were pre{ent at
this buſineſs, who when they ſhall read this Book, I am certain will nor give me the lye.
I cannot remember (which I wonder at my ſelf for ) whether Monſicur de Caillas was
with us at the engagement or no, or whether Monſieur de Termes did not detain him ar
home , but I am ſure that if he was not there, he was in Savillan, and may very well re-
member all rhis to be rue.

Now the deſign of the Marquis de Gaſt ſoon diſcovered it ſelf, which was to put him-
ſelf into Carignan, and there to raiſe a Fort, and leave in 1c a ſtrong Garriſon of Foot, as
hedid ; and che very day that T gave them this defeac he encamp'd at a Village near
Carmagnolle, on the right hand of the Road from Recojns to the ſaid Carmgn0lle (I have
forgot the name ) and at midnight ſent che greateſt part of his Cavalry t© get over the
Bridge at Lombriaſſe, over which an hour or two before there had paſſed rwo Lighr horſe
of Monſieur de Termes (who had been withus ar the fight, and were ſtollen away wich
their booty, fearing they thould be madeto diſcount) who gave intelligence to Monſienr
4 Anſſun, and Signior Franciſco Bernardin, who were both ac Caripnan, ſent thicher by
Monſieur de Boitieres, on purpoſe to diſmantle that place, calling co mind chat Monfiear
de Termes , and the ſaid Signior Franciſco had told him four monchs 5:fore , char the
Marquis would do ſo, and pofleſs himſelf of ic1n order to the raiſing of ſome Fortificati-
ons there , which would be yery prejudicial to che Kings Service.

I had nothing to doto write this, if it were not for a caution to the young Co »ains ;
who ſhall read this Book, that they muſt never arrempr to retrear atthie head of a1. Army,
to which they are not ſtrong enough to give Bartel, Bur (as I was faying) ſo ſoon as theſe
Light horſe had ſpoke with Monſieur d' A#fſun, and told him of che defeat we had
given them,he had a great mind(as hisheart was in a right place)co do ſomething alſo before
he retir'd : bur the faid Signior Franciſco underſtanding by theſe Ligitt hvrſe where the
Enemy was, preſently concluded, thar by break of day they would certainly 'e upon them,
which made him very importunate with Monſieur d* Auſſup co retire ; bur he wonld by
no means hearken to him, and ſo ſoon as day appear'd, they ſaw the Marquis de Guſt,
all che Infantry, and part of the Horſe marching all along the fide of che River, when the
Marquis advancing he caus'd Monſieur 4 Asſ#n t be talk'd withal,only to hold him in
play,which Signior Tg perceiving, call'd ourro him, that che Marquis did only this to
amuſe him ; but he was deaf as before , and would believe nothing (a man cannot avoid
his Deſtiny ) till ewo Lighr horſe he had ſent out upon the Road towards Lombriaſſe,
came and brought him an account of the truth ; bur it was too fate, for already the grca-
reſt part of cheir Cavalry was got over. There was bur two Boats there, but they were very
large, and they had begun to paſs an hour afcer midnight,

Upon this Monſieur d' Auſſun commanded Signior Franciſco to retire as far as the
Bridge of Loges, and there tro make #halr, which he did. Foor he had none, buc
the Chevalier Abſal, with his fingle Company, to whom he gave order to march ſoftly,
after the ſaid S1gnior Franciſco, and halt very often to relieve him, if occaſion were ,
which he accordingly obeyed, when on a ſuddain came up fifty or threeſcore of the Ene-
mies Horſe to begin the skirmiſh, Ir 15 very true, that beſides his own Troop, and chat
of Signior Franciſco, he had thirty Launcesof che Company of Monſieur de Termzes, com=
manded by the elderTiladet, which had parted from Monfieur de Termes ſeven or ejohe
days before , by the command of Monheur de Boitieres, and ar his encreaty co ſend them,
which the ſaid Monſieur de Termes very much repented after , wanting chem himſelf, at
the time when he expected a Siege. The ſaid Seigneur d' 4Anſſun chen began himſelf alſo
to retire, dividing his men into three Squadrons, whom che Enemy follow'd very
cloſe : his Lieurenant, call'd Hierenywo Magrin, commanded the firſt Squadron, whom
the Enemy ſometimes bear up to the ſecond , commanded by Monſieur de Aaſſun ,
and otherwhiles the ſaid Fieronimo recharg'd the Enemy, who were continually ſupplyed
by a great number of freſh men, and who, as they found themſelves the ſtronger , charg'd
Captain Hierenimo wich might and main , driving him back into the Squadron of Mon-
fieur d' Auſſun, who thereupon gave a charge, and repell'd the ſaid Enemies up to their
main body , which again chare'd the ſaid Seigneur d' Auſſwn , and bear him back to che
forenam'd Captain Tiladet, and at the ſame time anorher Troop of che Enemy, b*fides

thoſe,

NIN 4
b;
SY Fa a» as ;
4 ts » fo n * > xk * L «7  -
DOE OR DIX "ONS Oe II

af Re -
—— IE EE OS On

46 The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Boox I.

I noo ern,

thoſe, who came up upon the Gallop , charg?*d the ſaid Tilladet , who was advanc'd to
relieve Monſieur d' Auſuns, ſo that the Enemy was four times ſtronger in Horſe,
than we were, and freſh ſupplics, as they landed, ſtill cameup tothem , infomuch thar
Monſieur d* all was put to rout and confuſion , Monſieur d' Auſſun beaten down to ground his
Auſſun defea» Ljeutenant, and above fifty more taken priſoners, Captain TiHadet twice taken , and
ee” we taken refcucd by his men , who cloſing togerher , and often facing about , made good their
OE. retreat in ſpire of the Enemy, even to rhe Bridge of Loges. Signior Franciſco Bernardin ,
who ſtood drawn up cloſe by the Bridge, ſeeing this torrent coming upon him, and
knowing that he with his Troop was not ſufficient ro remedy the diſorder , took it into
conſideration, and paſſed over the Bridge, where he again made head, by which means a
grear many more of our Pcople ſay*d themſelves, who under his proteQtion fac'd abour at
the end of the ſaid Bridge. In the mean time the Chevalier Avſal , who had taken his
way a little on thelefc hand , was till retreating a foot pace , and often made a halt,
which was the reaſon chat he could never recover the Bridge ; for one part of che Enemy
ſeeing the viRtory already ſecure, ran up to him , who having ſeen all our Cavalry rou-
ted and defeated, any man may judge what courage he, or his men, could have, who
rod all cut to pieces, their Colours taken, and himſelf upon a litcle horſe vegy hardly

elcap'd.
After this manner was Monſieur d' 4»fſun defeated,more out of vanity to do ſome notable
tear, than out of any default of courage or conduQ; for in the firſt place he order'd his
Troops ſo well,that they all fought, and ſecondly himſelf was taken,overthrown to ground,
with his Sword bloody in his hand , for his horſe was killed under him , and would he
have becn ſatisfied with reaſon, he had never enter*d into diſpute with Signior Franciſco
Diſpute be= Beynardin, who had perform'd all, both in his perſon, and conduR, char a brave Leader
pe ek cught todo. Bur the King, after the ſaid Seigneur d' Auſſun was fer at liberty , made
Sienior Fran- them f:icnds for Signior Franciſco had ſent him a Challenge for the wrong he had done
ciſco Berngr= Nm, in reporting to the Marquis de Gwaſt , and elſewhere, thar he had abandon'd him
am, in time of need + but Mcnſicur & Aſſn made him an honorable ſatisfaQion, and indeed
both che one and the other had very well perform'd their duty, though had Monſieur 4
Auſſan taken the advice of Sig:ior Francs/co , he had nor been defeated 3 neither was
it reaſonable, chat he ſhould throw himſelf away to no purpoſe , when he ſaw it was too
late co repair the fault commitred in deferring the time of their retreat ſo long, as at laſt ro
be forc'd to do it in the face cfan Army, Icould give ſeveral exemples of it, it itwere
convenient {o to do, where the advice ct retreating at the head of an Army, has been as
fatalz as it was here , witneſs Monchant, where Monſieur le Mareſchal de Strozzy loſt
the Battail, not for want of courage, for he was there deſperately wounded ; nor
through defaulc ct conduR, for he had order*d his men tor his retreat to Layfignan, as
well as any man upon earth could have done. T could alſo inſtance le Seigneur Afarien
de Santa Fire, who loſt me almoſt all my Cavalry near unro Piance, 1n attempring the
The danger famearthe head of an Army. Many others our of inconfideration have commiurred the
of TS ſame error, as I have already inſtanc'd, and I could name ſeveral orhers, which would
pe Non url te too tedious to recount. Burt, I beſeech you, fellow Captains, deſpiſe not my coun
" fel, for many brave and prudent Leaders having loſt chemſelves after chis manner, no
good is ro beexpeted, A man is only to atrerfipc what he can, and ought to do,

and not attaque his Enemy, and offer to retreat in the face of an Army ſtronger than
himſelt,

' Carignan for- The Marquis de Gaſt, at the ſame inſtanc, with all his Camp, paſſed the Bridge ,

tihed, and puc himſelf into Carignan , where he deſigned a Fort encloſing the Bourg within ir,

which he was nor long in doing foraſmuch as the ditches that encloſed che ſaid
Bourg an. the City, very much contribuced ro che work ; and he there left two thou-
ſand Sp:niſh, and as many German Foor, with Signior Pedro de Colgnne to command
them : wherein, 1n truch, he made a very prudent choice, and deceived none in the good
opinion they !'ad conceiv'd of him ; for he was a man of great judgment and valour :
The Chara. Paving .hen lett Ceſar de Naples at Carmagnolte with ſome Enſigns of /talians (the number
fter of Pedro Of winicls I have forgot) and two thouſand Germans ; and ar Reconts , four Enfigns
de Colonne. of Spaniards, ( that 1s to ſay, Loys Quichadou, Don Ja#n de Gzibarra, AMandeſſa ,
and Argillere ) and his Cavalry at Pingues, Vinue, and Vigon, he afcerwards (having firſt
ſent back the remainder of his Camp ro Qiers, and the Duke of Savoy to Verſeil) reti-
rca himſelf ro Milan,
A. notable en- Somerime after Monſieur de Termes carryed on an enterprize , that was never diſcove-

id wig car- req to any but ro Monſficur Boitieres, and my (elf, not ſo much as ro Monſieur de Tas,
FICG ON y 4

veicha,,  Chough he was our Colonel and ic was thus. There was a Merchant of Barges, a grear
| | | friend
>

Book I. de Montluc, Mare/chal of France.

47

friend , and ſervant to Monſieur de Termes , and a good French man, call'd Granachin ,
who, coming from Barges to Savillan, was taken by ſome Light horſe belonging to
Count Pedro d' Apporte , Governor of Foſſan, and being a priſoner was ſomecimes chreat-
ned tobe hang'd.; and ſometimes promiſed to be pur to ranſom , with ſo great uncer-
tainty , that the poor man for ſeven or eighr days cogecher was in delpair of his life
bur jn the end he bechought himſelf ro fend word ro the Connt, that if he would be
pleaſed ro give him leave to talk with him, he wonld propound things char ſhould be
both for his advancage and his honor. The Count thereupon ſenc for him , where, be-
ing come, Granxchin cold him , chat it ſhould only ſtick ar himſelf if he were not Lord
of Barges , for that it was in his power to deliver up the Caſtle into his hands, che Ciry
not being ſtrong ar all. The Count greedy to liſten co this enterprize , preſently clos'd
with him abouc t,apreeing and concluding, that Granachin ſhould deliver up his wife and
his ſon in Hoſtage ; and the ſaid Granuchin propoſed che manner of ic to be chus; ſaying,
chat he was very intimate with the Captain of che Caſtle, and char rhe proviſions that
were put into 1t ever paſſed thorough his hands, and thac moreover he had a ſhare in
ſome little Traffick they had berwixt them , to wir, berwixt the ſaid Caprain of rhe Ca-
file, call'd 12 Mothe, and himſelf ; and thar the Scorch man , who kept the Keys of che
Caſtle was his very intimate friend , whom he alſo evermore had cauſed to ger ſomething
amongſt them, and whom he was certain he could make firm co his purpoſe; . not che
Caprain de 1a Mothe nevertheleſs 3 bur chat he was fick of a Quartan Ague, thar held
him fifteen or ewenty hours togecher ; ſo thar he almoſt continually kept his bed ; and
that ſo ſoon as he ſhould be ar liberty, he would go and complain to Monkeur de
Termes of two men that were reputed Imperialifts , who had cold him, and given rhe
Enemy intelligence of his Journey, and thar after having lefc his wife and his ſon in
hoſtage, he would go and demand juſtice of Monſieur de Boitieres , by the mediation of
Monſieur de Terms, and then would go to Barges to the Caſtle , and chat upon a Sun-
day morning he would cauſe fifreen or twenty Soldiers that /« Afothe had there, to gs
out (leaving only the Scotch man, the Butler, and the Cook within ) to take thoſe who
had told him, as they ſhould be ar the firſt Maſsin the morning, and in the mean time
the Count ſhould cauſe forry Soldiers to march, who before day ſhould place chem(elves
in ambuſh in alittle Copſe about an Harquebuze (hor diſtant from the Poſtern Gate, and
that ſo ſoon as it ſhould be time for chem to come, he would ſer a white Flag over the ſaid
Poſtern, Now there was a Pricſt of Barger, who being banith'd thence, lived ar Foſ-
ſan, that was a great friend to Granxchin, and had labonur'd very much for his delive-
rance, and he alſo was cail'd into the Council , where amongſt them it was conclu-
ded, thar the ſaid Prieſt on a night appointed , ſhould come toa little wood the half
way berwixe Barges and Fsſ[an, where he was to whiſtle, © give notice that he
was there, and that if he had corrupted the Scot , he ſhould bring him along wich
him , to reſolve among} chemſelves how the bufinels ſhould be further carried
ON.

Things being thus concluded , Granuchin writ a Letter to Monſizur de Ter-
mes, wherein he intreared hjm to procure for him a ſafe-condut frem Monficur
de Beitieres , thac his Wife and his Son might come to Foſſan, there co remain pledges
for him, for he had prevaiPd {o far by the interceſſion of certain of his friends, that
the Count was art laſt content ro diſmiſshim upon a ranſom of fix hundred Crowns z but
that if he was not abroad, and at liberty, no man would buy his goods, out of which he
was to raiſe.thac ſum 3 which ſate-conduRt if he ſhould obtain in his behalf, he defir'd
he would pleaſe to deliver icto a friend of his he nam'd in SaviÞan , ro whom he alſo had
writ to defire him to make what haſt he could to ſend his Wife and Son to the {aid
Foſſ an.

All chis being accordingly procur'd, and done, and the ſaid Grannchin ſer at liberty,
he forthwith came to Savifan ro find our Monſieur de Termes, to whom hegave an ac-
count of the whole buſineſs, Wherenpon Monſieur de Termes ( who already began co
feel himſelf falling tick ofa diſeaſe that commonly held him fourteen or fifceen days at a
time ) ſent for me, ro whom he communicated the enterprize , where ir was by us. all
three concluded, that Granschin ſhould go talk with Monſieur de Boitieres, and in-
form him ar large of the whole deſign. To which purpoſe Monhieur de Termes gave him
a'Letrer ro Monſieur de Boitieres , who, having received and read ic , made no preac
marcer of the buſineſs , only writing back co Monſieur de Termes, that if he knew Gra-
nschin tobe a man fic ro be craſted , he mighc do as he thoughe fir: by which flight an-
{wer Monſieur de Termes enter d into an opinion, that Monſieur de Boitieres would be
glad he ſhould receive ſome baifle, or affront, (and indecd he did nor much love him )

whick

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book I.

MN _ —_—

which made him once in mind to break off the deſign, and ro med ile no more 1n1t: bar
ſecing the {aid Granuchin almoſt in deſpair ro think, that the buſt! els ſhould no: go for-
ward,and I being more concern'd than he,thac ſuch an opportunity of crapping rhe Encmy
ſhould be loſt, earncſtlv entreared Monſieur de Termes to leave the whole buſineſs to
my carez which he made great difficulty ro granc, ever fearing, that ſhould any ching
happen amiſs, Monſicur de Buitieres would do him a conrtefic tothe King, asche cuſtom
is : for when any one bears a man a grudoe, he is glad waen he commits any overſight ,
that the Maſter may have occaſion -0 be offended, and co remove him from his command ;
condemning him for thac he would not be govern'd by the wiſe: bur in che end with
much importunity, he was contenr corefer che management of ihe buſineſs wholly ro my
diſcretion,

The ſaid Granuchin departed then to goto Barges , where he made diſcovery of all to
Captain 1a Mothe and the Scotch man, ro whom Monhieur de Ter mes writ alſo, and the
night appcinted being come, they both went out, and alone (tor Granuchin was very well
acquainted with the way) and came to the wood, where whey found the Prieft 5 with
whom they agreed , firſt char thar rhe ſaid Count thould acquit Grannchin of his ran-
ſom, giving him as mich as the Soldiersy that roox him, had taken from him, and
moreover appoint him an Apartment in the Caſtle with the Captain he ſhould pur into
It, with a certain Penſion for his ſupporc ; and ſecondly that he ſhould marry the Scotch
man to an Inherecrix there was in Barges, and alſo find our fome handſom employment
for him , foraimuch as he was never afrer to return either into Scotland z or into
France. All which was azreed and concladed berwixt chem,and marcover that the Prieſt
ſhou'd bring all chele Articles fign'd and ſeal'd with the Arms of the ſaid Count toa Sum-
mer houſe in the fields belonging to the Brather of the faid Prieſt, ro which he ſomecimes
xepair'd a nights ; and that the Sunday following the buſineſs ſhould be pur in execution,

Having accordingly received all theſe obligacions, Granachin returned again to Savillan,
where he gave us an account of all, and ſhew'd us the Bond, Now there was only
three days ro Sunday , wheretore we made him prcſenily to recurn, having firſt agreed
that he ſhould bring along wich him ewo Guides of the very beſt he could find our ;
not that he ſhould however diſcover any ching to them ct the buſineſs, bur only ſhew
them ſome counterfeir Letters , wherein mentzon ſhould be made of fome Wine he had
bought for me.

The Guides came accordingly by Saturday noon to Savillan, when, ſeeing them come,
I rook Captain Favas my Lieucenanc aparc, and privacely in my chamber commus
nicated co him the whole deſign, relling him wichal, thac I had made choice of him for
the execution of it; which he made no ſcruple to underrake (for he had mettle enough )
and it was agreed that he ſhould cyc che Guides togecher, and rhar they were by no means
co enter into any high way, or Road : bur co march croſs the fields. We had much
ado to perſuadethe Guides to this , foraſmuch as chey were to paſs three or four Rivers,
and there was Snow and Ice all along, ſo that we were above three hours diſputing this
way : but inthe end the rwo Guides were content, to each of which I gave ten Crowns,
and nioreover a very good Supper.

We werc of advice, that we ſhould not take many men, that leſs notice might becaken
and at char time we were making a Rampire at that Gate towards Fofſan, where, in
order to that work, we had broken down a litcle part of the wall, and made a Bridge
over the Graffte , over which to bring in earth from without. By this breach I pur our
Captain Favas,and with him four and thirty more only,and ſo ſoon as we were withour,
we tyed the Guides for being loſt, and ſo he ſer forwards, Now the Enemies affigna-
tion , and ours was ar the fame hour ; ſo that Granuchin had direRed them the way on
che right hand to come to chis Copſe, and ours he had ordered to march on the left hand,
near tothe walls of the Ciry ; who, ſo ſoon as they were come to the Poſtern, there found
Granuchin and the Scot ready to receive them, it being the hour that the Scotch man us'd
ro ſand Centinel over the ſaid Poſtern , ſo that rhey were never diſcover'd, and he
diſpoſed them into 2 Cellar of rhe Caſtle, where-he had prepar'd a Charcoal fire , with
ſome Bread and Wine. In the mcan time the day began to break, and as the Bell run
to low Maſs in the Town , the Scot, and Granwchin commanded all the Soldiers in che
Caſtle ro go take theſe two men (that Granuchin had accuſcd ro have betrayed him) at
Maſs, ſo thatthere 1cmain'd no more in the Caſtle , buc only 1s Jothe himſelf, his va-
let de Chamslre, who all: trayl'd a Pike, the Burler, the Cook, the $ cotch man and Grann-
chin.

The Scog then pull'd up the Bridge y and call'd our Captain Favas, making him to

skulk behind certain Bavins in the baſe Court, kneeling upon one knee, which being done,

they

ae 3s

X EL Rat S0e SIE” >
WL CE EI ng

— ——

Es ” "EO
Book I. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

m—

they went to ſer up the white Flag upon the Poſtern z ſoon atter che Prieſt arriy'd, and
with him abour forty Soldiers, who were no ſooner entred in, but the Srotch man
{huc the Gare, and ar the ſame inſtant Capcain Favas and his Company flew uvon them;
who made ſome little reſiſtance , infomuch that ſeven or eight of them were ſlain; bac
Granuchin ſav'd the Pricſt, and would not endure he ſhonld have the leaſt injury offe-
red tohim. In the mican time a Country fellow , as he was coming from a little houſe
below the Caſtle , ſaw the Spaniſh Soldiers wit't their red croſſes enrer in at che Poſtern
Gare, and thereupon ran down into the Town to give che Alarm, and to cell chem chac
the Caſtle was becray'd ; art which news, the Soldiers who had been ſent ont co rake the
two men at Maſs, would have return'd into the Caſtle + but ours thor at them, though
ſo high as nor to hit them , raking upen them ro be enemies, and crying our Imperi,
Imperi, Savoy, Savey, which was the reaſon that the Soldiers fled away to Pignerol car=
rying news to Monſieur de Boitieres , that Granuchin had becraycd the Caſtle, and thar
the Enemy was within ic. Monfieur de Boitjeres chereupon 1n a very great fury, diſvacch-
ed away a Courrier to Monſieur de Termes, who lay fick in his bed, and almc{t dj-
ſtraRed ar the diſaſter , often crying our, Ah Monficur Montlnue you have rnin®d me,
would to God I had never hearkened to you: and in this error we continued cill the
Wedneſday following, In the mean time the Soldicrs who had enter'd were clap*d
np in the Cellar, my Soldiers taking the Red Croflcs, and moreover ſerting up a white
Flag wit1 a Red Croſs upon a Tower of the Caſtle, and crying out nothing bur Imperi,
 Imperi. |

Things being in this pcſtare, Granuehis immediately made the Pricſt to ſubſcribe a
Letter, wherein he had wrir to the Count, that he {nonld come, and rake pofleſhon
of the Town and Caftle, for that Granachin hed kepr his word with him, and then
{cnt for a Labourer , who was cenanc co the Brother of the ſaid Pricſt, ro whom he
cauſed the Letter to be given by the Pricſt himſelf , ſaying, and ſwearing to him, char if
he made any kind of Sign, either 1n giving che Leiter, or ocherwiſez that he would pre-
ſently kill im 3 maxing him morcover deliver feverat things to the meſſenger by word
of mouth ; The fetlow went awav, and upon a mae of his own made all the haſt he
could to Foſſan, it being but twelve miles only , immediarely upon whoſe coming the
Count reſolv'd that night ro ſend away a Corporal of h's call'd Fanin , with five and
rwenty of the braveſt men of all his Company , who abour break of day arriv'd ac Bar-
ges, So ſoon as he came to the Caſtle , Grangchin, the Prieſt, and the Scot were ready
rolet him in at the foreſaid Poſtern , whilſt Captain F:vas wene to plane himſelf be-
hind the Bavins as before , alchongh Grannchin was ſomething long in opening the Gare,
both becauſe he would clearly ſee, and obſerve whether the Pricſt made any fign, and
alſo for thac he had a mind thoſe of the City ſhould {ce them enter ; when fo ſoon as
it was broad day, he opened the Poſtern, celling them that the Soldiers who came in
with the Prieſt were laid to fleep , being tir'd our with thelong labour they had ſuſtein'd
the day before , and ſo ſoon as they were all in, the Sect ſuddainly clap'd to the Gate ,
and as ſuddainly Captain Faves ſtart up , and fell upon them , without giving them
time, ſaving a very few, ro give fire to their Harquebuzes, as ours did , whe had
them all ready ; nevercheleſs they defended themſelves with their Swords, fo
thac ſix of mine were hurt, and fitreen or ſixteen of this Company were ſlain upon
the place, of which Corporal Fanin was one ( which was a very great misforcune to
us ) regether with a Brother of his , the re{t were led into the Cellar tyd two and
two together , for there were already more priſoners in the Caftle, than Soldiers of our
Own.

Now this fight continuing longer than the former, the Enemy in fighcing 211 cry'd
out /mperi, and ours France ; infomuch chat their cries reach*d down inco the City,
and eſpecially che raccle of rhe Harquebuze thot , ſochat to avoid being ſo ſoon diſcoye-
rcd , thr deſign being to Train the Count thither (for to chat end rended all the Farce)
chey all gor upon the walls of the Caſtle , and from thehce cryed out Imperi and Savoy,
having on their red croſſes, as I ſaid before. Now the Country fellow char had been ſence
with the Lercer to the Counr, did not return with thoſe men up co the Caſtle , buc
{laid at his Maſter's Country houſe by the way, wherefore he was again ſuddainly ſenc
for, and another Letter deliver'd to him by the hands of the Prieſt ro carry to the ſaid
Count to Foſſan , wherein he gave him co undeiſtand , thac Corporal Jain was ſo wea-
ry he could not write, but thac he had given him in charge to render him an accounc of
all, and thar he was laid down to fleep. So ſoon as the Count had read this Lecter, he
-ut on a reſolution to go, not the next day which was Tueſday, but the Wedneſday fol-
{2wing (when God intends to puniſh us, he deprives us of our underſtandings, as ic

happened

The 7, TONE of Meſſire Blaize Book I:

tes Ao. adit. ed

happened here in che calc of this Gencleman.) The Count in the hiſt place was reputed
one of the moſt circumſpe& (and as wile as valiant ) Leaders they had in their whole
Army , which notwithſtanding he ſuffered him(ſclf to be gull'd by ewo Lertcrs from this
Prieſt, eſpecially the laſt, which he ought by no means to have relyed uponz nor to have
given credit to any thing , withour having firſt (cen ſomeching under his Corporal's own
hand , and ſhould have confider'd whether or no it were a plauſible excuſe, ro ſay, that
the ſaid Corporal was laid down to ſlcep. Bur we are all blind when we have once ſet
our hearts upon any thing of moment. Bclieve me, Gentlemen , you that are grear un-
dertakers of Enterprizes, you ought marturely to conſider all things, and weigh cvcry the
leaſt circumſtance , for if you -be ſubtle, your Enemy may be ascrafry as you. A Trem-
peny trompeur et demy, (aysthe Proverb , Harm watch harm catch » And The cunning ſt
ſnap may meet with his match. But that which moſt of all deceived the Count was,
chac the Tueſday thoſe of che Town, who thought themſclvcs ro be become Imperialiſts,
and yer in ſome doubt by reaſon of che various cries they had hcard during the hehe, had
ſent five or fix women to the Caſtle under colour of ſelling Cakes, Apples, and Cheſ-
nuts, to ſee if they could diſcover any thing of Treaſon (tor all choſe that remain'd in
the Town had already taken the Red Croſs;) whom (o ſoon as our people ſaw coming up
the Hill , they preſcncly ſuſpeRed their buſinels, and reſolving to ſer a good face on the
matter, went to ler down the little draw bridge to l-t them in, My Soldiers then fell
to walking up and down the baſe Court with their rea croſſes, all ſaving three or
four thar ſpake very good Spaniſh, who fell ro talk wich the Women , and bought ſome
of their Wares, taking upon them to be Spaniards, infomuch that they afcerwards re-
curning to the Town, aſſur'd the Tnhabirants that chere was no deceit 1n the buſinehs :
and moreover krought a Letter which /a Mothe writ coa friend in the Town , wherein
he entreated him to go to Monſieur de Botieres, and to tell him, char he had ncver
conſented to Granwchin's treachery 3 which Lercer he delivered co one of the Women,
knowing very well, that the party to whomit was direfted, was not there to be found ;
bur would be one of the firſt to run away, as being a very good French man : bur their des
fign was, tha the Lecter ſhould fall inco che hands of choſe of the Imperial party, as ac-
cordingly it did,

As the Count was coming on Wedneſday morning , our peovle in the Caſtle diſco-
ver d him marching along rhe plain , and the people of the Town went to meet him
without the Gate, where being come, he ask*d them if it were certainly rrue, that the
Caſtle was in his hands, to which they made an{wer, thac they believed it fo to be:
bur chat at che entrauce of his men the firſt time, there were a great many Harquebuzes
ſhor off within, and a very great noiſe was made : and that on che Manday morning,
when the others encred , they lixewiſe heard a very great noiſe, that concinued longer
than the former , and that they once thought they heard chem cry one while France, and
another Imperi and Duco : but that notwithſtanding they had yeſterday ſent their
Wiyes into the Caſtle with Fruit, Bunns and Cheſnurs, whom they had permicred to
enter , where they ſaw all the Soldiers with red croſles. The Count hearing this, com -
manded his Licutenant to alighr, and to retreth his horſes and men, bidding thoſe of
the Town ſpeedily ger ſomething ready for him to eat ; for ſo ſoon as he had taken or-
der in the Caſtle, he would come down to dinner, after which he would cake their Oath
of Fidelity , and ſoreturn back again to Foſſan, Now you muſt know it is a very ſteep
and uncafie aſcent from the Town to the Caſtle, by reaſon whereof the Count alighted, and
walk'd it up on foot, accompanied with a Nephew of his,another Gentleman and his Trum-
per. So ſoon as hecame to the end of the Bridge, which was Jer down, and the Gate {huts
bur the Wicket left open, ſo that a man might eaſily paſs, and lead his horſe after him :
Granachin and the Prieſt being abovein the window, ſaluting him, defir'd him to enter «
to which nevertheleſs he made anſwer, that he would adyance no furcher, cill he had
fiſt ſpoken with Corporal Janin fceing then thar he refuſed to encer , Granschin in
his hearing ſaid tothe Prieſt (:oger him from thence) Pray Father £0 down, and tell Corpo-
ral Janin that my Lord i at the Gate, where he ſtays to ſpeak with him, and at the
ſame cime himſelf alſo departed from the window, pretending to 95 down ; whereupon
Caprain Favs and his Soldiers ran to open the Gate , which was only bolred, and all on
a \uddain leap'd upon the Bridge. Seeing this, che Count who was one of the moſt a-
tive men of all 1taly, and who held his horſe by the bridle (the beſt one of chem, rhac
ever thar Country bred, and which Iafterwards gave ro Monheur de Tar ) vaulted over
a lict]: wall which was near to the Bridge, drawing his horſe after him, with incenc
to have leap'd into the Saddle (for there was no horſe ſo call ( provided he could lay his
band upon che Pummel ) bur he could arm'd ar all pieces, vaulc inco the Sear) buc

he

——_—

Book I. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France; _ + 51
he was prevented by che Baſtard of Bazordan , cali'd Janot ( yer living , and then of

my Company ) who by misforrune being he eicher could not, or would not,ger over

the wall to lay hands upon him, ler fly act him an Harquebuze, which taking the de-

faulc of his Arms, went inco his belly', piercing therough his bowels almoſt co the other Count Pegro
de, of which thor he ſunk down to the ground, Captain Favas took his Nephew, and Governor of
another che Trumpet , buc the other Gentleman eſcap'd down the Hill, crying our that che Foſſan woun-
Count was cither kill'd or taken 5 whereapon the Licutenant, and all his Company ed,
Skucked ro horſe in ſo great a fright, thar they never Iokx*d behind chem ll they came
wo Poſſan, Had ir fo fallen our that Fanin at che ſecond encry had nor been flain ,
they had not only ſnap'd the Count, and by degrees all his whole Troop (for they
might have compell'd him to have {poke to them , with a dagger at his reins ready
t ſtib him ſhould he make a ſign) but moreover might perhaps from hence haye ſpun
cur ſome contrivance againſt Foſſan it {elf ; for one Enterprize draws on anos
ther.

Theſe rhings being done, they in the evening diſparch*d away Captaia Milhas ( a
Gentleman of my Company J co bring me the news, 2nd to relare ro me from point
to point how all things had paſſed 5 togecher with a Letter from the ſaid Count ,
wherein he entreated me, ſeeing he was my priſoner, and char greater advantage was to
be made of his life than of his death, to do him che courteſie, as ro ſend him with
all ſpecd a Phyſician , a Chirurgeon, and an Apothecary, Captain Milhas arriv*'d juſt
at the time thar they open'd the Gates of the City , fo that he found me putting on
my cloaths , and chere related to me the whole bufinels , thereby delivering me from the
ercat anxicty, and trouble wherein from Sunday till Wedneſday I had continually re-
main'd ; forthough [ was really concerned for the place, yer was I much more afflicted
for the loſs of my Licutenant, and my Soldiers , who were moſt of chem Gentlemen,
and all very brave men. Immediacely upon the n:ws, I ran co Monſieur de Termes
his Lodgings, whom I found fick a bed : but I dare lay, char neither he nor 1 wete
ever ſo overjoy'd ; for we both very well knew , thar had it fallen our otherwiſe ,
there were Rods in piſs. So ſoon as I departed from lim, I preſently ſenc away a Phi-
fician, a Chirurgeon, and an Apothecary , whom I mounted upon three horſes of my
own for the more ſpeed; neither did they either ſtop or ſtay nn] they came hither :
but it was impoſſible to fave him , for he died abour midnighr, and was brought to
$.villan, whom every one had a deſire ro ſee , even Monlicur de Termes himſelf, as fick
as he was, and he was very much lamented by all. The nexc day I ſent the Bo-
dy to Fofſan , but derein'd the Nephew , and Trumpet with the reſt chat were
taken priſoners ac Barges, untul they (hould ſend me back the Wife, and Son of
the ſaid Gyanuwchin , which the next day they did, and 1 alſo deliver d up all the
Priſoners.

I beſeech you, Captains, you who ſhall ſee and hear this Relation, to conſider whe-
ther or no this was a ſtratagcm for a Merchanc ; believe me, the c[deſt Captain would
have becn puzled, and have had enough to carry 1t on with ſo much dextericy, and reſo-
lucion as he did : wherein alchough Captain Favas was the performer of it, when it came to
exccurion 5 nevertheleſs the Merchant was nor only che original contriver, bur alſo a prin-
cipal Actor thronghour the whole buſineſs, having che heart in order to his revenge,
to expoſe his Wife and Son to the excreameſt danger. In reading of which (fellows
in Aims) you may learn diligence wich temper, and cake notice what ſleights, and Po-
lices were uſed , and continued for the ſpace of four days together , ſuch as no man
either cf theirs, (or which is more, of our own) could poſſibly diſcover , both parties
being held equally ſuſpended. The Count for a prudent Cavalier , behav'd him-
{clt herein with very grear levity , eſpecially upon che ſecond Letter ; buc he repair*d
his faulc when he refuſed ro enter the Caſtle , without firſt ſeeing his man ; though thar
caution fignified nothing as it fell our, Whenever therefore you defign an encerprize ,
weigh every thing, and never go hand over head; and without precipicating your
ſclves, or bcing toocafie of beliefe upon light foundations, judge and conſider whether
there be any appearance, or Iikelyhood in the ching ; for Ihave ſeen more deceived chan
otherwyſc, and whatever aſſurance is given youz or whatever promiſes may be made, be ſure
to raiſe your Commer-barterygand never rely fo wholly upon him, who is to carry on che
worx , bur chai you have {llla reſerve to ſecure yoar venture, ſhould his faich,or condu&t
fail. Ic 1s not, I confeſs, well done to condemn him who has the manggement of
anaFa'r, ifir do not ſucceed 3 for men ſhould always be attempting however they ſpeed,
and lit or miſs *s all one, provided there be neicher treafon nor abfurdity in the caſe,
Mev mult try, and fail ; for being we are to confide in mcn, no one can ſee into their

H 2 hearts:

His death;

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book I.

A deſign to

ſuccours of

Lads. ali. Atl Lai. ate. 4

hearts: but however go warily.co work. I have ever been of opinion (and do think thar
every good Captain ought to have the ſame ) chat ir 15. better to afſaulr a place upon a
ſurprize , where no one is privy tothe delign , than to have perhaps ſome Traytor for
your Guide for as much as you are certain there can be no counter-treaſon againſt you ;
and though you fail, you retire with the le(s danger, for your enemy can have laid no am-
buſcados to entrap you.

Ceſar de Naples being this day at Carmeagnolle , had there news brought to him of the
Count's diſaſter and death, ar which he was exiremely afflifted ; and co ſecure Fiſſun,
would ſend chither three Companies of /talians , which had formerly been in Garriſon
there, to wit, that of Blaiſe de Somme a Neapolitan, that of Baptiſtaa Hillaneſe, and thar
of Rasſſanne a Piedmuntsis , who nevertheleſs refns'd ſuddainly to depart ( fearing we
would fight them by che way ) and would not ſtir till they might have a good and
ſtrong Convoy ; and the Germans he had with him would nor be perſwaded togo, by
which means he was conſtrain'd co ſend ro Reconzs to the four Spaniſh Companies which
were in Garriſon there; that is to ſay,that of Don Juan de Guebars Camp-Maſter,of Lowys de
Quichadow, Aquilbert , and CMendiz1, which made it rwo days before they durſ}
ſer our to march, In che mean time Monſieur de Termes was advertiſed by his ſpy,
that the ſaid Italian Companies were to fer forth the next morning, to go pur themſelves
into Fofſan, and that they were co have ewo Troops of Horſe to conduR chem : but he had
heard nothing that the Spaniards were to go,

The ſaid Seigneur was at this time bur newly recovered of his ficknefs, who the ſame
morning communicated the aftair co me, and ar the very inſtant we concluded to. draw
four hundred Foot our of all our Companies, all pick'd and choice men, to wit, ewo
hundred Harquebufiers, and as many Pikes wearing Corſlets. Captain Ti[adet (who
had loſt but two or three of all his Launces) was not yer return'd to Savitlan, which was
the reaſon that Monkieur de Termes his Company was not ſo ſtrong; and on the other
fide Monſieur de Bellegarde his Lieutenant was gone to his own houſe , and had taken
ſome few with him, by which means Captain ons could make bur fourſcore Horſe
in all; and the Spy told us, that the 1talias Companies were to take the ſame way by
which cheir Army had march'd when they went co Carignan, which was by the Plain,
where we before had fought the /talianr, We therefore concluded to cake the way of
Marennes , and to be there before them 3 when as we were going our of the Town Mon-_
fieur de Cental arriv'd , who came from Cental , having with him fifteen Launces of
Seigneur Mare, and twenty Harquebuſiers on horſeback, which hindred us a lule,
foraſmuch as he entreated Monſieur de Termes to give him a little time to bait his hore
ſes, for he was alſo of neceſſity to paſs the ſame way we were defign'd to march, to gg
to his Government of Cairs., To whom we made anſwer, that we would go bur very
ſofily before , and ſtay for him at Marenner : bat thac he ſhould make haſt ; for in
caſe we ſhould hear the Enemy was palſing by , we conld not ſtay for him. Monſiegr
de Termes had once a great mind to have gone along wich us himſelf 5 but we entreared
him not to do ir, both becauſe he had been fo lately fick, and alfo chat the Town being
lefcin a manner naked , ſhould any misfortune happen co us, ic would be in ereac danger
to be loſt.

Being come to Marennes, we there made a halt, ſtaying for Monſieur Cental , where
we orderdcr'd our Battail in this manner, to wit, that the Captains Gabarret and Ba-
ron ſhould lead the rwo hundred Corflers, and I che ewo hundred Harquebutiers, wich
whom I preſently rook the Vanne, the Corflers following afrer me, and {o march'd
out of the Village. Captain Mons alſo divided his Horſe into Troovs : buc ro whom
he gave the firſt I am notable to ſay , they being all Camrades, but I do believe ic was
either to Maſſes, Mouſſeric, Tdrog, or the younger Tilladet ; and when we had march'd
alittle way , before we would diſcover our {elves to the valley, thorough which the Ene-
my was to paſs, we madea ſtand. 1 then rook a Gentleman along with me ca'l'd 14
Garde ( he being on horſeback ) and advanc'd a little forward to diſcover the valley ,
where preſently on the other fide 3n the plain of Babe, ( a Caſtle belonging to the
Caſtellano of Savoy ) I diſcover'd the three 1talian Companies , and the Cavalry march-
ing direcily towards Foſſav. Ar which 1 was ready ro run mad , curfing Monſieur
de Cental , and the hour that ever hecame, thinking chere had been no more than choſe
I ſaw on the other fide, who wee already gor a grear way before us; when being
about toreturn to tell the reſt, that they were already paſs'd, and looking down inro che
valley (for before I had only look'd into che plain on the other fide) I diſcover'd the
Spaniſh Foot ſhewing them to [a Garde (who before ſaw them no more than T ) having
almoſt all of them yellow breechcs 5 and moreover ſaw their Arms glitter againſt the Sun,

by

ER

RR

4 5 LS oats

Book . de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 53

by which we knew they were Corſlets. We never dream'd of meeting any more than the
three /talian Companies only, ſo that had we not by accident made ſome ſtay in expeRta-
tion of Monſieur Cental, we had met the Spaniards and the Jtalians cogether, and do
verily bel:eve had been defeared , conſidering what defence the Spaniards made alone. I
preſenily then went and gave the reſt of the Captains an accounc of whar I had ſeen,
adviſing them withal,by no means as yer to diſcover themſelves ; for the Spaniards had made
a halr,and ſtood ſtill. I alſo began to loſe ſight of the [talsans, who march'd directly to
Foſſan: it wasa very great over fight in them te ſeparate themſelves at ſo great a diſtance
from one another ; la Garde then return'd , and told me, char Monſieur Cental was
coming hard by,bringing a Trooper along with him, whom I made to ſtay above, keeping
always his eye on the Italians, whilſt I, with la Garde, went down to number their
men, who let fly ſome Harquebuze ſhot at me : bur I norwithſtanding went ſo near, thar
FT made ſhifc ro count them , to berwixr four and five hundred men ar the moſt, and pre-
ſencly rerurn'd to the top of the Hill, where I faw their Cavalry returning towards them,
having left the Ttalians, who were already a great way off, and clean out of fight, I then
{cnt the Soldier ro my Companions to bid them preſently march, for the Spaniards began
to beat cheir Drums to return. The Troops of Horſe they had were thoſe of che Count
de Saint Martind' Eft, Kinſman to the Duke of Ferraraz who himſelf was nor chere,
bur his Lieutenant ouly, and of Rezalles a Spaniard. Their Companies of Foot were thoſe
of Don Juan de Guibara, Hguillere, and Mendoza, with one half of chat of Louys de Gaj-
chadon, he wich the other half having put himſelf inco the Caſtle of Reconzs, Here Mon-
fGeur de Cental and Captain ens came up to me, they trwoonly, and ſaw as well asI, thar
the ſaid Spariards pur themſelves into file, which we judg'd to be cleven or thirteen in
' Bile. and in che mean time their Cavalry came up to them.

Now they had already diſcover'd us, although they had hicherto ſcen no more than five,
and I for my part was particularly known , when 1 went down to diſcover, by the Ser-
jeant of Mendoza , who had been taken ar the defeat of the /talians, and deliver'd three
daysafrer; whereupon they plac'd all their Cavalry before , and only twenty or five and
twenty Harquebuſiers art the head of them, a great Company ar the head of their Pikes,
and theremainder in the Rear 3 in which order with Drums beating they began to march,
I crook my Harbuebuſiers which I divided inco three Squadrons, the firſt whereof I gave
ro Captain Lienard, the ſecond to le Pallu Lieucenant co Monhieur de (arces , who had
his two Companies at Savillan, and I my ſelf led the third in the Rear of chem, the Cor-
ſlecs following after 5 where, ar che firſt coming up, I had 1a Garde killed by my fide.
The Encmy ſtill held on cheir march, withour making any ſhew of breaking, firing
upon usall che way with very great fury, and we alſo upon them, ſo that T was conſtrain'd
rocall Captain Lienard to come and join with me, foraſmuch as a Squadron of Harque-
bufjers was drawn off from their Front , to reinforce their Rear. 1 likewiſe call'd u ids
le Pals, and after this manner they march'd on till they came wichin kiehr of the Caſtle of SRCOns
St. Fre, which was three miles, or more , continually plying us with cheir Harquebuze Imperialifts
ſhor. I had once almoſt pur them tro rout at the paſſing over a great ditch, near to a and the
houſe where was a baſe Court where we purſued them ſo cloſe, thac we came to the French.
Sword, wherenpon twenty or five and twenty of them leap'd into the baſe Court, and
there ſome of curs falling in pell-mell amongſt chem, they were all cut to pieces, whilſt
in the interim of that execution, the reſt got over the ditch : Our Cavalry had choughc ro

- havecharg'd them, bur did nor, being kepr oft by the Harquebuze ſhor, by which many of
their horſes were ſlain, and as for Captain Gabarret and Baron, they committed an error,
who, ſeeing usin the ditch, all ſhuffled peil-mell rogerher, forſook their horſes, and cook
their Pikes, yer could they no come up 1n time, which if they had, and char the Corflers
could have maich'd art the rare the Harquebuhers did, they had chere been infallibly de-
feared 2 bur ir was not poſſible, being hindred by the weight of cheir Arms, ſo that the
Enemy taarch'd on, (till ridding ground, till being come near co a little Bridge of Brick ;
E lettonr Harquebuſers (till fighting, and gallop'd to our Cavairy, that was in three Bo-
dies, Monſieur de Cental leading his own, which {bill keeping at diſtance our of the reach of
the thor maich'd ſometimcs before, and ſometimes a little on one fide, ro whom, coming
ap to him, I ſaid, Ah Monſieur de Cental will you not charge ? do you not ſee that the Ene-
my will eſcope us, if they once get over thit Bridg, and immediately recover the word of St.
Fre? which if they do, we are never more wortby to bear Arms, and for my part I will frons
this h nr forſwear them. Who in a great fury made anſwer,hac it ſtuck not ar him,butchac
] was co (peak to Captain Mons, which Ialſo did, ſaying to him theſe words. Hyh Can-
rode ! muſt we this day receive ſo great a iſgrace, and liſe ſo fair an opportunity, becanſe your
Horſc will not charge? Who chercupon anlwered, What world you bave us do, your Cor-

flets

et

54 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book I.

_—

ſlets cannot come up to the fight, would you have 4 fight alone? To which I madeantwer,
ſwearing for rage, that I had no need of Corflers, wiſhing they were all at Savillan,
fince they could not come up to fight ; hethen ſaid to me, go ſpeak to the foremeſt Troop,
and in the mean time I will advance ; I then ſpurr'd to them, where I began to remon-

ſtrate ro Monſieur de Termey his Gentlemen, that it was not above nine or ten days fince

we had fought with the /talians,and beaten the m, and now that we ſhould fight wich the
Spaniards to obtain greater honor, mult they eſcape from us ? Who thereupon with one voce
all cryed out, It does not ſtick ar us, It does not [tick atns, Irhen ask'd chem 1t they would
promiſe me to charge ſo ſoon as I ſhonld have made the Harquebuiters berake them-
ſelves to their Swords , torun in upon them, which they did aſſure me they would upon
pain of their lives. There was at that time amoneſt them a Nephew of mine call'd Serillae
(who after was Lieutenant to Monſieur de Cyplerre at Parma, and there taken priſoner
with him, and fince {lain at Montepellianne, and, in tiuch 3 among(t thele thirty
Launces there were the beſt men char Monſieur de Termes had inall his Troop)to whom [
ſaid 5 Serillac, thow art my Nephew, but if thou deft not charge in the firſt man among ſt them,
I benceforth diſclaim thee, and thou ſhalt no more be any Kinſman of mine 5 who immedi-,
ately return'd me anſwer , Towſhall preſently ſee, !!ncle, whether I wil cr no. Which ſaid
heclap'd down his Beaver, as alſo did all che reſt, ro charge, I then cryed our to them co
Ray a lictle, till I firſt got up to my men, and thereupon ran to my Harquebuſters, where
being come, I told them) that it was now no longer time to ſhoot, bur thar we mult fall on
to the Sword. Captains, my Camrades, whenever you thall happen co be ar ſuch a feaſt as
this, preſs your followers, ſpeak firſt ro one, and then to another , teſtir your ſelves, and
doubt not but by this means you will render them valiant throughour , 1t they bur half fo
before, They all on a ſuddain clap'd hands to their Swords, when ſo ſoon as Caprain
eMons, who was a little before, and Monſfizur de Cental, who was on one fide, ſaw the firſt
Troop ſhut down their Beavers, and ſaw me run to the Harquebahiers, and 1n an inſtant
their Swords in their hands, they knew very well thac I had mer with Lads of mettle,
and began to draw near, I for my part lighted trom my horſe, taking a Halbert in my
hand (which was my uſual weapon in fight) and all of us ran headlong to throw our
ſelves in amongſt the Enemy. Serillic was as good as his word, for he charg'd in the firſt,

as they all confeſs'd, where his horſe was kill'd at the head of che Enemies Harquebuſters,

and our own Horſe, with {even Harquebnze ſhor, Tilladet, Lavit,Ydrow, Montſelicr,les Mau-
rens, and les Maſſes,tall Gaſcon Gentlemen of the ſame Troop, and companions of the ſaid
Serillac,charg'd the Horſe thorough and thorough, whom they overturn'd upon the head of
their own Foor, Monſieur de Cental alſo charg'd in the Flank, quite thorough both Hotſe

The Tmperi- and Foot, Captain Mons charg'd likewiſe on the other fide,ſo that chey were all overthrown,

aliſts over- and routed both Horſe and Foor, And there we began to lay abour us, above fourſcore or

thrown.,, an hundred men being lefr dead upon rhe place. Ryzalles, Captain to one of the rwo
Troops of Light borſe, with four others got away , as alſo did Don Juan de Guibara
upon a Twik with his Page only, who happened co be on horſeback, being ſhot thorough
che band, of which he ever after remain*d lame, and I do believe js yet living.

This 1s the true relation of this fight, as it paſs'd, there being ſeveral at this dav alive, who
were preſentar it, and I delire no other reſtimony to prove whether I have tail'd in one
tittle of the rrach, Monſicur de Cental carried away priſoner with him the Liencenant of
the Count St. Martin, hc having been taken by ſome of his people , rogerher with ſome
others both of Horſe and Foot, and with us went Captain Agaillere, and Mendoza the
Lieutenant of X:2.2/1zs, he thar carried the Cornette, and he that carried thac of the Count
Saint Martin, (though they had nor their Colours with them ) and all che reſt borh of
Horſe and Foot to Savillan. In ten days were all theſe three Actions performed, to wirzthe
rout of the /talians, the death of Count Pedro d' Appirte at Barges, and this defeat of the
Spaniards. I muſt needs therefore ſay, for whar concerns my {clt , char if ever God accom-

The good for. panied the fortune of a man, he went along with mine ; and do ſtediaſtly believe, that had
tune of Mr.de }c not putto his Almighty Arm, we had been overcome. Bur he ſent us Cental, who dee
Monluc,y ferr'd the time in very good ſeaſon forus, which had 3: fallen our ocherwiſe, a more fuious
combar had never been heard of then that had been ; tor it chey were brave and hardy, we

were nothing indebted co them. Ours was a marvellous ſpritely little Budy , and (that T

' may leave norhing 1mperfeR) I would nor that any one ſhould imagine, that the Corſlecs

came not up tothe fight for want of courage, nothing hindering them from adyancing ſo faſt

a5 nced requii?d, bur the weight of cheir Arms : tor we had ſcarce inade an end , when

they arriv'd upon the place of Bactel, curling rheir arms, thac had hindred chem from having

parr of the feaſt.
Now theie three Companies and a halt of Spaniards thus defeared, ihe three thar went to

Foflan,

—_—

Book I. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

_ ”

Do ——

no1c who were retir'd with the Dake of Savoy, and the Marquis de Ga.ft, and the four
thonſand German and Spaniſh Foot, which were lefe in Carignan , had alcogether very
much weakened the Enemies Camp ; fo tnar atrer ſome time Monſieur de Boitieres reſolv'd
(having Monficur de T ats and de St. Jelien with him) to draw all his Forces in the ſeveral
G:rriſons rcgerher,, ro makeq flying Army. To thisend he ſent me order, with my own
Company, the two Companics of Monſieur de Carces, and that of Count Landriano an 7-
lim, to meethim at Pignerol. He allo ſent to Monſieur de Termes, thac he ſhould only
keep two Companies with him at Savillan, namely thoſe of Gabarret, and Barn 3 where
alſo the Quarters were ſo good, that the forenamed Genilemen were very glad, that Mon-
Gear de Termes invited them to ſtay with him. I will write a word or two to ſerve for a
caution ro my fellow Captains, and to thew chem, that they oughe ro conſider all the in-
conveniences that may happen to them) and to provide remedies againlt every accident rhac
may befall. So

Monlicur de Termes had a mind to perform an exploit at Caftiliholle in the Margui-
ſate of $a/nzz0, upon three Enfigns of the Enemies, that had pur themfelves into three
Palaces, one cloſe by another, having Baſtion'd che Streets in ſuch manner, thar they
could go trom one Palace co another, within their own lines, and his deſign was to kill
two Birds with one ſtone that is, to accompany me as far as Ceſti/lhulle, and with wo
field pieces he intended to carry along with him to force the Palaces, and char from thence
I ſhould go on ro Pignersl, and he (taking the two Companics of Baron and Nicholas to
euard che Artillery) would return to Savillan. Now all the Enemies Forces were quarcr'd
ar Pinguons, Vim, and Vigon) and in two or three adjacent places ; fo that T hid no Eorcac
ſtomach to this enterprize, toraſmuch as the Encmies ſtrength lying ſo near to the ſaid Ca»
fillholle, they might in ſeven or eight honrs time have intelligence of any thing ſhould
there be attempred , and conſcquently 19 as much more be upon us: Burt Monkeur de
Terms, who ha ſer his heart upon this deſign, would hear no argument of mine to the
contrary, eſpecially being that nor four months before Monſicur de Anſſun and St. Julian
hat ac the ſame place defeared ewo Companies, and taken their Captains, where I was
preſent with them, chey having borrowed me of Monficur de Boitieres, and my Compa-
ny alſo: bur I repreſented ro him, that theſe were the ſame Caprains, thachaving paid their
ranſoms, were newly come out of priſon , and who having ſeen the error whereby they
had loſt themſelves before, had doubtleſs now provided againſt ſuch ſurprizes. For after
a man has once been trapp'd in a place, he nwſt havea damnable chick skull, if, when he
ſhall be again expos'd to che ſame danger, he look not better about him than before, and
become wile a: his own coſt. And I have heard great Caprains ſay,that 1 15 convenient to be
beaten ſometimes, becauſe a man becomes morecircumſpeR by his diſaſters: bur I am very
glad chat I never was, and had rather learn to be wiſe at anocher mans expence than my
OW. |

All my remonſtrances could do no good, fo that in the beginning of che night we began
ro march, and an hour before day arrived at the place. Monſieur de Termes then planted
his Canon within an hundred paces of one of the Palaces,which le Baron and Nicolas imme-
diately undertook to guard,and Caprain Pallz,che Count de Landriano and my ſelf were to
fight. 1 won one of the Palaces, not that which was batrer'd by rhe Artillery, bur by break-
ins thorcugh from houſe to houſe, ill ar laſt 1 had broke a hole into che Palace ic ſelf,
thorough which nevertheleſs they Kept me from entring ( beſides I very well res
membred the Ho!e where I had been ſo well cudgell'd, in the voyage to N.ples ) which
made me fer fire to a little houſe adjoyning to the faid Palace. They then retir*d into
one of the-others, the tight having continued until two of the clock in rhe afternoon, with-
our any ocher laying roa helping hand , ſave our four Companies only, I there loſt fifteen
or ſixteen of my men, Monſieur de Carces as many of his, and che Count de Landriano eſca-
ped nor fcot- tree, We had nowithſtanding compell'd chem to quit the other, which che
Artillery had batter'd, and to recreat to the third ; where, being we were to unwall two
Gates, ſom? were of opinion not to make any further atrempr, but chat Monſieur de Ter-
mes (hon'd revurn with all ſpeed to $.villan, and I, with my four Companies to take my
way dircRly to Pignerol, which (to my great grief ) was concluded ; for I would either
have made an end, or,wich che remainder of my men,have perith*d in the artempr. Andi
1s a vice that has cver been obſerv'd 1n megthat I have always been coo obſtinace in fight : bur
lerthem all fay whar they will, have ever done better chan worſe, Bur Monfiear de Termes
conſented to give over,fcaring he might loſe ſome Captain, for which he might afterwards
receive 2 rebuke, the King's Lieutenant having no knowledge of the enterprize ; and 1
marcii*d on ſtraight ro Barger, When I came ro Bonrg the night fell upon me, and I had
yer three long miles of plain ro march over, before I could come to Caborrgs , where T inten-

ded

\

—

EE Tm

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book [

—_— 2 FTE
a A MAINE

mA

ded to bait, and to rakethree or four hours repoſe 5 when being entred into the Plain, ]
ſent Captain Lienard (who was with me) to go ſpeak wich Monſieur de Boitieres, to know
what kind of way it was to Cabowrs (for T had never been in that Country before ) who
brought me word char it was all plain, I then made a halr, and fell to diſcourſe with Cap-
tain Lienard,chat we had fer out from Savillan the night before, that 1n ſeven or eight hours
Ceſar de Naples might have intelligence of our motion, and thar ewo days before it had
been known all over Savillaw, thar I was to go to Pignerol ; of which Caſur de Naples
might have notice, and ic was not above {ix or ſeven miles co Vigon, where the greareſt parc
of their Cavalry lay, wherefore we could nor potſivly paſs over chis plain wichoue running
a manifeſt danger, which (eſpecially in che night , where there 1s no ſhame) we might
without any diſhonor avoid, Captain Lienard confeſs'd that all chis mighr be, bur thac
nevertheleſs I had no other way to go, unleſs I would go three or four miles abour , and
pals theſtreight ncar co the ſource, where he thought we ſhould however meer with wa-
ter. Upon this my Guides overhearing our diſcourſe,cold me rhat there was water up tothe
middleof the thigh, and there was not a man amongſt chem, bur was of a contrary opinion
to mine: buc I, contrary io the opinion of all, turn'd on the lett hand,and took the way di-
realy rowards the Mouncain, finding the water, by good for.une, but knee deep , fo that
we recover'd the {ide of the Monnrain leading ſtraight to Barges , whither we did not
however expect to come till break of day ; which we did withour ſleeping from the day we
ſer out : For the evening we ſlepc nor, at night we began co march, all day long we fought
at the Palaces, and che night after we march*d to Barges, which was eight and forty hours.
T have done the like withour ſleeping five or fix times in my life, and fix and thircy feyeral
times, You muſt (fellow Soldiers) cnure your (elves berimes co labour and hardihip, wich-
our ſleeping, or eating, to the end, chat in time of need, you may ſupport all forts of royl ,
and travel wich patience.
Now you muſt know, that my ſaſpirion was not vain, for Ceſar de N.p:es, having had
intelligence of our deſign, pared from Carmagnolle with five hundred Harquebuſiers on
horſeback, drawing out of Vinw and Yigon five hundred Horſe, wit which he came, and
laid an Ambuſcado in the middle of the plain, about a Croſs- bow ſhot on the one fide of
my way , wherehe lay all nighr ; ſo that when I came to Barges, a litile after Sun-riſe ,
asI was juſt laid down to ſleep, I heard the Arrillery of Cabowrs, which ſhot ar them as
rhey went oft; for they were of neccllity ro paſs by che Suburb of che ſaid Cabonrs.T was not
certainly enform'd of this Ambuſcado, tl three days afier my coming to Pignerel, that
Monſieur de Boitieres puc himſelt into che field, at which time we went directly ro YVigon,
co forcethe Cavalry that were there, for Foor they had noneac ally where we gain'd the
houſes adjoining to the Gate ; bur being we could nor enter the Town, our Camp recrea-
ted a mile off, and in the night the Cavalry ſecrecly abandoned rhe place 3 inſomuch char
at break of day, when we had thonght to have gone on to the aſſault (Monſieur de Bojtie-
res, having ſent for two pieces of Canon from Pignerol) we found no body there, and che
place rotally empry. The ſame alſo did thoſe of Via, Pingues, and the orner places, wich-
drawing themſclvesro Carmagno!le,

I chought fic to diſcourſe this affair,and commit this paſſage to wricing to roule up ourCap..
tians ſpirits,that they may look abou: chem, and whenever they ſhall find themſelves enga-
ged upon the ſame account,may carefully compute, what time che Enemy may have where-
in to be advertis'd of their motion, and alſo what time 1s requir'd wherein to make their
xetreat, Whereupon if you thall find, thac your Enemy has c:me enough to take you upon
your march, and chat you arc nor ſtrong enough co fight cacm, never fcruple to curn out of
your way, for the troutle of going three or four leagues abour ; for it 1s better to be wary,
chan to be kill'd or taken. You mult not only have your eycat watch, bur your under-
ſtanding alſo. *Tis under your vigilance and care, that your Soldiers repote, confider chere-
fore every thing that may happen, always meaſuring the time, and raking things ar the
worſt, and deſprſe not your Enemy. If you have the arr, wich cheartul and ſrolick expretſi-
ons to cajole and roulſe up the Soldier, by timesrepreſencing to' him the danger of a lictle
delay, you may make them do what you liſt, and withour giving them leiſure co ſicep,con-
vey ther and your ſelvesinto a place of ſafery, wichout engaging your honor , as ſeveral,

Hs panes of whom I have known taken a bed a 1a Frangoiſe (as the ſaying 15) have done. Our Nation
tae Frensb, |

cannot ſuffer long) as the Spaniard and German can; yer is not the faul in che air of France ;
norin the nature of the people, but in the Chief, I am a French man, impatient (they ſay }
and moreover a Gaſcon, who excced the other French in choler and 1mparience, as 1 chink
they do in valour; yer have ever been paricnt of all ſores of royl and ſuftering,as much ag
any other cenld be, and haye known ſeveral of my time, and others whom I have bred,
thathave cnur'd and hardned chemſclves to all pain andtravel, and belicve mz (you thax

COM*+

26:20 — er
7 As; UE $9 © oehY
Po WET * Es 7

2 OG __— —

Boox I. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 6

Gn —

Do" pac. ven Ae coun errant cout
ene eee EE — —— —__

command in arms}. if you your ſelves be ſuch, you will make your Soldiers che ſame in
time, I am ſure, had not I done fo, I had been kill'd or caken, But ler us return to our
Subject.

The next day we went to paſs the River of Pan, over which we made a Bridge of Wag=
gons for the Foot only 5 the Horſe fording it over at great caſe, ir being no more than bel-
ly deep: we wereall night in paſting, and ar break of day when they were almoſt all gor
over, I with a Company of Harquebuſiers went up cloſe to the Town, where I fcll to
skirmiſhing, having ſome Horſe alſo with me, Cer de Naples then immediately pur his
men in order to quit Carmagnolle, and began to march, returing rowards a River there to
retreat to Oniers, Wherehad ir not been thar our Cavalry fetch' a great compaſs ro ger
clear of che ditches, we had certainly faulr, and perhaps defeated them , as (to (ay the
wruch) we might have done however, had ſome been ſo difpoſec's Pm ſure it ſtuck not ar
our Companies ; nor ar Monſieur de Tas : But Monſieur le Preſident Biragve, if he will
ſpeak the truth, knows very well where the fought lay, tor he wasthen in the Army with
Monfieur de Bottierer, and both heard and ſaw all they ſaid and did, and knows very wel!
that I with two hundred Harquebuſiers purſued them upon their retreat, firing all the
way for above a mile and a half rogether, and ready to tear my fleth co fee how faintly
they advanc'd, which ſhew'd they had no greart ſtomach to fight.

*Tis an 11] ching when a Generall is in fear of being bearen, and whoever goes timerouſly
to work will never do any thing to purpoſe : had there been no greater men in the Com-
pany chan my ſelf, without trifling after char manner, I had done as I did by the Spani?
ards, which I defeated but fifteen days before, There were a great many excuſes however
on all fides, why we did not fight, and nor only chere, bat alſo throughout all Piedmont ,
where they ſpoke of us God knows with whar CharaQers of honor, Atrer the report of
tiis Cowardiſe ( for ir can be call'd by no other name) was {pread abroad, Monſieur de
Boiticres was not very well ſatisfied with himſelf : bac I ſhall leave this diſcourſe, and fall
upon ſome other Subject ; only this I muſt ſay, thar the world had airer, no great opinion
of him; he was illobey'd, and worſe reſpeed : if chere was any taulc on his part or not,
I leave others to judee, and there are enongh yer living, that can tell berter than I 5 yet was
kea prudent and a good Cavaltcr : but God makes no body perfett at all points.

Three or four days after came Lndovico de Birague, who propos d an enterprize to Mon-
Geur de Boitieres, which was, thatin caſe he would leave Monſieur de T azs about Bog
lmgne (where he was Governor) with ſeven, or eight Companies of Foor, that then he
would cngaze to take (aſſantin, St. Germain, and St. Fago; a thing that, becauſe Monſieur
de Boitieres was upon the deſign of breaking the Bridge ar Carignan , he made very grear
difficulty ro conſent unto, until the ſaid Bridge thould firlt be broken down : but Mon-
fieur de Termes being come with his own Company, and therwo Companies of the Baron
de Nicola, it was concluded amongſt them, that Monfeur de T azz might be ſpar'd to go
with Signior Londine, with ſeven Enfigns, being thar ſtill chere wonld remain five or fix ;
the three Companies of Monheur de Dros,which he had again recruited, and ſeven oreighr
others of 1talizns. I do not well remember whether Monſieur de Strozzj was himſelf yer
arriv*d or no, for the laſt nam'd were his men : bur ic may ſufhce,thar we made up, what
French and 1talians, cighteen Enfigns beſides the Swiſſe. It was therefore concluded in the
Council, that before they ſhould take in hand the breaking of the Bridge, chey ſhould
firſt ſee how the enterprize of the ſaid Signior Lndovico thould ſucceed , which ſhould ir
miſcarry, and that they were defeated, all Piedmont would bein very great danger. Bur
in a few days afier news was brought tro Monſieur Bottieres, that they had taken St. Ger-
#2ans and Sc. Jago, with four or five other little enclos'd Towns. Neither muſt I forger
thar Monſicur de Taz ſtifly infiſted to have had me along with him, inſomuch thac there
arole ſome diſpute abour it : Bur Monſieur de Boitieres proteſted he would not undertake
to break the Bridge unleſs I was there : Monſieur de Termes, Monſieur d' Auſſun, the
Preſident Bireome, and Signior Franciſco Bernardin ftood very high on Monſieur Boitieres
his fide, fo that I was couftrained to ſtay, very much againſt my will, I having a very graar
defire to have gone along with Monficur de T air, both becauſe he lov'd me, and had as
ercat confidencein me as in any Caprain of the Regiment ; as alſo that he was a man of The enter- |
excecding great mettle,and would ſeek all occaſions of fighting : however the foremention'q Priz< of brea-
news being bronght, the breaking of the Bridge was conccluded, and atrer this manner, _ me c

Ic was order'd that I with five or fix Companies of Gaſcons, thould go fight the hun- rio 6 3.4 or C#e
dred Germans, and hundred Spaniards char had every nighc kept Guard ar the end of L
the Bridge, cver fince our Army had been at Pingues, To which I made anſwer, chat T
would nor have ſo many ; for being to pals cthorongh narrow ways, fo great a number of
men would maxe fo yery long a File, that the fxth parc of them could never come up to

I fiohr :

58 The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book I)

fight : and in ſhort, that 1 would only have an hundred Harquebuhicrs ,. and an bundred
Corflets, to be equal ro the Enemy z not doubting , bur, betore the Game was done, to
make it appear, that our Nation were as good, as either German or Spaniard + bur withal
that Boguedemar, 1a Pallu, and another Captain (whoſe name have torgo-) ſhould bring
all the ret of the men after, at the diſtance of three hundred paces, to afliſt me in caſe the
Encmy ſhould ſally out of Carignan, to relieve their own people. Which accordingly was
lefr to my diſcretion.

There was a houſe on the left hand the Bridge, which it was order'd the Italians (who
might be between twelve and fourteen Enfigns) ſhould poſſeſs rhemſelves of, ro favonr me,
ſhould the Enemy make a Sally ; thac Monkeur de Boitieres ſhould advance with all the
Cavalry, and the Swiſſe within half a mile ; chat Captain Labard:c with his Company
ſhould advance on the other fide of the River, with rwo picces of Canon, to make ſome
ſhor ar a little houſe which was on the Bridge end on our ſide, where the Enemy kept their
Guard, and that Monheur de Salcede (who bur a little before was come over to us) with
three or fourſcore Country fellows (every one bringing a hatcher along wich him) ſhould

FO. attempt to break the Bridge. For whom alſo ſeven oreight Boats were prepared wherein to

avi trig the COnvey themſelves under the ſaid Bridge, where they were to cut the Poſts, not quite tho-

Bridoe.” rough , but torherhickneſsof a mansleg, and that being done, to cut the long beams that
ſupported the Bridge above, which d:viding from one another the Pillars would corter and
break of themſelves; they had moreover certain fire works deliver'd to them, which chey
were made to believe, being applycd to the Pillars, would in a thort time burn them down
co the water, Every onethen going to execute the orders they had received ; T with my two
hundred men, choſen our of all the Companies, went full drive directly towards the Bridge,
where I could not however {ofoon arrive, bur that the Canon had already made one thor
at the lictle houſe, had broken into ity and kili'd a German, whom ar my coming I found
there not quite dead. And although it was night, yer the Moon ſhone cur fo clear thac
we might eaſily fee from th: one end ro the other, ſaving that by in:ervals there tell a miſt,
which continued ſomer:mes halt an bour, and ſomerimes lefs, during which we could not
ſee a yards diſtance tom us.

Now either irighced at ri1c report of the Canon, or at the noife I made at the houſe (ir
being not above an hundred paces diſtant fiom the Bridge)the Enemy took their heels,and
fled away towards Carignan, afrer whom I ſcat ſome Harquebuze ſhot ; but follow'd no

further than the end ot che Bridge, Ar the ſame time alſo Monheur de Salcede, with his

Boors and his Boacs,arriv'd underneath, who at his fiſt coming preſently faſtned his arrificial
fires to che Pillars : bur it was only ſo much timechrown awayy and he muſt of force make
the fellows fall ro't with their Axes, who having ty'd their Boats faſt co che ſaid Pillars,
began to lay on ar that end where the Siſſe were, catring on raight towards me, who
kept the other end of the Bridge towards the Enemy.

This fury of che Clowns laſted for four long hours, continually laying on upon the Pijl-
lars, infomuch that chough they were rank'd four and four together , and of a very great
thickneſs, yet before we had any diſturbance, they were all cur to the very place where I
was. Monſieur de Salcede cver cauſed one Company to reſt themſclves upon che Bank of
the River, where he had caus'd a little fire ro be made, and from hour to hour made them
to relieve one another ; during which employment, che Enemy ſent out thirty or forty Har=-
quebuſers to diſcover what we were doing , juſt at a time when the Fog fell, whom I
could neither ſee nor hear for the noiſe of the axes, *cill rhey were got within four Pikes
length of me,and ler fly amongſt us, which having done they immedaately retir'd : yet could
they not ſee us by reaſon of the miſt. Methears de Termes then and de Afoneins with three
or four horſe came up to us to know the meaning of choſe Harquebuze ſhots ; and ſent
back to Monficur de Boitieres to tell him that it was nothing, and that for them we nothing
deſiſted from the work, themſelves alone {till remaining with me. They had nor ſtaid an
hour bur that the miit avain began to fall, and the Enemy as ſoon return'd upon us , that
3s to ſay, ſix hun-ired Spaniards cnoſen men, and 6x hundred German Pikes, Pedro de Co.
lonne (a5 I have ice ::iderſtood ) having order'd the buſineſs thus, That two hundred
Harquebuſiers #,;9:n choſen out of che {1x hundred ſhould charge full drive directly upon
us; the ocher for imndred to march at an hundred paces diſtance, in the Rear of them,
and che {ix hundred Germans two hundred paces after all, Now I had plac'd the Captains
who led the Entigns afcer me, againſt a great ditch bank ſome rwo hundred paces behind
me, and {omecimes Caprain Favas my Lieutenant, and ſometimes Bognedemar came to
me to ſee wharwe did. and again rerurn'd back to their place. On thar fide of the Bridge
cowards the $xifſe we peradventure had broken down fome twenty paces, having begun
co cur the bcams above, and found that as the Bridge divided it fell down for fifteen or

rwenty

te FF
"oo oe SS

—_—___w_ ——
— —} Ali

Book |. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

Ln —

1 I CA, — CAO us AGO IIS

59

ewenty paces together, which gave us hope that we ſhould makean end of the work, In
the mean time Monſieur de S-lcede ſtill made the Pillars to be cur over again, yer nor quite
chorough 3 bur only a little more then before, which wasthe reaſon chart he had divided
his workmen into three parts, whereof one was in the Boats, the other upon the Bridge

—————

cutting the Traverſe beams,and ren or twelve by the fire fide. As God 3s pleas'd ſcmerimes

ro be aſſiſting ro men, he this night wroughr a real miracle; for in the firſt place, the two
hundred Harquebufiers came up to me, finding me in ſuch a poſture, that ſcarce one Sol-

dier had his match cock*d, for they went by curns ten ora dozen at a time to the Coun- -

try mens fire to warm their hands, having two Cencinels our a hundred paces from me,
upon the way towards the City and nor doubring bur the talians on their fide would al-
{o have the ſame, for they were a little nearer than IT ; bur ic was a lictle on one fide. How
they order'd their buſineſs I cannot cell, for I had no more than my two Cencinels, who
came running in to me, and asthey came in with che Alatm , che Spaniards allo arriv'd
crying out Spain, Spain, all the two hundred Harquebuſiers firing upon us together.
Whereupon Meſſicurs de Termesand de Afoneins being on horſeback , and alone, ran unto
Monfieur de Boitieres, who had already ſeen the beginning of the diſorder ; and note thar
almoſt ail che the rwo hundred men I had ac che end of the Bridge ran away ſtraight co
the Enfigns, and on a ſuddain the Enfigns alſo fled, and in like manner at the ſam? time
the [ta/lans who were on our lefc hand did che ſame, neither once looking behind chem
till they came to the head of the Cavalry, where Monficur de Beitiereg himſelt ſtood, Oar
word was St, Pierre, but that did me no good 5, ſeeing which, I began to cry out Hontine,
Montlus, you curſed cowardly whelps will you forſake me thus? By good fortune I had
with methirty or forcy young Gentlemen, who had never a hair on their faces, the han d-
ſomeſt and the braveſt youch that ever was ſecn in one little Company , who thought I
had run away with the reſt : but hearing my voice, returned immediately towards me z
with whom, without ſtaying for any more, 1 charg'd ſtraight to the place, from whence
the ſhot came whizzing by our ears: bur to ſee one anocher was impoſlible for the miſt chac
Fell, rogether with the thick ſmoak that was mixc withic,, and in running up to them my
men diſcharg'd all together, crying out France, asthey cry*d out Spain ; and I dare afhirm
that we fir'd ar leſs than three Pikes diſtance, by which charge their cwo hundred Harque-
balters were overturn'd upon the four hundred, and all of chem upon che fix hundred Ger-
ans; {o that all ina rout, and confuſion, they fled full (peed cowards che City, for they
could not diſcover what we were. I purſu'd them about rwo hundred paces : bur my
purſuit was interrupted, by the great noiſe in our Camp (I never heard che like) you would
have ſworn they had been all ſtark ſtaring mad, calling and bawling upon one another :
yet theſe great bawlers arc none of the greateſt fighters. There are a Fork of men who
buſtle up and down, call, command, and keep a great clutter , and in the mean
time for one ſtep advance, retire two paces backward : but this hideous noiſe
was the reaſon, that I could never diſcover the enemies (diſorder 5 neither could
they diſcover ours, by reaſon of the great outcry they made, at their entrance into
the City, which was no other than a Poſtern near to the Caſtle, into which three or four
men only could march a-breaſt. Thus then I return'd to the end of the Bridge, where T
found Monſieur de Salegde all alone, with ten or a dozen of the Country fellows whoſe
earn it was to reſt; for the ochers that were in the Boats, cut the Ropes, and fled away
with the current of che River ſtraight to Mſontcallier, thoſe on the top that were cucting the
traverſe beams, on that fide rowards the Swifſe leaving their axes and hatchers upon the
Bridge, caſt chemſclves into the water, which was there no more than waſt deep,they being
not yer come to the depth of the River. The S»iſſe, likewiſe, who heard this diſmal noiſe, fell
ro running towards Carmagnole, having an opinion that borch we and all our Camp were
In a rout, and taking the rwo Cannons along wich them made all che haſt chey poſſibly
could ro recover Carmagnolle, 1 ſent one of my Soldiers after the run-aways, to enquire
news of my Lieutenant Captain Favas, whom he met ( having rallycd chirty or forty of
his men) returning towards the Bridge, to ſee what was become of ine, belicving me to be
flain z who preſently diſpatch'd away to Begwedemar, 14 Palin and ſome other Capcains,
who had made a halt, rallying ſome part of their men, whom he caulcd in all haſt co march
direly towards the Bridge, telling chem, chat I had beaten back the Enemy, who theres
upon came at a good rate, to ſeek me. Captain Favas was the fiſt that came, all corn and
racter'd like a skare=crow ; foraſmuch as the Soldiers in a crowd a!l run over his belly as
he thought to have rallyed who found Monſieur de Salcede and me ar the end of the
Bridge conſulring what we were beſt todo. So ſoon as he came he gave us an accounc of
his fortune., and that of the reſt of his companions, when ſeeing him ſo accoucred, we
rarn'd all into laughter ; bur che hubub in our Camp continued above a long hour afcer.

I 3 The

Diſorder 1n
the night.

60

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book I:

The Bridge
broken down.

The other Captains being come up to us , we concluded to make an end of breaking
down the Bridge ; or there to loſe our lives: whereupon I preſently rook fifty or three-
{core Soldiers, and Monſieur de Salcede the ten or twelve Country fellows ke had lefr, giv-
ing order to Captain Favas, Boguedemar and [a Palls to remain art the end of the Bridge ,
and to ſer out Centinels almoſt as far as che Gares of the City. TI believ'd that the 1taljans
notwithſtanding the hurly-burly in our Camp , were yet ar their poſt, and therefore com
manded Caprain Favas himſelf ro go and ſee if they were there or no; who ar his recurn
found, that I had cauſed fiftcen or twenty Soldiers to take up the axes the Peaſants had
left upon the Bridge, who, together with the cen or twelve Country fellows, were cutting
the croſs beams abovezwhere he told us,that he had been ar che houſe, but that he had found
no body there. This news pur usa little to a ſtand,what we were beſt co do- but nevertheleſs
weſtopt not to execute our former reſolntion 3 and fo ſoon as the cumule was a lictle over,
came Mcſſieurs de Termes and de Moneins, who brought me a Command from Mr,de Boitic-
res immediately to retire. The ſaid Sieur de Moneins alighted frem his horſe, for Monſieur
de Termes could not for his Gout,and came to me on foot, where he found that fince the dil-
erder, wehad at two cuttings made above thirty paces of che Bridge to fall, and werefalling
upon the third, cach of them being fifreen, or rwenty paces long 3 who thereupon recurn'd
ro Monſieur de Boitieres to acquaint him how all chings had paſ?d, Monſieur de Salcede
having loſt almoſt all his Peaſants : but that our Soldiers had raken their axes, with which
they did wonders incatting,and that all che Captains and Soldiers, Monſieur de Salcede and
L were reſolved to die rather than depart from thence, till firſt che Bridge was torally bro-
ken down; Monſieur de Boltieres thereupon ſent him back to proteſt againſt me for any
loſs, that might happen contrary to his command , which the ſaid Sieur de Aoneins did ,
telling us moreover, that the ſaid Sicur de Boitieres was already upon his march to return ,
though he halced within a mile of us; which I conceive he did to the end, that by that
means he might draw me off; for he wanted no courage , but he was always 1n fear
to loſe. Whoever is of that humor, may perhaps make a ſhift ro ſave himſelf, bur ſhall
neyer atchieve any great conqueſts. Monſieur de Termes had made a ſtop ar the end of the
Bridge, ſo ſoon as he had heard Monſieur de Boitieres to be upon his march, and return'd
no more back with Monſieur de ſoneins to carry my anſwer; but preſently ſent orders
to his Company not to ſtir from the place where he had left them, and ſo we cut on all the
remainder of the night, 'rill within an honr of day, that we march'd towards the liccle
houſe upon the Hill, Monſieur de CMonrsny return'd again to us, juſt ar the inſtanc
when the laſt blow was given, and Monſieur de Termes ran to his Company, to cauſe them
to advance a little towards us, that they might favour our retreat, and Monſicur de 70-
reins ran rowards Monſieur de Bojtieres , whom he found expeRing his recurn ; ſo thar
having deprived the Enemy of a great convenience , we retir'd without any manner of
tmpediment at all. I was willing ro commir this to writing, not co magnifie my ſelf for
any great valour in this Action ; bur to manifeſt to all che world, how God has ever been
pleaſed ro conduR my forrune. I was neither ſo great a Fop, nor ſo fool hardy, but thar
could I hayeſcen the Enemy, I ſhould have retir'd , and perhaps have run away as faft
as the reſt, and it had been madneſs, and not valour to have ſtaid. Neither is there any
ſhame attends a rational fear, when there is great eccafion 3 and I ſhould never have been
ſo ſenſeleſs, as with thirty or forty Foot ouly to have ſtood the fight, |
Caprains by this may take exemple, never torun away,or (co put jt intoa better phraſe)co
make a haſty retreat , withour firſt diſcovering who there is to purſue them, and more-
over having {cen them, to atrempr all ways of oppoſition till they ſhall ſee there is no good
to be done, Por after all the means chat God has given ro men have been employed, and
to no purpoſe ; then flight is neither ſhameful nor unworthy : but believe me (Gen-
tlemen) if you do not employ itall, every one will be ready to (ay (nay, even thoſe who
have run away with you) if he had done this, or if he had done that, the miſchief had been
prevented, and things had fallen out berter chan they did ; and ſuch a one vapours moſt
and ſpeaks higheſt, who perhaps was himſelf che firſt chac ran away, Thus hall the re-
putation of a man of honor (let him be as brave as he will) be brought into diſpure with all
the world. When there is no more to be done, a man ought not to be obſtinate, bac
to give way to fortune, which does not always ſmile. A man is no leſs worthy of blame for
wilfully loſing himſelf, when he may rerire, and ſees hiniſelf ar che laſt extremity, than he
who ſhamefully runs away ac the firſt encounter : Yet the one is more dirty than the others
and rhisdifference there is berwixt them, that che one will make you reputed raſh and hair-
brain'd, and the other a Poltron and a Coward. Both extreams are ro be avoided. You are
never to enter into theſe ridiculousand ſenſeleſs reſolucions , but when you ſee your (elves
fallen into the hands of a barbarous and mercileſs Enemy ; and there indeed you are to fight

2c

" _— tt. enco—wanc ——_ . « . —* r_ Px "_ __ —_—

Book I. n de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 61

iro che laſt gaſp, and (ell your skin asdear as you can. One deſperate man is worth ten
ochers. Burt to fly, as they did here, withour ſeeing who purſues you, 1s infamous and un-
worchy the courage of a man. Ir's rrue that the French man is accus'd for one thing, that
is,chat he runs and fights for company : and ſo do others as well as they. There are ill work<
men of all Trades. Now affer the place was furrendred » I will cell you how I came to
know che Enemies diſorder. Ir was by the people of Carignan themſelves, and from Signi-
or Pedro de Colenna's own month, who related ir ro S»ſanne , in the preſence of Caprain
Renovard, who conducted him to the King bythe command of Monſieur d' Angaien, ac-
cording to his capitularion after the Batrel of Serizulles, which you ſhall have an account of
in Its proper place. ; |

The breaking of this Bridge was nor undertaken but upon very mature conſideration ,
and the Enemy ſoon after began to be very much diſtreſs'd, beine no relief was to be had
from Qulers, as before they had every night duly received. So ſoon as Monſieur de Tas
and Sigmor Ludovico de Birago had heard the ſucceſs of this enterprize of che Bridge, they
ſent word tro Monſicur de Boitieres, that if he would come into thofe parts where they were,
they believ'd they might carry /vree, Whereupon both Monſiear de Boitierrs and his
Councl were of opinion, that he oughe co go, leaving Garriſons at Pingwes, Vinus, Vigon
and other places, neareſt ro (arignan. And as I remember Monſieur 4 Auſſun, with ewelve
or fourteen 1talian Enſigns, and three or four of ours, his own and ſome other Troops of
Horſe (which I have forgot) remain'd behind co command in chief. The Enemy had no
Horſe at all at Carignan, which was the reaſon they were kept ſo ſhort on every fide.

Monſieur de Boitieres then departed, with Meſfiears de 7 ermes, de Sc. Jalien , Preſident
Biragne, and the Sieur de Manre , and went to joyn Forces at St. Fagoand St. Germaine,
and afterwards ſate down before I[vree, where we did juſt nothing , becauſe ic was nor
poſſible to break the Cauley char damm'd up the water 3 which thing could ic haye been
done, we had infallibly taken the place, foraſmuch as there was no other defence but the
River on that ſide: but we were conſtrain'd co ler it alone, and to go to befiege St. ar-
tiny which alſo we took upon compoſition, after ir had ſtood ont two or three hundred
Canon ſhot ; and ſome other places thereabouts. And as we were returning towards Chis
v@,in the interim of the Sicge of Ivree, Monſieur de Boitieres had notice given him, thac
Monficur d' Auſſun was coming to command in his ſtead.

The King, in truth, was highly diffatisfied with him both for that he had ſuffer'd Ca-
rignan at (0 much leiſure to be forrified, and alſo upon other parricular accounts, A man
muſt walk very uprightro ſarisfie all che world, The faid Sieur de Boitieres was however
very anpry atit ; and was ſaid thereupon withdrew from before 7vree in deſpite, which
etherwiſc in the end *twas choughr he might have taken : bar T am nor of thar opinion, So
it was that Monlicur 4 Angsien arrived, bringing with him for ſupplies ſeven Com panies of
Swifſe, commanded by a Colonel call'd le Baron z and, as I remember, it was ar this cime,
that Monſieur de Dros with ſeven or eight Enfigns, what of Provengals and Ttaliens, came
up alſo, and Monſieur de Boitieresretir*d to his own houſe in Dawphine. There is much
todo inthis world, agd thoſe who are in great command are never without vexation; for
if they be two adventurous, and come by the worſt, chey are look'd upon as fools and mad
men; if tedious and ſlow, they are deſpiſed, nay repured Cowards; the wiſe therefore
are to obſerve a mean berwixt both, Our Maſters in the mean time will not be paid with
theſe diſcourſes, they expeR to have their buſineſs done, but we mult ever be prating , and
ccuſuring others when were we inthe ſame condition we thould find we had enough to

do.

ati
uae - 4

IE RM
—_—

—_— — ———— —
"II IC AR
he OP I

ne EIS
+0 rrbaree þ Bro anneyoer anoy

a7. > ng reg En
FI wt in

”— dh. "YL _—_ x ——_——__— _

|
J
Y
N
>
1
1
[i
$4
#
Þ
pal
F
+
Fs
lh
[8
|
F Þ
Pj
FH
I #
J

The End of the Firſt Book.

THE

on: - Book II

THE

COMMENTARIES

IIMeſpire Blaize de Montluc ,

MARESCHAL of

FRANCE.

Fe = —_— —— "SY -——

The Second Book.

apr EEC III.
CET

JT the arrival of this brave and generous Prince, which promis'd
ereat ſucceſſes under his condu, he being endu'd with an ins
Ie finice number of ſhining qualities , as being gentle, affable, va-

Q liant, wiſe and liberal; all the French and all thoſe who bore

8 arms in our favour, did very much rejoyce , and particularly I,
Ya becauſe he had a kindneſs for me, and was pleaſed to ſer a
FD< 2 higher cſteem upon me than I could any way deſerve. Afﬀeer he
Mr. d Angui- HS S SOURS had taken a view of all the Forces, Magazines and Places that we
en the Kings held, and that he had caken order for all things after the beſt manner he could , about
Lieutenant in the beginning of March he diſpatch*d me away to the King,to give his Majeſty an account
Pieamont. how affairs ſtood, and withal to acquaint him, that the Marquis de G#aft was raifing
Monſieur de -2 very great Army, to whom new ſuccours of Germans were alſo ſent, and moreover
by Montlus ſent that the Prince of Salerna wasalſo coming from Naples wich fx or ſeven thouſand Ttali-
Monſieur 4 ys under hiscommand. Tr was at the time when the Emperor and che King of Eng-
IN ar tO land were agreed, and combin'd together join.ly to invade the Kingdom of France,
the NING. which they had alſo divided berwixt them. I had waites at Conrt near upon three
"7:44. weeks for my diſpatch, having already acquitted my ſelf of my Conmiffion , which was
in ſum only to demand ſome ſuccours of the King, and to obrain leave to fight a Bartel.
And abour the end of the ſaid Month came Letters alſo to the King from Mui. 5:ur d?
Angaien, wherein he gave him norice that ſeven thouſand Germans were already arriv'd at
Milan,of the beſt of thoſe the Emperor had had before Landreci, where there were ſeven
Regiments of them ; bur teing he could nor at thac ome fight with the King , he com=-
manded the ſeven Colonels to chooſe each a thouſand our of their reſpe&ive Regiments ,
ordering them to leave their Lieutenants to get their Regiments ready , and !o ſent chem
into /taly ro joyn with the Marquis de Guaff. Wherefore the ſaid Monfeur d* An-
giien humbly beſought his Majeſty ro ſend me ſpeedily away to him, and alſo reque-
ſted him, tharc he would pleaſe ro do ſomerhing tor me, as a reward for my former
The Sieur Jo ſervices, and an encouragement to more for the time to come, Upon which Letter his
Moniluc made Majeſty was pleaſed to confer upon me the Office of a Gentleman Waiter (which in thoſe
a Gentleman cimes was no ordinary favour ; nor ſo cheap as nowa days ) and made me to wait upon
Walter, him ac Dinner, commanding me in the afternoon ro make my felt ready to recurn into
Piedmont, which I accordingly did. About two of the Clock Monſicur de Annebaxt
ſent for me to come to the King , who was already entred into the Counc!!, where there
was aſhſting Monſieur de Sc. Pol the Admiral , Monſicur le Grand Eſcayer, Galiot, Mon-
fieur de Boiſſy (ſince grand Eſcuyer) and two or three others, whom I have forgor, to-
2cther with the Dazphin who ſtood behind the Kings Chair ; and none of them were
ſer, bur che King himſelf , Monſieur de Sr. Pol, who fate hard by him , and the Admi-

ral on the ocher fide of the Table over againſt rhe ſad Sicur de St, Po!,

So

Book II. The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize,&c. 63

So ſoon as I came into the Chamber, the King ſaid ro me, Montluc, / world have you
return into Piedmont to carry my determination , and that of my Council to Monſieur d'
Anguien, , and will that you hear the difficulties we make of giving him leave to fight a
Battel according to hu deſire , and thereupon commanded Monkieur de St, Pol to ſpeak.
The ſaid Monficur de St. Pol then began to lay open the enterprize of che Emperor, and che
King of England, who within (ix or ſeven weeks were determin'd to enter into the King=
dom , the one on the one fide and the other on the other z ſo that ſhould Monficur d
Angnien loſe the Bactel , the whole Kingdom would be in danger to be 1: ſt : for as much
as all the Kings hopes (for what concerned his Foot) refided in the Regiments he hadin
Piedmont, for that in France there were no other but what were now Legionary Soldiers,
and that therefore it was much better, and more ſafe to preſerve the Kingdom than Pied-
mont , concerning which they were to be on the defenſive part, and by no means to
hazzard a Bactel , the loſs whereof would not only loſe Piedmont ; bur morcover give the
Enemy footing on that fide of the Kingdom. The Admiral ſaid the ſame, and all the
reſt, every one argning according to his own fancy, I twitter'd to ſpeak, and offerings
to interrupt Monficar de Galliot as he was delivering his opinion, Monſieur de St. Po!
made a ſign to me with his hand, ſaying not too foſt, not too faſt, which made me hold
my peace, and I ſaw the King laugh. Monſieur /e Dasphin ſaid nothing, I believe it is
not the cuſtom , though the King would have him preſent, that tie might learn; for be-
fore Princes there are evermore very cloquent debates, bur nor always the ſoundeſt derermi-
nations ; for they never ſpeak bur by halves, aud alwzys ſooth their Maſters hymor, for
whichreaſon I ſhould make a very ſcurvy Courtier ; for I muſt ever ſpeak as I think. The
King then ſaid theſe words ro me, Montlac, have yim heard the Reaſons for which I cannot
give Monſieur d Anguien leave tofight ? to which I made anlwer, tha. 1 had both heard
and weightd them very well, bat that if bis Majeſty wen'd pleaſe to give me leave to deliver
my opinion, 1 would very glad!y do it : not that nevertheleſs for that his Majeſty ſhould any
ways alter what had already been determin'd inhis Counctl, His Majeſty then told me thathe
would permit me fo todo, anq char I might treely ſay whatſoever I wonld. Where-
upon I began after this manner, I remember it as well as 1t had been bur three days ago 5
God has given mea very great memory in cheſe kind of things, for which I render him
hearty thanks ; forlc 1s a great contentment to me now that I have nothingelle ro do, to
recolle& my former fortunes , and ro call ro mind che former paſlages of my lite, to ſer

them cruly down without any manner of addition ; for be they good or bad you ſhall
have them as they are.

SIR,

|| Think, my ſelf exceedingly happy , as well that you are pleaſed I ſhall deliver my $0071
opinion upon a ſubjef that has already been debated in your CMajefties Comncil, as alſo that The Dieu: os
I am to ſpeak to a Warlike King ; for both before your Majeſty was call'd to this great charge, - as gh IM
which God has conferr'd upon You, and alſo ſince, you have as much tempted the fortune of War, Kino to ob-
as any King that ever rul'd in France » and that withoat [paring your own Royal Perſon any rain leave to
more than the meaneſt Gentleman of your Kingdom ; wherefure I need not fear freely to hgh a arte!
deliver my opinion, being to ſpeak both to a King and a Soldier. ( Here the Dauprin, who

ſtood behind che Kings Chair,and juſt over againſt me, gave me a nod with his head, by

which I gucls'd he would have me to ſpeak boldly , and that gave methe greater aſſurance,

though , in plain cruch, T had ever confidence enough, aad fear never ſtop'd m

mouth.) Sir, ſaid I, we are betwixt five and ſix thouſand Gaſcons #pon the Liſt, for Gaſcon:

your Majeſty knows that the Companies are never fully compleat 3 neither can all ever be at the
Battel ; bat I make account we ſhall be frve thinſand, and five or fix hundred Gaſcons com>

pleat , that [ dare make good to your Majeſty upon my Honor : Of theſe every Captain and

Soldier will preſent you witha Lift of all their names , and the places from whence we

come , and will engage our heads to you, all of us to fight in theday of Battel, if your Me
jeffy will pleaſe to grant it, and give us leave to fight. *Tis the only thing we have {o
expetted and deſr*d, without ſneaking thus up and down from place to place, and hiding our
heads in corners. Believe me, Sir, the world has not more reſolute Soldiers than theſe are

they deſire nothing more than once to come to the deciſion of Arms. To theſe there are thir-

teen Enſions of Swiſle : Of which the ſix of St Julien 1 know much better than thoſe of Swife-
Ic Baron , which Fourly commands , yet 1 have ſeen them all muſter'd, and there may

be a4 many of them as of ours. Theſe will make you the ſame promiſe we do, who are your
waturai Subjects, and deliver in the names of all tobe ſent to their Cantons, to the end that

if any man fail in bus duty, he may be be calhier*d , and degraded from all prattice of Arms

for ever, A condition to which they are all ready to ſubmit, as they aſſured me at my de-

partmres

.

£

FT:
r K
K
\
.
©
$

1
L
r
F
f
:
i
4
$
|

#
'S
oy.
&£
}
%
*
»;
2
4? , ;
4;
.

;
he
S*
|
#+
i

þ
by
[4
v :
g ©]
q el
p14
kv

—_—

es A CAA
Hy nt, <

© oat. 3
AAS

———— — A
wo _ my © ——
Ne an _memogs

UV I Wen OR

4 bus is oe, AE
—— $I -
- ” _ _ <3. —

long

ted... AMG. aa * —— -

4m: indictment im} dA 4 a> ons 2 Ac.

64. The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaiz Boox IT.

DO

partare, And being of the ſame Niation, 1 mike nn doxbt but chaſe of le Baton will do the
ſame. Your Majeſty may have taken notice of them all befire Landrecy, Here then ,
Sir, are nine thouſand men, or mure, on which you may depend, and aſſure your ſelf that
Italians, Pro- they will fight to the laſt gaſp of their lives. As for the Italians and Proven-als which are
vencals, and wnder Monſieur des Cros, and alſo the Fribourgers that came to m4 before Ivrece 5 I ſhall
Fribourgers. not take upon me to become ſecurity for them, but I hope they will all do as well as we, eſpeci-
ally when they ſhall ſee how we lay about #s (at which I liked up my arm (1n the carneſtneſs
Gensd' Ar- of ſpeaking ) as if I were going to ſtrike, whereat the King (mil'd.) You ſhuwld alſo, Sir,
= 7 have four hundred men at arms in Piedmont, «of which there may w'll le three hundred ,
Liekt bor le and as many Archers, as well dif poſed as we. You have four Captains of Light horſe, which
| are Meſſieurs deTermes, a Aufſun, Franciſco Bernardin and Maurc, each of which
ought to have two hundred Light horſe , and ammgſft them: all they will furniſh 31n with
frve or fix hundred Horſe, all which are ambitions to manifeſt the ze:l thy hve to your
Service. I know what they are, and what they will do very well, The King then began
to be a little angry to hear that the Companies of the Gens-d' Armes were not all com-
pleat ; but I rold him that it was impofſible ; foraſmuch as ſome of chem ia obtained
leave of their Captains to go home to rheir own houſes to refr:th themſcives, and others
were ſick : but that it his Majeſty would pleaſe to give leave to thoſe Gentlemen who
would beg it of of him, to be preſent at the Bartel , they would yery well ſupply that
defaule, Since then, Sir, ſaid I, (continuing my diſcourſe) that I am ſo happy as to ſpeak
before 2 Soldier King , who wonld you have to kill ten thiuſand Foot, and a thonſand or twelve
hundred Horſe, all reſolute to overcome or dye ? Such men as theſe , and ſo reſolv'd, are not
ſo eaſily aefeated ; neither are they Nyvices in War, We have have ſev.ral times attaqu'd
the Enemy upon equal terms, and for the miſt part beaten them, And 1 d:re boldly ſay
that had we all of us one arm ty'd behind wa, it world not be in the power of the Enemy to kill
2 all in a whole days time , withont loſing the greateſt part of their Army, and the chiiceſt
of their men, Imagine then when we have both 6#ur arms at liberty, and onr weapons in our
hands , how eaſfie it will be to beat uw. Truly, Sir, I have heard great Captains diſcourſe ,
and ſy thit an Army of twelve or fifteen thouſand men is ſufſicient to confront an «Army
of thirty thouſand ; for *tis nst the crowd lut the courage that yvercomes, and in a Battel
the one half of them never comes to fight. We deſire no more than we have , let wa deal it
out, ( The Daxphin all this while ſtood langhing behind the King's Chair, and (tif
made ſigns to me, for by my behaviour I ſecm'd already ro be in Bartel.) No no, Sly ,
theſe are not men to be beaten , and if theſe Lords who have ſpoken , had once ſeen then
at their work , they would alter their opinion , and ſo would your Majtſty tov. Theſe are
mot men to lye dozing in a Garriſon , they require an Enemy , and have a mind to ſhew their
valoar ; they beg leave of yout to fight , and if you deny them z Jo take away thcir {pirits ,
and give it to your Enemies , who will be puffed with vanity to ſee themſelves fear'd , whilſt
your own eArmy ſhall miulder away to nothing. By what 1 have heard, Sir, all that
theſe Lords ſtumble at, who have deliver'd their opinions before you , is the appre-
henſion of lofing the Battel , and that makes them always cry, if weleſe, if we loſe ; but
1 have not heard one of them tell you , if we winit, what preat advant-ges will thereby accrae.
For Gods ſake , Sir , fear not to grant our requeſt , and let me nit returnwith ſuch a ſhame
pon me , that men ſhall ſay you durſt not truſt the hazard of a Battel in our hands , who
{os voluntarily and chearfully make a tender of our lives to do you ſervice, |
The King who had very artentively hearkened to me, and that was delighted at my
pcſtures and impatience , turn'd his eyes rowards Monheur de St. Pol , who thereupon faid
ro him, Sir, will 30u alter your determination at the importunity of this Coxcomb, that
cares for nothing but fighting , and has no ſence of the misfortune; nor the inconveniences
that the loſs of a Battel would bring upon you ? Believe me, Sir, tiza thing of too great im-
purtance bo be referr d to the diſcretion of a young hair-brain'd Gaſcoy, To whom I made
RP Fg > anſwer in theſe very words. My Lord, aſſure Jour ſelf I am neith:r a Bragadochio nor
Montluc's ye- Jo arrant a Coxcomb as you take me for ; netthcr do I ſay this oat of Bravado, and if
ply x0 Monſieur J0# will pleaſe to call to mind all the intelligences his Majeſty has received ſince we return'd
de $r, Pol,, from Perpignan into Piedmont , you will find that wherever we encountred the Enemy,
whether on horſeback. or on foot , we have always beaten them , excepting when Aunſienr d'
Aufſun was defeated ; who alſo miſcarried through no cther def anlt than fur attempting to
retreat at the head of an Army, which a prudent Captain never onght to do. 1t is not yet three
months ( 1 am ſure you have heard it , for it is known to all the world ) ſince the two brave
Combats we fonght both on fost and on horſeback in the plain over egainſt St. Fre, firſt
againſ# the Italians , and ſince againſt the Spaniards , and both in ten days time; and
Monſieur d* Auflun fifreen days before he was taken, fought and defeated an entire Regiment

of

Boox Il, de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 66 |

of Germans. Conſider then we that are in heart, and they in fear ; we that are Conqueriars,
and they beaten; we who deſpiſe them, whilſt they tremble at us; what difference there is be-
twixkus. When ſhonld it be that the King ſhould give u4 leave to fight , if not now, that
we are in this condition in Piedmont? Jt mnſt not be when we have been beaten, that his
Majeſty ought to doit; but now that we are in breath, and fl:(/d with conqueſt. Neither
is there any thought to be taken, ſave only to take gosd heed that we afſault them not in 4
Firtreſs as we did at the Bicoque : but Monſieur d' Anguien has too many gocd and experi-:
enced Captains about him to commit ſuch an errur ; and there will be no other queſtion , if
not how to tempt them into the open field;where there ſhall be neither hedge nor ditch to hinder us
from coming to grapple with them, and then, Sir, you ſhall hear news of one of the moſt furious
Battels that ever was fought, and 1 moſt humbly beſeech your Majeſty to expe8 no other news
bist that of a great and gloriom vittory,wbich if God give ua the prace to obtain (a4 1 hold my
ſelf afſnred weſhall ) you will ſo ſtop the Emperor and the King of England in the midſ? of
their Carreer , that they ſhall not know which way to turmgghem, The Dawphin (till conti-
nued laughing more than before, and ſtill making figns, which gave me ſtill the grea-
ter aſſurance co ſpeak : All the reſt then ſpoke every one in is curn, and ſaid, thac his
Majeſty ought by no means to rely upon my words: only che Admiral ſaid norhing, bur
ſmiled ; and I believe he perceiv'd the ſigns the Daphin made me, chey being almoſt op*
polite to one another z Bur Monſieur de Sc, Pol reply'd again, ſaying co the King ; What,
Str, it ſeems you have a mind to alter your determination, and to beled away at the perſwa-
fron of this frantich fool : to which the King made anſwer, By my Faith, Cozen, he has
given me ſo great reaſons , and ſo well repreſented tome the courage of my Soldiers, that I
know not what to ſay. To which Monſieur de St. Pol reply'd , Nay, Str, 1 ſee you are
already chang'd ; (now he could nor fee the ligns the Dauphin made me, as the Ad=
miral could , for he had his back rowardshim ) wherenpon the King direQing his ſpeech
tro the Admiral, ask'd him what he thought of che buſineſs, who again ſmiling return'd
his Majeſty thisanſwer , Sir, will you confeſs the truth ? You have 4 great mind to give
them leave to fight , which if they do, 1 dare nit aſſure you either of viftory or diſgrace ;
for God alone only knows what the iſſue will be : but [dare pawn wy life and repntation, that
all thoſe he has named to you will fight like men of honor ; for 1 know thelr bravery very well ,
as having had the honour to command them, Do only one thing, Sir, ( for we ſee you are al-
ready half overcome » and that you rather encline to a Battel than otherwiſe ) addreſs yonr
ſelf to Almighty God, and humbly beg of bim, in this perplexity , to aſſiſt yon with his Comm: -
ſel, what you were beſt to do. Which having (aid, the King, throwing his Bonnet upon
che Table, lifr np hiseyes towards heaven, and, joining his hands, ſaid 3 Afy God, I be-
feech thee, that thou wilt be pleafed to direft me this day what 2 ought to do for the preſer-
wation of my Kingdom , and let all be to thy honor and glory. Whuch having ſaid, the Ad-
miral ask*d him, I beſeech yor, Sir, what «pinion are you now of 2 When the King, after a
Iucle pauſe, turning towards me,with great vehemency cryed out, Let them fight, let them
fight. Why then, ſays the Admiral, there is no more tobe ſaid, if you loſe the Battel ,
308 alone are the canſe , and if you overcome the ſamt, and alone ſhall enjoy the [atisfaltion ,
having alone conſented te it. This being (aid, ctheKing and all the reſt aroſe, and I was
ready to leap our of my skin for joy. The King then fell co talking withthe Admiral abouc
my diſpatch, and to cake order for our Pay which wasa great deal in arrear. Monfieur de words of Mx"
St. Pol in the mean time drew near unto me, and ſmiling ſaid, thou mad Devil, thou wilt de $t. Pol to ©
be the cauſe either of the greateſt good or the preateſ# miſchief that can poſſibly bef all the whe Sicur ge
King ( now you muſt know thar the ſaid Sieur de St. Pol had not ſpoken any thing for #niluc-

any ill will that he bore me, for he lov'd me as well as any Captain in France, and of

old, having known me at the time when I ſerv'd under Mareſchal de Foix ) and moreover

rold me, that it was very neceſſary I ſhould ſpeak to all che Captains and Soldiers, and tell

them that the confidence his Majeſty repoſ'd in oar worth and valour had made him conde-

ſcend co permur usto fight, and not reaſon, conſidering che condicion he was then in, To |
whom I reply'd, My Lord, 1 moſt hambly beſeech you not to fear, or ſo munch as doubt but Monttyns ana
that we ſhall win the Battel , and aſſare yorr ſelf , that the firſt news you will hear will be , ſwer. ;
that we have made them all into a Fricaſſe, and may cat them if we will, The King Th. x.
chen came rome and laid his hand upon my Shoulder , ſaying, Montluc, recommend me 5.,;.. >.
to my Cozen d' Anguien 4nd to all the Captains in thoſe parts, of what Nation ſoever , and Sieur de Mont:
tell them that the great confidence I have in their fidelity and valowr has made m: condeſcend luc. ,
that they ſhall fight, entreating them to ſerve me very well upen this occaſion, for 1 never

think tobe In ſommch need again as at this preſent , that now therefore is the time, wherein

they are to manifeſt the kindne(s they bave for me , and that 1 will (uddainly ſend them the

monty they defire , To which I made anſwer ; Sir, 1 ſhall obey your commandr , and this His anfwet!

will

The Battel
concluded,

me ſaying to the

66

a. lt. A —_—

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book I;

will be a cordial to chear them, and a ſpur to the good diſpefition they already have to fight ,
.and I mf humbly beſeech your Majeſty , net to remaain in donbt concerning the iſſue of onr

fight » for that will only diſcompoſe your ſpirit ; but chear up your ſelf in expeliation of

the good news you will ſhortly hear of ws ; for my mind preſages well , and it never yet de»
ctived me ; and thereupon, kifſing his hand, I rook my leave of his Majeſty. The Ad-

miral then bid me go and ſtay for him in the Wardrobe, and whether it was Monfieus
de Marchemont or Monſieur Bayart that went down with me, Icannot tell : bac going
out, I found at the door Mefſieurs de Dampierye , de St. Andre and d' A ffier, with three
or four others, who demanded of me, if I carried leave ro Monſieur d' Anguien to fight,
to whom I made anſwer in Gaſcon, bares y harem aux pics, & patacs ; go in preſently,
if you have any ſtomach to the entertainment, before the Admiral depart from the King,
which they accordingly did , and there was ſome Cilpurs about their leave ; but in the
end his Majeſty conſented they (ſhould go : which nothing impair'd their feaſt ; for after
them came above a hundred Gentlemen poſt to be preſent ar the Batrel. Amongſt 0-
thers the Sieurs de Farnac and de Chatillon, fince Admiral, the Son of the Admiral q
Annebaut , the Vidame of Chartres, and ſeveral others 3 of which not one was ſlain in
the Battel , fave only Monſieur 4' Afirer , whom I lov'd more than my own heart, and
Chamans who was wounded when I fought the Spaniards in the plain of Perpipnan ;
{ome others there were that were hurt , bur none that dyed, There is not a Prince in

Praiſe of the the world ', who has ſo frank a Gentry as ours has, the leaft ſmile of their Kin

French Gen -
wy.

Carionn
blocked np:

The Sieur de
Mortluc {ent
ro diſcover
the Enemy.

will enflame the coldeſt conſtitution , without any thought of fear, to convert Mills and
Vineyards into Horſes and Arms, and they go Volunteers co dye in that bed which .
we Soldiers call the bed of honor,

Being, arrived ſoon after at the Camp, I acquitted my ſelf of my charge towards Mons
fieur d' Angnjen, and preſented him my Letters from the King, who was infinitely
overjoy d, and embracing me in his arms, ſaid theſe very words; I knew very well that thus
worldſt net bring peace, and turning to the Gentlemen about him, Well my Maſters ,
ſaid he, the King is pleaſed to gratifie enr deſire, we muſt goto't, I then gave him an ac-
count of the difficulty T had met witht in obtaining thar leave, and that the King him=
ſelf was the only cauſe of ir , which ought the more to encourage us to behave our ſelves
bravely in the Battel. He was moreover very glad when told him , that the foremen-
tioned Lords were coming after me, being certain thar ſeveral others would alſo follow

after them , as they did. Bidding me by all means go diſcharge my {clf of his Majeſties

commands to all the Colonels, Captains of the Gezs-d' Fes, Lighthorſe and Footz which
T did, not obſerving one that did nor mightily rejoyce, when I gave them co under-
ſtand , what aſſurance I had given the King of che victory. Neither did I fatisfie my
ſelf with ſpeaking to the Officers only ; but moreover went amongſt the Soldiers,
aſſuring them that we fhould all be highly recompenc'd by che King, making the mat-
cer ſomething better than it was; fora man muſt now and chen lye a lictle for his Maſter.

Daring the time of my abſence Monſieur d' Angien had block*d up Carignaw , being
he could not carry it by fine force without infinite loſs, quartering in the mean time ar
Vines and erfer. ira and ſoon after the arrival of theſe Gentlemen, the Marquis de
Guaſt departed with his Camp upon Good Friday from Aft, and came to lodge at the
Mountain near Carmagnelle, and upon Exfter day remoy'd his Camp to Cerizolies, The
Company of the Count deT ande , was thisday upon the Guard, to which Captain Vax-
rines was Lieutenant, who ſent word to Monſieur d' Angaien , that the Camp was upon
cheir march , and that their drums were plainly heard. Monſieur d' Angaien there-
upon commanded me preſently ro mount to horſe, and to go in all haſt to diſcover them,
and to bring him certain intelligence of cheir morion , which I alſo did, Captain V au-
rines giving me twenty Launciers for my Guard, I went fo far that T diſcover*d the Ca-
valry, who march'd thorough the Woods belonging to the Abby of Defteffarde, and heard
the Drums , ſome marching before and ſome following after , which put me to a ſtand
togueſs what the meaning of chis order might be. Ar my return I found Monſieur d'
Angnien , Meſſieurs de Chatillon, de Dampierre, de St. Andre, Deſcars, (the Father of
theſe now living) d' Affer and de Jarnac, in the Chamber of the ſaid Seigneur d' Anguien,
calking with him , having cauſed their Arms to be brought and laid upon the Beds in the
{aid Chamber, where I made a report to him of what I had ſeen, whereupon all the
Gentlemen cryed out to him, Let #4 go, Sir, let # go to fight to day, for it #s 4 goed day , and
Gd will afiſÞ a. Upon which the ſaid Seigneur cotnmanded me to go bid Mefſieurs
de Taisand de St. Jalien ro draw ont their Regiments inco the ficld, ac the ſame time
ſending another Gentleman ro che Gens-d* gArmes and the Light horſe ro dy the ſame,
which was perform'd in an inſtant, and we drew our of (arm :gnolle into a plain leading

roward

Boos I. & Montluc, Mareſchal of France. | 65

coward Cerizlles, where we were all drawn up into Batralia, Monfieur de Mailly
Maſter of the Ordinance was there ready with his Artillery , as ſoon asany of us all, and
we heard the Enemies Drums almoſt as plainly as we heard our own. In my life did I
never ſee ſo chearful an Army , nor Soldiers ſo well diſpoſed to fight as this of ours was,
excepting ſome' of the great ones of the Army,who were evermore perſecuting Monſieur 4?
Angulen, not to put itrothe hazard of a day,repreſenting to him what a blow it would
be to the King ſhould he loſe che Barrel, which might perhaps occafion the loſs of the
Kingdom of France ; and others were ſtill perſwading him char he ought co fight , the
King having granted leave , and expeAting he ſhould now ſo do; fo that amongſt chem
they pur this poor Prince, being yet very young, into ſo greata perplexity, that he ſcarce :
knew which way to turn him, nor whatcodo. You may imagine whether I was not Monfeus 4",
mightily pleaſed with theſe doings, and whether I would not have ſpoke at mouth, 5 renin in.
had I had to do with my march ; neither as ic was could I altogecher forbear. The __? em rat
Lords who were lately come from Courc, were all for fighting, and I could very Kaceal” R
well name both the one and the ocher , if I ſo pleaſed; bar I ſhall forbear to do it ;
for I have not taken my Pen in hand to blemiſh any one : bur che Admiral Chatillon
and Monſieur de Farnac , who are both living , know 1t as well as IT. Both the one
and the other had reaſon for what they ſaid , and were not prompred by any fear of their
own perſons ; but only the apprehenſion ot lofing all witheld chem ; and ſome perhaps
(as Thaveofren ſeen) argue againſt cheir own inclinations, and rhe plurality of voices, to
the end that if any ching fall amiſs, they may afcerwards ſay, I was of a contrary opinion, pw 1 of
1 told him as much, bat I was nit to be believed. Oh there 1s great cunning in dawbing , among Sol-
and in our trade eſpecially of all others. diers: :*
Juſt as we ſhould have march'd to go to fight, four or five drew Monſieur d* Anguien
aſide, alighting from their horſes, where they entertained him walking up and
down for above half an hour , whilſt every one gnaſh'd their ceech for rage that chey did
not march : inthe end the reſult of all was, thae all che Regiments of Foot ſhould re-
curn to their Quarters , and alſo the Artillery and the Gens-d' Armes, and that Mon-
fieur d' Angaien with four or five hundred Horſe , and ſome of the Captains of his Coun-
cil, ſhould go to the plain of Cerizolles ro diſcover the Enemics Camp ; that I ſhould
bring after him four hundred Harquebuſiers, and all che reſt to retire co their Quarters.
I then ſaw a world of people ready to ran mad for veaxcion , and do verily believe thac
if God had ſo pleas'd thac Monfieur d' Anguien had march*d according to his determi=-
nation, he had won the Batcel with very lictle difficulty ; for the Drums thac T had heard
return into the Enemies Rear , were all che Spaniſh Foot , who went back to draw off
two pieces of Canon, which were ſet faſt in ſuch manner that chey could not be ſtirr'd ei»
ther backward or forward; ſo that we had had nothing ro fight with bur the Germans,
the Italians and the Horſe,none of which,nor even che Marquis himſelf, could have eſcap'd
us. Butafter we had ſtood above three hours facing the Enemy , which were in a plain
betwixe Sommerive and (erizolles, who expeRed no other bur to fight ; ( and che Mar-
quis told Monſieur de Termes (ince (being a priſoner) as he has aſſured mee , thathe was The Marquis
never in his life in ſo great fear of being loſt as thac day, for his chiefeſt hopes was in the de Guaſt in
Spaniſh Harquebulters ) Monſieur d' Angaien return'd back to Carmegnolle as diſconten- a;
red as ever Prince was, and at the deſcent of a Wood, as we were upon our return to the
ſaid Carmagnolle, I (aid to him as werid along, Meclſicurs de Damplerre andde St. Andre
being by, theſe words; - Sir, Sir, this morning what you aroſe what could you have defi d
of God Almighty more than what he bas this day given you ; which is to find the Enemy you ;. * 512. Jy
have ſo much deſired in the open fiN; where there was neither bedge nor ditch to obſtrutt 69%. "a9 :
yon? but I perceeve you are more enclined to believe thoſe who counſel you not to fight than Mr, 4 Angui:
thoſe who adviſe ye toit. At which he fell ro ſwear and curſe , ſaving, that hereafter en. 7
he would belive no one but himſelf, by which I well perceiv'd him to be nectled, fo
that {till going on to appeaſe him, Iſaid, No Sir, no, in Gods name believe no body bat
your ſelf ; for we all know very well that you deſire nothing more then to fight , and God will
proſper you , and ſo went on ſtreight tro Carwagnolle , vext to the blood , remembring
what I had ſo largely promiſed co the King in his Conncil.
So ſoon asthe ſaid Seigneur cameto Carmagneile, he preſently call'd a Council of War,
and I at my arrival found our whole Regiment both Officers and Soldiers up to the cars
in mutiny , demanding their pay : bu they held them in hand with che coming of Mon-
fieur Langey, who brought ſome money along with him, I was then entreated by Mon-
feur de la Molle the elder, who commanded two Enfigns, and the next day was ſlain,
ro ſpeak to Monſieur d' Anguien in the behalf of all , and that he would bear che blamez
and as we were all waiting in the Hall , by forcune Mcſſicurs de Dampierre and 4e Sr.

K 3 Andri

A ſaying of

68 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox II,

Andre came in, and finding all in muriny ſaid to us theſe words 3 Have 4 little patience
I beſeech you, till Monſieur d' Anguicn riſe from the Council ( and 1 do believe they had
been calking to him by che way , for I tound him riding berwizt them ) and ſo they
entred inco the Chamber , where they ſtaid nec long , bur came our again, Monfiear
de Damyierre came our firſt , who, becauſe Monſicor d' Anguien immediately followed
him, looking at me, he laid his finger upon his monch, tor a fign thar I ſhould ſay
nothing , and Monſieur d' Anguien all in rage went ſtraight ro his Chamber, and the 0-
ther Colonels and Captainsevery one to his own quarters; bur we ſtirr*d not from thence.
Preſently after Meſſieurs de Dampierre and de Sc. Andre came out into the Hall, and faid
Reſolution to £2 us theſe words : Get you home to your Quarters, and prepare your ſelves, for to morrow
feht, we muſt fight ; as they came our we take nocice of thoſe who were for fighting , all of chem
ſmiling upon us, by which alſo we gueſs'd betore hand how the matter wene. In the
evening when I accompanied Monſieur de Dampierre to his lodging, he told me the
* whole ſtory, and whar Monſieur 4' Angaien had propounded to the Council , infilting
upon the Error he ſaw hehad commicced 1n not fighting, by which he had loſt an advan-
rape that he could nor again recover , entreacing chem all co conſider of it , and to reſolve
upon a Bartel, Whereupon ſome fell again to di{courſethe fame thing they had (aid be-
fore, of what a loſs it would be to the King, with many other reaſons co divert him from
that reſolution ; and others maintain'd the ſame opinzon they had eyer done, that he
onghc to pur ic toa Bartel : Bur Monſieur 4 Angauien,who ſaw himſelf fallen incorhe ſame
diſpute chat before, broke outin a violenc paſſion, ſaying, that he was reſolvedto fight at what
price ſoever, and that if any one ſhould any more diſpate the contrary, be ſhould never think ſo
well of that man again, ſo long as he liv'd, Whereupon one in che Company, who before
- had ſo highly argued againſt ic,made anſwer: O Sir , is it then a reſolutien you have taken
that you will fight ? yes replyed Monſieur d' Anguien , then ſays the other there is no
wore to be ſaid 3 and thereupon it was concluded , that every one ſhopld repair to his com-
mand , and that an hour before day , we ſhould bzallin the ſame Plain where we had
been the day before, to march direly rowards che Enemy , wherever he was to be found;
which was accordingly perform'd , ſome remouſtrating in the mean time to the Cap-
tains and Soldiers, that it would be our of ſeaſon co ſtand apon telling them our their
pay in the face of the Enemy, and char chey were to ſtay till the Battelwas over ,
which was only a device to amuze thoſe who were ſo importunate for their
Pay.
| Now being we had the day before left the Enemy in the Plain betwixe Sommerive and
Cerizolles , Monſicur d' Anguien did not very well know wherher they might be ac
Sommerive orat Cerizolles, notwithſtanding that the Governor of Sommerive had ſenc
him word, that the Camp intended to quarter there. Signior Franciſco Bernardin
cherefore ſent our three or four of his Light horſe towards che ſaid Cerizolles, who wenc
{o nearthat they diſcover'd their Camp , which was already in arms, and the Drums
beginning to bear, That which had made them recurn to Cerizolles, was to ſtay for the
| Spaniſh Foor , who were gone for the two pleces of Canon, as has been ſaid before,
Monſieur de Termes likewiſe ſent out again three or four of his people alſo, and in the
mean time we march'd underneath roward Sommerive ; bur ſo ſoon as the Light horſe
return'd with the ſame intelligence , w2 turn'd on che left hand, and come up into the
Plain , where the whole Army was, and there made a halc. And there Monſieur 4'
Angnien and Monſieur de T ais gave me all che Harquebuſiers co lead, for which honor

The Sieur 40 J ;erarned him my moſt humble thanks, celling him chat 7 hoped, by Gods a ſſiſtance, to ac-
Mendes com” quit my ſelf ſo well of my charge , that he ſhould remaif ſatisfied with my ſervice , and ſaid

Harquebuſi- 3 much to Monſieur de Tais , who was my Colonel , 2nd who came and commanded
ers. all the Captainsand Lieutenants, that I would take, co obey me equally with himſelE.
| I then cook four Lieutenants, namely le Brieil (whom I have mentioned before) le
Gaſquet , Captain Lienard and Caprain Faves, who was my own Lieutenant, To F a-

vas and Lienard I gave theright wing, and my {elf with che ewe other took the left ,

The order of leading towards the little houſe,that was afterwards ſo much diſputed $ and it was ordered
the Battel of that the Swiſſe which were commanded by Monſieur de Boitieres ( whoa little before the
Cerixolles 'rymor of the Battel had been recall'd from his own houſe) and we ſhould fight coge-
fought the [7. , - n the Vantguard : the Battel was to be conducted by Monficur 4 Angsien , having
of April ,1544 der his Cornet all che young Lords thac came from Court, and the Rear-guard was
commanded by Monſieur d' Ampierre, wherein were four thouſand Fribewrgeys, and three

chouſand Jtalians,led by the Sieur de Dros and des Cros,cogether with all the Guidons and

Archers of Companies. Now there was a lictle Eminence, chat dipt cowards Cerjzolles

and Sowmerive, which was all on a lictle Copſe, bur nor very thick : The firſt of the Ene-

my

LO ————

Book Il. | de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 69

FEE" "IE

my chat we ſaw enter into che Plain ro come towards us , were the ſeven thouſand 1ta-
lians conducted by the Prince of Salernya, and in the flank of them three hnudred
Launciers , commanded by Rodolpho Baglione, who belonged co the great Duke of
Florence, The Skirmiſh began by this litcle Hill , on che deſcent whereof the Ene- The begia-
my had made a halc juſt over againſt us, and fo ſoon as the sxirmiſh was begun , I gave ning of the \
one Squadron to Captain Brmeille, being that which was neareſt to me, and the hind Batte!.
moſt to Caprain Gaſquet » abour two hundred paces diſtant the one from the -0
ther» and of my own I gave forty or fifry Harquebuhiers ro a Serjeant of mine called
Arnant de St. Clair, a valifnt man and one that very well underſtood his Eufineſs, and
I my ſelf ſtood for a reſerve. Being at che foreſaid litrle houſe, I diſcover'd three or four
Companies of Spaniſh Harquebufiers, who came full drive to poſleſs themſelves of rhe
houſe, and inthe mean time Favas and Lienard tought the [talians in the valley on
the right hand. The skirmiſh grew hot on both ſides, che Enemy one while bearing
meup to the houſe, and I again other whiles driving them back co their own party z
for hey had another that was come up to ſecond the firſt, and ic ſebkm'd as if we had.
been playing at Baſe : but in the end I was conſtrain*d co call Captain Braeille up to
me, Srl faw all their Foot embody together , with a Troop of Horſe to flank them.
Now had Inotſo much as one horſe with me, notwirhftanding thar I had advertiſed
Monſieur d* Angaien that their Cavalry was alſo with the Harquebuſfiers chat came up
to me, Let it ſuffice, that of a long time no body came, infomuch thar I wasconſtrain-
ed to quit the houſe ; but not withour a great diſpute , which continued for a very
great ſpace, Ichen ſent back Captain Brweille co his place, the skirmith continued for al-
moſt four fours without intermiſſion , and never did men acquic themſelves better.
Monkeur d' Angnien then ſent Monſieur 4? Axſſ#n unto me , commanding me to repoſ-
ſeſs my ſelf of the houſe , which was neicher of advantage nor diſadvantage ro me; ro.
whom I made anſwer, Go and tell Monſieur d' Anguien that he muſt then ſend me ſvme wee mig -
Herſe, to fight theſe Horſe that flank their Harquibuſiers (which he alſo ſaw as well as bs he
I) for 1 am not to fight Horſe and Foot together in the open field. He then ſaid ro me, fight,
It is enough for me thit ] have told you, and (o recurn'd to carry back my anſwer to |
Monficur d' Angaies ; who thereupon ſent Monſieur de Aoneins to tell me, that one
way or another he would thar I ſhould regain it, with whom alſo came the Seigneur Ca*
bry, Brother to Seigneur Mawre, bringing wich him threeſcore Horſe, all Launciers , ,
and Monſieur de Moneins might have about ſome five and twenty , he being chen bac
beginning to raiſe his Treop. To whom I return'd the ſame anſwer IT had given bes
fore ro Monſieur d' Auſſwn, and char I would nor be cauſe of the loſs of the Bat-
rel : but char if they would go charge thoſe Horſe that flank'd the Harquebuſicrs, I
would quickly regain the houſe. They then anſwer'd , that 1 had reaſon, and thar
they were ready to do it, Whereupon I preſently ſent co Captain Brweil ro come
upto me, andtco Captain Gaſquet to advance to his place, and immediately Caprain
Brmeil coming up on the righc hand, and che Horſe in the-middle, we march'd ac a
good round trot direRly np to them ; for we were noc above three handred paces di-
Rant from one another. All chis while che skirmith 'never ceaſed, and as we drew
within a hundred or fix {core paces off them , we began to fire , upon which the Ca-
valry fac'd about, and their Foct alſo, and I faw their Launciers curn their backs ,
xetreating to their Troops. Monſieur de Montins , and Seigneur (abry went im-
mediately hereupon ro Monſieur 4' Angvien , to tell him what they had cen
their Cavalry do, and thar if he did not ſend me up Horſe to ſecond me, I
cog not choole but be routed. I ſent back Captain Brzejil and Gaſquet into their

aces.
: Now there was a little Mariſh near unto Cerizo/ler, and a great hollow way, which
hindred the Enemy that they could not come up to us drawn up in Batcalia: and rhe
Marquis de G#2ft had cauſed fix pieces of Artillery to paſs over this mariſh, and they
were already advanc'd a good way on this fide, when ſeeing their people driven
back , they were afraid that the whole Army followed the purſuit, and chat they
ſhould loſe rheir Canon. Wherefore they preſently made che Germans to paſsover this
mariſh, and thorough the ſaid hollow way, who, ſo ſoon as chey came into the plain,drew
up again into Battalia ; for it was not poſſible for them to paſs, bur in great diſorder, and
in the mean time the Cavalry and Spaniſh Harquebuſters came up to me as before + inſ{o-
much chat having no Horſe with me, I was necefſicared co quit them che place, and to
rerire to the place from whence I came,

Now I had diſcover'd their German Foot and their Artillery , and as T was retiring
Monſieur de Termes and Signior Franciſco Rernardin came , and plac'd themſelyes on

the

|
[
|
|
'
|
|
4
j

gs Hfths pit gr eee ron MEG arts - As on ne lier DAG Aran AO A tattoo

—_—_—

———

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book IT.

S

A furious
Skirmiſh.

The Canon
frights more
than it hurts.

Th Sieur de
Montluc's

Speech to his
Soldiers,

'ﬀA pardonable
miſtake in a
Soldier not -
well read in
Hiſtory,

The Sieur de
Montluc's ads
vice to the
Pikes, con-
cerning the
manner of
their hight,

the right hand of our Battaillon, and upon the s$kirt of the Hill ( which was very
{traight) and over againſt the Batcaillon of the 1talians ; for their Launciers were exatt-
ly oppoſite to our Pikes. Monſieur de Boitieres with his Company, and that of the
Count de T ande advanc'd on the left hand of our Batrail, and the Swiſſe were three or
four ſcore paces behind us, and alittle on the one fide : In the mean time our Harquebu«
fiers that were conduQed by Lienard and Captain Favas ſometimes bear back the Enemy
as far as their main Battalia , and ſometimes the Enemy repell'd chem up to ours. 1
ſaw then thac I muſt of neceſſity diſarm our Battaillon of the Harquebuſiers that made
our flank on that fide where Monſieur de Boitieres ſtood , and give them to them, wheres
with ro make a Charge , which they did , and with great fury beat them up to their
Barrail ; and it was high time ; for their Harquebuſiers had almoſt gain'd the flank of our
Horſe, I therefore ran up to them, and we began a furiousskirmith, which was great,
and obſtinately fought, for all our Squadrons were cloſed up together, and it continued
a long hour or more.

Now the Enemey had placed their Canon by the fide of the little houſe, which play'd
direly into onr Bactaillon > Monſieur de Mailly then advanc'd with ours , and pla-
cing himſelf cloſe by us, began to ſhoot at choſe of the Enemy by the little houſe; for
there where we maintain'd the skirmiſh he could not do it, withont killing our own
men: when, looking towardsour own Battail, I faw Monſieur de Taw, who began to
march with his Pikes, charg'd dire&ly rowards the 7talians; whereupon Iran up to him,
ſlaying , Whither do you go, Sir, whither do yeu go, you will loſe the Battel ; for here are
all the Germans coming to fight you, and Will charge into your flank The Caprains were
the occaſion of chis, who cealed not to cry out to him, Sir, lead us on ts fight ; for it is
better for us t0 dye hand to hand, than ftand ſtill bere to be killed with the Canon. *Tis thar
which terrifies the moſt of any thing , and oftentimes begers more fear than it does harm :
but however ſo it was, that he was pleaſed ro be ral'd by me, and I entreated him to make
his men kneel on one knee, with their Pikes down for I ſaw the Swifſe behind laid at
their full length ſquatt to to the ground, ſo as hardly to be ſeen ; and trom him I ran to

the Harquebuſers, The Enemies Harquebuſiers by this time were beginning torctire behind

che houſe , when, as I was going up to charge ſtraight up to them, I diſcover'd the Front of
the Germans Battaillon, and ſuddainly commanded the Caprains Brre!le aud Gaſguet to
retire by degrees towards the Artillery, for we were to make room for the Pikes to come up
to the fighr, and I went to our Bartel, where being come, i {aid to my mien rheſe words.
Oh my fellow Soldiers let us now fight bravely, and if we winthe Battel we get a prea-
ter renown, than any of our Nation ever did ; It was never yet yead in Hiſtory, that
ever the Gauls fought the Germans Pike to Pike, but that the Germans defeated them,
and ta ſet this honorable mark, upon our ſelves, that we cre better men than our Anceſtors ,
this glory ought to inſpire u with a double courage to fight ſo as to overcome , or dye, and
make our Enemies know what kind of men we are. Remember, Camerades, the meſſage the
King ſent to us, and what.a-glory 14 will be topreſent our elves before him after the witte-
ry. Now, Sir, ſaid I to Monſieux de Tat, it is time to riſe, which he ſuddenly did ,
and ] began to cry out aloud, Gentlemen, it may be there are nit many here who have
ever been in a Battel before , and therefore let me tell you , that if we take eur Pikes by the
hinder end , and fight at the length of the Pike , we ſhall be defeated; for the Germans are
mire dextrons at this kind of fight than we are + but you muſt take your Pikes by the middle
as the Swiſle do, and run head-long to force and penetrate into the midſt of them , and you
ſhall ſee how confounded they will be, Monſieur de Tais then cryed our to me to go along
the Battail, and make them all handle their Pikes after this manner, which I accordingly
didz and now we were all ready for the Encounter. |
The Germans march'd at a great rate direRly towards ns, and Iran to put my (elf be-
fore the Bartail, where I alighted from my horſe ; for I ever had a Lacquey ar the head
of the Battaillon ready with my Pike ; and as Monſieur de T ais and the reſt of the Caps
trains ſaw me on foot, chey all cry'd ont at once, Get #p, Captain Montlac, get »p «-
8g ain, and you ſhall lead as on to the fght. To whom I made anſwer , that if it was my
fate to dye that day , 1 conld not dye in a more honorable place than in their Company , with
my Pike in wy hand, Then call'd to Caprain la Barre, who was Serjeanc Major, that
he ſhould always be ſtirring about the Battaillon , when we came to grapple, and
that he and the Serjeants behind and on the Gides ſhould never cealc crying , pur
home, Soldiers, puc home, to theend thar they mighe puſh on one another, =
The Germans came up to us at a very round rate, infomuch that their Batcail being
very great , they could nor poſſibly follow ; ſo chat we faw great windows m cheir bo-
dy , and ſeveral Enfigns a gopd way behind , and all on a ſuddain ruſh'd in among

them,

- a. we we. we. han At >. <<

= > a.

Book Il.

chem, a good many of us ar leaſt, for as well on cheir fide, as ours , all che firſt :
Ranks, eicher wich pnſh of Pikes or the Shock at che encounter , were overrurn'd ; nei- A furious
cher.is it poſſible amongſt Foot to ſee a greater fury ; the ſecond Rank and the third Charge.
were the cauſe of our viRtoryz for the laſt ſo puthed chem on, thar they fell in upon
the heels of oneanother, andas ours preſs'd in , the Enemy was ſtill driven back : I
was never in my life fo ave and light as that day , and ic ſtood me upon fo to bez
for above three times I was beaten down to my knees, The Swiſſe were very {ly and cun-
ning ; for till they ſaw us within ten or a dozen Pikes length ot one another, they never
roſe ; bur then like ſavage Boars they ruth'd into their flank , and Monſieur de Boitie- | Wo
res broke in ata * Cancron. Monſieur de Termes and Signior Franciſco in the mean * Or Corner,
cime charg'd Regolpho Baglione, whom they overthrew , and pur his Cavalry to rout.
The Italians, who ſaw their Cavalry broken , and the Lanſquenets and Germans over-
thrown and routed, began to rake the deſcent of the valley, and as faſt as they could co
make dire&aly towards the Wood, Monſieur de Termes had his horfe killed under
him at the firſt encounter, and by ill forcune his leg was fo far engaged under him The $eur 4-
in the fall , chat it was not poſſible for him to riſe,ſo that he was there by the /talians Fermes :taken
taken, and carried away Priſoner , and , co ſay che cruth, his legs were none of priſoner.
the beſt.

Now you are to take notice , that the Marquis de G#aft had compoſed a Bartaillon
of five thouſand Pikes, namely two thouſand Spaniards and three thouſand Germans ,
out of the number of fix thouſand , being the ſame that Count Lawdron had broughec
into Spain, where he had remain cen years, or more, and whoall ſpoke as good Spa-
mifh as natural Spaniards. He had formed this Battaillon only co claw away the Gaſ-
cons; for he ſaid that he feared our Batraillon more chan any of che ether, and had an
opinion that his Germans { being all choſen men ) would beat our Swifſe, He had
placed three hundred Harquebuſiers only in che nacure of a forlorn hope, at the head
of this Battaillon, which he reſerved ro the forenamed efte&, and all the reſt maintain*- g ,3:041e o&
ed theskirmiſh, Now as he was by the lictle houſe on the ſame fide with the Germans, the Marquis
he ſaw the Fribourgers , who were all arm'd jn white , and took chem for the Gaſcons, de Guaſt.
and thereupon ſaid to his men, Hermanos, hermanos, a qui eſt ant todos Gaſcones, ſarrais 4
ellos. They were not gone two hundred paces from him , bur that he perceived our
Battail, which ſtart up, and ſaw his error when it was too late ro help it, for we all wore
| black arms.

This Bartaillon of five thouſand Pikes march'd then at a good round rate direRly up-
on the Fribourgers , and they were of neceſſity to paſs hard by Monſieur d' Angaien ,
who by ſome body or other was very ill adviſed; for as they paſs'd by he charg'd
with his Gens d* Armes quite thorough their Bactaillon in the Flank , and there were ONPr WES
ſlain and wounded a great many brave and worthy men , and ſome of very conſidc- hen. Set 4
rabl equality,as Monſieur 4 4 ſer, le Sieur de Ia Rechechovard, with ſeveral others,and yer A4nzuien, ©
more at the ſecond chargez there were ſome who paſs'd and repaſs'd quite thorough and *
chorough; but ſtill they clos'd up again,and in char manner came up to the Fribourgeys Bat=
talia, who were ſoon overthrown without ſo much as ſtanding one Puſh of Pike, and there
dicdall their Captains and Lieutenants who were in che firſt rank and the reſt fled ſtraight
to Meſſieur des Cros : bur this Bartaillon of Spaniards and Germans ſtill at a very great |
rate purſued their victory, and overthrew the ſaid Sieur des Gros, who there dyed and ju} SE.
all his Captains with him ; neither conld Monſieur d' Anguiew any way relieve him, ;; ” WG:
foraſmuch as all the horſes almoſt of his Cavalry, in theſe rwo furious, but inconſide- choparr lain,
rate charges were wounded and walk*d fair and ſoftly over che field towards the Ene- 2nd the Sleur
my. He was then in the height of deſpair , and curſt the hour that ever he was born , 4** ©795-
ſeeing the overthrow of his Foot, and chat he himſelf had ſcarce an hundred Horſe left 7
to {uſtein the ſhock , inſomuch that Monfiear de Pignan of Montpelier ( a Gentleman Monficur 4
of his) aſſured me, that he twice curn'd the point of his Sword into his Gorget , to have _— he
offered violence ro himſelf, and himſelf cold me ar hisrecurn , that he was then in ſucha
conditions he ſhould have been glad any one would have run him chorongh. The
Romans might have done ſo bur I do nor think it becomes a Chriſtian. Every one ac
that time paſſed his cenſure upon it according to his own fancy, For our parts we were
as well as heart conld wiſh, and as much pleaſed as the Enemy was afflited 3 but lerus
return to the blows, for there were yer borh to give and to take. The cowardiſe of the The Cowar:
Friborrgers occaſioned a great loſs on thar fide of the field ; in my life 1 never ſaw ſach giſe of the *
grcat labbers asthoſe were , unworthy ever to bear Arms, if they have nor learnt more F rikawrgers-
courape ſince. They are indeed neighbours tothe Swifſe, but there is no more compariſon |
berwixc them than berwixc a Sp:#iſh Horſe and an Afſe. Ir is not all to haye a great

number

de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. — 71

te |
CT Roi _

_—__n— —_— —_w—

The Commentaries of. Meſfire Blaize Book II"

The Marquis
de Guaſt rou-

Monſieur
Anguien pur-
ſues the victo-

CG reat Nv q-

The 5wiſfe re.
veng'd, tor

number of men upon the liſt; bur co have choſe char are true bred ; for a hundred of
them are worth a thouſand of the other. And a brave and valiant Captain with a
thouſand men, that he knows he may truſt to , will paſs over the bellies of four
thouſand. | |

After the ſame manner that Monfieur d' Anguien had ſeen his people maſſacred before
hiseyes, without any power to relieve them, did che Marquis ſe G#aft behold his peo-
ple alſo trampled under foot by an equal forrune, ſo wantanly ſhe play*d on both hands
with cheſe two Generals; for as he ſaw Ridoſpho Baglione and his Germans , both of
them routed and overthrown, he tcok his horie and recreated towards 4/7. Monſfienr
de St, Julien, who that day diſcharg'd the Office of Camp-Maſter and Colonel of che
Swifſe, was on horſeback ( and, to ſay the truth » he was but weak of perſon and wanted
ſtrengch co ſupport any great burthen of arms on foot) ſaw their Batcail overthrown on
the one fide and ours on the other , and before he went ro Monſieur d' Angaien ſaw us
Swiſſe and Gaſcons amongſt the five thouſand Spaniards and Germans, killing on all
hands. And then it was that he turned back and overtook Monficur d' Angaien near tothe
Wood that leads cowards Carmagnolle ,, but very poorly accompanied, and cried out to him,
Sir, Sir, face abont, for the Battel #s won, the Marquis de Guaſt u routed, and all bes Tra-
lians and Germans cut to pieces, Now this Bartraillon of the Spaniards and Germans had
already made a halt, giving chem(clves for loſt , when they ſaw neither Horſe nor Foor
of their own come up to them ; by which they very well knew that they had loſt the
Batte!, and began to take on the right hand ſtraight towards the mountain from whence
they had departed the day before. I choughtT had been the cunningſt ſnap in all che
whole Army , having contriv'd to place a row of Harquebuſfiers betwixt the firſt and ſe-
cond rank , to kill all the Caprains firſt , and had ſaid ro Monſieur de Tais three or four
days before, that before any of ours ſhould fall, I would kill all their Captains in the firſt
rank : but] would not tell him the ſecret till he had given me the command of the
Harquebuſiers, and then he called ro him Burre the Serjeant Major , bidding him pre-
ſently make choice of the Harquebuſiers, and to place-rhem after that manner. Upon
my faith I had never ſeennor heard of the like before, and thought my ſelf ro be the firſt
Jnventor of it; bur we found that they were as crafty aswe , for they hadalſo done
che ſame thing, who never ſhot no more than ours, till they came within aPikes
lengch, and there was a very great ſlaughter, not a (hor being fir'd but it wronght
irs effec, | ,

So ſoon as Monſieur 4d' Angsien underſtood the Battel to be won , which before (by
the defeat of thoſe on his fide ot the field , and thoſe cowardly Fribowygers, to encourage
whom he had done all that in him lay ) he had given over for loſt ; he preſently put hime
{elf in the Rear of thoſe Germans and Spaniards ; which as he was doing, ſeveral of thoſe
who had taken fright, and were ſhifting for themſelves, rallyed up to him, ſome of
which now appeared wonderful eager of the purſuit , who had run away bur a little be-
fore , and others had broke their bridles on purpoſe to lay the fault of their own fear
upon the the poor horſes, who by chis means were to bear more chan the weight of their
' Maſters, He hada little before the Batrel , by good fortune , ſent to Savillan for three
Companies of very good /talian Foot , to be preſent ar the buſineſs, who being as far as
Reconis upon their way from thence heard. the thunder of the Artillery , by which be-
ing aſſured that the Bartel was begun , they mounted all che Harquebuſiers they could
on horſeback, and coming all the way a gallop , arrived in ſo opportune a ſeaſon, char
they found Monſieur d' Anguien in purſue of the Enemy , not having one Farquebu-
fer in company with himz where, alighting from their horſes , they pur themſelves in
the Rear of them, whilſt the ſaid Seigneur d' Anguien with his Cavalry, one while in their
Flank and another in their Front, ſtill puſh'd on the vi&tory. Hee then ſent a Trooper to
usin all haſt, ro bid us turn that way, for there was more work co do, which meſlenger
found us ar the Chappel hard by the Gate of (erizolles, having juſt made an end of
:illiag with ſo great fury and {laughter , that nor ſo much as one man remained alive ,
i.yeonly a Colonel call'd Aliprando de Mandraca Brother to the Cardinal of Trent ,
ho being laid amongſt the dead with ſeven or eight wounds upon him, Canbois a
ight horſe belonging to Monheur de Termes, as he came thorough the dead bodies, ſaw
him, being yer alive, bur ſtripr ſtark naked,{poke to him, and cauſed him to be carried to
Carmaguolle , to redeem Monfieur de Termes in caſe he ſhould recover and live, as
he afterwards did. The S»iſſe, in killing and laying on with their two-handed
Swords , {till cied out Montdevi , ZAontdevi, where thoſe of their Nation had recei-

the foul play ved no quarter, and in ſhort, all that made head againſt uson our fide of the field

at Montdevi, were {lains

SE ————_— _— LEON |
ook Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 73
EE En cr” KL HIVE
We had no ſooner-received che command from Monficur d' Angaien, bur that imme-
diatcly che Batraillon of the Swiſſe and ours turn'd cowards him : I never ſaw two Bat-
caillons ſo ſeon reunited as thele were ; for of our f{clves we rallyed, and drew up into
Bactalia as we went, marching all the way fide by fide, Tn this poſture the Enemy,
who went off at a great rate, firing all the way, an by thar means keeping the horſe
at diſtance, diſcovered us coming'np to chem, who ſo ſoon as they ſaw us advanc'd
within five or ſix paces, and the Cayalry in their Front ready to charge in 2mongſt
them , they threw down their Pikes, ſurrendring themieclyes ro the horſe : bur here
the Game began, ſome killing and others endcavoring to fave, there being ſome
who had fifteen or twenty men about him , ſtill gerting as far as they could from the |
crowd, for fear of ts Foot , who had a mind to have cur all their throats ; neithcr Another body
could che Cavalty fo well defend chem z bur that above halt of chem were ſlain ; for pry Fr a
as many as we could lay our hands cn were difpatcn'd. Now you thall know what be- v4 ES
came of me, |
Monſieur de Valence, my Brother , had ſent me a Tarkiſh horſe from Venice , one
of the flecteſt Courſers tha ever T yer ſaw 3 and I had an opinion which all che world
could not diſpoſſeſs me of, that we thould win the Baticl, whercfore ] gave my ſaid horſe
to a ſervant I had, an old Soldier, in whom I repoſed a very grear confidence z bidding
him be ſure always to keep behind our Batrailion of Pixes, and telling him char 3f 18
pleaſed God I did eſcape from che skirmith, I would then alight, and engage with
the Pikes, and that when wecame to cloſe, 1t he thould ſee our Barcuilion overchrown,
that then he might conclude me to be lain , and ſhould fave lumſelf upon the horſe;
and on the contrary , if he ſhould ſce us prevail over the Enem'es Bacraillon, chatrhen
he ſhould (till follow , ( wichour offering to break in) in the Rear of our Barcaillon ,
when ſo ſoon as I ſhould be certain of the victory, I would leave the execution, and
come to take my horſe to purſue the Cavalry ,and try torake ſome priſoner of Condition.
I had a whimiy came into my head char I ſhould rake the Marquis ge Gzaft , or dye
in the actempt, truſting to the ſwiftneſs of my horſe; for which 1 had already in my A conceit of
imagination ſwallow'd a mighty ranſom , or at leaſt ſome remarkable recompence #3 Sicur 4s
from che King, Having then a while follow'd the vitory, I ſtaid behind, chinking MOREKe,
co find my man; and indeed I was ſo weary with fighting, running, and moreover ſo
{ſpent with ſtraining my voice to encourage the Soldiers, that-I was able ro'do no more,
when I was aſſaulted by two great maſtift Germans, who had thought preſencly to have
done my buſineſs; but having rid my ſelf of one of chem, the other berook him to his
heels , but he weve not very far; in truth I chere ſaw very brave blows giver. I then
went to ſeek our that Son of a whore my man; but the Devil a man tha: I coald find ,
for as the Enemies Artillery plaid upon our Bactaillon , and very ofcen ſhor over,
the thor falling behind it , had remov'd my Gentleman from the place where I
thought to find him; who very diſcreetly went , and pur himſclt behind the Swiffe 3
when iceing the diſorder of rhe Friboargers and Provengals, he very learnedly concluded
us to be in the ſame condition, and thereupon fled back as far as Carmagnolle, Thus
are men oftentimes deceived in their choice ; for I thould never have ſuſpected chat chis
fellow would ſo ſoon have had his heart in his breeches, and have run away with ſo
little ado. TIrhen found Captain eAMons, having no more than one ſervant only with
him , who had done a great deal becrer than mine; for he had kept alicile pad Nag rea-
dy for him, upon which he took me up behind him, for I was extremely weary , and
ſo we paſs'd on, ſtill ſceing the Germans knock'd down all the way as we went, till being
ſent for by Monſieur d' Anguien, we both alighted and wenr on fcor, till che entire defear
of the Germans and Spaniards ; when preſently I ſaw my man come back, calling him
a hundred Rogues and Cowards, tor fo baſely runging away 3 who-replyed that be had not
done it: alone , but in company with better men and better clad than himſelf, and that he had
only rap away tobear them company ; by which pleaſant anſwer my anger was appeaſed ,
and upon my word he hit upon it ina lucky hour z tor I was very ncar ſhowing him a
trick of a Gaſcon, |
"We then rallyed together ſome ewenty or five and twenty Horſe, whar of thoſe of Mon-
fieur de Termes, of Sigmior Franciſco Bernardin and the Sicur de Manre, and rid a round
gallop afcer the Marquis de G#2/f, and with us moreover a Gentleman whoſe name
I have forgot, but he was one of choſe who came poſt from Court co be ac rhe Bartel
and as we went we met by the way two lighr horſe leading priſoner Signior Carlo de
Gonzaga, . whom they had taken 1n the rear of che Enemies party , which (till
more encourag*d us to ſpur forward. So ſoon as we came fo near to the Enemy as to
dilcover what poſture they were in , we perceived chit chey were rallved and cloſed up

1. eo

—_—  —

— —— >< Oo oe a <A bis rotors A er we .

|
|

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox 11:

The Enemy
rallies upon
their retreat,

to the Crupper , {till marching on in very good order, at a good round tror, and
their Launces ready in _ the Reſt, Which mace me ſay to thoſe of our Company,
theſe people are ready for us, and therefore I do not think 1t convenient to charge
in amoneſt them , leſt inſtead of taking ſome cf the chick of them, it fare with us as with
the Scotch man who took a Tartar. S9 that we recurn'd without attempting any thing
more upon them; bur I am yer of opinion , that had nor that raſcally man of mine
play'd me that dog-rrick I had raken ſome man or other of Command amongſt them,
As we were upon our return, the Gentleman I ſpoke of before accolting me , ſaid theſe
words , Jeſu! Caprain eMontlac, what danger was this Bacrel in once to day of being
loft > To which I (whohad neither {cen nor heard of any diſorder, and thought that the
laſt we had defeared had bcen thoſe of Carienan , who were drawn out of their Garri-
ſon to be preſent at the: Bartel ) made an{wer, why, which way were wein any danger,
ſceing that all day we have had the viRtory in our hands? I perceive then, ſaid he, thar
yon know nothing of the diforder has happened , and thereupon told me all that had
befallen in the Barte)J, As God (hall help me, I do believe, char had he given me two
Rabs with a dagger, I ſhould nor have bled , for my heart was ſhrunk up, and I was
fick at the news, in which fright I continued for chree nights after, Rarting up in my ſleep,
and dreaming continually of a defeat,

Thus chen we arriv*d at the Camy , where Monkienr d' Angaien was, towhom T wear,
and making my horſe curver, ſaid ro him ſporcingly theſe words ; What think you, Sir,
am I not as pretty a fellow on horſeback as I aw on foct ? to which he made anſwer (though
yet very melancho!y ) you will always behave your ſelf very well , both in the one poſture
and in the other , and bowing his bady was pleated to embrace me in his arms, and

The Sieur de knighted me upon the place ; an honor I ſhall be proud of fo Jong as I live, both for

Montluc
Knighted up=
on the place
of Battail by
Monſieur 4
Anguicn.

The Sieur dc
Montluc dil-
contented.

being perform'd upon the field of Battel , and by the hand of fo generous and ſo great a
Prince. Accurſed be herhar fo baſcly deprived us of him. But no more of that ; I then ſaid
to him, Sir, haye 1 ſerved yiu to day to year (atisfaftion ? ( for Mcenhieur de Tan had
already told him , that I had tonghr with them on foot) ro which he replyed , Yes, Cap-
tain Montluc , and ſo well that 1 will never forget how bravely you have behaved your ſelf ;
neither, do I aſſure you , will I conceal it from the King, Why then, Sir, ſaid I, it lies in
your power todo me the greateſt kindneſ« that ever you cando a poor Gentleman ſo long as yiu
live : At which words, drawing me apart, that no body might hear , he asked me whar
it was thar I would have him do for me, to which I made anſwer, that ir was to diſpatch
me ſuddenly away with news of the ſucceſs of the Bartel to the King ; telling him
withal , that it was an office more properly belonging to me than any ocher, conſidering
what I had ſaid ro his Majeſty and his Council, to obtain leave to fight ; and that the laſt
words Ihad ſaid ro the King were, that he was only to expe news of the victory, To
which, turning towards me , he made anſwer, that ir was all the reaſon in the world,
and that I ſhould be ſent beforeany other, And fo all the Army returncd viftorious to
Carmagpnolle : but as I expected to have been ſent away poſt in che nighr, I was rold char
Monſicur Deſcars had gained every one to ſpeak for him, that he mighr go. Monſieur de
Tats had alſo paſſed his word to me z but in the end he ſuffered himſelf ro be overcome, as
alſo did Monheur d' Anguien , which was the greateſt misfortune that poſſibly could have
befallen me : for having overcome the King's Council and their deliberation , and thar
his Majeſty had done me the honor to condeſcend to my opinion 3 here to have carried
him che certain news of what I had promiſed and aſſured him fo few days before, I leave
every one to judge whether I ſhould have been welcom or no; and what wrong I had
done me , eſpecially having becn thar day in a great and honorable command , and ac-
quirted my {clf of ic to my Generals content. Ic had been a great good fortune for me,
and alſo a gerear honor, to have carried to the King what I had before promiſed ,
and aflured him of ; there was however no remedy , and 1 wasforced to ſubmit, chough
they had much ado to appeaſe me 2 but it was to no purpoſe to be angry or to complain of
the injury was done me, TI have ſince repented mea thouſand times chat I did nor ſteal
away the ſame night , which it I had done, I would have broke my neck or have been
the firſt char ſhould have broughr the news tothe King, and, I am confident, he would
not only himſelf have caken ic un good part, bur moreover haye made my peace with 0-
thers. But I, from that time forward, gave over all thoughts of advancement , and ne-
ver after expeAted ro come to any thing , which made me beg leave of Monſieur d* An-
guien to be diſmiſs'd , that I might return inro my own Country. Which ſaid
Seigneur - promiſed me greac matters ({ knowing me to be diſconrented) and Monſieur
de T ais did the ſame , uſing all the perſwaſions he could ro make me ſtay : but I preſsd
my deparrure ſo much that ar laſt I obrazn'd leaye, upon my promule to return ; and for

far-

de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 75

_— - _— ———  ——

—_—

Boox Il.
tarcher aflarance of me, the ſaid Sjeur d' Anguien made me accept a Commiſſion from
him for the ſpeedy raiſing of one thouſand or twelve hundred Foot , to bring into
Piedmont, to recruit the Companies, for in plain crutch we had loft a great many
men, |
Now TI ſhall tell you what advantages accrued ro the King from this vitory ,
which 1 only had from Monficur de Termes ; to whom the Marquis de Gaſt had
cold it, lying wounded in bed of a Harquebaze ſhor in his thigh. He te1d him that The great ad-
che Emperor and the King of England were apreed at one and the ſame rime to .cn- vantages that
ter the Kinedom of France, each on his own fide, and thac the Emperor had **: winning of
{ent him the ſeven thouſand Germans purpoſely ro make him fo ſtrong , that Mon- Ne a
{eur d' Anguicn might not dare to fight him, and afterwards co march direaly to Gen t6 he
Lumlrias there tro throw a Bridge over the River, and to put intro (arignan the King,
Drovifions that he brought along with him, and as much mote as he could provide |
beſides , and thence to draw our the four thouſand Spanjſh and German Foot , who
were to return towards Tore, leaving four thouſand [talians 1n their ſtead ; which
being done, he was to ſend back the ſeven German Colonels , with their Regiments
co the Empcror, Thar chen there would ſtil remain wich him in his Camp five thou-
land Germans, and as many Spaniards, with which at the ſame time, that the
King of Ergland ſhould enter the Kingdom, he was to deſcend by the valley of
Oſtiz, thorough which he ſhould march ſtraight ro Lyons, where he ſhould meer
no body to oppoſe him but che Inhabitants of the Ciry , nor any Fortreſs ar all :
where lying between the two Rivers he mighz: command all che cerritories of the
Duke of Saws, together with Dauphine and Provence, All this was told me by
Monficur de Terns:s after his return; an enterprize that had nor been hard to execute
had we not won the Barcel , in which berwixc twelve and fifteen thouſand men of the
Enemy were ſlain, The victory was very 1mportanc , both in reſpe&t of che Priſoners ,
which were many of them very contiderable, as allo for the Baggage, which was ex-
ceedingly rich ; and beſides many places ſurrendred out of fear, aadin the end (arig-
nan it ſelf, of which I ſhall not meddle with the particulars, becauſe I was. not preſent ar
the furrender, Had they known how co make cheir advantage of this Bartel, Millan
had been in a tottering condition : but we never knew how to improve our viRtories to the
beſt. Tr is alſo very crue chat the King had ar this time enough to do to defend his
Kingdom from two ſuch powerful encmics,
His Majeſty having intelligence of the grcar preparation that was made both by the
one and the other, withdrew the preatcſt parc ot his Forces out of Piedmont, where I
arriv'd acthe time when Monſicur de Tais had received a command to bring away all
che men he could; for I never could ſtay long ar home, and never hated any thing
ſo much as my own houle , ſo that alchongn I had once pur on a reſolution ( for the
wrong that had been done me) never to go any more into chat Country., yet when
it came too'r I could not forbear ro go. Monlieur de T ais had made choice of two
and rwenry Enſfigns, the Companies whereof were now very well recruited ; to which
te moreover raiſcd a new Company , which, at my requeſt, he was pleaſed to give to
Captain C-fetgeſonx, whohad been affiſting co me in the railing , and conduRing of
my men, and had formerly carryed my Enfign in the Kingdom of Naples. And ſo we
began to ſet forwards towards France, dividing cur Companies into five and five. Of
theſe I had the fiſt Diviſion, and went before to Suzanne, to prevent the Soldiers
from getting thither before us, and to rake order for the proviſions, much of which T
found upon the way going thither , which made me redouble my diligence. TI arri-
vedin the night rwo hours before day , at Villanme , aud ac the Inn where I alighted ,
found Signior Pedro de Colonna , whom Caprain Renoward carried priſoner to the King ,
according to the capitulation ac Carignan. They were already gor up 8nd the ſaid
Capcain Renovard carried me into the Chamber of the ſaid Signior , who ac my coming
told me, that he underſtood ic was 1 wo had broken the Bridge ac Carignan, and
that had commanded the Harquebuſiers at the Bartel. After which, falling into diſcourſe
concerning rhe ſaid Bridge, I rold him , char had his people follow'd their forcune ,;
they had found no body to fight with, but my ſelf and ſome fory men ar msſt; and
that our whole Camp was in ſo great diſorder, that had he purſued them, we had all-
been defeated ; and Capiain Renovard alſo affurcd him, that whar I faid was crue.
Ar which, afcer a little pauſe rurning towards me he ſaid: E vii dicete che ff ls noſtr
Gente ſeguto hav:ſſi la ſ4a fortuna: no havena a combatere pin di vol co quarante ſoldati,
On have ſims poſie in to tata la v2ſtra gentes In vi dico che {i val b weſti ſeguita la no-
Bra w havreſti meſs freeri di Carignan! , per che la ma gente havia pigliats i! ſpavents

$2 cf;

—

&

. $92 tt 1» 0 ne oo Sega hoe

[I OR gy. :
© CE _— 4
nr en

Doo tr batted ERS CA Wane
— em woof ” ,
_

Mr Erone 2 go I TAS IEF
23 -» SINE? ny"
ri BEI & . AGILE

WEIL ing. oo ents 7

RE —_
nyo ore

Rag” A
NN a

redo
#*,<

___ tg ru <4._-

en 924
data
—— —

L Py =

t 7.
_—_ S 2ghie >: -
m ——_—_—

MEnn pol * ni a A 2 Bee et
" "Fro COD + Ov

=> >" ade." ee eu.
> "ATNES

- | 6 | The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox II,

—

—_—

coffe forte che la citta no erabaſtante di vaſſecs/arli, 'Which in Engliſh 1s this. Tos tell
me that if our people had followed their fortune, they had had to deal with ny more of yours
than forty Soldiers only , and had put your whole C:mp to flight, And I tell you, that had
you purſued your fortune, yor had driven me out of Cariznan , foraſmuch as my people
had taken ſo terrible a fright , that the flrength of the City had not been ſufficient to reaſſure
them : And thereupon told us the great diſorder his people were in, tayinz, chat he
had once thought the Spaniards had becn mcn without fear , bur that he was row fſatif-
fi:d, they had as much of that paſſhon abour them as other men ; and thar he was then in
ſo grcat extremity that he was conſtrained to throw himſelf betore the Gare, ro try to ſtop
them : bat that in ſo doing he was like ro have been born down by the torrenc, and that
chey entred in ſuch a crowd , that they had like ro have lifted the Gate off the hinges,
And fo ſoon, ſaid he, as they were all eatred in this diſorder, I ſtep'd ro the Gate to clap ir
rozand knowing all the Caprains call'd them name by name ro come to help ms 5 bur nota
man would come, inſo much chat had 1c nor been for a ſervant of my own, char heard
me call our, and came to my affiſtance , I could never have ſhuc it. Nay che diforder in
the Town was moreover {o great z that above four hundred threw themſelves over the
Curtines, who in the morning returning back were ready co dye for thame, and this is
the reaſon why I have told you, that if you had followed your fertune , you had cas
ken the Town with forty men. By which account of his I knew the Preverb to
*It wp ” ol be true, that ſays, * Que js Loft ſyaveit ce que fait iſt, ſuuvent Fon defſeroit
my FNCV Po 3 ;
rig Non notwithſtanding that afcer the ſurrender of Carignan the Inhabicants of the
did, that Ar- City aſſured us of this diſorder , yer could we nor by any means believe it , efpecially ar
my would the firſt; or at leaſt that it could be ſo g1car; ir feem'd ſo unlikely and fo cxceeding=
ſoon be de= 1y ſtrange : bur after ic had been confels'd by their Governor himſelf, we were bound
feared, to believe it to be true: and thar they were purſued by ſome Phantome, or poſſefſed
by ſome evil ſpirit ; for we did them no harm , being as much frighted as chey, and -
and it may be more :; But the night 1s terrible when a man canuot ſee by whom ke is afs
ſanked. However this makes me conclude, char all befel me chrough good fortune
for it canu2t be called valour , bur rather che greateſt folly that any man could com-
mit ; and 1do believe, that of all che good forcunes God has pleaſed to beſtow upon
me, this was the moſt remarkable and che moſt ſtrange ; bur let us proceed to our buſi-
nels. |
The thirſt of Revenge had prompted the Emperor ( contrary to the faith he had en-
gaped to the Pope ) ro league and confederate Iimſelt with the King of England, who
was fallen off from his otedience to the holy Chair , our of deſpite ; which ewo Prin-
ces (as it was ſaid) had divided the Kingdom ( for ſo borh the Marquis de Gzaſt told
Monſicur de Termes, and I have fince heard the ſame from an Engliſh Gentleman ar
The ſtrength Bowlogne ) bur however it was bur diſputing rhe bears skin. France well united within ir
of France. ſelf can never be conquer'd rill after the loſs of a dozen Bartels 5 confidering the brave
Gentry whereof it is fruitful, and the ſtrong places wherewich it abounds. And I
conceive they are deceiv'd who ſay, that Pars being taken, France is loſt, Ir is indeed
the Treaſury of the Kingdom, and an unexhauſted Magazine, where all the richeſt of the
whole Nation unlade their Treaſure z and I do beheve in the whole world thee is not
ſuch a City , for *cis an old ſaying, thar there 1s not a Crown m Pars but yields ten
Sols revenue ouce a year z bur there are {o many other Cities, and ſtrong places in che
Kingdom, asare ſufficient ro deſtroy thirty Armies. So that ic would be eafie to rally
together, and to recover that from them again, before chey could conquer the reſt ; un+
leſs the Conqueror would depopulate his own Kingdom , to repeople his new Conqueſt.
I ſay this becauſe the defign of the King of England was to run direRly up to Paris ,
whilſt che Emperor ſhould enter inco Champagne. The Forces of theſe two Princes being
join'd together conliſted of fourſcore thouſand Foor and twenty thouſand Horſe, with
a prodigious train of Artillery, by which any man may judge whether our King had
not cnoughto do, and whether ic was not high time to look abour him. Wichour all
doubt theſe poor Princes have greater care and trouble upon them than the inferior forts
of men and Iam of opinion the King did very well to call back his Forces one of
Piedmont , though ſome are pleaſed to ſay , thar the State of Milan might otherwiſe have
been won , and that the Emperor would have been neceſſicarcd to have called back his
Forces out of France to detend that Datehy : but all this depended upon event. So ic
was that God would nor ſuffer theſe Princes to agree berwixr themſelves, each of them
being bent upon his own particular advantage ; and I have often heard, and ſomerimes
ſeen, thar when two Prarces jointly uncercake the Conqueſt of a Kingdem, they never

agree ;

——

Book Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. ,

ae |

agree ; tor each of themis always ſnſpicions of be:ng over-reach'd by his companion ,
and evermore jcaloys of one another, I have nor, I confeſs, much converſed with
Books; but I have heard ſay , thar after this manner we fiſt loſt che Kingdom of N. -
per, and were cheated by the King of Spain, This ſuſpition and jealouſie at this time
preſerved us, 2sit has ar other times done ſeveral others, as che H:ſtorians report, For
my part, I ſhould more apprehend one grear ſingle Enemy chan rwo who would divide
the Cake between them , there will always be ſome exceptions raken , and two Nations
do not eafily agree, as you ſee here, The Engliſh King came ant fac down before Bone . >
lgne » which was baſely ſurrendred co him by che Sjenr de Vervin, who loft his avs. by _—
life for his labour; an <xample thar ought to be fer before all ſuch as undertake the Engiif, Fey
defence of ſtrong holds. This by no means pleaſed the Spaniard . who reav'd no ad- ;
vantage by it, and ſaw very well chat his confedera:e would only intend his own
buſineſs. |

Our Colonel, Monkeur de T air, brought three and twenty Enfigns to the King, be- :
ing all the ſame which had been ar the Bartel, ſaving onc new Company ; bur I fell
ſick ar Troyes, and came not up to the Army, ci!] they were advanc'd near to Box-
logne , where the faid Sieur de Tais delivered me the Parenc his Majeſty had ſenr me Py
for the Office of Camp-Maſter 3 bur there was nothing done worthy remembrance, ill Fed expe Þ

| Þ

the Camilado of Box/ogne, As we arrived near to 14 Ifargaiſe, the Dauphin who Camp.Ma-
commanded tlie Army had intelligence that it was chrce or four days ſince che Town fer.
had been taken (though he knew it before) and thac the K'ng of England was em-
barked and gone for England. Tt is co be pictumed thac this Prince had made ſuch
haſt away only co avoid fighting, foraſmach as he had lefr all chings in fo great diſ-
order ; for in the fiſt place we found all his Arullety bctore the Town 1n a Mea- The King of
dow , that lics upon the defcent towards the Tower of Ordres fecondly rhere was England re-
found above thirty Casks tull of Corfleis which he had cauſed ro be bronghc our of 505:
Germany, therewith to a:m his Soldiers, which he had left for the ditence of the
Town 3 thirdly he had lefc all che ammunition of vicual, as Corn, Wine, and 0-
ther things to eat in the lower Town, inſomuch that if Monſieur de Teligni be yer
living. ( as I am told he is) che Father of this whois a Huguenor, and who treated rhe
peace during theſe troubles , and was taken upon the Camiſado in the lower
Town , ( where not one man bur himſelf cfcap'd alive) he will bear witneſs thac
there was not jn the higher Town proviſion co ſerve tour days , for himfclF cold ir
me.

The occaſion of the Camiſado was this. A Son in law of the Mareſchal de Blies The Cami.
( not this fine Monſieur de YVervin, bur another whoſe name I have forgot ) came to ſado at Bylen.
Monſieur de T ais, and teld him that a Spy of his, who came from Boulogne, had afſu-
red him, that as yet norhing had been remov'd to the higher Town $ bur that all
ſtill remained below , and thar if they would ſpeedily actempr to take the lower,
Town ( which might eaſily be done) they would in eighc days time have che upper
come out tO them wich ropes avout their necks; and rhat if Monfiear de T ais fo plea-
ſed, he would in the morning lead him , where he mighr liimſelf diſcover all : the $
moreover zffirming , thar as yer not one breach in the wall was repaired ; but chat all lay
open as if jt were a village. 5

Upon this information Monſteur de T ais was umparient to go to take a view of all,
and took me along with him, togerher with this Son in law of che Mareſchal. We mighs
be about a hundred Horſe drawn our of the ſeveral Troops , and juſt at the break of day
we arrived before the Town, leaving the Tower of Ordre ſome rwo or three hun-
dred paces on the right hand , and ſaw five or fix Pavillions npon the deſcent in che
great high way leading to the Gate of the City, We were no more than five or fix Horſe
only , Monficur de T ais having left the reft behind a litcle Hill. This Son in law of
the Mareſchal, and I therefore went down to the fuſt Pavillion, and paſſed cloſe by
it into the Camp on theleft hand , cill we came to the ſ{efond, from whence we diſco-
vered all their Artillcry, ar no further diflance chan fourfcore paces only ; nei: her
did we fee any more than three or four Engliſh Soldiers thac were walking vp and Mioohour a
down by the Canon , and in the forefaid ſecond Pavillion we heard chem jabber Engliſh, eh Who OI
The Mareſchals Son in law then made m2 return back to Monfſiear de Tais, who imme- tuc diſcover
diately npon my telling him whar we had ſeen, went down with me co the placefrom the Town, ,
whence I came, and there with rhe foreſaid Gentleman ſtood till. Tn the mean time
it erew ro be tair broad day, fo that the Centinels very well perccived .ns to be none
of their own people , and thereupon prelently gave the alarm : bu:

| | Qt for all char we ſaw
not a man offer to (ally ont of the Tower ( 1 have indeed fince been cold char Dondellat,

ry 7 Los, I
7 E =

k
:
b
: j
[1 {
f 4
|
: ;
| %
» 1
d : ®
3
: 1 *
£ | by
.
\
: |
YH.
41
a p
f
+ »
& 5
b *
$\ we
2 :
[1 $
P - -
by i} Pe "x
\FIY i
 $ERE
h ' 4
FRM.
ARS ©
BL
oF os
zi 27 1
WY
38
4234.8 2&1]
$47
k * i
'F 2 -
þ 3:8
$510
2. 7
BY
[$7 f :
{265 F
; VP
3
15,
4 *; Bog.
UH 5S6-

hn, NEE”
br FS
Sogn,

CD REG

ng 4 wo —__—_—
Pet gg

-
- = _—

m—

ets ys I otienern oo
re
_ w_ —_ ts; Rog

whom

EO OFT CEE CET HH" —_—

* The Commentaries of Meſfice Blaize Book 1:

' Camiſado
concluded on,

Monſieur de
Taiswounded,

whom Monſieur de St. Po! had bred up of a Page, had the Guard ar the Tower) and ſo
we return'd.

Monſieur de T ais then with the ſaid GeniIcman preſently went ro find out the Daw-
:hin, and Monſieur d* Orleans, where it was concluded, thac the nexe morning at break
of day a Camiſado ſhould be given, and thar Monſicur de Tajis, with our Com-
panics, ſhould give the firſt onſer by three Breaches thar were in the wall, on thar
fide where we had been to diſcover ; which were Breaches that had only been made
for pleaſure. The Rhcingrave then entreated the Dawphin thar he and is Germans
might go on with us to the Aſſault : bur Monſiear de Tais had already promiſed
Count Pedemarie, that he would ſpeak to the Danphin co give him leave to go on with
us, which was a very great misfortnne: for had the Germans gone on with us to the
Breach, the Enemy had never fir'd one (hot , which would have invited a great many
more to come In to our relief much ſooner than they did,

We ſec ont in the night with (ſhirts ovcr our Arms, and mt the Rheingrave with hig
Germans ready and reſolved to paſs over a Bridge of Brick there was near unto [a Aſars
gniſe, which reſolution he was not to be nerſwaded from ; bur would pals over after us,
what promiſe ſoever he had made to the Count, Or which Monhieur de Tais ſent pre-
ſent word to the Dauphin , and whilſt they were in ciſpure abour 1c, came the Admi-
ral Annebaut , who ſs far prevailed with che Rheingrave , that at laſt he was perſwa-
ded ro retire behind , giving us leave to pals, aad the 7taltans atrer us; but for his
own part he would not ſt:r from the Battail of the Gens d' Armes, that was drawn u
near to la Marguiſe and Monſieur Dawpicrre allo , who was Colonel of the Griſons,
came up as far as the Tower of Ordre,wheie he drew up his men 1nto Bactaltia. Now Mon=
fieur de Tajs had given me one part of his m:n with them to fall on by the high way on
his righe hand , being the ſame he had dilcover'd the day before. I then charg'd n
ftraight tothe Arvllery, and thoſe who remain'd with Monfienr de Tails and the 1ta-
lians fell on by the three breaches , which they bravely carried ; and being there was net-
ther Gate not breach on that fide where the Artillery was, IT was fain ro go all along
by the wall on that fide cowards the River , where I at laſt found a breach of ſome ten
or twelye paces wide, which I entred without any manner of oppoſition , and went on
{trajght to the Church + where I ſaw no Captain of ours, ſave one only, who was ranning
along by the River direRtly to the forementioned breaches, and him T call'd to, but he heard
me nor.

Now you muſt know that Monheur de Tais was wounded, and enforc'd to retire ;
what became of Count Pedemarie I know not ; butT was afterwards rold that all che
Captains, both Gaſcons and Germans, were gone out of the Town, and had made no
ſtay rhere, by reaſon of an Alarm, that che Exgliſ} had recovered the breaches by che out-
fide of the Town, as it was true : but there were of them not above rwo hundred men;
that were allied our on the ourfde from the higher Town - and I was moreover told
that ic was Dondetet, who fled from the Tower of Ordre (traight to the Fown. All
our Enfigns were left in the Town, but I never perceived any thing of all this: for had
I ſeen the diſorder, I do believe, I ſhould have done as che reſt did ; I will nor prerend
to be braver than Iam. Before the Church 1 found rwo Jtalian Caprains only with
their Companies and Colours, where fo ſoon as I arrived, I fell to aſlaulting three or
four houſes, and forced chem, wherein were a great number of Expliſh, and moſt of
them without arms; ſome of which were clad in white and red, others in black and yel-
low, and a great many Soldiers alſo wirhour thoſe colours 3 but I ſoon underſtood
thar all choſe in Liveries were Pioneers ; becauſe they had no Arms, as the other had, who
defended themſelves, and ſo, thar above two hundred of them were {lain in the houſes.
1rhen march'd ſtraighc co the Church, where I found the ſaid 7talian Captains (the one
call'd Ceſar Porto, and the other Hicronimo Megrin, and with theſe 1talians Mcſſieurs
D' Andelot and de Novailles, who was Licutenanc co Monhieur de Nemygnrs) asing them
where all our Captains were z w/ho returned me anſwer, that they knew not what was
become bf them, TIchen began to perceive there was ſome diſorder in the caſe, not ſec-
ing one man ofall our Companies; excepting thoſe who were centred with me, and a-
bour fifry or threeſcore others , who had ſtaid behind co plander, and were rallyed to
me atthe aſſaulr of the houſes : whilſt 1 was conſidering with my ſelf what the macter
thould be, all on a {uddain there came a grear number of Engiiſh tull drive duectly
npon us, as we ſtood before the Church , and 1n the ſtreec adoining, crying oar, hg
goes there? ro which I made anſwer in Engliſh, A friend, a friend, (tor of all che Langua-

es that are ſcattered monpſt us, I have learn'd ſome words, and tlie 1talian and Spa-
ni/þ paſſably well , which has ſomerimey, been very uſeful ro me } bur the Engii pro-

c22ling

v »&@ oo .

db > 8 E-$>;
M a - = tp.

Book Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 9

ceeding co turther Interrogatories, thty ſoon put me to to the end of my Latine; by
which perceiving what we were , they preſencly fcll on, crying.our , Kill, kill, kill;
] then call'd out ro the Ttali in Captains, ſaying,. * Ajutate mi, G& ſtate appreſo me, perehe * Which [

io me ne v0 afſ ablir li, no biſogno laſſtar mi inveſtire, Whic!y having (aid , I ran tull drive gre 1s t©
upon them , who immedaately fac'd about , and purfucd them , laying on in their rear, 1. Fr _
rothe end ofthe Street , where they turned off on the rigiu hand along by che wall of a,,yuc, by
the upper Town ; from whence they diſcharged at us ſome tmall pieces, and a whole his leave,was
Clend of of Arrows. I chen revr'd back to the [tains where 1 was no fooner come 9 very good
and ſercled in my former order,out that they retard tocharge me again: out I had raken Ttatian) Aft

| : , a COPRRR(S _Y me and ttand.
a liccle heart , having found them fo eahily to run away , and therefore gave chem leave ready by me.

ro come up cloſe to us, where I then charg'd them , and we thoughr they ran away for whilſt 1 55
with greater facility than before; 1 therefore retir'd once more before che Church : bur to aſſault *

then there fell ſuch a furious ſtorm of Rain, that ir ſeem'd as if God Almighty had them, there is
becn diſpoſed ro drown us all ; during which thower there came up ten or twelve Enfigns 9 Teaſon

of ours from one of the breaches, at which they hac entred , not having above fix Sol- ws” IE
diers with them ; and I might have about as many Enfio2ns with m2. One of the them 3 hog

Enſigns then told me that the Breaches were all raken, and char rhe Captains were fled cloſe me be-

away : Which having heard , Idchr'd the two /talian Caprains that they ſhould a while hind. ;

make good that Canron , where the Church ſtood (for there was a wall before the door 1%* Engliſh

of it ) and I would go diſpute the Breach by which T had enrred , which ſo foon as I put to Hight,
{hould recover, I would ſend them word, that they might draw off and come to

me , and it peradventure the Enemy in the mean time , 1honl;

4 come up to them,
that then they ſhould remember whar they had ſeen me do , and boldly charge

chem.
I chen went tothe breach, where I ſaw already ren or twelve Engliſh got rhither, two
of which ſtood upon their defence ; bur of che reſt, tome Teap'd over the Breach, and
others flipr on the righr hand along che 1nf{ide of che wall, and fo foon as we were got
out, we ſaw moreover fiftcen or twenty that came ranning towards us, along on the
outſide the wall, and ſceing ns turn'd on the right hand cowards the other breaches,
by which our people before had centred. I chen entreated a Gentl-man of Bzrgandy
(whoſe name I have forgot) who was mounted npon a horſe he had caken, chat he would
goto Ceſar Porto and Hieronimo Megrin to call them away, which he was very willing
ro do, provided I would promife to {tay for him , which I aſſured him upon my
life I wonld do, and that dead or alive he thould find me ac this Breach, The
Rain ſhll continued more and more violent , when the ſaid Gearleman returning, told
me thar he could nor poſſibly get ro them 3 and that they were cicher recreaced
into the Church, or all dead . when behold on a ſuddain thiee or four hun-
dred Engliſh came at a good round trot duetly upon us all along by the wall ,
juſt as we were upon the point ro enter again to go relieve the /talians : but
ſeeing them come full drive upon us, we were conſtrained ro alter chat reſolu=
iN. |
Mcſſicurs d' eAndelot, de Nwovailles , this Burgandian Gentleman and three or four
others had never ſtirred from my fide, from the r1me they had firſt mer mebefore che
Church ( and it was well for them, for it they had they had gone co pot with che
reſt) and as the Engliſh came on in this tary , there aroſe a .hubub amoneſt us, ſome |
crying out to me to fly towards the River , and others towards the Mountain : bur The French
upon the inſtant I reſolv'd ro remonſtrate ro them , What have you to do to go to the ®* fear.
CHMonntain ? in our way thither we muſt of neceſſity paſs cloſe ly the higher Town, fr
to go diretly to the River , do you not ſee that it 1s riſing, and got ſo high already that we
ſhall be all drown'd ? let no one therefore think any mcre of that ; bat let us make our ſelves TI
ready, for we muſt fight theſe people. Whereupon Monficur d' And: lot cryed out aloud, I, bp, © LONTANS
I, (aptain Montluc , / pray you let #4 fight them; for that is the beſt, He was a man og #4"
of very great courage , and *tis great puy he afcerwards curn'd Huguenot z for I do be- © i=
lieve he was one of the braveſt Gentlemen in the Kmgdom. We cherefore march'd
direGly up to them, when fo ſoon as we came within four or five Pikes length of
them , they ler fly a grear ſhower of Arrows upon us, and we ran up to them ro
puſha Pike; for there were but rwo Harquebuze thor fired , and immediately they
faced about , and fled the ſame way chey came. We follow'd after, and very cloſe,
and when they came to the Canton of the Town cowards cheir own people, who
kept almoſt all our Enfigns encloſed , they ſering them come, and we purſuing in the
rear of them , quitred che Breaches ro relieve theix own men, and rallying all together
came running direfly vpon us , who were all ar the foor of che Mountain of the Tower

of

>

.
"=
f.
F
i895 .

\ The Commentaries of Meſtire Blaize Book II,

The Sieut de
Montluc came
the laſt man
out of
Bullen.

of Ordre. 1 then crycd ro Monſieur d Andelet, and to all the Enfigns and Soldiers,
Get away as faſt as you can and climb the Monntain ; forT, for my own parr,with four
or five Pikes, would ſtay to ſee the event of all, retiring towards a Rivoler which was
by the Artillery, So ſoon as the Engliſh had quitted the breach, to come to. us, our
Enſigns leap'd out of the Town towards the valley z by which they had come, and
being got to the foot of the Mountain , where Monſieur d' Andelot and che Enfigns were
marching up, the Enemy ſaw that our Enſigns were again paſs'd over the Breaches,
and that the ſaid Andelct with the cther Enfigns were gor halt way up che Hill; they
then thought co turn after che others, as they did , bur could never overrake above ejgher
or ten Soldiers at the moſt, whom they cur all co pieces. Five or fix Engliſh then came
upto me, and T paſs'd the Rivolect, where the Water was more than knee deep above
the Banks, They beſtow'd ſome Arrows upon me, and thor them into the Target,
and another thorough a flecve of Mail I wore upon my right arm 5 which for my part of
the Booty I carried home to my Quarters, and having received them, went to mount
the Hill on the backſide of the Tower of Ordre, Mconſicur le Dauphin, having with
him Monſieur d* Orleans and the Admiral, madehis Lanſquenets to march to relieye us
within the Town z bur before they cou'd come near the diſorder was already hapned,
and they found Meſſtcurs 4* Andelot and de Novailles with the Enligns, who were got up
to the top of the Mountain,

In che interim of tivis confuſion the Vidame of Chartres, and my Brother Monſieur
de Lieax, advanc'd as far as the botrorn of the Hill, ro fee if they could learn any news
of me 3 but chey were ſent back with a vengeance , and rold the Dauphin that they did
certainly believe I was ſlain within the Town : foraſmuch as they had ſeen all the
Captains, me only excepted ; and whilſt they were 1n this diſccurſe Monficur d' An-
delet arrived, of whom the D.;uphin demanded it he knew what was become of me, to
whom he made anſwer, that Lhad becn the preſervation of him and all thoſe thar were
with him : but that (it ſeem'd) I had not known how to ſave my felt, which T might
have done , it I had fo pleaſed, as wellas the reſt, The ſaid Sieur d' Andelot conclu-
ded me for dead, believing chat I had ſuffered my {clt co be ſnap'd aboat cheir Artillery, or
by a Ship char lay upon the Rivoler I paſſed over; bur I was no ſuch fool: for I call
God to witneſs, and let him punith me according to my perjury, if of all that day I ever
loſt my underftanding, and it was a great bleſſing that God was pleaſed to preſerve ic
to me entire for had I loſt my judgment , we had received a very great diſgrace,
which we could neither have concealed nor excuſed , and I had been in giear danger
never to have been a Mareſchal of France, We had loſt all our Enfigns, and thoſe
that carried them withall , which nevercheleſs God gave me the grace co ſave. When
a man 1s once poſſefied with fear , and rhar he loſes his judgment y as all men in a
fright do , he knows nor what he does, and ut 15 the principal thing you are to beg
at the hands of Almighty God , to preſerve your unde ſtanding entire ; for whac dan-
ger ſoever there may be, there 1sſtill one way or other co ger off, and perhaps co your
honor : Burt when fear has once poſſefled your judgment , God ye good even! you
think you are flying towards the poop , when you are running towards the prow, and
for one Enemy you think you have ten before your eyes, as drunkards do, who ſee a
thouſand candlesat once. Oh'tis a wonderful advantage to a man of our Trade, when
his danger docs not deprivehim of his ſence, he may then take his opportunity, and avoid
both ſhame arid ruinc.

In the evening I went to the Dauphin for the Word , becauſe Monſieur de T as
himſelf was wounded and could not goz when, foſoon as 1 came into his preſence, Mon-
fieur 4 Orleans, who always delighted ro jeſt with me ( as the Dauphin alſo himſelf
ſometimes would do) began to fing the Camilado of Ballen, and che affaulc of Cony,
for the old Soldiers of Piedmont, jecring and pointing at me with his finger : at which I
began to be angry, and fell ro curſing mole who had been the cauſe; ar which the
Dauphin laugh'd , and ar laſt ſaid ro me; Montluc, Montluc, in plain truth, you ( ap-
tains can by no means excuſe it , that you have not carried your ſelves very ill. Which
way, Sir, (ſaid 1) can you conceive me to be any way in fault? if 1 kuew my ſelf to be
guilty 1 would at this inſtant go, and cauſe my ſelf to le killed inthe Town : bat in truth
we were 4 company of Coxcombs, to venture owr lives in your ſervice. Whereupon
he ſaid No, No, 1 do not mean you , fur you were the laſt Captain that came ont of the
Town , ant above an honr after all the reſt, He gave me very well to underſtand, when
he came to be King , that I had not tail'd of my duty , by the value he was ever plea-
ſed co pur upon me; for when he went his expedition into Piedmont , he (enr an ex-
preſs Courrier to ferch me from my own houſe, to which I had retired my felt by reaſon

of

\

de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. =

——_l_u—_

Book Il.

ot a certain Pique, thar Madam d'Efampes had conceived againſt me, abour the quarrel
berwixe Mcfſicurs de Chaſtaign raie, and de Farnae. A man has evermore one gand office
or another done him ac Courty and the miſchief on'c is, the women evermore rule the roſt ;
but I ſhall not cake upon meto bea Reformer, Madam 4 Eſtampes ſent better men chan
' mny ſelf packing from Courr , who have made no boaſts of ic ; bur I wonder ac our
rave Hiſtorians that they dare nor tell che truth.

This was the (acceſs of the Camiſado of Boxlogne, whereas had the Camp follow'd Overſight in
after us, they might all have quarter'd in the Town, and in four or five dayes (as I po
have already ſaid) the higher Town had been our own. Let any one ask Monſieur de My Ons
7 elipni, if he be the man who was taken priſoner there, and fee whether or no I «ll a
lye. Idonot know who was the cauſe that the Dolphin did not march, but I ſhall al-.
wayes affirm thar he ought to have done it, and know alſo very well that jr did notſtick
athim ; bar jr were to enter into diſputes to ſay any more of that buſincſs. Had they
come, the Engliſh would not have known which way to turn them. TI diſcover'd thera
to be men of very little heart, and believe themto be better ar Sea than by Land.

The Dolphin ſecing the Winter draw on (having left Monſieur le eMareſchal de Bies
at Monftrenille, to bridle and keep Boalegne in aw ) recurn'd back to the King, who alſo
had concluded a Peace with che Emperor : all this great preparaciony and thoſe invincible Pexce conclu-
forccs, to our great god fortune, vaniſhing through the ill incelligence berwixt theſe two ded berwixr the
Princes, I mean the Spantard and the Engliſh, Evil befal him chat will ever love the one, Emperor and
or the other. Three months aiter I quitced my command of Camp-maſter, to go to de- rear, py
{end a little eſtate that had been left me by an Uncle of mine, TI had much 2do ro ob- pb
tain leave of the King rogo ;z burin the end the Admiral wrought ſo eftectually in my
bchalf, that ic was granted upon condition that I would promiſe him to take upon me
the ſame employment in caſe the ſaid Admiral ſhould have the command of the Army,

He fail'd not of that command, nor thereupon to ſummon me upon my promiſe I had

made him, bur obrain'd a Comm'fſion from the King (which he ſent me) to be Camp-

maſter to fifry or threeſcore Enſigns that his Majeſty would fer on foot for the Englith

voyage. I brought the men accordingly to Havre de Grace, where I delivercd them jn-

tothe hands of Aonſrenr de T air, Wethen pur to ſca, Our Navy conſiſted of above two

hundred and fifty fail, and the moſt beautiful Ships thar cycr eyes beheld, with cheir

Gallies. The ardent defire the King had to revenge himſelf on the King of England made

him enter into a very vaſt expence, which in the end ſerv'd to very little purpoſe, al-

though we fiſt landed, and afterwards foughc the Englith upon the ſea, where many A Naval Es

Ships were funk on both fides : When at our ſetting out I ſaw the greac Carrick (which gagewenr be«

was certainly the goodhieſt Veſlel in the world ) burnt down to the water, I had no Boe the PY
ercat opinion of our Enterprize, bur being thact I for my particular perform'd nothing Hae tngg
in thac expedition worthy remembrance, and that moreover a perfe& account of that Na- x545.

val Engagement has been given by others, I ſhall ler it alone co give a Narrative of che

conqueſt of the Territory of Oye : and indeed our bufineſs lies more properly by land chan The French no
by water 3 where I do not know that our Nation has ever obtain'd any great victories, Very good ſea»

So ſoon as we were return'd fiom the Coaſt of England, and diſembark*c ar Hawre 50+
de Grace, the Admiral went to attend the King, and Afonſiewr de Tais went along wich
him, carrying all the Companies to the Fort of Oxtrean before Boulogne, where Captain
V ifte-franche had been left with the old Companies in the quality of Camp-maſter, he ha-
ving been put into the Command that I had tormerly quirted. The Mareſchal de Bles
his Majeſtics Lieutenant in that Country, had ſomethin ro as Monſter de St. Ger- The Marcichal
2ain, whom the King had given him foran afliſtanc, Mer well witneſs ; for all che 42 Bies betgus
Pioniers had forſook him, and were ſtoln away, as is uſual with choſe raſcally people, AUF
if they be not narrowly look't unto : and yer had he all che Courtine leading toward

13

the Bridge of Brick to make. Of which affair though there be no fighring in che cale,
I chink fic to give an account in this place, chat it may ſerve for an example co others in
command, upon the like occaſion.
The Mareſchal being frequently ſolicited by the King to pur this fort into a poſture of
defence to block up Borlogne , rold me that there was a neceſſiry the Soldiers (hould
work , ſince the Pioneers were wanting ; of which 1accordingly carried word to the
Captains, and chey from me to the Soldiers, who all at once flatly deny'd to do it, ſay-
ing They were Seldicrs, and not Pioneers, Witch this anſwer the Mareſchal was highly The Caprains .
oftended, and in great anxiety what to do, foraſmuch as the Courtine remained open, refuſe ro work |
and char the King of England had ſent freſh ſupplies of men into Bellen, Wherefore ei Powe
the Mareſchal having ſent chroughour all che Country for Pioneers, and none being to =
be gor, I contriv'd a way to make the Soldiers work, which was by giving chem five

M PEenees

"
”
2
py
.
1
”
z
1 [9
F +
4
1 d
[
'TK* *
*;
. e
| fs
: F
4 5
, <4
y $9
SF
| 1!
i Fe
TR
3-H
386
#31 ©
"Þi$
4 wo 6 ,
HERS -|
or + »* i
«®y . '
7704 94
6+07-
' ;
THEM ©
s 1
1+ |
is bw
>
3623
L %
XF--1
4
$T a
- F
iF < CG
4
'- i T
W
T 1 P
. F =
31545 0;
y ig 3 #1
. $
72.
7
T 24s :
WT
$4) þ
58:
$ 3%
HEY 4
dK : F'Y
13 2.3
; -
j? b-.
2%
nE
pF :
K '"'F
£28 3 4
+: " '$
v8. Fg
'Y v4
+$1.37 x
$ a,
Wee”
3 r
i £
t "4
; '
a; :
£17. 7
&
25 p
ns N i
Cx
-# *
S! .
4 :
x! ſe
x
* 75 }
#1
4
; q
*
BY
j Ml
k,
<
.

An II > 7

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book IT,

Oye 18 a Coun-
ty of Picardy
wherein are the
Ciries of Ca/ice,
Oye, and ſome
ethers of leſs
note extend-
ing it ſelf as
far as Dankirk
in the Low
Countries, and

' was poſleſt by

the Engliſh 219
years.

pence a day, the ordinary pay given to the Pioneers. The Mareſchal very readily conſented
co the motion, but notwithſtanding Icould nbc find one who wontld once put his hand
to the work. Secing therefore their refuſal, to invite them by my cxample, I rook my
own Company) that of Monſieur de Lienx my Brother, with thoſe of Caprain Leberon
my Brother-in-law , and Captain Labit my Couſin German 5 tor thoſe I knew duſt
not refaſe me, We wanted no tools, for the Mareſchal had made proviſtion of very
oreat ſtore, and moreover the Pioneers who were run away, had letr all cheirs in a grear
Tent, which the Mareſchal had cauſed to be ſet up to thar purpole. So ſoon as I came
to the Courtin I began my ſelf firſt ro break ground, and afcer me all the Capratns, T
had cauſed a Barrel. of wine tobe brought to the place, and with it my dinner, which
I had order'd to be mich greater than ordinary, and the Captains alſv had brought
theirs along with chem, together wich a Sack full of pence which I ſhew'd to the Soldi-
ers; and atter having wrought a ſtart every Captain din'd with his own Company, and
toevery Soldier we gave half a loaf, ſome wine and a little fleſh ; of which alfo we were
more liberal ro ſome than to others, pretending they had taken more pains than their
fellows, on purpoſe to encourage them ; and ſo ſoon as we had din'd we again fcll ro
our work, ſinging and plying our buſineſs until late in theevening, infomuch chat one
would have thought we had never follow'd any other Trade. So ſoon as we gave 0-
ver, three Treaſurers of the Army paid to every man five ſols, and at our return to our
Tents, the other Soldicrs by way of dirifion call'd ours Pioneers and Delvers, The next
morning Captain Forcez came to tell me, that all his men alſo would come to the work ,
and thoſe of his Brocher likewiſe (who 1s alſo yer living) all which I receiv'd, and we
did as the day before; thethird day chey would all come, (9 that in eight dayes time
we had finiſhtthe whole Courtin; and all the Engencers told Monſrenr de St. Germain
(who him(clt had never ſtirr'd from the work) chat my-goldiers had done morein eight
dayes, than four times {ſo many Pioneers would have done in five weeks. And obſerve
that Captains, Lieutenanrs, and Enfigns ſtuck all the while as cloſe ro che work, as the
meanelt Soldier did, and ſerv'd as inciters ro the reſt.

I thought fit ro commit this Exemple to writing, to ler the Captains fee, thar it is not
the Soldiers fault, if they do not perform whatſoever you would have them do : bur
then you muſt get the knack to make them do it chearfully, and with a good will, and
not by force 3 put your hands firſt ro the work your ſelves, and your Soldiers will for
ſhame follow your exemple, and do more than yeu would have them do. Burt it your
come to ill words and blows, ic muſt be when out of ſpice they refuſe to do a thing to
which they are no ways obliged ; and to that we are indeed ſometimes by necefſi:y con-
ſtrain'd. O Camrades, how often have I, ſceing the Soldier weary, and ready to faint,
aligh:ed ſrem my horſe ro walk with them on foor, to encourage them to make a lon
march ! how often have I drunk water with chem, that they might chearfully ſuffer by
my 2xemple. |

Believe me, Geatlcmen, that all depends upon your ſelves, and that your Soldiers
will conform themſelyes ro your hamour, as it is ordinarily ſeen. There isa mean in all
things, ſometimes a licele roughneſs 1s very requiſite, bur then ic muſt not be againſt a
whole Company, but ſome particular perſon, who would grumble, and hinder the reſt
that are well diſpoſed, I have ere now made ſome ſurly ſtubborn raſca)ls feel my anger
of which I now repent me.

Sometime after the Mareſchal de Biez would attempt to ſeize upon, and lay waſte the
Territory of Oye, having in vain tryed to tempt che Engliſh to a Battail, All our new
Companies therefore march'r, for the old ſtirr*d not out of che Forr, but were kept there
to guard it, and the Mareſcal rook fix or ſeven pieces of great Artillery along with him
ſo that we ſet out ſecretly in the beginning of the night, and went to ſome little Villages
that had formerly been burnt, This Enterpriſe was taken in hand contrary to the opi-
nion of all the Captains in the Army, out of the hope the ſaid Marelchal had co bring ic
to a Battail, which had drawn ſeveral Princes and Lords to come from the Court :
Where after there was no more hopes of drawing the Engliſh into the field, the Mareſ-
chal deliberated to take ſome Forts from them in the County of Oye, Now ſo ſoon as
they drew very near to one of theſe Forts, the Mareſchal, Meſjicurs 4e Briſac, and de T als,
drew themſelves apart (I think Monfiear de Effre was with chem, being then newly
come out of priſon) Monſieur de BordiBton, and three or four others (whoſe names I have
forgot) and got up toa lirthe eminence under the ſhadow of a Tree, trom thence peeping
and conſidering which of the ſaid Baſtions, that were oppoſite ro us, they ſhould aſ-
ſault ; and in the mean time I caus'd all our Enfigns to make a halt for the laſt, which
were yet a league behind, Now you muſt know I had never been there till this time z

neither

Boox Il. | de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fratice.

neither have I ever been there ſince , bur to the beſt of my memory I ſhall deſcribe the
(cicuation of the place.

I was to deſcend about thirty or forty paces, to enter into a great Meadow, where on Deſcription of
my right hand there was one Baſtion, and on my lefe hand, ac the diſtance of a good the Englith
Harquebuz ſhot,another,and ſo conſequently all along the Courcine leading towards Calice Fort:
(which Courcine was only of carth, and abont two fachoms high ) there was alſo two
great Dirches with water middle deep, and berwixt the ewo Ditches there was a Terrace
of carth, Whilſt chey were in coſulcacion under this Tree on my left hand, I took Cap -
rain Favas, and 1a Moyenne, having both been my Lientenants, and abour 300 Harquebn-
zcers, to whom I gave the leading of the fiſt Diviſion, and I Rtood behind in the Rear
of them. There preſently ſallyed onc of the Fort an hundred or {x(core Engliſh, who attempt upon
came into the Meadow, having planted five or fix Masketcers npon their Terreſs, berwixr the Engliſh
two Ditches, and ply'd us ſmartly with their thot, havin? left becwixr the ſaid Baſtions Fs:
and Ditches a little path, by which one maa only could march a breaſt, to enter in, and
fally out of their Fort, confident, it ſcems, thar ander favour of their Muskers, thoſe of
ours on the outhde would not dare to charge them. Our men began then to Harquz-
baz it at a good ſmart rate, and they to ler fly their arrows : bur me-chought they had
ſtill an eye rowards their recreat 5 wherefore being mounced on a little pad Nag, I came
up to the Captains, and ſaid chele words rothem. Carrades, theſe people are mainly
enclin'd to retreat , and I fee it 1s our of a confidence they have in their Muskees ,
charge then briskly through and through, and I will ſecond you, I nceded not to bid
them twice, for before I could return to the head of my -mcn , I ſaw them together
by the ears, and in a moment the Engliſh pur ro flight + wherefore I ſtope my men from
falling on, to make firm in caſc any more ſhould ſally our, This little pach was ſome-
thing narrow, and adjoyning tothe Baſtion, under which the one part of them ſtood
firm, the reſt caſt themiſclves intro the Dicches in ſo great haſt, that they had not leiſure
ro carry off all cheir Muskers, for our Soldiers leapt into the water as ſoon as they , and
brought away four of them; and there were four or five of the ſaid Soldiers chac paſs'c
over the (aid Terrace, and the other Ditch, to the very foot of the Courtine, who broughr
me word that the greateſt depth of water was in the firſt Ditch ; for the other next the
Courtine was not above knee deep. I then preſently ſpoke to the Captains, Favas and
Ia Mojenne, that they ſhould draw up my Diviſion and theirs togerher , and finding
Caprain Aurloqui, and almoſt all the other Captains entreaced them them to make ewo
Diviſions of theirs 3 for that fo ſoon as I had ſpoken with Monſieur de Tais, T would 70
on toan Aſlaule. They chen told me, that they wanted near half of their Soldiers, who
were not yer come up, to which I madeanſwer, that it was no matter, ſceing that with
thoſe we had we could do our buſineſs, who thereupon without farther reply began to
divide themſelves into two Bodies, and I ran to ſpeak with Monſieur de Tais, whom I
found with che Mareſchal and the reſt, and faid ro him; Let as go, Sir, ler wa go to the
Aſſault, for we ſhall carry the Conrtine 5 1 have taſted them, and find, that they have more
mind tornu than fights The Mareſchal then ſaid ro me, What is it you ſay (aptain Mont-
luc, world to God we were certain preſently tocarry it with all the Artillery we have. Where-
upon I anſwered him aloud; Sir, we ſhall have ſtrangled them all before your Artillery
can come up to, and taking Monſicur de T ais by the arm, ſaid ro him; Let #s £0, Sir, The Sieurs de
you have bellev'd me at other times, and have not repented ; neither ſhall you repent you of Tars and Mont-
this, I have diſcover'd by theſe approaches, that theſe people are little worth. Let ms gg.0664 $9.90. £6
then, anſwered he, and as we were entring into the Meadow , we already found our me Bol
two Diviſions of Pikes and Harquebuzeers ſeparated apart. Look you, Sir, then ſaid I,
cake your choice on which hand you will fight, whether on that of this Enſign over againſt .
che Baſtion below, or on chat of che Englin oppoſite to thoſe I have fought with : who
chereupon ſaid to me, Fleht you that Body you have already attaq#'ty and 1 will go fight
the other, and ſo we parted.

So ſoon as the Mareſchal de Biez ſaw us begin to march, he (as Monſieur de Bordillon
told me afcerwards ) ſaid theſe words ; now we ſhall ſee if Tais with his Gaſcons be IC
brave as he pretends. 1 then call'd all the Sergeants of my Diviſion, ſaying to them alond
at che head of our Bartail ; Tow Sergeants have ever been accuſtomed, when we go tofight,
to be inthe Flanks behind, but 1 will have you now fight in the firſt Rink. Do you ſee that
Enſign there? if you do net win it , as many as 1 (hall meet ſlinking off in my way as I
go, 1 (hall make bold to cut his hamſtrings ; you know I am pretty dextrow that way : then
rurning towards the Captains, I ſaid, and you, Carrades, if I am not there as ſoon as they,
do you cnt mine, 1 then ran to Captain Favas and la @Mojenne (who might be at the di-
ſtance of ſome thirty paces) and laid ro them, March, and throw your ſelves headlong into the

Dits b,

EE
——

WR rm ra OOO a —— —

C———————_

84 * The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox 11,

* A Ceremo- Ditch, and in an inſtant recurn'd ro my men, when having * kiſt che grqgnd,: I ran
ny formerly {tr2jght up to the Ditches, making the Sergeants {Ul ro march before , and paſſing over
7 dye the firſt and the ſecond, came up to the foor of the Courtin. I then ſaid to the Sergeants,
ws: > Eate, Help one another, hes ne another with Your Halberts to get up, which they ſpeedily did;
ot to any del- and others puſht them on behind, throwing them headlong into the Fort : I had allo
perare Entet= a Hallert in my hand. In the mean time arriv*d all the Captains and Pikes, who found
priſe. me making a preat ſhew of endeavouring to get up with my Halberr, holding with my
An Afſaulc gi- left hand by the wood 3 when ſome of chem, nor knowing who I was, took me by the
ven to the En- breech, and puſhe me quice over on the other ſide, making me by that means more va-
gliſh Fort, antthan Tintended to be ; for what I did was only to enconrage the reſt co get over:
but char fellow, whoever he was, made me forgec my policy, and take a leap that T had
no jntent to have taken; and indeed in my whole life I did never ſee yeople fo foon
get over a Courtine, Afﬀcer I had caken this leap, Captain Fav4is and la eMoyenne,
who were in the Ditch of che Biſtion , pur themſelves into the liccle path, and paſt on
the ocher Gde into the Baſtion, where all they found within it they pur to the ſword.
Monſicur de Tais, who weiit on t» hisencounter, ſceing us ſcrambling up the Courtine,
threw himſelf into the Dicches of the other Forr, when the Engliſh (ceing their people
pur to flight, and weentring into it, quitted the Fort, and ran away as faſt as they could
towards (alice, The Mareſchal this while ſeeing us run on ſo bravely upon the Enemy,
cried out (as I was told afcer) Oh heavens ! they are already gor in 3 whereupon the
Scieneurs de Briſſas and de Brardillon came full ſpeed upon the ſpur , and the faid Sei-
encur de Briſſac General of the Horſe, put his horſe into the little path, where one man
could not very eafily paſs, ſtretching out hislegs at full length upon the horſe neck, ac
whoſe mercy he paſt over, Monſicar de Bordsllon afcer him, and after them follow'd ſome
fourty or fifty horſe, all leading their horſesin cheir hands. Monſieur de Briſſacthen
preſently came up to me , whom he found drawing up allthe men into Battalion , be-
| Leving that we ſhould be fought with, and thar thoſe of Calice would certainly iſſue out
to relieve their mer. I had got an Enſign we had won upon my ſhoulder, which in his
preſence I reſtor'd to the Sergeant who had taken it, bidding him goand carry it to
Monſieur de Tais, which he did, and the ſaid Sieur de Tajis{ofoon as he had receiv'd ir,
ſent it by the ſame Sergeant to the Mareſchal, who was very buſie wich his Pioneers,
breaking down the Courtine ( which was only of earth ) co make way for the Gens=d'
Armwes to pals over 5 and now we were all within, Artillery and all ; where ſo ſoon as
we wereall arrivd, Mcfticurs de Briſſac and de Bordillon, with the forty or fifty horſe
chat had cntred with them, took the right hand toward the Sluces which ſeparate the
Coun'y of Arteis from the County of Oye, where they met with forty or fifry of the
Engliſh, bearing Launces, who preſently began to recire full gallop cowards Calice. Mon-
fieur de Briſſac was jealous, that theſe had only run away to draw him into ſome Am-
buſcado, and therefore made a halt, ſending out Ceftegeac to diſcover a little valley that
was on his left hand g which ſaid Caftegeac preſently brought him word that he had ſeen
above 400 horſe, bur it was no ſuch ching, thoſe he ſaw being no other than Country-
men and women of the neighbouring Villages, who were flying towards Caljer, which
was a great misfortune ; for otherwiſe Monſienr de Briſſac had purſued them, and they
were all the Cavalry that the Enemy had in Calice, which had been no inconfiderable
defeat, A General of all things ought always to ſend out an old Soldier, or ſome
| one whoſe intelligence he may abſolutely rely upen, to diſcover; for men of little
The miſtake o f cxperience ſoon take the alarm, and fancy Buſhes to be Bartaillons, I will nor ſay
Caſtegeac, chat (aftegeas was no Soldier, but upon my word he here committed a very great
error.
Our Cavalry being got over the Breach, the Mareſchal had cauſed te te made, Mon-
fieur de Tais would himſelf lead the Harquebuzeers, ordering me to remain with the
Battail of Pikes. There were ten or twelve Enſigns which retir'd rowards (alice, and had
been coming ro have diſputed our entry, which, could they have come up in time, had
found us enough to do, with our Artillery and all, as the Mareſchal had told me when
I went tocall Monſieur de Tais ro go on to the Aſſault : and although I know very well
ar whom it ſtuck, thar we dd not fight chem ren or twelve Enfigns, I will however for-
F,ulr of tha bear committing ir to writing, foraſmuch as in delivering the truth, I ſhoald be ob-
French, * lig*dto ſpeak ill of ſome particular perſons, and thoſe none of the leaſt, which I will
by no means do : Butit Monſieur de St. Cire (who was Lieutenant ro fifty men ar arms
| belonging to Monſieur Boifſy, who died Grand Eſcuyer ) were alive, he could ell
where the fault lay , for he was there grievouſly wounded, had his horſe kill'd under
him, and above forty horſcs more of che ſame Troop kill'd and wounded, There fol-

The Engliſh
put ro Aight,

; low'd

a As Back 40s fc ant LIL

Book ll. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

low'd a great quarrel upon ir, which proceeded fo far as almoſt co bring two men to fight in
Liſts, Ir was indeed a moſt infamous cowardife, and of great prejudice to his Majeſties
ſervice ; for had thoſe been defeated, there had no body been left in Calice bur old men
and women, and I have ſince heard che Mareſchal de Biez ſay, thac had thoſe Enfiens
beencut off, wich his Artillery he had taken the Town in two days. Bur ſeeing thoſe
people to be retreated fafc into the City, they concluded to retire, which two days after
we did; as alſo the ſcaſon of the year began to ſettle into very great rain.
Lec mectell you Captains yon ought not diſdain to learn ſomeching of me, who
am the oldeſt Captain in Francey and who have been in as many Bartails, or more, as
any Captain of Errope, as you will judge at the end of my Book, Know therefore that
the reaſons which induc't me to attempt this aſſault, were theſe, Firſt, becauſe T had felt
the pulſe of the Engliſh at my firſt arrival, and found them a very eafic Enemy. Secondly,
becauſe they had abandon*d their Fortifications , which we gain'd, having the Baſtion
that ſery?d them for a Flanker. Thirdly, becauſe from the litcle eminence where Thad
made a halt before 1 went down into the Meadow, I had feen coming along the Plain
on the inſide toward Calice a great number of people coming from thence, and obſerv'd
all che Courtine to be fall of men, by which I ſawir was high time to fall on ; and for
a fourth reaſon , becauſe thar in the Ditch next to the Courcine there was very little
watery and from the ſaid Ditch to tne ſaid Courtine it was but two good ſteps, where the
Soldiers might Rand well enough, and with a lictle help of their Pikes or Halberts, and
the aſſiſtance of one another (the Courtine being no more than two fadoms high) we
ſhould carry the place, When (Caprains) therefore your eye ſhall have diſcharg'd irs
office in diſcovering the number of your Enemy, and the ſtrengrh of che place where he
is, and that you have taſted, and found him apt ro fly, charge him whilſt heisin the
fear you have pofſcſt him withal, forif you give him time to recover his ſenſes, and ro
forget his fright, you will be more ofcen in danger of being beaten, than likely to bears
Wherefore you ought evermore to purſue him in his fear, without giving him leiſure to
re-aſſume his courage , and carry always about you the Morto of eAlexander the Great,
which is : Deferr not that till to morrow thow canft do to day ; for many things fall out
betwixt the lip and the emp, eſpecially 1n war, and then 1t will be too late toſay, 1 ſhould
never have thovught it. You ſhall execute many things in your hear, which, if you give
your ſelves leiſure to confider of, you will think of ir thrice before you once attempt it,
Puſh home then, venture, and do not give your Enemies lciſure co conſult together, for
one will encourage another. |
Being rewun'd to the Fort of Ontrean; there was hardly a day paſt that the Eneliſh
did not come to tickle us uponthe deſcent rowards the Sea, and weuld commonly brave
our people up ro our very Canen, which was within ten or twelve paces of the Fore :
and we were all abns'd by what we had heard our Predecefſors {Ff , that one Enelith
man would always beat two French men, and hat the Engliſh would never runaway,
nor never yield. Thad rctain*d ſomerhing of che Camiſado of Belen, and of the buſineſs
of Oye ; and therefore ſaid one day to Monſieur de Tajs, that I would diſcover to him
the myſtery of the Exgliſh, and wherefore they were reputed fo hardy : which was,
tha they all carried arms of little reach, and therefore were neceſſitared to come up cloſe to
us to looſe their arrows, which otherwiſe would do no execution 5 whereas we who were A diſcourſe
accuſtomed to fire our Harqueburzes at a great diſtance, ſeeing the Enemy uſe another concerning the
manner of fight, thought theſe near approaches of theirs very ſtrange, imputing their valour of the
running on atthis confident rate to abſolute bravery : bur I will lay theman Ambuſ- Engliſh,
cado, and then you ſhall ſceif Taminthe right or no, and whether a Gaſcon be nox as
good asan Englih-man. In antient time their Fathers and ours were neighbours.
I then choſe our ſixſcore men, Harquebuzeers and Pikes, with ſome Halberrs amongſt
them, and lodg'd them in a hollow which the water had made, lying below on the
right hand of the Fort, and ſent Captain Chawx art the time when it was low water,
ſtraight ro ſome little houſes which were npon che Banks of rhe River almoſt over againſt
the Town to skirmiſh with them, with inſtruRions that ſo ſoon as he ſhould ſee them
paſs the River, he ſhould begin to rerire, and give them leave to make a charge, Which
he accordingly did : bart it fortun'd fo, that he was wounded in one of his arms with a
Hurquebuz ſhot, and the Soldiers rook him and carried him back co the Fa ſo chat
the skirmith remained without a head. The Engliſh were ſoon aware of it, and gave pqcounter be:
chem a very brisk charge, driving them on fighting up to the very Canon. Sceing then ewixt the Enz-
our men ſo ill handled, I tart up ourf my Ambuſcado ſooner then I ſhould have iſ and the
done, running on full drive direRly up to them, commanding the Soldiers not to ſhoor, F743:
tl chey came within che diſtance of their arrows, They weretwo or three hundred men,

haying

— ——— —_—

86 © The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize

CO EY Oe i en RR. Cit A. "Wh

OO Oi” Ve wore: ara

having ſome Italian Harquebuzeers amongſt them, which made me heartily repent chac
I] had made my Ambuſcado no ſtronger : but it was now paſt remedy, and ſo ſoon as
they ſaw me coming towards them, they left the purſuit of the others, and came to
charge upon me. - We marchr ſtraight up to them, and ſo foon as they were come up
witnn arrow ſhore, our Harquebuzeers gave cheir volley all at once, and then clapt their
hands to their {words, as Thad commanded, and we ran on to come to blows ; but ſo
ſoon as we came within two or three pikes Jength, they turn'd their backs with as grear
facility as any Nation that ever I ſaw, and we purſued them asfar as the River, cloſe by
the Town, and there were four or hve of our Soldiers who followed them to the other
fide. I then made a halc at the ruins of thelictle houſes, where I rally'd my people to-
gechcr again, ſome of whom were left by the way behind, who were not able to run ſo
faſt as thereſt. Monſieur de T ais had ſeen all, and was ſally'd out of the Fort to re-
A pleaſant dif. lieve the Arvllery, tro whom {o ſoon as I came up to him, I aid, Lock yon, did I 165
courſe of the F*il you how it would be ? wye muſt either conclude that the Engliſh of former times were
Sicur de Mont. 220re valiant than thoſe of this preſent age, or that we are better men than or forefathers,
lue concerning 1 know not which of the two it ir. In good earneſt, ſaid Monſieur de Tais, theſe people
the Engliſh. retreat inwviry great haſt; I ſhall never :g.iin have ſo good an opinion of the Engliſh, as /
have had heretofore. No Sir, ſaid I, jou mnſt know that the Engliſh who antiently uſ*d
to leat the French, were half Gaſcons, for they married ints Gaſcony , and (0 bred good
Soldiers : but now that race is worn out, and they are no more the ſame men they were.
From that time forwards our people had no more the ſame opinion, nor the ſame
fear of the Engliſh, that before. Therefore (Captains) as much as you can, keep your Sol-
dicrs from apprchending an Enemy z for it they once conceive an extraordinary opinion
of their valoar, rhcy ever go on to fight in fear of being defeated. You are neither to
deſpiſe your Enemy, neither ſhould your Soldiers think them to be more valiant chan
themſelves. Ever after chis chargeI obſerv'd our men alwayesro go on more chearfally
ro attzque the Engliſh, and came {till up cloſer to them z and let any one remember when
The remarka- the Mateſchal de Biez fought them berwixr the Ferr of Andelot, and the Town, whe-
ble valour of (ther our people needed to be intreated to fall on. The ſaid Sicur de Biez there per-
the Mareſcba) f.rm'd the part of a very valiant Gentleman, for when his Cavalry were all run ft the
” —__ Field, he came alone to put himſelf in the head of our Batrallion, and alighted, raking
a Pikein hishand to go onto the fight, from whence he came off with very great honor.
I my ſelf was not there, and therefore ſhall ſay nothing of itz for two or chree months
af;cr our return cut of the County of Ojze, I had askt leave of Xſonſtenr do T ais to go
ro Curt : but the Hiſtcrians in the mean time are very unjuſt to conceal ſuch brave aRi-
ons, and that was a very remarkable one 1n this old Cavalier. Being ar Court] pre-
vail'd ſo far with the Admiral, that he procur*d me a diſmifſion from che King, for as
much as I had reaſfum'd the office of Camp-Maſter upon no other terms, bur only to
command in the firſt Expedition that the Admiral ſhould goupon ; and having remain*d
2a month at Court, atcending the King 1n the qualicy of one of his Gentlemen Waiters
(who was now grown old, and melancholic, and did not careſs men, ashe had wont to
do, only once he talkt with me abour che Bartail of Seriſoles, being at Fountain-Bleas)
I took my leave of his Majcſty, and never ſaw him atcer, Ichen return'd into Gaſcony,
Bullen deliver- from whence I never ſtirr*d till King Henry by the death of his Father was become King,
edup rothe Jmying all thac while been oppreft with croubles and ſickneſs. And that is the reaſon why
French ine 25+ T cangive you no account of the ſurrender of Bullen, which the King of England by the ob-
wp, 4 Apis ſtinacy of Francs: the firſt, was conſtrain'd to quir for ſome conlideration in mony. A
The Jexh of little after he died, and our King ſtay'd but a very little behind him, We muſt all dies
Francis the but this Surrender of Bullen hapened 1n the reign of King Henry, my good Maſter, who
firſt, {ucceeded his Farher,

Our new King having peace with the Emperor, and after the redelivery of Bullen,
being alſo friends with the King of England, it ſeem*d that our arms were likely long to
ruſt by the walls ; and indeed, if theſe rwo Princes fitſtill, France may be ar reſt. After
having continued ſome time at home, the King was pleaſ *d to call me away, and to

The Sieur de pive me the command of Camp-maſter, and the government of Montcallier under the
MoatlucGover- Prince of Malphe his Lieutenant: General in Piedmont , Monſieur de Bonnevet being our
= of Mmtcale © lonel : heremembers me very well, and if thoſe who have govern'd ſince had lov'd me
; as well as he, 1 had had as much riches and honour as any Gentleman that has come ont of
Gaſceny theſe many years. Ichere remain'd eighteen monechs, without doing any thing

all che while worthy to be remembredz for I will wrice nothing, but that wherein I had

ſome command. Having obtain'd leave co reare my (elf ro my own houſe, I recurn'd

into Gaſcony , where I hearda little while after, thac by reaſon of the age and infirmneſs

ot

Boox o;-:

> T4
+>
P. T

Chi ine eta M0 I 9s Res k
WY. Pad ES Ss -P os, ,
7 3. "Was 5s - ph EY

FS ISIN >; £Þ6.- RR Xa Ca8t9 I

2%

of i WS at hero IINY EE PAT Rr At adhd js le hb EE Een hrs
EO ae der SH ES bes WR PAD I CES
CS Ine Oo OE I DE

: 4 ada " ec; yt > = 4
- IGENES a ThE I aan "oy . EF aw 4h ebads ow At ora CIDad eb ks
TT p aig $5, ng " *j * Na" ” N a "ob" IS ><p 4
Wo no, EC TW LS EY - a 2 . l 2.» de ids, $0 Dede 3 L Dn 5 8
wt AL GEN; pn); 258 et : OE IL, : ct - OT PEP "ot ER ON RT EO de INS oe ST In 6

Boox Il. de Montluc, Mareſehal of France. | 87

of the Prince of Malphe) the King was abour to ſend thither Mon flenr de Briſſac in the Monſicur de

quality of his Lieutenant General chere , which was the occaſion thac Captain Tilladet Priſſac Licure-

(who had alſo been diſmiſt) and my ſelf went rogether ro Court, where at our coming, we nanc General |

tound that the ſaid Seigneur had taken his leave of the King in order to his Journey, We FROG:

then preſented our ſelves before his Majeſty, who very graciouſly received us; and tothe

Conſtable, who was return'd to Court, and in greater favour than ever in the time of

King Francts, which many did hardly believe he would have been : but the Ladies had

now loſt their credir, and others were entred in. Immediately upon our comming his

ſaid Majeſty , who was all chis ctime1n a little Town betwixe Helen and Paris , called

Ville-neufve Saint Geerge, commanded usto go to Pars, and repair to Monſieur Briſſac.

The next day after our arrival, the ſaid Sjear de Briſſac departed, being very glad chat

we were come tohim, and ſo we went as far as Suze, where we found the Prince of A4al- The death of

phe, who had pur himſelf upon his way, to cometo end his life in France, as alſo with. ** Prince of

inan hour after our arrival he died. Which, though I ſerv'd ſome time under his com- Phe.

mand, 1s all T ſhall ſay of him, having very little opportunity co know more of him;

than what I have taken upon cruft ; and it is a great misforcune co a Captain, ſo often to

change his General 5 for betore you can come to be throughly acquainted with him, you

are old ; and new friend{hips, and new acquaintance are troubleſome. Aſonſiexr de Briſſac Monſieur de

preſently hereupon diſparcht away CMonſienr de Forgaevanx to the King with an account B74 made

of all, whom his Majeſty ſent ſpeedily back again with the Patent of Mareſchal of France, 55a 8

which he was pleaſed to conferr upon him. POR
Welay idle five or ſix moneths without any war ;z butit is hard for two fo great Prin=

ces, and ſo near neighbours, to continue long without coming to arms, and indeed ſoon

afcer an occaſion preſented ic ſelf : rhe King having taken upon him the proteRion of Duke

Oftavio, whom the Pope, and the Emperor his Father in Law, would deprive of his Duke-

dome. In order whereunto Don Ferrand de Gonzaga had laid fhege to Parma, wherein was

Monſenr de Termes, and to Miranda where Movſieur de Sanſac commanded, who there -

acquir'd very great reputation, for having worthily acquicted and approved himſelf a fin-

gular good Captain, as in truth he was; which he has alſo manifeſted in all places where-

ever he has been, He was one of the beſt Horſe-men that ever was in France : bur be- The war be-

ing I can give no account of theſe affairs, bur by report only 3 nor of whac paſſed at cheſe ewixt Fraxce

two Sieges, I ſhall let them alone. and Spaiz
The King having incelligence that the Emperors forces were wholly caken up in Par- NOR,

meſan, ſent tothe Mareſchal de Brifſſac, that he ſhould break the Peace, and upon the This war be-

rupture to attempr to ſurprize ſome Town or other upon the Frontier, which he did. For $49 in che year

he cook Qwiers, and St. Damian : but the artempr upon (airas did not ſucceed, as did 155”

the other two. Monſieur de Baſſe went to execute that of St, Damian, which he ſurpriz'd

berwixt break of day and Sun ſe, and che Mareſchal himſclf executed that of Quiers

afcer the manner am going to relate, and I think Afonſewr le Preſident de Biragu:, who

was there preſent, wall in this Book find that I have not much miſled it in the rela»

Lion.
Monſieur d' Anſun was cholen to goe execute the deſign upen Cairar, who took with him

the Baron de Cyps, and two or three other French Companies, togecher with Monfieny de

Genta!, and ſome Icalians. The Scalado was given with greac fury ; bur they were as well

received. There died one of rhe Brothers of Monſieur de Charry, who was gone as far as TheEnterprite

Savillan, and being in their way as chey marchr in the night, went aloug wich them, 9&Fziras.

and mounted a ladder the firſt may, from which he was beaten down. He wasillenough

followed, asic was faid. In che mcan time Monfrewr de Baſſe roox ſome Companies with

him, with which by break of day he arrived within half a mile of St. Damian; they were

once upon the point torerurn, ſeeing they ſhould be diſcover'd before they coald come to

the place, butin the end marchc on cotry their fortunes The cuſtom of St. Damian was,

that the Soldiers conſtantly opened che Gates every morning ar break of day, to let all che

people out to work, and afterwards placed ſome Centincls upon the wall; ſo tharthe Sicur

de Baſe entered with his ladders into the Graff, and had rear'd chem to the wall before he

was diſcover'd. The Captains mounted firſt, and before they were eſpy'd by any, the

one half of our people were got into the Town, where chere was only one foor Company, &. pm:

which retired into the Caſtle, where there was not proviſion for one day, and in the morn- eo

ing yielded up themſelves. By which, Captains, you may ſee of how great imporcanceit

is to be caretul never to leave a wall naked of Centinels, or at leaſt to have them upon

{ome Tower or Gate, eſpecially about break of day, for that is che time of greateſt dan-

ger. People are weary of watching their walls, but your Enemy is nor weary of watching

his opportunity. All theſe chree caterprizes of Cairas, St, Damian and Quiers ſhould have

been

,
vt 0
i
| *
' Re
<
o 0
J »
j
F "
F
L
:
?
N
»
K
$
I?
;
%
'
5
3 W-
:
k

Þ
n. 9
4 %
# ;
i |
£
:
|
r $ .
+ om
L q
& : o
"©!
4 pb
'''F
Fs } }
F'Y-
| %

THe” i:

- RE Ire > -
nn 09% IIS: a : ——— =: <
I ITED CWIES” —_ ps AT $1 290 > pe 2 ed : — TIEN 6 to ade <<
NU Fo 2 PEI TIER _» x - s
\ L's IIS £ 1 PR ER
> SS -

p - 6 : < "ART 2 =y ,
Dons gre Eee
og a Er FOI n Tana” 5,"

Slay

Dodge, Lanes"
wn Bk, ans. < root pectne ys
TAR — £32

ern |
_” -, os!
WES OICTANTY 2. apt nt ths 7G

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book II.

The Enterpriſe
of Nuicrs,

been cxecuced 1n one nights and indeed whoever will break a Peace, or a Truce, ler hin
do all the execution he can, and makeall che noiſe at one clap ; tor if he go picce by piece,
he 3s certain to loſe cuher a leg or a wing»

Tice dayes before the Mareſchal had been in conſultation about the manner how to
execuie this enterpize upon Qziers, at which Council were atfiſting Melſicursde Boniver,
Preſiden: Biragur, Franciſco Bernardiny de Baſſe, and d* Auſſun ; and I cannor certainly
ſay whether Sicur Ludovico de Biraga was preſent or no; but Iam almoſt confident he
was, foraſmuch as the Mareſchal reſolved upon nothing without his advice y he being a
man of a mcſt approved judgment, Ir was there concluded that we ſhould give a Sealado
on the upper ſide by the Vinyards upon the way from Agneſſe to Qgiers, I had no fan-
cy to this Scalado, ncither did I think it likely -to take effeft, which made me entrear the
Mareſchal, that ſeeing he was himſelf reſoly'd to go in perſon upon this defign, and char
it was the firſt place he had undertaken fince his Lieutenancy, 1c might be ordered fo, as
to ſucceed, and redound to his honour + for if in his firſt cryal he ſhould fail of ſucceſs,
men commonly judging of things by the event, would look upon it as an ill omen, and be
apt co ſuſpe& his fortune, which 15a very great prejudice toa man in ſupreme command.

The opinion of That therefore he ſhould with great ſecrecy cauſe four or five pieces of Canon ro march all

Monficur ae
Montluc.

night, that they might arrive at the ſame me char the Scalado ſhould be given at the
Port Jaune, and {o by one way or the other he would nor fail to carry the place; for fince
he was reſolved to attemptir, he was to try all ways conducing to the end propoled, Now
the Artillery was already mounted on carriages, and fic for preſent ſervice, betore che
Caſtle of Tarin ; for lo ſoon as the Mareſchal underſtood that his Majeſty had taken upon
him the proceCtion of the Duke of Parma, and that the war was already broke out in
thoſe parts, he made no queſtion but che rempeit would ſoon fall upon him, and thete-

fore had wiſely made his preparations before hand, that he might not be to ſeek 1n time

Mis opinion

1 putcd.

The Ecalaco
fails.

The good for-
rune of the
Mareſcha) de
Biiſſ ac,

Dues batter-
| ed,

FY
WW
lt
&S

f needy being indeed one of the moſt prudent and circumſpe& Commanders that 1
ver knew,

This advice of mine ſuffered a great diſpute ; for it was objected that in one night the
Artillery could not bedrawn to Qulers, and that all the three enterprizes would be diſ-
covercd by the rattle of the Carriages, and the voices of the drivers of the Artillery : bur
1 tncend it was concluded thar at Veſpers the Gates of Tarin ſhould be ſhur, and that
Oxcn ſhould be raken about Rivolle and Veitlamie, and ſhould be all brought in the Even-
ing into the City, and great Guards kept at the Gartes, to theend that no oneliving ſhould
ſtir out. Ir was morcover concluded, that Þ at the ſame hour thould draw ſome Canon,
and the grear Culverine out of the Caſtle of Xontcallier, and ſhould take the Oren be-
longing to the Gentlemen and Citizens of Afontcallier, which graz'd on the turther fide
of the Bridge towards the Lodges. They made account that by one of the clock atnighr
the Artillery would be at Monte llizr , by the way beyond the Bridge, and Monſieur de
Cailic and I were to ſtay together tro convoy the Artillery with my Company, and the
Mateſchal, Mzflicurs de Bonnivet , and Franciſco Bernardin would go the other way
with all che reſt of rhe Foor. The ſaid Mareſchal alſo Iefr me Monſieur de Pigaigni with
his Company, and another, who were to go before us with the Pioneers, and ten Gabions
that we took with us from the Caſtle of onteallier, 1n which order we arriv'd both the
cone and the other at the time appointed before Quiers. Bur the Camiſado vaniſhe into

moak ; for as much as all the ladders prov'd too thort, and the Graffe was much dee -
per than had been reported ro the Mareſchal : which was the rcaſon that we all rurn'd
to the Port Faune, where we found that they had alrcady filled che Gabions, and were
ready to lodge the Canon for Battery. The Mareſchal's good fortune began here to dil-
cover it ſelf; for had the ladders been of a ſufficient length, and thar we had gone on to
the Ailault, all the Citizens as well as the Soldiers were reſolute to defend their walls
tothe laſt man; ſothatin my opinion we ſhould have been very well ſwing'd, and beaten
off : for as much as they would neither ſuffer chemſelves co be ſurpriz'd by night, nor
taken by force : and we could not carry our defign ſo cloſe, buc that they had had notice of
ic the day before ſo that it had been no hard marter for them cogive us a repulſe, which
perhaps might have diſcourag'd them to do, as they afterward did. Dor Ferrand athigs
departure trom thence had there lefc an /talian Governor with three Companics, and had
drawn our all the Spanith foor, totake them along with him to Parma. |
Our Battery having for ſome ſpace play'd againſt che Town, wrought its effe&t, and
made a breach on the lefr hand of the Porc Ja#ne + but there fell thereupon fo violent a
{torm of rain as almoſt ſpoild all our work 3 yer notwithſtanding by eleven of the clock
the breach wascight or ten paces wide, Hereupon the Inhabicants of the Town, who de-

fired norhing more than a fair opportunity of purcing themſelves into the Kings obedience,

by

LL ee EE en ES ES _

Book Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

by reaſon of the ill uſage they had received from the Spaniard, began to ask the Gover-
nor if he thonghe himſelf ſuſhcient with his Soldiers ro withſtand che Afﬀaulrt; to whom
he made anſwer, that he was, provided the Townſ-men alſo would take arms to afliſt
him. Whereupon they plainly told him, that rhey would not do it, and moreover
chat they had not been ſo well encreated by the Spaniards, that they ſhould take arms a- |
eainſt rhe French. By which anſwer the Governor, who was an underſtanding man, per- Diviſion in
ceiv'd himſelf to be lodg'd betwixt my Lord and my Lady, and doubted that thoſe of the W#trs-
Town were more likely co afſault him behind chan otherwiſe, which made him ſay to
chem, Have a little _ friends, and I will make ſucha Capitulation with the Ma-
reſchal, as ſhall preſerve you from any injury, and be honourable for our ſelves; and
thereupon cauſed a Trumpet to ſound a parly, ſending out a man to defire the Mareſ-
chal, that he would ſend him Signior Franciſco Bernardin, and the Signicur de Monbaſtn,
and in the mean time cauſe his Battery to ceaſe, The Mareſchal! immediately then ſent
rous to give over ſhooting, which we accordingly did ; and it was thereupon agreed,
that the Governor ſhould ſend out two or three in. Hoſtage, and that then the two fore-
named ſhould enter in to Capitulate, and I think Preſident Birague went 1n with them, The Capitula-
by reaſon he would not the Town ſhould be ſackt, his Wife being a Daughter of Oniers, rion of Duiers,
and the moſt part of the Gentry in the Town being by char means ally'd co him : bar
thac I may not lie, I am not certain whether he went a chird or no. Neither wonld ”
che Mareſchal himſelf by any means, that any vielence ſhould beoffer'd ro them, being
this would be an excmple to the other places that were in che Enemies poſteſſion, to draw |
them on, that when they ſhould happen to be in che like conditiony our of conſideration
of the Civility he ſhould ſhew ro thoſe of Qujers, they might be the more enclin'd to
take part with the French,

The greateſt difficulty ch2r hapned betwixt our Deparies and the Governor, and Inhabi-
rants, wasy that the ſaid Governor, it being already almoſt night, ſaid he conld not poſlibly
xecreat to Aſ# , and conſequently ſhould be in danger of being defeated by the way z
wherefore he defired that the Surrender might be deferred ill che next day : The Mareſ-
chal who ftood upon thorns, fearing leſt chis night they might be reliev'd trom 4/#, de-
manded then to have Ia Roguette deliver'd up to him, co put into it threeſcore men, and
that they ſhould chooſe our of our Captains any one whom they would, to enter in with
them; in the mean time making our Companies ſtill advance nearer to the Breach, which
the Governor having notice of, he himſelf came upon the wall of the Roguerte, where he
call'd ro me, entrearing me ro make the Soldiers retire, and relling methat they had con-
cluded with the Mareſchal. The concluſion of which agreement was, that they were to
march away with Bag and Baggage, their Colours furl'd up, without beat of Drum che
next morning z and for further affurance it was agreed, that /a Roguette ſhonld be pur
into our hands. The Town then ſent ro che Mareſchal to entreat, char I, with the three» 5; Rogueite
ſcore men might be pur znto 1t ; for Thad in Piedmont acquir'd the repuration of a man of ſurrenared.
good diſcipline, ro prevent all forts of diſorder in the Soldier : and I order'd it fo well
here, that not any one of the Cirzens loſt the worth of aſtraw, The avarice of alice
plunder does ofrentimes turn the hearrs of ſuch as otherwiſe are encliw?d ro favour
ones party. This buſineſs was very well confider'd by the Mareſchal ; for thac very nighe
400 Harquebuzcers ler ont from Af? to try if they could get into. the Town ; bar they
met inrelligence by the way , that we were poſleſt of 14 Rogazite, which made them xre-
turn. There was one error commuted in this buſineſs; for ic was propounded in the
Council, that withour doube the Enemy would come to us at che report of this Siege
and that therefore at rhe fame rime the Regyette ſhould be deliver'd uprons, we Ghonld
ſend out a good ſtrong party to go the patroxille on the high way towards Aſt, which
had ic been done as it ought to have been, we had cercainly cut off this Relief.

The next morning Monſieur de Bonivet who was encampt upon the road of 4#dezun.
wich fifceen or twenty Gentlemen in company with him came to Quters, juſt ar the time
when the /ta/ians were marching out of the Town, who being entred in, ſtayd at che
Gate to {ce them march away , when ſo ſoon as they were gone , Monfiear des Boniver
being under the {econd Gare to enter into the City, and the Mareſchal having command-
ed me not to ſuffer any perſon whatſoever to enter till he himſelf was firſt come in, I
heard my Licatenant very lond and angry at the Breach, where IT had placed him to
watch, thac none thould paſs in that ways; at which Monſieur de Bonivet (aid to me, k
there is ſome diſyrder, whereupon I preſently ran te the place, and found thar they were
Thieves of che very Town of Qzizrs 1 {clt, who would have cntred in to pillage the Ciry 3
ac which going hathily down the Breach to fall upon them, the ruines of the wall made
my tcer ſlip from under ine , fo char 1tcll upon my lefr fide amonglt che (tones, with

. 'S; p

f
bs. {i
|
8 #2
I;
5
»
it
8 -
{ 7
, x
a
2 4
F «
l L
Bet”
£ ny
L;
: A
: -
.
re oy
'$' '
i T3 }
: »
:
(?
;
-f
5
W's
i
n IN
| by
vi
Hh
5 (5
#2
$4
A
i"
,
;
i
13 7
1
au
7798
th.
45
# q

PANE

pe Y
CORE
—

” p pgs _, 4 = - ey ny y
: p "% . IS "4 of 2 - EA es \ ow 4 EL
» 0s e es 20 4 b og © I > 3 PE > » «> + D
Þ , PI 3s £ Sat 4 » a8 . \ . FL Tt yet CREE AR” LES
- Sa SEA DB nod a onda * S3trro ffe- ot 3 44 4 EI - YL A RIDE Ag TEST OI bo
OE IP BL CIS v i __; 2, Ge an” h - 4

Pe

-
"A NOYES OT PO T0 ——i—_— OI

, F _—

am nr rn GS” PuWF 1 Wipro ern EE tg
— * G —

et, 2b Se OE or;

\0

V WL

90

OE

© The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox II,

Monſieur Mont-
luc hurt with a
tz;

The arrival of
the Freaco No-
bilicy in Pigd-
9101t.

The Praiſe of
the Prench Nos
bury.)

The Enterpriſe
of Lais.

Deſcription of
Lans.

{o great violence, that I put my hip our of joynt. I do think that all che cortures in the
world are not comparable to this, by reaſon of a little nerve we have 1n that joynt, where
the bones are all enchac*c into one another, which was extended, in ſo much char I have ne-
ver walkr upright ſince 3 but have ever had pain more or leſs, notwithſtanding all the Baths
and other remedies Icould uſe to remove it. Monſieur de Bonivet cauſed me to be carried
by the Soldiers into a Lodging, and I before had brought in the Quartermaſters, who
were ordering the Quarters. About an hour after T was hurt the Mareſchal entred the
Ciry, and did me the honour to 8light at my lodging to ſee me, expreſſing as much ſor-
row for my miſchance as if I had been his own Brothers and indeed he heartily lov'd,
and had a very great eſteem for me. During our abode there he came three times to keep
his Conncil ac my Beds head, as Prefident Birague, whois yet living can witneſs. He
took great delight to hear men diſcourſe in his preſence, bur in few words; and if any
one ſaid any thing, he would preſently demand his reaſon. Arche ſaid Quiers, and ac
Montcallier I kept my bed two moneths and a halt of chis unlucky fall.

Don Ferrand leaving the war of Parma, came to Aſt to draw his Forces together,

thereof to form the Budy of an Army, having left in ParmeſanSigntor Carles and the Mar-

uisde Vins, The King having notice thereof, commanded the Admiral char he ſhould
in all haſt ſend away ſix of his Companies to the Mareſchal de Briſſac, which were con-
ducted by Captain Tnard, who at that time was Sergeant Major onely. Monſieur d' Aus
male, who was General of the horſe, came alſo, as did Monſieur de Nemours a few days
afrer ; and preſently after him Meſſieurs d' Angairn, and the Prince of Conde, Brothers
then Monſieur de - Montmorency, who is now Mareſchal of France, and eldeſt Son of
the Conſtable Monſieur le Compte de Charmy, and his Brother Monſieur de 1a Rochefon-
cault, having a2 great number cf Gentlemen of very good quality in their Train, inſo-
much that three Companies of foot being quarter'd in Qsjers, the Mareſchal was con-
ſtrain'd ro diſlodge them to accommodate the Princes , and the Lords of their Train.
Certainly there is not a braver Nobility 1n the world than the French, nor more ready
to put foot in theſtirrup for the ſervice of their Prince 3 bur then you muſt rake chem
in the hear, Certain days after their arrival the Mareſchal laid a defign to go and rake
the Caſtle of Lans, which Garriſon very much infeſted the Road betwixt Suze and
T «rin, by reaſon of a valley that extends it ſelf from Lang to the high way, ſo that the
Soldiers of the ſaid Lans were almoſt continually there, having a little Caſtle in the mid
way, thar ſerv'd them for a retrear, The Mareſcal then ſent for me to Afontcallier, whi-
ther ſix weeks after my fall I had cauſed my felf tro be conveyed in a litter : upon
whoſe ſummons I made my ſelf ro be ſet upon a little Mule, and with extreme pain ar-
rived ar Owers, every day ftriving by little and little to walk. Behold theſe were the
{acceſſes of the taking of Qaiers and St, Damian, and I will now give an account of rhe
taking of Lans.

The Mareſchal chen, and all the Camp (wherein were all the above-named Princes and
Lords) march'c dire&ly to Lans, and becauſe there are ſome of them yet living, who love
me, and others that have an unkindneſs for me , I will come as near to truth as my
memory will give me leave, co the end that thoſe who hate me, may have no occaſion to
reprehend me, ſpeaking the truth ; and chat the reſt who love me, may take delighe in
reading what I have done, and call me to their remembrance, for the Hiſtorians I ſee
mince the marrer.

The Mareſchal with all the Camp went before, leaving me with five Enfigns of foor,
and the Maſters of the Ordnance, Meffieurs de { aillac and du Nogay,who were alſo at the
taking of Quiers, to conduct the Artillery. The day after he departed from Qziers he
arriv'd at Lans about noon, and we with the Artillery came ap 1n the beginning of the
night. The Bourg of Lans is large, and encloſed with fcurvey wallsz the Mareſchal cook
up his quarters 1n another Bourg, about a mile diſtant from the ſaid Lans, and round a-
bout him the Gens d' Arms, and all the Cavalry. All che Princes and Lords would be
quarter'd in the Bourg of Lans, with ſome French and 1talian Companies of foot, and
particularly Monſieur de Bonivet , with his Colonel Company, Ac their arrival they
went to the foot of the Mountain, on the right hand as you come out of the Bourg. The
Sergeant Major had already got to che top of the laid Mountain behind the Caſtle round
about which were very great precipices, and eſpecially. behind irc, where the Mareſchal
was of neceſſity to go to take a view of the Place. There 1s nothing bur precipice, ſaving
in the front of the Caſtle, which looks cowards the Town, and there were two great Bul-
warks, and the Gate of the Caſtle berween them. To plant the Artillery there, was only
ro loſe ſo much time, and to place it on that fide by which we came, we ſhould be en-
forc't to point the Muſſel of the Canon upward, fo charit conld barter bur one half of the

| s: on wall,

RY

Boox Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. g1

wall, and befides we were to climb above a thouſand paces, with the greateſt difficulty
imaginable; before we could come to che foor of the faid wall, On therighr hand it
was the ſame, and behind the worſt of all : for falling thence, a man ſhould rumble
headlong a quarter of a mile down into the River, By reaſon of which grear diſticulty
of bringing np Canon bchind the ſaid Caſtle, where there was a little even plot of ſome
twenty or five and twenty paces broad, the Enemy had made no other fortification on
that ſide, ſaving that they had cur a palcry Ditch of abour half a pikes derth in the
Rock, with two Ravelins on either ſide that flanckt the Dirchz and it had nor been a-
bove three moneths before, that two of the Emperors Engineers had been there, and had The opinion
declar*d, that it was not poſſible for all mankind co bring up Artillery, cither by this of rhe Engi-
fide, orany of the others, if they did nor plant iron the Town fide, before the Gate of ****?
che Caſtle, which alſo would be ſo much labour loſt. |
The Marcſchal ac his firſt arrival with all the Princes and Lords, and the Engireers he

had with him, went to take a view of the backſide of che Caſtle, up an aſcent of above 300
paces, and as uneaſ:e ones as ever they wentin their lives, where after they had diſcover'd,
and remain'd above two hours upon the place, they all concluded it impoſſible to be ra-
ken. At night I came with the Artillery, when ic was preſently told me, that the next da
we wereto return back again z at which I was very much dathtz but was ſo intolerably
rormented with my hip, that I preſently chrew my felt upon a Matrice, and ſaw not the
Mareſchal that nights for he was gone back to his Quarters, very much diſpleaſed with
ſome who before had repreſented the Enterpriſe ſo eafie ro him, and would undertake to
bring it about, and yet when itcame to the puth concluded it impoſſible, In the morning
' he came again, and again went to view the place ; but the more they lookt, the worſe

chey like*r,and (till diſcovered greater difficulties than before. Juſt as T had din'd Mcfhieurs
de Piquigny, de Tonchezeid, and de Vina, cameto ſeek me our, and rold me, that the re-
ſolution was concluded to return, and that I would not be unwilling to it, if Thad ſeen
the place, putring ſo many whimfies into my head, that they got me upon my little Mule,
and carried me behind the ridge of the Mountain, where Harquebuz ſhots were very good The Siear &+
cheap, unleſs a man took on the right hand towards the River, and there it was hard ro Montluc goes
paſs, and more hard to diſcover any thing; and both the Mareſchal and all the Princes ary gs FI
had gone vp, and come down at the mercy of the Enemies ſhot, Whom God defends ** "9
is well defended. I have ſeen the time when a thouſand Harquebuz ſhot have been dif-
charg'd within an hundred paces of me, and done me no harm : bur weall four made

ſuch ſhifc, chat at laſt we gotup to the cop, and they led me the ſame way by which che
Mareſchal and all his Company had aſcended and deſcended before.

I will here ſer down for an exemple to thoſe that ſhall follow after us, how I found
the thing feaſible, and which way Canon was to be got up to this level 5 not howeyer
withour very great difficulty : but how hard ſoever it appear'd to be, we concluded ro
bring up the Artillery to the top of the Mountain, and there to plant it in Battery, In
the firſt place to look up from the foot of the Mountain to the height of ir, was a per-
pendicular the Angels themſelves would have enough to do to climb ; bur T began to
rake notice, chat making one adyance of abour an hundred paces, to a lictle place which
might be ſome ren paces in circumference, that there we might have conveniency to reſt
che Picce, for che little place was almoſt even, I then conceived that we might make
another Stage, crofling over on the left hand towards the Caſtle, to another little even
ſpor, that was ſuſhcient to repoſe the Canon, and afterwards that we were to make a-
nother Stage, crofling again to the right hand to another level ſpor;z and from thencq
indeed wehad the aſcent ſomething ſteep to rhe backſide of the Caſtle ; but we ſhould
before have got paſt all the Rocks and Precipices.

By all theſe three reſting- places we deſcended the Monntain in great danger of onr
necks, where I ſhewed them, that cach of them was to undertake to advance the Ca-
non from one repoſing place to another, all which they took eſpecial notice of, and af-
rerwards remounted me upon my Mule ; for before they had led me all the way under
the Arms like a Bride, and fo we went directly to the Mareſchal's Quarters, where ]
found them all {er in Conncil, to take order for ourreturn. So ſoon as I came into the
room, the Mareſchal ſaid ro me, How now Yonfiewr de Montluc, where havs you been ?
I bave ſent for you twice to come to the Council, that you might hear the determinatiog we
have made to return. Yor maſt carry back the Artillery by the ſame way you came, To
which I made anſwer, What Sir, will you return with1nt taking this place, that is a refu-
Intion nuworthy 2onfieur de Briflac? I have been to view the place, and by the ſame way
that you have view'd it your ſelf, and do aſſure you that we will bring up the Artillery to
the top of the Auntain. Ferhen told me, thacit muſt be God alone that muſt work

O 2 fuck

=,

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book Il.

ſuch a miracle, for that it was not jn the power of man to doir; ro which I mate an-

ſwer, that 1 was not God, and yt that I would undertake to Lring them up, He then
ſaid ro me, yes in eight or ten days time perhaps with the help of Engines, and in the
mean time Don Ferrand , who is at Verſeil, ſhall gather together all the Forces he can

make, both in the field, and out of the Garriſons, and come to give us Battail , who hag

The Sieur de
Montlucs con-
reſt in the
Council,

A diſpute in
tze Council

concerning his
advice,

The order a-
bourt the Bat-
Kery.

The Piinces
aſlif.

The Sicur de
Montluc goes
again ro view
rhe Caſtle of
Lans.

3000 Germains, and I have neither Germans nor Swiſs to match him. Sir, chen (ſaid I)
1 wiil pawn toyou my life and my honour, in two mornings to plant you Four Pieces of Canon
reedy mounted on the back fide of the Caſte 5 notwithſtanding which he was ſtill harping up-
on the 3000 Germain? ; at which growing art laſt alitile angry, I ſaid, Ds you make (9 great
account of Don Ferrand's Germans ? The Admiral has here ſix Companies commanded by
{ aptain Ynard, Monſieur de Bonniver ſhall give hjm forr more of his, with which En-
figns he ſhall undertake tofight th: Germans, aud Monſiear de Bonniver with the remainder
of hi ſhall fight the Spaniard... Owr Italians will engage to fight theirs, and for Cavalry
you have (reckoning the Train of the Princes) a thirdpirt more than Don Ferrand. 1f
{+ptain Ynard h:d rather fight with the Span'ards than the Gzrmans, Monſrtenr de Bons
n:vet and 1 will fght them, and let him take bus choice, To which Captain Ynard made
anſwer, thar he was ready to fight either the one or the other, as the Mareſchal ſhould
pleaſe to appoint 5 Monhieur de Bonnivet alſo (aid, 1t was all one to him, whereu»on T
ſaid, and muſt we then mike ſuch a piece of m aver of the Germans? 1 dare lay a 9:08
wager of thiſe three thouſand, fifteen hundred have nere a tatter to their arſes, whereas
eur Soldiers have moſt of them breeches of Velvet and Satin, and think themſelves all Gentle-
men, Seeing then themſelves ſs well clad as they are, ſhall they be afraid to fight with the
Germans? /et them bat come to once, and we ſhall handle them as we did at Cerifolles.
Monſicur de Montmorancy then ſtood up, and faid, Sir Monſieur de Montluc #& an old
Captain, methinks you ought to give credit to what he ſays; to which the Mareſchal made
anſwer , You donet know hims ſo well as I, for he will never think any thing impoſſible, and
one time or another will make uw life all; whereupon I made anſwer again, that where /
ſaw a difficulty 1 feir'd my thin as much as another ;, but that in this I con!d diſcover no
inconvenience at all. Monſieur de Nemours then ſpoke, and ſaid, Sir, let him have his
own way for once, and ſee what he will do; Mcſſeurs the Prince of Conde, and Monſieur
4 Anpuien laid asmuch, and Monheur d'eAnmalle the ſame. Monſieur de Gurnort who
15 now Mareſchal of France, and Monhieur de /a Rochefonucant, the Count de Charney, the
Sicurs de [4 Fayette, and de Terride, wereall of the ſame opinion : which the Mareſcha!
ſeeing, ſaid, ell Gentlemen, I perceive you have all a deſire that we ſhould play the fools :
let uu do ſothen, for 1 intend to let yin ſee, that 1am as great a one as any of you all, And
thus I gor the viRory againſt the whole Conncll,

Things being thus concluded I faid ro Monſieur de Nemoars, Sir, it will be neceſſary
that you Princes and Lords put your helping hands to this buſineſs, and lead the Soldiers the
way, tothe end that if you would ſhrink away, and avoid the great toyl and labear they are to
undergo for the execmticn of the thing in queſtion, we may reproach them, that the Princes
and Lords put to their hands before them. In the mean timeI rold him, thar ic would do
well if he ſo plcaſ'd, that he with his own Company ſhould rake a Canon he himſelf had
brought thicher with him, and conduG it to the foot of the Mountain, who anſwer'd
me, that he would very willingly doit. Now the Artillery was of neceſficy to be drawn
thorough the Town, and they were moreover conſtrain'd to break three or four Corners
of houſes, to draw them out, and alſo to level alittle deſcent ar the going our of the
Town, from whence they fell into a plain way to the very foot of the Mountain upon
which che Caſtle ſtood, about a chouſand paces diſtant from the Ciry. T ſaid as much
to Monhieur 4 Angalen, and the Prince of Conde, who very readily conſented to take ny-
on them the charge of other two, to whom allo Monſieur de Montmeorancy very frankly
offer*d himſelf. As to the fourth piece of Canon, I cannot remember who it was, thac
undertook the care of thar, for it was not Monſicur d' Aumale, being he was to go back ro
his Quarters co che horſe with the Mareſchal : but however it was they reſted nor of all
nighc, £1 by Torch- light they had brought the Artillery co the foor of the Mountain.
Bur before they went out of che Council, I ſaid ro Monſieur d' Aumale ; Sir, will you go
along, and 1 will ſhew yow which way we will get np the Artillery behind the Caſtle, and Sir
(ſpeaking to the Mareſchal ) / know you will not yet retire to your Quarters, Monſieur d' An-
male then went willingly along with mehaving only Monſieur de 1a Rechefancan!t, the Sig -
ncur Piquigny, and my (elf in company with him; who, chough I was damnably plagu'd
with my hip, nevertheleſs forc'r my felt that they might ſee with their own eyes which
way it was to be done. $o ſoon then as we had aſcended the Mountain, and taken a
view of the place, we returned back to the Mareſchal, whoſtayd expefting the laid Mon-

{1eax

Boos Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fraice.

Gear d Aumale, who ar tis coming cold him chac my reaſon was very good, and chat no
body had raken notice of what I had perceiv*d 4 nor obſery'd thoſe reſting places in the
Rock, All the Princes and Lords were yer in the Hall where the Mareſchal- had din'd *
where Monſieur de Bzſſe ar thar time was, I do not certainly remember, for the Maref-
chal ſent for him to come with his Company, and two French Companies more, with
command to Captain Tilladet, and Savallan, to advance night and day, and come to joyn
with him, which they accordingly did,

The nexc morning I went toſce which, way we were to gct up this Mountain, with-
our being gall'd by the ſhot from the Caſtle ; and here I firſt difcover'd five little loop-
holes made for Harquebuzes only, ro which we lay open and expol '*d all the way We were
cogo: To countercheck thele I increaced Caprain Yanard to bring me three hundred Har-
quebuzeers of che beſt marksmen he had in all his Companies ; which,ſo ſoon as they came
we divided to be ſer ten to each loop-lole, who ſhot as they do ata mark one after another.
and all open 5 and when the laft of che ren had made his ſhot, the firſt always began a-
gain, There was in che Towna houſe higher than the reſt, from the roof of which one
might play into the Caſtle, and all along che Curtain : bur the Enemy, to ſhelter them-
{elves from this inconvenience, had nail'd ſeveral plancks one above another, in ſuch ſort
chat thoſe who were upon the top of the houſe could ſce nothing within the wall. Now
theſe plancks were very thin, and before che beginning uf the War I had pur ir into che
Mareſchal's head to cauſe four hundred Harquebuzcs to be forg'd at Pignerol, of a bore
ro carty point blank three or four hundred paces, of which he might d:ſtribure rwenty
roeach Company, with order to the Treaſurers to allow twelve * Francks pay to ſuch as
ſhould carry thoſe arms. Theſe Harquebazes were already made, and diſtribured, where-
fore I intreated Caprain Ricveliew (the ſame who was fince Campmiaſter) to place twenty
of thoſe Haquebuzcers upon the ſaid honſe, to ſhoot through the Planks along the Cur-
tine, whoſe ſhot broke thorough with as much caſe as if they had been paper ; inſomuch,
that what with the Harquebuzcers, thar from the top of the houſe playd along the Cour-
rain, and what with the other who fir'd by tens againſt the loop- holes, the Encmy were
in ſuch acondlition, that nor a man dutſt venture co paſs to and fro on the infide of the
Curtains

We then deliver'd to every one of the three who had view'd the way up the Rock,
twenty Pioneers and chree Maſons, with great hammers and picks of iron, wherewith to
break tome Rocks that were in the way. And thus abour eight a clock in the morning
we began to work upon the way, which by two in che afcernoon was brought to perfe-
Qion, and ar one of theclock in the nigh they began ro mounc the firſt Piece, with four-
ſcore Soldiers of my company I had there with me (the reſt being lef: behind ar ont -
callier ) which they alſo mounted. This Piece gave them more trouble than all the o-
ther chree ; for they were atrer fo well acquainted wich the way, thar the reſt came up
with much greater caie, Mcnſieur de Piquigny all the way carried alittle Lanthorn co
lighc che wheels of the Carriages, by the aim of which the Encmy began to ſhoot, but no
{hor ever touche us. Meflicurs de { aillac and de Puno were in the mean time buſie behind
the Caſtle above, placing the Gabions, and filling chem with carth; and as the Pieces
wae hall'd up co che top of che Mountain, chey (till came ro receive, and plant them in
barrery : bur nota man ever put a hand to the drawing up of the foreſaid Canon buc
my Soldiers only ; for alrhougn Monſieur de Bunniv:t kad broeghr one Company, and
Captain Ynard another co alliſt chem 3 yet would they nor accept of their ſervice, but told
them that they needed no help, and thar fince they had had the honour to hale up che
firſt Piece , they would likewiſe have the advantage to bring up all che reſt : Which I
was very glad of, becaute they were already very perfe& in all the turns, and by three
of the clock in che morning all che pieces were planted ready to batter. The Mareſchat
and Monſiexr d' Aumzale were by this cime come trom cheir Quarters, where I believe they
had nor {lepc much chat night. The Mareſchal our of the tear he had that ic was not
poſhble co hale the pieces up, and Monlieur d* Aumale on the other fide was in no lefs
pain, foraſmuch as atrer he had viewed the place, he had aflur'd him that I world infallibly
mount chem. The Princes and Lords, who had becn at work che night before, root
their reſt, cill che Mareſchal ſent co rowſe them, which was noc until Captain Martin
(a Baſque, whohada Company in his own Regiment) came and affur'd him thar he had
ſcen che [:{t piece brought up co the top of the Mountain : Which Caprain Martin I do
verily believe made that night fifty journeys ro and fro, for che Mareſchal had ſent him
almoſt every momear co {ce in what torwarducſs we were,

The Marcſchal and all the Princes and Lords veing come, chey found char all the four
Canon were ready mounted to begin the batter. I had cauſed half a Sack of a very Cx-

vo

<a 4 &n% - © cn 7

* cc lent

OS Eo! AO ans. ae to arr ods. .

9;

AMES 1, ON OO Ser os A OR

*'A Frank, a
Livre, and a
Cardecue are
rwenty Pence

Engliſh,

RT OS Iz, —— NESS | —_
- - bel p Eo bot < -
_—_— at 4> Sth 4 owerty 6. .

a

- = oo —— — os A
ee eee ea ee i REI

?
[
|
©
F
z:
e- |
43 BY

The Arrillery

mounteds

and planted in
Battery b

94

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox Th

Lans furtens
cered,

cellenc ſort of apples, four grear leather Boctles of wine, and fome bread to be bronght c9
che place whcrewith to refreth my Soldiers : But firſt che Mareſchal, and afcer him all che
Princes and Lords rob'd me of all my apples, and whilſt chey ſtaid expeRing the break
of day, out of an ugly pot drunk two bottles of my wine. I leave thoſe who ſhall read
this Hiſtory to judge, whether or no I did not ſwagger the Mareſchal, ſeeing he had fo
highly oppoſ'd me, about the bringing up of che Artillery. Ichink in my whole life !
was never in ſo good a humour, as well in reſpe& to the contentment I diſcover'd in the
Mare(chal, as alſo in all the other Princes and Lords, who were preſent, and had all had
their ſhare of the royl. In the morning by break of day we made three or four vol-
leys againſt the Wall, which pi:rcd it, and thorough the Stables entred into the Baſc=
Courr, and from thence into the Lodgings of che Caſtle. The Mareſchal had alſo cauſed
three pieces of Canon tobe planted below, on that fide by which we came, which barcer'd
upwards, only to terrifie the Enemy , for hurc they could do none : But fo ſoon as our
Artillery had given cheir three or four volleys, they began to ſound a parley, and pre-
{ently ſurrendred. The Mareſchal Icttc Caprain Brweil, brother-in-law to Monſieur Sal-
cede, with his Cempany in Garriſon there, Fe deing one of the Captains belonging to the
Admiral; which being done, he march'c wich all his Horſe and Foot towards the plain of
Cainge, to fcerf Din Fexrand might not be upon his way to reheve the Caſtle : buc he
had there intelligence, that he was yet at Yerſeil z whereupon the ſaid Mareſchal return'd
to Ozicrs , and I return*d ro eMontcallier , where I fifteen dayes kept my bed of my
hip, and do verily belive, that had I not ſo beſtirr'd my limbs in this ation it had ne-
ver been cur'd.

This (fellow Captains) ought to teach you never to truſt one or two to diſcover a place,
and wichour relying on your own judgment, to call thoſe ro your aſſiſtance, whom you
conceive to be men, not of the greateſt experience only , but moreover of che greateſt con»
rage 3 for whar one cannor lee, anorher may perhaps diſcern. Neither muſt you refuſe to
rake pains, where you diſcover a little difficulty in the thing, in order to the execution of
a brave exploit, and learn to be wiſe at your enemies expence, When you have taken up a
reſolution to defend a place, take notice to ſmooth and cut off all the reſting places chac
thall happen to bein any of che avenues, for wherever Canon fhall find ſuch places to re=
poſe in, as will allow the men time to pant, and take breath, they will in the end infalli-
bly mount them. Neither without this convenience could I poſſibly have brought whar I
had undertaken to paſs. The taking of this place depriv'd the Enemy ofa mighty advan-
rage, and vvasvery convenient for us 1n order to the proſecntion of this War,

Some time after the Princes (ſeeing no likelihood of Don Ferrand de Gonz -g4's being
drawn to a Bartail, nor hearing of any preparation he made for the aſſaulcing of anv
Town) return'd back to Court. And ſoon after their departure, the Mareſchal by the

The Character advice of Preſident Biragne, Signior Ludovico, and Franciſco Bernardin deliberated ro go
or Monſicur de take certain places abour Torre, to keep thoſe in Toree the better in aw. He was a General
Briſſac Mareſ- eyery way worthy his Command, always in aCtion, never idle; and I do think tha ſleep-
chal of Frauce. ing his fancy was evermore at work, and that he was ever dreaming of undertaking, and

executing {ome notable enterprize.
To the forementioncd end we march'd with all the Army direQly to St. Martin,

wherein wasa Company of /talians, and where the Caſtle was batrer'd, and taken, toge-

cher with the Caſtle of Pons, Caſteltelle, Balpergue, and ſome others about Yoree, and we
began to fortifie the {aid Caſtle of Sr. Martin. Now Meſſicurs de Baſſe and de Girdes had
taken Sebe, wherefore ſo ſoon as the Fort of St. Martin was brought into a pretty good
condition, the Mareſchal went to Qjers, that he might be nearer ro Monſieur de Baſ57,co al-
6ſt him jncime of need 5 for he had already received intelligence, that Den 4rbro de Cende
eathered cogether the Army 1n Alexandria (and I think Don Ferrand was at that time
fick) which made the Mareſchal doubt chart he might have ſome def ga npon Sebe, and
chercfore left Monſieur de Bonnivet, Signior Franciſco, and me, making Signior Ludovico
to retire to Chevas, and Boarlengue, to have an eye to thole places, of which alſo he was
Governour.

| Eighr dayes were nor paſt before the Mareſchal ſent orders to Monſieur de Bennivet, and
tome, that we ſhould march in all diligence day and nighe directly ro Montdevi, with
five or fix French Companies we had at St. Martin, leaving Signior Franciſco to purſue
rhe Forcification, which accordingly he did, marching night and day, as it was neceffary
we ſhould, for che Mareſchal was engag*d in Sebe, for the relicf of Monſicur de Baſſe -
buc when Don Arbro heard of cur coming, that we had drawn ancther Company our
of Savillan by the way, and thar he ſaw us arriv'd at the corner of the Town, he preſent-
ly drew off, and having recover'd a Bridg of brick, began co paſs over his Baggage ;

whether

Boox Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fratice. EY oe iT:

IB I—O=—S _— — PC errooeegye CL EIS WII e__ —_—_—_ > 4 VO CW —  —_

whether Signior Ludovico de Biraga was with us, or no, Iam not able to ſay, becauſe vve
had ſome Italian in our Company, pegs
The Mareſchal ſeemg himſelf diſengag'd, fallyed out of the Town with all the Forces
he had brought wich him, and went to artaque che Enemy at the Bridge, vvhere ic ap-
peared Don eArbro had an intention to have encamped, for we there found many Hats, I
ready ſer up. The skirmith was great, and ſmart on both fides ; nevertheleſs I am of o- Dot Arbro de .
pinion, that had we charg'd him home horſe and foot and all, we had pat him very hard- £e2de n bravs
ly co't, and perhaps given him a ſhrewd blow ; for after he had paſt che Bridge, he was _ Cap-
zo climb a ſteep mountain, where the way was ſo narrow, that they could only go one by. ©
one. But he made us know that he was a very able Soldier for he firſt paſt over all
his horſe, fearing that ours would charge and overturn them upon his foor, then he paſt
over his Germans , and himſelf remain*d behind with a thouſand or twelve hundred
Harquebuzeers, with which he {till made good the Bridge, by the favour of three hou-
ſes that ſtood ar the end of it, vyhich vve could never gain from him, he having opened
them ſo, that they flanck't and defended one another,
Oan the top of th? Mountain there was a Plain that extended it ſelf to a little Town
they held, being avout the length of 1000 paces, or thereabouts, vvhere he firſt cau(*d
his people to make a halt, and afterwards retyr'd. But at his departing from the houſes,
we had thought to have fallen in amongſt them, which we alſo attempted, and there
were in that place ſome men ſlain, both on the one fide, and che other, and we continually
followed in their Rear up the forementioned narrow path, ſtill plying them with our Har-
quebuz ſhot 3 for we ſaw nor the preparation he had made for us on the rop of the moun-
rain, Mefſſicurs de Bonivet , and de 1a 240th Gondrin, and I were all on horſe-back, and
amongſt the Harquebuzeers to encourage them, when ſo ſoon as vye.came to the top, he
gave nsa charge vvith a 1000 or 1200 Harquebuzeers, vyhich ſent us back vvith a rattle di-
rely to the Bridgey and full drive upon the Mareſchal ; Monſieur de 1a Meoth's horſe was
killd under him, and mine {o hurt that he died five or fix days after z and God was aſ-
ſiſting to us, in having put it into our minds, to draw our men into two diviſions, on the
right and lefc hand of the way, though che aſcenr was very difficult and ſteep, for by thac
means we loſt but very few of our men, whereas had we been all clutter'd rogether in the
narrow path, vve had received a very great defeat, and had our ſelves remained upon the
place. Take notice of this ( young Captains ) vvhen you ſhall happen co be in the like
Ground, upon the like occaſion z for the old and circumſpe& have been often {nap in
ſuch places as theſe, and know well enough how to avoid them. The Mareſchal then
withdrew with all his Army about Sebe, and che next day carried away the Canon, thar
Meſſieurs de Baſſe and de Gordes had brought along with them vyhen they rook it,
leaving there three Companies, two French and one Italian, and fo retired by Montdevi
rowards T#rin and Quaiers., How Sebe was afcer loſt I do not remember, burloſt ir was,
for we return'd a year after to recover it, vvhen it was much bercer defended, and longer
diſputed chan before, as hereafcer you ſhall hear,
Sometime after Don Feryand (er an Army on foot, by much exceeding all the forces the
Mareſchal could make, he having neicher Swiſs nor German Foot : wherefore (being ad-
vertized by the Signeurs Laidovico de Birague, and Franciſco Bernardin, that this Arm
was defign*d for the reraking of St. Martin, and the other Caſtles we had taken before ;
and alſo to take Caſſa!, ſome even leagues diſtant from Twriz, and to fortifie ir, to the
end that 7 #rin might receive no relief from the mountains and yalleys of Lans, and ef pe-
cially from Cafſal, frem whence we had moſt of che fruicand wood thar yvas brought to
Turin) So ſoon 28 Don Ferrand's Army was ready to march direRly to St. eAfartin; the Monſieur Briſ-
Mareſchal call*d a Coundal of his Officers to deliberate vvhar he ſhould do concerning Caſ- ſac calls a
ſal, ſeeing ut was neither fortified nor tenable : who amongſt them concluded to quit x, _
and to dilmantle ir, though the diſmantling could fignifie nothing ; foraſmuch as Don Spaniſh Artoy.
Ferrayd would ſoon have repair d itagain. I wasche ſame night advercized at Aſont-
callier of this derermination, which was the reaſon char I wenc early the next morning to
che Mareſchal co T#rin, where I made bold to ask him if ic were true, thathe had taken a
reſolution to abandon Caſſal, vvho told me, that yes, becauſe he could find no one, who
would hazard his life and repurarion in pucring himſelf into ir, and thac therefore they
had concluded in che Council, co put only one Company of Icalian Foot into ic, which
was to ſurrender the Town ſo ſoon as chey ſhould ſee Don Ferrand approach with an in-
cention to arraque ir. I chen cold him char char would fignifie very liccle, for che Cap-
cain himſelf would however tell the Soldiers as much, co make them willing to ſtay ; bur
chac he muſt Gatriſon it in good carneſt, and nor after this manner. And who (ſaid he)

wo#u'd you have fo ſenſeleſs as to undertake the defence of it? tg which I made anſwer thac
F

ge 4 ___— :
"0, 1 Bn % ro roo Te Dy
Wears. [- by. > 5 WT IEC IO —— - 2

-
|
+l
pl
iv
$
:
*”
1
.
1
-
»
i
”
&
$
F4
&
4
TY
F:
2)
$2
«
©
wo
&:
$8
*3
=T.
' RE
"o
+
4
f
_—_
1
2x)
4K
4
* 2
'
4
iT
Ws
v4
x
4
4H
+7
:
y.
©
5
'£
io
te
I
A
.
od

01-" LOIA FCRIIOE JET CES dab 5
$ a IT OE Donates on OT OE
ys. 405 Rae ao $a ze. IE Sg oa erat 3 ago. Ws:
th bei —_— . . :
<4 We Poet mn eta
Re T7 Y D A A 4

96 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book H:

——_—_w_

—S_DF©l

1 would becthe man, He chen cold me that he had rather loſe the beft part of his eſtace,
than to ſufter me to engage my ſelf init , conſidering that the place could not in a years
time be fortified to reliſt Canon. To which I made anſwer, Sir, the King does entertain, and
pay #4 for three things only ; one to win him a Battail, to the end that he may overrun a preat
ſpace of gronnd, and ſubdue ſeveral ſtrong holds to his obedience another to defend a Town :
for no Town can be loſt, but a great deal of ground gues along with itz and the third to take
The Sicur de 4 Town; for the taking of a Town brings a great number of people into ſubjeftion ; all the
Moitluc undere reſt are only shirmiſhes, and renconnters, that ſignifie nothing to any body but onr ſelves, ts
takes the de- gy ghe 124 known unto, and efteemed of our Superiars, and to acquire honor to our own particular
tence of Caſſel. perſons ; for the King has by this no advantage at all, nor by any other effett of war, ſaving by
the three ferementioned ſervices; wherefore before this place ſhall be ſo quitted I will loſe my
life inits defence, The Mareſchal hereupon diſputed it very ſtrongly with me; to divert me
from this intention 3 bur ſceing me reſoly'd, at laſt gave me leave to do as T would. He
was a man thar would be govern'd by reaſon, without relying roo much upon his own
jadgment, as did Monſieur de Lantrec, who was ever obſerved to be guilty of thar faulr,
as I think Thave ſaid elfeyvhere.
Defcriprion of  Caſſal is a lictle Ciry encloted with a rough wall of Flints without any one Axler ſtone
Caſſal, amoneſt them ; a Graffe that environs 1t, to which the water comes and goes, ſo rhar
the Grafte can neither be made deeper, nor the water retain'd 1n any place, to be muck
above knee dcep. There was no manner of Trencheither within or without, neither were
chefour Blankers fill'd at all, ſo that the Enemy having once batter'd me a Courtain by
the Canton, they might afcerwards batter me in the flank, I demanded of the Marel-
chal goo Pioneers of che Mountainz which he ſent preſently to raiſe, ſo thar within
four dayes they were all ar Caſſal : T demanded likewiſe a great nuraber of Inſtruments,
and iron Tools, wherewith to furniſh my Soldiers alſo for the work, which he alſo ſud -
denly ſent me, together with great ſtore of grain, bacon, lead, powder, and march ; I de-
manded moreover the Baron de Chipy Ia Gard (Nephew to the Baron de Iz Gard) le 14a,
Martin, and my own Company. All theſe five Companies were exceeding good, and
their Captains alſo 3 who having underſtood that Lhad made choice of them of my own
accord, rook it for a great reputation, and a high honourto them. I demanded of him
alſo le Gritti a Venetian, who had a Company of Italian foot : all which were granted
come, |
In the morning then I went to put my elf into it, and at night all the Companies
arrived. Monſieur de Ge, eldeſt Son of Monſieur de Javgiron was there in Garriſon
with the men atarms belonging to his Father, co whom the Mareſchal ſent order to
march away, and to carry his Company to entcallier : bur he wrir an anſwer back,
thar he had not continued ſo long in Garriſon at Caſſal, ro abandon it at atime when a
Siege was going to be laid before it, eſpecially when ſo old a Captain as Thad undertaken the
defence thereof, and rhat therefore he was refoly*d there to hive and die with me, The
Mareſchal would nor take this anſwer forcurranc pay z for the next day betimes in the
morning he came himſelf tro Caſſal, having Monſicur d'eAuſſun, Monſieur de Ia Mothe-
Monſicur de Gondyrin, and the Vicount de Gourden 1n company with him. IT had there already af-
Briſac viſits fign'd all the Quarters for the Foor, withour diſlodging the Gens 4 .4rms, foraſmuch
Caſſel. as I ſaw Monſieur de Gye, and all his Company obſtinately reſolute to tay, And although
the Mareſchal himſelf was comein perſon, yer could he never prevail with Monſieur de
Gye to depart the Town, who plainly rold him, that he, if he ſo pleaſed, might com-
mand his Company away from him , but for what concern'd himſelf, he was reſolv'd
not to ſtir a foor 3 which was che reaſon that che Mareſchal returned very much difla-
tified with himfclf, that he had granted me leave ro take upon me the defence of thar
place, which was conceived to be {o deſperate an undertaking, that Monficur de 1a 2fothe-
Gondrin, and the Vicount de Gordon wept at parting with me, and all of chem gave me
over, as alſo did Preſident Birague himſelf, who is yer living, for loſt either in my life
or my honour, and ſo after dinner they departed. Ar their going away I entreated
che Mareſchal and all my Companions, char chey ſhould no more come to ſee me, for
] would not be hindred ſo much as a quarter of an hour from intending my fort'ficati-
on. 1 moreover deſired the Mareſchal ro ſend me Colonel Charomond , who was ac
Riboxlle, ro affift me in the ſaid fortification, with two Engincers which the ſaid Ma-
reſchal had one of which was ſlain ar che raking of Zipian, and che other is the Cheya-
lier Reloge, who 15 now 18 France. |
The diJigence We bcgan then to fill the four Cantens, each Captain of four having taken one, and
of the Sicur df \frerwards divided the other two Compamies ro the four Curtains, and alſo rhe 500
acer ng - Pioneers, for all che Inhabitants of the Town above ten years of age carried carch for the
Caf al, j

four

dee. Ls. An tt —_— SJ —{ ſt. p_ PRI as that. Bt.

Boos Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. A 97

four Captains. Bur (that I may deprive no one of his due honour) T (hall cell you char
Monfienr de Gye had an Enfigne of Danphine called Iontfort, and the Gaidon Monſieur
de P Eftanc, who being arrived at ontcallier in. the Evening, began to conſider and la-
ment their Captain's condition, inſomnch that all the Company mutiny'd, reſolving to
go and dye with him, and never to ſtir from his fide, Whereupon P Effanc entreated the
{aid Captain Montfort to ſtay, for it might fall out that the Mareſchal would ler them all
g0, when he ſhould ſee that one part were already gone, and to the end the Mareſchal
might not be overmuch offended, that he ſhould kecy with him all choſe who were wil-
ling to ſtay 3 which being agreed berwixt them, the ſaid Efanc fearing leſt the Mareſchal
ſhould have any inkling of his deſign, ſtole away at midnight, and was followed. by the
whole Company ; for not a. man fave only two Gens d' Armes and three Archers would ſtay
behind wich the ſaid 2fontfort. They left cheir great horſes and arms, excepting their
Cuiraſles and ports, mounted themſelves each upon a little Carcal only, and leaving their
Launces at their Quarters, cook every one a Pike and a Footman, and fo at ſun-riſe came
co Caſſal, fix miles diſtant from Afontcallier. Monſicur de Ge and the Baron de Chipy
had undertaken to Terraſs up the Gate, from whence they ſaw theſe people coming, and.
ſtood (till a good while ro diſcover what they were, and then both ran out together to =
meet them. I ſaw by this that AZonſrenr de Gye was well belov'd by his Company, and he Commendari..
did very well deſerve fo to be ; for I dare boldly ſay he was one of the worthieſt and the 92 of Monſieur
braveſt Captains in France. Monſieur de Montfort went in the morning to the Mareſchal, Os
and told him that he had loft che Gaiden and all the Company, who were ſtollen away
by night totheir Captain, and therefore begg'd his leave thar he might follow afcer with
two men at arms, and three Archers ovly that were left behind, which he would by: no
means permit him to do, buc expreſly torbad him, aad made him return back to Afont-
callier. |

Now our order in the Town was thus, that every morning generally all, as well Cap-
tains, Soldiers, and Pioneers, as men and women of the Town, came every one before The excellenc
day upon pain of death ro their work, which to compel them to I erected a Gallows, that order in the
chey mighc ſee what they were to truſt ro; and indeed I had, and have ever had ſo, a little City of Caſſat-
ſcurvey CharaQter of deing liberal of the rope, ſo that there was not a man great nor ſmall
who did not fear my Gaſcon humour and complexion. Tr being then winter, and in the
ſhorteſt of days, they were to work from break of day till eleven of the clocks and then
every one went to his dinner, and at twelye return'd again to his work, which he afcer-
wards never left till ir grew to be dark. As for their dinner, every one din'd of himſelf :
but the ſupper was alwayes at my Quarters z or at thoſe of Monſieur de Gye, or ar one or
another of che Captains, every oye 1n his tary, To which place conſtantly there repair*d
all the Engineers and Commanders of the work, where if any one had not adyanc*c his
work ſo much as another , 1 aſſign'd him either Soldiers or Pioncers, chat by the nexc
nighr his work might be as forward as his neighbours. Now my buſineſs was to run v
and down every where on horſeback, one while to the Fortifications, then to choſe who
were ſawing the plancks at the Mill, of which T made a great many half a foot thick, and
other poſts and beams of timber, that were very neceſlary for us. The water of this Mill
did us great good ſctrvice, for by means of that the Saw never reſted ; and the moſt part
of the night I went by torch-light quite through the Town ; one while I went out to the
place where they digg'd the Turf, another while where they made the Gabions, then re-
turned into the Town, and went the round within : afterwards I went out again to view
all the places, and never reſted ina place, excepting at dinner, no more than the meaneſt
Soldier inthe Town, encouraging in the mean time all people to work, and carefſing all
both ſmall and grear.

I there learned what it is to take a buſineſs in hand where all people generally concur
to the bringing a thing ro paſs, as alſo whar a maſs of people, ambitious to acquire honour
in the place chey have undertaken to defend, may do and moreover that there is great
praiſe to be obtain'd in ſo well ordering of things, and diſpoſing of time, chat nor ſo much
as a quarter of an hour ſhall be ſpent in vain ; and indeed a Commander ſhall never do a-
ny thing worthy ſpeaking of, if chey be not allof one mind, and have not equally a deſire
to come off trom the Enterprize in hand, with great honour and reputation, as it was in
this place. This ( Captains ) 15a thing chat principally depends upon you, if you have
once got the Knack co vvin the Soldier by a word, you ſhall do more chan with a thouſand
Baſtinadoes ; it js true, that if there be ſome mucinous ſtubborn ſpirit amoneſt them,
vvhich gentle ways cannor reclatm, you are'tro make others wiſe ar his expence, Bur I
will return co Monficur de Gyr, who never ſtirr'd frem the Gate with his Gens d' Arms,
vl it was fally and fafficiently terrafſed boch within and without , who chere all of

P theny

op IF STE I -

3
. ” = = ing oe” ons, ak Er #5 > BL Tree'S : , -
- guy. Ss pwr 0s, es pn tA ny og; nn ety ey 1, :. - Fever ee SEE ©. oi rr apr nee ea - --
> + te by , j oy I -

"_— on b*» 0. Nb ONS INS
rag 92 0-15 ee 4 4 << S107 _—

*
#
i
x
in
+
'}
: z
5
£
Z
£
b
hs
$
'Y
bz
.
YN
4:;#
=

— I.
CREE

REAR wy,

wx FL me. __
PRC: Arora amet Anat oa
3 95 ae

3 20
EE
T-redill

ny a _— 44
oe meyer werreiiarins WO>; 1 Fo
Pg Re A, % >
——
P

gt gp cms = es *
Tg 2

» —
7 2 V

4
|
2
&.
F-

H—

08

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book It,

them wrought as hard as the meaneſt common Soldier in the Town.

Oh (Caprains) vvhat a beautiful exemple you have here, if you pleaſe to obſerve ir,
when an occaſion (hall preſent it ſelf, ro undercake the defence of a place ! I will moreover
ſay tharT had taken ſuch order, thar there was not a morſel of bread eaten, nor a glaſs of
wine drunk, but by weight and meaſure; and if you will take exemple by Cafſaly you ſhall
not only be able ro undertake che keeping of a Town, let ic be as ll fortified as it will ;
but even a Meadow encloſ'd vyich no more than a contemptible ditch only, provided
there be unanimity amongſt you, as there was here : for we had all one vvill, one deſire,
and one courage, and the labour vvas a common dclight to us all.

Now my good fortune was ſuch, that Don Ferrand gave to Ceſar de Naples the onchalf
ot his Army, almoſt all his Infantry, vvith a part of his horſe, to lead chem to Riverel
icven Jitcle miles from Caſſal, Vlpian being berween ; and the ſaid Ceſar de Naples ſtaid
two and twenty days about che taking of St. Martin, and the other Caſtles, During
this time I had by my great diligence put the Town into a good poſture of defence, and
had cauſed great Trenches and Rampiers to be made behind all our Cantons, vvell cer-
rafled all the Gates, and gabion'd all the upper Gabions with a double row of Baskets,
yvcll refolv'd to cauſe our ſelves to be ſo.indly battered, and get a brave ſhare of honour,
Ar laſt Ceſar having caken Se. Martin, and the other Caſtles, arriv'd at Riverol vvich his
Czmp, vvhere immediatly Don Ferrand called a Conncil ro determine, vvhether he ought
to Artaque us, or to let us alone, conſidering the time I had had vvherein to fortifie my
ſelf, and thar I had finiſher all the fortification I intended ro make for my defence ;
vvhere alſo he forgor not to put them in mind, that vve vvere fix Companies vvithin , all
reloJute to fighr it our to the laſt ; and that he doubred he ſhould loſe more valiant Cap-
cains, Spaniards, and Italians in the aflaule than the Town 'vyas vvorth, giving chem an

A conſultation account vvithal of all that I had done vvithin. The Spanith and Icalian Captains, vvho
of the Spant- vycre preſent at this Council, ſeeing the danger vvould fall upon them, cauſcd ic by cheir

aids concerne

ing Caſſal,

Camp- maſter to be remonſtrated, that the Emperor had rhere the beſt Officers he had in
all /:aly, and of vvhom he made greater account than of all the reſt, and that cherefore
they entreated Don Ferrand to reſerve them for a Batrail , or ſome Enterprize of conkde-
rable moment, and not to expoſe them for the gaining of ſo trivial a place as that of
C:ſſal. There followed rherupon a great diſpute, and three days the Council were in
debate abour this very buſineſs. Ceſar de Naples, and the Governor of V/pian obſtinately
maintain'd, that they ought to affaule us 5 bur the Spaniſh Soldiers who underſtood whar
Ceſar de Naples had faid, plainly told their Caprains, that they might then go on to the
aſlaulc wich the Iralians, 1f they ſo pleaſed, for as for them they would have nothing to
do in the buſineſs, being reſolv'd to ſtand to whar by their Camp-maſter had been pro-
poſed, All theſe diſputes came to the Mareſchal's knowledge, after Don Ferrand was riſen
trom before Riverol, by Letters that he writ to the Preſident of Aſiflaw, which by ſome of
Signior Ludovic de Biragu's people were intercepted, and whilſt they were diſputing a-

Alba furpriſed bour a Town that was none of their own, the Mareſchal ſurpriz'd Alba from them by
trum the Spa- Meſſtcurs de 1a Mothe- Gondrin, Franciſco Bernardin, and de Panan, the Lieutenant to his

#:14rd.

own Company,and ſome others whom I do nor remember. The Mareſchal by break ot day
had notice of che ſurprize (for our people entred ar eleven of the clock in the night) who
preſently diſpatcht a footman of his to me with a Letter which contain'd theſe words.
Monfieur de Montluc, T have juſt now receiv'd intelligence that our deſign upon Alba has
taken effet, and cur people are within it, which is the reaſon that T am juſt now mounting to
hirſe to go thither in all diligence. The Foorman came co me about ren of rheclock, and

A Bravado of being the Governer of Zipian detein'd a Trumpet of Monſieur de Maugiron, I ſent chij-

the Sicur de
Moniluc.

ther a Drum of Captain Gritti, tro whom having ſhemed the Mareſchals Lecter, I gave
him charge to tell the Governor of #Iplan, that Don Ferrand could not better revenge
himſeif for the loſs of Alba, than to come and attaque us at Cafſal. So ſoon as the Drum
came to the Gates of Ulpian he found that the Governor was gone by break of day to the
Council to Riverol, and therefore told che Soldiers ar the Gate of ctheraking of Alba, ac
which they were ſo incenſ *d, that they would thereupon have kill'd him, andin order
chereunto Þegan to pinion and bind him; bur the Governor in the interim arnved, to
whom I ſent word, that he ſhould reſtore me my Trumper, conſidering that we had al-
ways made fair war, and that he ſhould take heed of beginning to ſnew foul play ; for
our people alſo had given good quarter ar Alba. The ſaid Governor then took the Drum
from the Soldiers, and carried him to his lodging, where he cold him, that if whar he
had ſaid concerning Alba did not prove to be true, he would hang him ro which che
Drum reply'd, that provided he would give him bur a Teſton, if 1c was true, he would

Se content to be hang'd if it prov'd atherwiſe. Whereupon the Governor recurn*d co

horſe,

i iam a ſ——— ——— —_—_ ———

Boox Il. . de Montluc, Mareſchal of France, | $9 |

—_—_ — td [WI ns #4 / WP —— ?

—_—

horſc, and went again co Riverol, where they continued all night in Council, to confider
whether this news could be crue, or no : but the next day arriv*d the Captain of the Caſtle
of Montcalvo, who brought them certain intelligence from the Governor of Aft, that Albz
was certainly taken 3 which was the reaſon .that the next morning Don Ferrand departed
in all haſt, and went to paſs the River ac the Bridg of Afare, to go direRly to the ſaid
eAlba to try if he could nor recover it before the Mareſchal could have leifur? to berter
tortifie the place. gs ns |
So ſoon as I ſaw my (elf delivered from all apprehenſion of a Siege, I immediately ſent
away my Pioneers to the ſaid Albaz who at that cime ſtood the Mareſchal in very greac
ſtead, I did not there ſtay for a Command, and it is ofren neceſſary to do before we are bid»
den, provided there be no hazard in the caſe. Monfieur de Bonnivet , and Santo Pedro
Corz0, with ſeven Enſignes pur themſelves into it, Now of Don Ferrand's arrival at the
Bridge at Aft#re, and of his palling over the River there, Monſieur de Salvazon who was
Governor of Ber#e gave me {peedy notice. I therefore ſodainly ſent away the Baron of The Sicur dg
Chipy, 1a Garde, and le Mas, who were the next.morning by break of day at Alba, of Hog ſends
whoſe coming the Mareſchal was excecding glad, as alſo was Monſieur de Bonnivet, foral- 9 woah on
much as they. came from a place where they had undergone extraordinary labour in forti»
tying, hoping that theſe would ſhew others the way, as they alſo did, Monſieur de Mau-
giron would remain.at Caſsal, becauſe jt was a very commodious quarter tor horſe I
chere lefr Captain Martin with him, and ſent le Gritti co his Garriſon, and Colonel Cha-
ramond, and I went to wait npon the Mareſchal at Tarin, who was then bur newly re-
curn®d from Alba, and my Company wenr back to eMontcallier, If I was welcome or
no to the Mareſchal, or whether careſ{'d by Preſident Biragac, and the whole Court of
Parliament afrer ſuch a ſervice, I leave every one to judge.
When (Captains) therefore from any undertaking great profic and commodity may
accrue, as there did from this (conſidering that Tarin, had Caſſal been poſſeſt by the
Enemy, would have ſuffer'd a mighty inconvenience) do not ſtick boldly to hazard your
perſons for the defence of any place whatſoever, And when you ſhall bs there, remem-
ber after what manner, and with what diligence I carried on my work ; for by thac
means you ſhall make your Enemy afraid to attaque you, He 1s more afraid to aflaulr,
than you are to defend. He medicates and conſiders who are within, and that he has co
do with men that know how to fortifie themſelves, which is no little advantage to a Sol-
dier, Iris true that Ceſar de Naples committed a great error in ſquandring away fo much
time abour thoſe paltry Forts, and in the mean time giving us ſo much leiſure to tortifie ;
for had he come directly to us ar firft, he would have pur us to our Trumps : bur Lthink
he wasafraid, My good tortune alſo would have it, that Dgn Ferrand ſhould divide his
Forces , who had he come to atraque us art the beginning, would have been che death of
a great many good men z but we ſhould have ſold our skins very dear.
Now as Don Ferrand was at Aft, 1n his way cowards Alba, he there met intelligence
that Monſieur de Bonnivet was very ſtrong within it, and that lately chree Companies
were entred into tne Town of thoſe that T had at Caſſal, together with a greac number of
Pioneers, which made him enter intoa very great debate, whether or no he ſhould go
to Alba, as he did before ac Riverol wherher or no he ſhould go to Caſſal. Afﬀeer five Delays and
or fix days then he deparced from Aft with all his Cavalty to go take a view of Alba, negligence ru-
where, after he had ſpent a whole day in diſcovering the place, he went to fic down be- 1995 to Mars
fore St. Damian, having been told , that the Marcſchal had taken thence almoſt all the ml
amunition of powder, bullet, and match, to put into Alba, and had given order to ſome
one to lay in as much more ; bur oftentimes the ſloth and negligence of men intruſted
wich the care of affairs eccaſion very ſignal diſadvantages ; I never ſaw man that was ftow
about his buſineſs, idle or negligent in war, that ever perform'd any great matters ; nei-
ther indeed is there any thing inthe world, wherein diligence is ſo much required, A day,
an hour, nay a minure 3s enongh to makethe braveſt enterprizes vanilh into air.
Now the Marelchal conceived that Don Ferrand was more likcly to put himſelf into
Carmagnolle to fortifie the Town, and to take the Caſtle, chan ro maxe any arcempt up=
on any other place, belicving St, Damian to be repleniſhr with powder, and therefore
c2mehimſelt chither to take ordcr tor ime ſecurity of that Fort, where Monſieur de Baſſe
who was Governor of the Marqueſate of Salazzs, would undertake the defence of the
place. The Mareſchal then went to Carignan, leaving me with the ſaid Sicar de Baſſe wo
alliſt him in puiting proviſion and ammunition into the Caſtle, which he did ar the re-
queſt of Monfieur de Boſſe himlelt, and the very ſame day that the Mareſchal departed
trom us, he had inrelligence by a letter trom Metfieurs de Briquemaut, and de Cavigny, that The $;ece ot
| | | iege 0
the Enemy was ſer down betore $t, Damian, and chat they therefore entreared him to $t, Dames.

P 2 rclieve

x
2
7
{
|
3
|
'
i

CEP St Ap PET Ev
- NE 4

> Tz <5 vat oh _

COT EEE HIT 2s;

wt
_— OY

_—_—_—
————"

a,
, YE . __. . 2 $% 4b ol 4 — 7 0? 1 ap ee eee _
4 Ie <> - - a er ia rn _— , = - or -
pr OR 2 Os Pt EE pi Ja P.-C WIS) q " - -

og rr eas
pa dc END

mas
s
*;

4 < Sc >
wo

O #

R [idk 4:
8 e3d#:3'S & ty

RET AL. -- <p>. Ie =

100 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book II,

relieve them with powdery bullet, and match for the Harquebuzcers, chey having not re-
ceived thar which he had promiſed, and taken order for ; ar which che Mareſchal was the
moſt highly concern'd imaginable, and immediately ſent chicher fix loads of powder, and
four of bullet , with a proportionable quantity of match, ſending order ro the Governor
of laCiſterne (a Fort two little miles diſtant from Sr. Damian) who had three Conpanies
of Italians in Garriſon with him) that he ſhould by all means venture thar night ro pur
thoſe ammunirions into the Town, Monſieur de Baſſe, and I had already heard that the
Camp was ſer down before St. Damian by the ſame Meſſenger that carried the news to
the Mareſchal, he being of necefſiry to paſs by Carmagnolle, as allo did this ammunirion,
three or four hours after, which was in the cloſe of the Evening. Monſienr de Baſſe and
T exhorted him who had the conduR of the Ammunition to remonſtrace co the Captains,
that the powder muſt of neceſſity be put into the Town that very nights for otherwiſe it
could not be poſſibly convey'd into its and that he who undertook the conduR of it, was
likewiſe to enter in himſelf : but we found the fellow fo cold in che buſineſs, that we
very well perceiv'd he would do no good : Tris very eafte to diſcover by a mays counte-
nance ifhe be afraid or no, and whether he have the hearc to execute what he hath un-
A mans cou= qdertakens and we ſaw fo mnch by this fellow, that we were rather afraid he thould diſ-
rage is to Þ© 1corten the Captains when he came to 1a Cifterne, than any wayes encourage them to
known by his che Enterprize enjoyn'd ; which made me reſolve ro go my {elt, to try by this relief to
countenance, ! | |
ſave the place, and Monſieur de Baſſe would that Monſicur de Cloſe his cldeſt Son, with
ren men at arms, he being Lieutenant of his own Company , ſhonld go along with
mce |
At one of the clock at night then we departed, and by eleven the next day came to
la Ciſtrene, where I found the Governor and his Captains 1n a great perplexity, forming
a great many difficulties abour the conduR of this Ammunition, and which way ir way
potſible ro be convey*d into the Town ; and 1n truth they had ſome reaſon ſo to do ;
Monfieur Mont- For St, Damian is a little place, and Don Ferrand had in his Camp 6000 Germans, 6000
luc andertakes Tralians, and 4000 Spaniards, 1 200 Light-horſe, and 400 men at arms, and all theſe were
ro relieve St. encampr cloſe by the Town, abour which the Court of Guards in a manner toucht one
U 03h another, fo char to carry it into the Town upon the horſes thar had brought it to 1a C-
fterne had been impoſſible, for it was a ſnow knee deep, and all the wayes were full of
Soldiers Huts. Bur I preſently cauſed a great many Sacks to be brought me, and made
chem co be cur each Sack into three parts, which by certain women , who were ready for
the purpoſey were handſomely {owed together again, and into theſe bags I pur the Pow-
der. I rhen got together thirty Countrey fellows, upon whom I cauſed the powder and
buller ro be tryed, with the match ar their Girdles, and gave to each of them a good
ſtaffe in hishand to ſupport him. Monſieur d? Briquemant, the Governor of St. Damian,
had cnc {ix Swiſs of his Guard out of the Town,who could not get in againzand fo hapned
co be ar /a (iſterne , who allo took their ſhare of the Ammunition. x
Being then ready to ſet ont, there arrived the Seigneurs de Pied-de-fou, and de Buurry
(who lam told js finceturn'd Hugonot) de St. Romain (Nephew co Monſieur de Fayette)
and three or fonr Gentlemen more, who were going to pur themſelves into the Town,
and alighting pur themſelves on foot, and fent back their horſes, The Mareſchal had
writ to two of the Captains, who were art la Cifterne, that they thould attempyr to pur the
An old Soldier powder into St. Damian z which ſaid Captains were old Soldiers, which made me char
fears death, Thad nogreat hopes of their doing any thing to purpoſe; for whoever would execute a
hazardous enterprize, and where there 1s like to be good ſtore of blows, mult of all chings
take heed of employing an old Captain and an old Soldier, for as much as they roo well
underſtand the peril, and too much apprehend the danger of death, ſo that you ſhall fel-
dom have any good account of their undertaking, as ] havefound by experience both
in this, and upon other occaſions: whereas a young fellow 1s nor fo apprehenſive of his
danger (it is true that there ought to be conduRt in the caſe) and will cafily undertake
any execution where diligence is required ; he 1s prompt and active, and his youthful
hear enflames his heart, which in old men is often cold and bloodleſs.
About two hours after midnight chey departed, and ſo ſoon as they were gone out of
the Town, I went up to a Platform hard by the Gate, from whence 1 could diſcover the
Enemies whole Camp, excepting a little on the other fide of che Town ; and in che mean
time ſent out the Governors Lieutenant to give an allarm on the left hand by the Springs,
which fignificd very little, the Enemy making very ſmall account of it. So ſoon as our peo-
. Foxr PIE WETE arriv'd at a little eminence near to the City, from whence they might diſcover all
The relief 6an- \, « fires, and even the men by the light of them , one of che Tralian Captains ſaid to
not get into , h :
$:. Damian. Monſicur de Pi:d-de-fo , and the reſt. Yedete 3! Campo, Ecco la Cavalerie, ecco la Cen-

darmerie

Boox Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

darmerie, ecco ii Tadeſci, ecco li Eſpaniolli, ccco li Italiani ( pointing ro them with his
finger ) non // in!rareble una Gatta, biſagna tournar endietro. Behold the ( amp, ſee yonder
the Cavalry, [ce the Gens d Armes, ſee the Germans, fee the Spaniards, ſee the Italians, a
Cat cannot poſſibly get in 3 and therefore 'ris convenient to turn back again. All chis while
I remain'd upon the Platform, with my pain in my hip, which plagu'd me to death, of
which T was not yer cur'd, nor of two years after.

Behold then ar break of day all our people retnrn'd, where they gave mean account
of whar they had ſeen, which gave me trouble, bur no ſatisfaRtion 3 wherefore I pre-
ſently diſparch't away a Mcſlenger poſt to the Mareſchal (who knew nothing of my be-
ing at [a Ciſterne, bur believ*d me to beat Carmagnzlle with Monſieur de Baſſe) to whom
I gave an account of all that had paſt, and withsll ſent him word, that he was not to
hope chat theſe Captains would ever pur the powder into St. Damian; for tha I had
already prov'd the contrary , entreating him therefore to ſend away poſt to ontcallier
ro Captain Chirry who carried my Enfign, that he thould forthwith come away with
fifry of the beſt Soldiers ] had to wit, thirty Harquebuzeers, and twenty Pikes, and that
he thould nor fail to be ar [2 Ciſterne by midnight, The Mareſchal wondred to hear thar
FT was there, and preſently G:lparch't away a Meſſenger poſt LO Captain Charry, co whom
T had alſo writ a word or two in haſte co the ſame effec,

This valiant young man, tull of ſpirir, and good inchnation to the ſervice, needed not
ro be intreated rwice, out immediately came away with his fifry men, and about an
hour after midnight came ro la Ciſferne, where I had in a Cellar prepar'd three or four
good Charcole fires, anda long Table full of mear, having lockt up the Country fellows
on the one fide, whom whilſt che Soldiers drank and made good cheer, I cauſed to be
loaden, together with the Swils, and wonld no more ſpeak to the Italian Caprains to
g0 with Captain Charry, ſave only that I entreated one of them to lend me his Enfign

4

called Pedro Antonio, a vain young Coxcomb, whom I had known at ontcabier, and Caprain Char-

had there twice laid him by the heels for miſdemeanors he had committed in the Town,
T took him then aſide, and ſaid to him, Pedro Antonio, I will dothee more honor than thy
Captain, thou haſt ſeen what a fault thy Countrymen laſt night committed, in not ftrivin

to enter into the Town, from whence you all return'd with a company of pitiful excuſes.
For my part 1 am a man that take no excuſe in payment , where the los of a Town, ant
the men of honour within it, are in concern. I know thon haſt conrage enough, but thou art
not wiſe ; and if thou wilt now give a teſtimony of thy diſcretion, as thin haſh at other times
done of thy waleur, 1 do engage to thee my word to make the Aareſchal give thee 2
Company, and thou haſt now an occaſion «ffers it ſelf, wherein to let him ſee, that as thou
art bold to extcute, thou art alſo prudent toc\mmand, I will therefore that thon take fifty

7 undertakes
the relief of
St, Damian,

men of thy Captains Company, to whom I will preſently ſpeak to deliver them to thee, and A diſcourſe of

at thy going out of the Town I will place all the Peaſants and the Swiſs that carry the Ammn-
nition in the midſ# of the fifty Soldiers, and will moreover that thou take three Sergeants,
which I will alſo cauſe tobe delivered to thee, ts place one in either Flanck, and vne behind, to
the end that they may encoarage the Soldiers to follow thee, and have an eye that the Peaſants dy
not ſteal away : but when (, aptain Charry ſhall attaque a Conrt of Guard, paſs thou on with-
out ſtaying to fight, unleſs any one oppoſe thy way, and make flill forwards, whether thou
meet any oppoſition or no, until thou comeft to the very pates of the City, He hereupon return'd
me anſ{wer1n Italian. Credete Signior, Chio la faro a pena di Morir, & voi conneſcerete che
Pietro Antonio ſara divinuto Saggio ; Wherenpon taking him in my arms, I ſaid co him,
Io ti prometto ancora, cbe io mirecordero dite, & che ti ſerarecognoſciuto il ſervitioz no mi
mancar di gratis, io ti ginro per lanoſtra Madonna ſe ta non ſai chello che un hnomo de bene
debbe fare, ioti farro un tratts de Monluco. Tuſa come io he manegiato non ſnono quindeci
die uno delle nusſtri f acendo d'il poltrone, Io non dimando ſino un pucco di pradenza con pres
ftezza. And indeed he kept his promiſe with mes and carried himſelf very diſcreetly
in theaction, The Captains gave him whatever he defired, being glad themſelves to be
rid of the employment; I alſo entreared Pied-de-fox, and che reſt befere named, thac
fince they were relolv'd to put themſelves into the Town, they were to do it ſo as to be
aſſiſting co the conſervation of che place, and not to loſe themſelves rogerher wich all
choſe who were within 1t 3 foraſmnch as the preſervation of the ſaid Town conſiſted only
in ſupplying ic wich ammunition , and char cherefore ic would be neceſſary chat they
ſhould divide themſelves, ſome into the Flancks, and others into che rear, to the end thac
whillt Capiain Charry ſhould be fighting , they might encourage Pedro Antonio's men to
g00n; Which they accordingly did,

All ct chem cheretore having received their inſtruRtions from me what every one was
co do, as well Iraliansand Peaſants, as my own Soldiers; they all in che order preſcrib'd,

marche

the Sieur de

Montluc to Pg

dro Antonio.

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book Il.

marcht out of the Town ; when going out at che Gate, I cold Caprain Charry in the
hearing of all my Soldiers, thar I would never {ce him more, if they did nor enter, or die
upon the place, as many as were of my Company z to which he made anſwer, chat he
only defir'd me to goto my reſt, and that I ſhould preſencly hear news of him, In crath
he was a Soldier without fear. In his Company there was a Corporal of mine called le
T'#rk, a Picard by birth, who ſaid rome, What do you make 4 queſtion of our entring into
the Town ? Par la mirt bien, we ſhonld have ſpent onr time and onr blood very well, having
above an hundred times fought with you, and ever remain'd viltorious, if we ſhould now ſtand
ſufpefed toyou ; art which I leapt abour his neck, and ſaid to him theſe words. My Tark,
1 do aſſure thee upon my faith, I think ſo wirthily of you all, that I am confident if any men
# pon earth can enter, you will doit ; and fo they deparced, and I wene to place my {elf
again upon the Platform, wheie I had ſtood the night before, and che Captain of che
Watch kept me company» | |

About two hours after I heard a great alarm on that fide by which ou* people were

Reliefpur into to enter, and ſeveral volleys of Harquebuzſhor $ but they continued bur a very. lictle

$t. Damian,

while, which pur me into ſome fear that our men might be repulſed, or ar leaſt that
thac the Peaſants were run away : who fo ſoon as they were come to the eminence where
the Iralian Captains had told them, that a Cat could not get in, chey made a hal.
There the Guides ſhewed them the Courts of Guard, from which, by reaſon of the ex-
cefſive cold and the ſnow, the Centinels were not twenty paces diſtant» Captain Charyy
then called Meſſicurs de Pied de-feu, Bourg, St. Remain, and Pedro Antonio, to whom he
deliver?d two Guides, reſerving one for hymſelf, and faid to them, this is the laſt Cour
of Guard of foot, for the reſt are all horſe, which can do no great matcers by reaſon of
the ſnow z ſo {con therefore as you ſhall ſee me atraque this Court of Guard, run on as faſt
as you can, and ſtop not for any thing you ſhall meer 1n your way, but make direQly
to the Gate of the City 3 who thereupon all of one accord ſer themſelves in a poſture to
charge throngh. Captain Charry then drew near to the Court of Guard, which he pur
ro rout, and overturn'd upon another Court of Guard, and both of them berook them-
ſelves to flight; which being done he paſt on forward ſtraight co the Gate of the Town,
where he found Pedro Antonio alrcady arrived , and where they immediately delivered
their Ammunition, without making any longer ſtay than whilſt Mefſieurs de Chavipny
and Briquemant cmbrac* Captain Charry, cntreating him to tell me, chat finceI was ar
la Cifterne, they thought themſelves certain to be reliev'd with all things chey ſhould
ſtand in need of, and that it would be very neceſſary to ſend chem in ſome more Am-
munition : but whilſt the Enemy bufied themſelves about taking the Soldiers of the
Guards that were run away (of which a Captain was the next day hang'd ) Captain
Charry and Pedro Antonlo, with their Peaſants, taking chem in this diforder, charg'd them
tho! ough and thorough, and came clear away. I there loſt not ſo much as one Soldier,
either French or Italian, neither was there any one hurt, nat ſo much as Peaſant, bur
all arrived ſafe ac 14 Cifterne, it being fair broad day, where they tound me ſtill upon
the Platform, I hercupon immediately ſent away a diſpatch to the Mareſchal co entreac
him to ſend me ſome more powder , for bullet and march they had enough already,
which he allo ſpeedily did from Quiers : to which place he was remov'd, that he mighr
be nearer to me.

Bchold the age a Captain ought to be of, ro whom you ſhould entruſt the execution
of a hazardous and ſudden enterprize, and I can affirm with truth, char theſe hundred

The CharzQer Years there has nor died a brayer, nor a more prudent Caprain for his years than Captain

of Captain
Charyy.

Charry was, and am aflur'd, that Monſicur de Briquemant will ſay the fame, though he
be of the Religion of thoſe by whom he was fince aflafſinated ar Paris, The manner of
his death I have nothing to do to meddle withall 3 for the King, the Queen, and all the
Princes of che Court, knew it well enough, and betides it was ſo foul an a, chat I will
not blot my Paper with the relation, and I am ſure very unworthy a Frenchman. When
I loſt him, together with Captain CAMontlac my Son, who was {lain at the Ifland of
Madera, belonging to che King of Portagal, it ſeemed to me that my two arms were
lopr off from my body, the one being my right, and che other my lefr. He had ever
bred up Captain Montluc from the age of twelve or thirteen years, and vvherever he

The Chara&er vvenc had this young boy evermore hung at his Girdle : Neicher could I have put him

of Caprain
M9niluc.

to a better Tutor, to teach him the trade of War : and in truth he had retein'd a great
deal of his precept, inſomuch that I may vvithour ſhame ſay (alchoughhe vvas my Son)
thac had he liv'd he vyould have made a great Soldier, daring, and diſcrezt ; bur God
vvas pleaſed to diſpoſe orherwiſe of hum. I ſhall cherefore leave this diſcourſe (vvhich
extracts tears from mine eyes) to purlue my former ſubject, |

Monſieur

Book II. w_— Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 103

Monſieur de Briquemant ſent me word by Captain Charry, that they had no Engi-
neers within , nor any one that underſtood where a Gabion was ficly to be placed, wich
which he defired me to acquaint the Mareſchal, entreating me moreover to ſend back to
him Captain Charry, and my fifty Soldiers, whom he eſteemed as much as the beſt Com-
pany he had in the Town, 1n return of which kindneſs he would be my ſervant for ever ;
which I did. Monſieur de Gohas that now is, was at that time one of my Company, and
one of the fifty, though he was then but 17 years of age, it being in the beginning of his
arms. The Mareſchal therefore ſent away poſt to Alba for the Engincers rhat were
chere, vf which the Chevelier Reloge was one. $5 ſoon as Captain Charry recurned back
from St. Damian, the Pikes rook rhe Powder, and hung it at their own Girdles, as the c<
chers had done before, and would have no convoy at all, but took their way a liccle on
the right hand on char fide where the horſe lay, where they charg'd chrough, and wich-
out the loſs of one man gor ſafe into the Town ; for Captain Charry was a man that
naderſtood his buſineſs very well. So ſoon as he was got in, he entreated Metheurs de
Briquemant, and de Chavigny, to entruſt him with the defence of the Ditch, which they
zmmediacely did, and he there covered himſelf with loggs of timber, planks, and Gabi-
ons after che beſt manner he could, and ſo ſoon as ever the Guides returned back to me,
I ſent away to the Mareſchal co give him an account of all, beſeeching him to ſend me
Captain Caupenne my Licutenanc , with another fifry of my Soldiers , which he did,
whom two days after his arrival T made venture to carry ſome more powder to: the be-
fieged. He went on that fide where the Gens 4 Arms lay, where the Enemy had now
placed a Court of Guard of foot, who were aware of him ar diſtance enough, and did Captain Cay-
all chey could ro ſtop his way : which norwithſtanding he made ſhift co lay down the Penne carries
powder upon the edge of the ditch of the Gate , and by him the forenam'd Seigneurs power tents
ſent me their ſervice, withall defiring me to affure the Mareſchall, that the place was no *'* THR
more in danger of being loſt, foraſmuch as they now had every thing they needed or
defired, The Baron de Chipy who was with Monſicur de Bonivet ar Alba, would after,”
wards try to put ſome powder into the Town, by that ſide towards the faid Alba, and
accordingly charg'd after the ſame manner that mine had done : but heloſt his powder, The Baron de
and Peaſants, and almoſt all his Soldiers, ar leaſt to fourtcen or fifreen only who charg'd nj uy
thorough with him, and got into the Town. There is luck in all things. ORR

Now the Camp lay ſixteen or ſeventeen dayes before the Town, and the Battery con-
tinned for ſeven dayes, in which time Ceſur de Naples had wrought two Mines which
were carried on under the Ditch towards the Breach, and were already brought up al-
moſt to the wall. A Pioneer running away from the Enemy was taken by our Italians,
who told me all, and whom fo ſoon as it grew to be dark I deliver'd ro Captain Mar- The Mines az
ries, (who was atrhar time my Serjeant, and in this laſt war Serjeant Major to Mon- pe, err
fieur de CMontferrand at Bunrdeaux) who bound him, and would cake no more bur one ES,
Soldier only co guide him, with which he carried the buſineſs lo well, chat he mer buc |
rwo Centinels by the way, who alſo ſodainly retyr'd co their Court of Guard, inſomuch
thar he paſt without any difficulty at all, and carried the Pjoneer into che Town, where
he remained all night, and ſo ſoon as it was fair light day, Meſſieurs de Cavigny, and de
Briquemast, carried him upon the wall of che Battery, from whence he mighr diſcover
the place where che Mine lay, They then preſently delicended into the Ditch, and began
to dig and {crapes fo that they preſently found the holes, and as we after underſtood,
miſt bur very lictle of trapping (Ceſar de Naples there, who was come thither ro view the
Mine. Now che two laſt dayes they made a very great Battery, and Don Ferrand had
cauſed a great number of Bavins to be made, which by the Spaniards, Icalians, and
Germans were thrown into the Dicch, having cut the Counterſcarp in ewo or three pla-
ces 3 but as many as they threw in, Captain Charry, who lay in the Ditch, conveyed in-
ro the Town through a hole they had made under che breach, ſo that thinking the, ſaid
Ditch co be fill*d, they ſent co diſcover in open day, being all drawn up in Batcalia, ready
ro go on to the Afſſaule : butthey found all was gone, and nor a Fapot lefr in the Ditch,
which made chem ply che Batrery for two days with wonderful fury, and moreover parc
of the night by che light of the Moon ; when after all, ſeeing the good countenance of our
people within, and that neither cheir Mines, nor cheir Bavins had done them any good,
chey reſolv'd at laſt norto attempt an afſaulc, but to raiſe the Siege and depart. Thelaſt The Siege cf
night thar chey gave over the Battery I made Captain Mawries again venture into the ow Damian
Town, who heard the riſing of the Camp, and thedrawing off the Arcillery, for Meſſieurs ?'*4:
de Cavigny, and de Briquemant would not let him deparc, till he wze firſt aſſur'd of the -
wrach, char he mighc bring me certain news ; and ſo he paſt and repaſt ac his eaſe, with
out encountring any one perſon, toralmuch as all the Camp wag already in Batralia, and

gong

—_

104

Rr  wmtro ery. am Melt ww cs Dieter lt A Pt...
,

The Sicur de
Montluc goes
ro Sf, Damian,
and narrowly
eſcapes,

Captain Cha/-
1.J raken prilo-
ner,

3

The Sicur de
Maont!uc quits
his office of
Campemaker,

Inn ION —
—_—— 2 & —<—

The Commentaries of Meſhire Blaize Book IT:

gone from their Hats. So ſoon as hereturn'd tro me, which was about rwo hours be-
fore day , I immediately diſpatch him away npon very good horſes to che Mareſchal,
whom he found yec in bed, becauſe he had nort ſlept one wink of all nighr, having becn
all day with Prefident Birague, and Signior Franciſco Bernardin upon the thoar of Quie.
ras, where from two of the clock in the afternoon, having obſerv*d the Artillery to ceaſe,
and having ſtaid till one of the clock ar night, without hearing any thing at all, they
all concluded the place to be taken , or ſurrendred 3 bur in che morning , a little
after ſun-riſe, and jaſt as his man had open'd his Chamber door, when Caprain Xanries
Nept in, and told him the news, I leave you to judge how he was overjoy'd. And ſent
me word to come ſpeedily away to him.

Now you muſt know There plaid the part of a young Captain z forſo ſoon as Cap-
tain Manries had told methar the Enemy's Camp was rifing, I went in all haſt to Se.
Damian, where ſo ſoon as Caprain Charry, who was upon the wall ſaw me coming, he
ſallied out with my other Soldiers, which I had afterwards cauſe co be ſorry for. The
Enemy had clapt themſelves down flat upon their bellies behind a lictle hill, and had ef:
fifteen or twenty fair to be ſeen; a fight by which T was ſo cempred, that I muſt needs
forſooth go and cha:ge them, and did ſo; bur fo ſoon as I came within four paces of che
reſt, chey all ſtart up and charg*d me on all tides, and tollowed banging np my Rear to
the very walls of the Town, which reliev'd me (in good time for me) with good ſmart
volleys of Harquebuz ſhot from the wall, and there Captain Charry was wounded, and
taken, and had ir not beenfor my Lieutenant whom I had left ac the Gabions, they had
cut me, wichall the fifty Soldiers of Captain Charry, to pieces, I loſt feven or eight men,
of which thice were lin, and Monſieur de Gohas was once round encloſed, but after-
wards efcap'r. The joy I wasin to ſce rhe Siege raiſed, and the grear mind Thad to ger
ſme priſe of the Enemy, were the occaſions of this ridiculous ſally of mine, This be-
ing done. atcer I had ſeen Mefdieurs de Chavign), and de Briquemant, 1 returned back

#£ la Ciftern?, and the ſame night went to Quiers , where I was as much welcom'd by
1c Mareſ(chal, and all thoſe who were with him, as any man in the world could be,

Which faid Mareſchal preſently difparcht away Monſieur de Biron to the King, to carry
his Majeſty news of the ifſue of this Siege, entreating of him the place of a Bedchamber
man for me; and moreover at my great inſtance and importunity (and being I was e-
rernally cormented with my hip) was pleaſed to diſcharge me of my Office of Camp-
maſter, chough it was a requeſt very unpleafing to him : but to gracifie me in whate-
ver I would ask of him, he was willing to content mein that particular. And theſaid
Seigneur de Biron being at Court, the King would not transfer to any one the ſaid Office
of Camp-maſter, till firſt he ſhould be berrer enformed whom he onghc to giveit to ; and
therefore ordered that the Mareſchal ſhould name one, Monſieur de Bonivet another, and
I a third : Itherefore nominated Monſieur de Chipy, which was the reaſon thar the ſaid
Sjenr de Biron continued very long at Court, becauſe of the diſpatches to and again, thar
he was enforc'tto make, during which I ſtillcontinued Camp-maſter, till the return of
the ſaid Seigncur de Biron ( who at that time carried the Mareſchal's Guidon ) who
brought me my diſcharge, his Majeſty having transferred that command to the Baron de
Chipy, whom I had nam*d, and alſo brought me the place of Gentleman of his Ma-
jeſties Bedchamber , for he would not depart till he had firſt ſeen me inroll'd in the
room of one of che old ones that was vacant, and moreover brought me a Patent for
the Government of eAl*a, which I never dream'c of, 2nd leſs imagin'd, that the King
ſhould prefer me to three or four others, in whoſe behalf che Mareſchal had wricten to
him. Behold the ſervices I perform'd for the King, and the Mareſchal his Lieutenanc,
all within fifrcen or twenty dayes of one another.

Happy (fellows in arms) is he who ſerves his King nnder a General who will not con-
ceal che merics of ſuch as perform any remarkable exploit , which Monficur de Briſſac
would ncycr do : for never did any man under his command do any handſome thing,
or any the lcaſt 2&ion which he thought worthy his Majeſties knowledge, bur he did
forchwicth give him notice of it : he was a Gentleman that would not cloath him-
ſclt with che ſpoils of anocher man*s honor, nor conceal the bravery of any from the
orcateſt tothe leaſt, When cherefore ic ſhall pleaſe God that you arc employ*d under
ſuch a General, fear not co hazard your lives, and employ all your vigilance and dili-
gence to do them the beſt ſervice you can, if you have an intention to advance your ſelves
by your arms and virtue, if not, get you home, and never meddle with the practice of
Arms, *Tizan cxtreme grief and diſappoiarment to a man, when he ſhall have expoſed
his life for the acchievment of honor, to have his name then conceal*d from his Prince,
trom whom we are to expect the reward of onr fideliry and valour. There is no chef:

comparab1*

— OA TETEIRee os Tr ar 17 WORE OY 790 2 22 07 YR nn _p———__—_ TT VE m—_—— w

Boox Il. = de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. top

> > __—

p—_—
—__m + OC ES < <ott 60 EO IE CO I EE <> —

comparable to that of robbing another man of his honor, and yer Generals for che moſt

part make no conſcience of it, ES | STE ENS
During the time thar Monſieur de Biron remained at Court, I till continuing Camps

maſter , as has been ſaid before, and in the beginning of Fane when corn began to

ripen, Don Ferrand would not ſuffer the great Army he had to lye idle, but at the per- |

(waſion of Monſieur de Trinitat, Brother to the Count de Benne, would go lay fiege ro The Siege of

Benne, the ſaid Monſicur de Trinitat adviſing him to cut off the water which turned Benze.

certain Mills within the Town, ſaying char they had nor wichin corn nor meal to ſerve

them for a monerhz and moreover aſſuring him, that he would ger him a pay for the

Army, by cutting the corn that was now almoſt ready for the Sickle , which he would

preſently cauſe ro bethraſhtup by 3oo Peaſants he would take along with hira for chat

purpoſe, knowing very well that rhoſe of Langner, and de Berniſſe 1a Paille would be

ready to buy 1t, and that fo 1n a moneths time the Town would be ſurrendred with

out one Canon {hor. | | | I RO IO
Monficur de Savoy , who was then very young , that being his firſt ſally into Arms, The Duke of

was at'this time with the Army , and they came to fer down their Camp within a mile ard OY.

of Benne, upon the Banks of a River that was there, of which they ſo curned the cur. PPD PIP

rent, that not ſo much as one drop came into the Town, Now, by 11l fortune, the

Mareſchal had ordered a Governor (whoſe name T ſhall forbear) co cauſe rwelve hun.

dred ſacks of corn and mcal, half of the one, and half of the other, to be brought into

this place from his own Government, as the cuſtom had been. Lwill not publiſh che

occafion why' the ſaid Governor did not accordingly ſend in the ſaid proviſions, being it

would too nearly refle&t upon his honor, and it is nor my purpoſe to ſpeak ill of any

Bur Preſident Birague knows the reaſons very well, ke being preſent at the Council, when

the Mareſchal was pleaſed to ſend for me, and where there was a very great clutter, and

high diſpute abour that affair. The Enemies Camp had already been eight days ſer

down before Benne, and made no ſhew of any intention to aſſault ie, hoping they ſhould

ſoon have ic for want of viuals, alchough the Town was of ir ſelf ſufficiently fortified,

and thar the Count and the Counteſs were very afte&ionate to the Kings ſervice. There

was inall but three Companies of foot within it, to wit, that of the Count, that of the

vounger la ole, and of Logys Duke, which was that of Afontdevi, making in all two

Companies of Italians, and one of French. The ſaid Captain 1a ole was ſick, and by

order of his Phyſitians for change of ayr, had cauſed himſelf to be carried ro Montdevi ;

{othat the Count had no man of Command with him, but the ſaid Lonys Dake, and The Count de

which was worſe, had never before been befieg'd, which pur him into a very great per- Benue in great

plexity, having no body with him who underſtood at all the defence of a Town. An perplexicy.

affair wherein the moſt hardy are apt co be aſtoniſhr when they hear a furious rattle a-

bout their ears , and ſee a mighty preparation againſt chem, if they have not been ar

{uch work Eefore : and on the other fide he faw himſelf totally withour proviſions ; in-

ſomuch thar he reſolved ro ſend che Mareſchal word of ally, aad of the fear he was in,

the place would be loſt ; as hehad juſt reaſon, it being thac where his chiefeſt intereſt lay,

the Town being his own. He therefore preſently diſparched away the Lieutenant to the

Company of eMontdevi, who arriv'd juſt asthe Mareſchal roſe from dinner, he being

then ar (armagnolle, and with him Mcfſicurs de Bonivet, Preſident Birague, d'eAuſſun,

Franciſco Bernardin, 1a Meth-Gondrin, and ſome other whoſe names I have forgot. So

{oon as the Mareſchal underſtood che Count's apprehenſion , and heard he had no provi-

ſions, and that the Governor (whole name I have omitted) had not ſent any in accord-

ing to his order, though he had {till pretended ro have done it, both he and all the com-

pany entred into a very great diſpair, and concluded the place for loſt, being the Mareſ-

chal had no viſible way to relieve ir, foraſmuch as he had not men to reliſt rhe chird pare

of the Enemy's Army. He then demanded of the Lieutenant what Captain he defir'd

to have come to him co alfiſt him, to which he made anſwer, that the Count loved me

exceeding well, and otren ſaid, that I had once reliev*'d him, and chat he would give

the one half of his eſtate, upon condition that I was with him. I wasthen bur newly The Counc 4+

recover*d of a Feaver, with which my mouth and lips were much {well'd and broken out. Bene demangs

The Mareſchal then fenc for me by his Yalet de Chambre to come preſently co his lodging, the Sicur de

where I found him in this trouble. He chere made the Lieutenant to give me an account Hontiuc to be

of the extremity they were 1n 1n Berne, as he did, and moreover complaining of che Go- on to his £60

vernor by whom they had been ſo deceiv'd, earneſtly entreatcd me to go and put my felt *

into the Town. To which I made anſwer, What would yow have me do, there being net-

ther corn nor meal ? I canwork no miracles; to which he return'd, that the Count had

{o high an opinion of me, as alſoall choſe in che Town, char if I could once ger in, they

Q_ wers

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book II,

The Sieur de
Montluc puts
himſelf into
Benne.

Benxe unfur- >
nifhr of pro-
Yifens,

The Counteſs
of Benne her
ſclf takes care
t fee the work
of the Town
£0 forward.

The way to ger
£07n.

were very confident the place would nor be. loft, bar chat I would find ſome expedient to
{ayc it,

Every one knows how theſe great Lords, when they would make one undertake an
1mpoſſible ching , can wheedle and flatter a man into a good opinion of himſelf, and
accordingly they here reprefented to me the exemples of Lans, St. Damian, and other
places where I had had to do, and had ever been fo fortunate, as thar all chings had ſuc-
ceeded according to my own defire, The Preſident Blragme then began to perſwade me
on the other fide , but Monfieur de Bonivet and the reſt ſaid nothing, knowing very
well how dangerous an Enterpriſe it was for the loſs of my honor, and thar I muſt in
the end of necellity come to a Capitnlation 5 as the Mareſchal himſelf alſo told me, char
for che laſt refuge I muſt proceed to chat; to which I made anſwer, thac I had rather
die, than that my name ſh1ld befound upon record ſubſcribed to a Capitmlation, or that any
place ſhould be ſwrrendred 1 had once taken npon me to defend 5, but that 1 would do as God
ſhould direft me , in whoſe aſſiftanze I repoſed my only confidence and truff. Monſicur de
Bonivet then commanded twelve or fifreen Gentlemen of his to go along with me, (of
which number the Governor de la Moth Rouge, who 1s yet living was one, and I took
as many of my own, making up thirty horſe, withont taking any ſervant with me, {ave
only a Valet de Chambre and a Cook) and writ to the Vicount de Gordon at Savillan, to
furniſh me with a good Guide, and to Captain Theodore Bedeigne, that he ſhould con-
voy me with his Troop, andl this was upon the Saturday. Upon Sunday morning by
break of day I entred into Benne, and the Count, if hebe yer living, and will ſpeak his
conſcience, will ſay that it was one of thegreateſt joys that ever he had in his whole life,
45 alſo the Counteſs, and the whole Town will wicnels the ſame. I prefently laid me
down to fleep in the Caſtle, and rwo hours after I awakr we went to dinner. The Connr
:n rhe mean time had appointed all the head men of che Town, as alſo all the Maſons
and Carpenters to repair to the Town-Hall , to which place the Count, the Counteſs,
and all of us likewiſe came. |

I there propoſed all that was neceſſary to be done, the Count complain'd of thelictle
corn he had , and the Towns-men deelar*d, that they had not ſufficient for cight days ;
ſo thac alchough che Town was ſcituared advantagiouſly enough, yet were they in a very
prear neceſſity, by reaſon 1t was the latter end of the year, and on the other fide they had
ſold all their corn to the Genoeſes, and to thoſe about Savosa, being tempred ſo to do by
the rates they gave, 1t being at chat time ſold for three Crowns a ſack : and the Count:
who was a man that liv'd at a very great expence, had (old all his in expeRation, and up-
on the aſſurance of the 1200 ſacks vvhich che Governor, that I forbear co name, ought to
have ſentin thither. We then fell ro diſputing in caſe we had corn, vvhich way we
(hould ger ic ground : Bur fo ſoon as the Count had told me whereabouts the Cam
lay, I preſently conceiv*d that I ſhould make a ſhift to ger corn, though I would nor ſay
any thing to any one, till afcer we were recurn*d from che Council, then I told it to the
Count and the Counteſs only, Whileſt vve were fitting in Council there was a little
man a Maſon of above chreeſcore years of age, who preſented himſelf before us, ſaying
that he had formerly gor ſeveral great ſtones to: lay upon the Graves of the dead, from
a Quarry that he nam'd hard bys and chat he conceiv'd if thoſe ſtones were taken off the
Gro: &, they wor ſome of them art leafty if not all, be proper ro make Mill-ſtones s
W.rereupon ive Gepued two of the Town, together vvith the Counteſs, vvho would needs
90 along vvith them, to make tryal vvith the Maſons , vvhether they could be of an
aſeor no : and nor lone after the ſaid Lady return'd with great joy, and offer'd her ſelf
to take the pains to cauſe the Mill-ſtones to be made ; vvhich ar the firſt I vvould by no
means endure; but in the end ſhe would be obeyed, and vvas ſo diligent in the buſineſs,
that in two days and wo nights ſhe had got eleven hand-Mills fginiſht complear, vvhich
were diſtribured 2mongſt thoſe of the Town, vvho vvould thereupon undertake to nou
riſh the Soldicrs, provided there might be a vvay found to ger corn, We then concludetl
vvith thoſe of the Town, that at one of the clock at night they ſhould bring me five or
fx hundred men and women, the one carrying little ropes, and the others Scythes 3nd
Sicles to cur the corn, and that the Gates of the Town ſhould inthe mean tirne be £57
(thur , to the end that no body might go out to carry intelligence to the Enctay ; tor
Mogfienr 4e Trinitat had ſeveral friends inthe City, that the Count himſelfhad 1n tome
ſu{voition. I then diſpatcht away rwo of the Inhabitants wich a letrer to Captain Hieronimo,
the Son of Colonel Giovanni of Turin (who lay at alittle Town, the name of whicl»
I have forgot, but it was about a mile diſtant from the place where the Enemy had @zr,
and Givcried the current of the River) entreating him that this night he would by conc
way cr anorficr arrempr to repair what the Enemy had broken down, and dy all Cat 112

3414Y)
} «. + 41

Boox II. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.
him lay, if poſſible, to ſend the water co us again, which chat very night he accordingly
executed, though he was bat a verv young Gentleman, for I believe he was not then a-
bove twenty years old, We then went home expeRting the night, when being retarn'd
back to the Caſtle, T cold the Count, that it would be convenient we thould go alone
npon the walls to look our a field of corn that ſhould lie necreſt to the City, which we
were to cut all thar nighr, whilſt T ſent out Captain Theodore with 200 Soldiers to give
a ſtrong and furious alarm to the Court of Guard , who were ſet to hinder thoſe of
the Town from cutting any Corn. So ſoon then as we had made choice of one, we
return'd back to ſupper, and after we had ſupp'd, carried out Captain Theodore and two
others, Commanders oft Companies, that were chere preſent upon the Wall of the Town,
' to ſhew them on which fide they were to give the alarm, and the others to fight che
Court of Guard. After which we appointed ten of the Townſmen on horſe-back to
overlook the people that cur the corn, co haſten them in their work, |

At one of the clock at night all theſe people went out, the Soldiers to fight, and the Greac 4ili-
people to cut 3 fo that nothing was to be heard all night long but alarms, as well in the gence in the
Camp, -as atthe Court of Guard , and as the people cur and bound up the corn, they people,
(ll ran back to the Gate ot the City, and there threw down their burthens, and im-
mediarely went again for morez for ſome were appointed to reap, and the reſt to bind
and carry. In the mean time the day appear'd, vyhen we cauſed thoſe to vvhom the
field belonged to convey away the corn from off the place, ſo chere vas nor one ſack of
corn loſt of all night, The Encmy vvho ſaw this field all cur, and carried away, plac'c
thereupon ſtronger Guards, and ncerer than before ; bur the people vvho began to taſte
the ſweetneſs of their gain, refolv'd to hazard themſclyes to get their corn off theground,
rather than the Enemy ſhould have ir; inſomuch char at the beginning of the nigh
there ſallyed our above cwo hundred'of the Inhabitants of the Town, of vvhich ſome ven-
cur'd further, and others did their buſineſs ncerer at hand. Now Berne you muſt know The ſcirnarien
3s almoſt rorally ſurrounded vvith valleys, vvhich are pretty vvel covered vvith Copſe, of Benne.
and vvatered vvich ſeveral Rivulets : ſo that vyhen they heard any body coming, they hid
themſelves vvich their corn, and in the morning at che opening of che Gates recurn'd
back tothe Cty, The next morning after my arrival.che vvater by the diligence of Caps
rain Hieronimo, began to come down to the Mills, and for two days and two nights con-
tinued its courſez vvhereupog enſued a great confuſion at the Mills bur vve made an
order that no one ſhould grind any more than to make ten or a dozen loaves only, by
vvhich means every body gor ſome to ſerve them a little vvhile, and two dayes and two
mghts afrer Captain Salines a Spaniard came to vievv the vyater, vvhich the ſame nighc
vvas again taken from us. I chen gave Captain Hieronimo notice of the place vvhere they
had again return'd to cut it off from us, vvho never ceaſed till he had made up the
Bank again : but he could not do it ſo asto ſend the vvater to us for above a day ; for
from hour to hour the Enemy ſtill came to viſit che vyork : but by this time the Coun-
tels had made an end of her vyork, fo that vve no more car'd for the vyarer.

Now by means of frequent skirmiſhes, which were here as many, and as handſome Hanefome
as in any place where Ieyer had the fortune to be, and by the diligence was uſed in cur- skirmiſhes be+
ting by night, we bad atlaſt as much corn as the Enemy. When Don Ferrand (ceing fore Benue.
himſclf fruſtrated of che aſſurance had been given him by Monſieur dela Trinitat, began Don Terrand
ro be highly diſcontented with him. Captain T heodore the night after we had made the diſconmrited
fiiſt curing,” in which he alſo was engag'd, return'd back to Savillzy, and in ooing a- With Monficur
way had chree or four horſes and men of his Troop wounded , wbo therefore ſtaid be- 4f {4 T'mtar,
hind ac Benne 3 but be fail d not to ſend away an account to the Mareſchal of what I
had done upon my arrival ; of which che Mareſchal was exceeding glad, as allo all thoſe
who were with him ; and thenceforward began to entertain ſome hope of the conſerya-
tion of the place : chough I am of opinion that had Don Ferrand batter'd the Town
with his Arallcry, they mult infallibly have been enforc'c ro a ſurrender : buc he was Don Ferrand”s
Nil buz'd jn the cars with this water, and the want of proviſions in the Town, which <r1or.
rendied him very much diffatisfied wich thoſe who had adviſed him to this courſe, and
made him enterrain ſome kind of jealoufic of Monſieur de 1a Trinitat himſelf 5 where-
fore he raiſed his Camp the three and twentieth day afcer my arrival, having becn ſer down
eight dayes before I came. The Count js ye living as Tam told, and Prefidenc Birague The Siege of
I know co be ſtill in being, with ſeveral ochers who can bear witneſs, if I have inſerted any Penne railcd. |
thing buc the cruch ; bur whether Monſieur de Cofſe was yer recurn'd back to the Mareſ\-
chal I am not able co ay; for he was a little betore gone into France. Thus then the
Town was fay'd, and a tew dayesafter the Baron de Chipz, who was gone to Courc to
eiye his Majeſty thanks for the donation he had made hum of che aforeſaid office return'd,

Q 2 and

JE ee er dm thn

i.
”

108

ha,

EET” Yo IEA. Aer TH... bi Vier 4 aa 't ”

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book Lf]

The Enterpriisg
of Conrteville.

Conrteville
batrer'd by
Movſicur de
Briſſac,

W—_— -

and Having taken npon him his command of Camp- maſter, 1 went co Aiba co rake poſ-
{c119n of my new Government.

On Caprains, the great things thac a man may do, how little ſoever his judgment or
experience may bc, if he will incend nothing bue char wherein he 18 iImmediacely engag'd
thence co come off to his own honor, and che advantage of his Maſter! and on the other
ſide nothing bur misfortune can attend him , who minds nothing of butineſs, and only
{ſpends his time in pleaſure, play, and teaſting ; for 1t is impotlible buc rhat the one muſt
make you forger the other ; we cannot ſerve ſo many Maſters : whenever chen you ſhall

e engag*d upon ſuch an account as this, ſtrip your ſelves of all your vices, and burn chem
all, roche end that you may remain in che white Robe of loyalcy and atte&ion thar we
all owe to onx common Maſter : for God will never proſper the vitious and voluptuous
man ; but onthe contrary will ever aſſiſt him who is clad in the white Robe of loyalty.
I give you the ſame advice rhar I ever gave my ſelf, and ir was therefore thar God has
cver afiſted and been ſo favonrable ro me, that I have never becn defeared, and have nc-
ver been in any engagement (if I commanded) that I was notalwayes victorious, Net-
cher could I fail, for God eyermore inſpir'd me, and prompred my memory with whac [I
had to do, and thar 3s the reaſon that I haze ever burn bleſt with to good fortune. And
he will alſo afſift you, as he hath done me, if you ſtady , nor buſie your ſelves a-
bout nothing but how to ferve your Maſter with the loyalty and fidelity we all owe him,
Afﬀcerwards when we have ncthing elſe ro do, we may freely enjoy our pleatures and de-
lights, tor then it will be no prejudice to the King , nor co him we ſerve under hnn,
Then you thall enjoy a ſweet and pleafing repoſe, when you {hall return home laden
with honor, and ſhall preſent your {elves before your Prince, ro whom 1c ſhall be cold
what you have done for his ſervice. All the treafnre in the world 15 not comparable tg
char, Takerhen (Camrades) exemple by me , who have never had other thoeght, nor
deſign, than how to acquit my {elf worthily of my charge, and doing fo it will be im-
poſſible, bur you muſt acquire great honor and reputation, In the mean rime you char
are put in truſt ro arraque or block up places : whenever you have a deſign to reduce a
Town by famine, if you find you cannot totally hinder the beficged trom fetching in
corn from the ficlds adjoyning, fer them on fire : for raking this commodity trom them,
they will be ſufficiently diſtreſſed 5 bur to ſay you preſerv?d it for your {elt, ir muſt be
concluded char you were very 1mprovident to offer co arcaque a place withont having
means and power to carry away all near unto, and in the very face of the Town you
would atraquez in ſuch cafes you muſt have no pity , for this affair requires {curvy re=
mechies.

Some time after the Mareſchal undertook to go take {onrteville, which 1s a Caſtle and
a litcle City inthe Largwes ; the Caftle is ſtrong, and rhe River runs through the midſt
of the Town, over which there is a fair Bridge of Brick , and a Bourg adjoyning to it.
The ſaid Mareſchal then came to Ajiba, and took me in his way along with him, with
the one half of my Company, which he enrerrain*d for the Guard of his own perſon,
leaving the other half jn Alba and being come to the ſaid Comrteville, lodg'd in the Bourg
on the furcher fide of the River, on this fide of which, and near unto the Caſtle was a
Monaſtery wherein he lodg'd three Enfigns, which notwithſtanding thoſe of che Caſtle
commanded us more than we commanded them. Monfjeur de Salcede had kept this
place all the time when he was with che Spaniard. The Mareſchal planted on this fide
tne Bridge ejghr or ten pieces of Canon wherewith to batter the Curtain that was oppo-
fite to the Monaſtery, in which during the Battery, Monſieur de Bonnivet lodged himſelf,
where although I was no longer Camp-maſter, I neverchelcſs never Icfr him whilſt che
Battery continucd day nor night. In two or three days time then we ſpent 1 200 Ca-
non ſhet againſt rhis Curtain, and jnrhe end were never the nearcr, foraſmuch as they
had rai'ed a prear and thick rampier behind the wall within 3 ſo thac when that was
beaten down, the place 1cmained ſtronger than before, by reaſon of the ſaid Rampier.
The Mareſchal thereupon 1cmained three days 1n {uſpence what he were beſt co do, whe-
ther he ſhould ſend for more ammunitjon, or return without making any further actempe
upon the place, Caprain Richelieu had in the mean time gain'd the Town, and was with

his own and two other Companics lodg'd within it : but fo ſoon as I ſaw the Mareſchal

in thisperplexity, I paſt the River on thar fide by che Monaſtery : tor although I follow*d
Monſieur de Bonnivet, I nevercheleſs now recir'd at night to the Mareſchal, There was a
Gate of chis Monaſtery, that went out into a great high way, upon which one mighc
march undiſcover'd and ſecure, wichout being ſeen by thoſe of the Caſtle : bur berwixr
the-Garte and the high-way there were ſome fifreen or ſixteen paces , which were to be
nimbly diſparchr, for the whole Curtain playd upon this Gate, Afterwards it was ne-

cellary

—————

Book Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. log

celſary to go ſtooping up to the Bridge ac che entry into the Town, and chen to run full
ſpeed cill you was within it. So foon asI had paſt this danger, and was got into the
high way , I began to look about me if it was poſſible to carry Canon into the Town,
which I perceived it a matter of great difficulty to doy and that was the reaſon that I went
into the Town to rake Captain Richeliex along with me, with whom I went to diſcover
the backſide of the Caſtle, which lookr into a great ſpace uninhabited, berwixt the Caſtle
and the Wall of the Town, There was there a little honſe cloſe by the wall of che City, The Sicur de
into which we put our elves to obſerve at our caſe, whether or no the Caſtle were much Montluc goes
fortified on thar part, and there T obſerv'd ſome cracks and chinks inthe wall, chrough 1 diſcove the
which one might plainly ſee the light on the other fide, and ſhew'd Captain Richelies , rnd
that if by any invention we could vring three pieces of Canon to this place we ſhould cer:
cainly take the Caſtle, foraſmuch as ic had not been fortified on that de, by reaſon of the
impoſſibilicy of bringing up Artillery to force it.
Thar which appears impoſſible co one, is feaſible enough to another, and many places
are ſo taken, T then rerurn'd by the way near cothe Abby, and Captain Richeliex with
me, where wefell ts diſcourſe about the buſineſs, and began to conſider if there was any
way to be found ro ger Canon ro the backſide of the Caſtle : whereupon ic ſuddainly
came into my head to cauſe the River to be ſounded, to ſee if the botrom was firmground ;
ro which purpoſe I cauſed a Soldier of the Abby to be call'd, ro whom ſo ſoon as he came
co me I made an offer of cen Crowns, it he would venture co ſound the River, cclling
him withall chat he muſt creep on his hands and knees, till he came into the wacer, and
that then he thould chop up to th? necx, I then calf'd another Soldier by whom I
ſent vvord to the Captains 1m the Abby, that they ſhould ſend our fifteen or twenty Sol-
diers, which ſhould go to the very foor of the wall, as if they went to skirmiſh, which
accordingly was done, and by that means I fay'd the Soldier, infomuch that the Enemy
never perceiv*d him, till he was got into the water, Firſt he went direQly to the wall
of che City , where th: water daſhr againſt it, and chence waded upwards as far as the
foard, where we uſed ro paſs over betwixt the Mareſchals Quarters and the Abby, and be- The River
hind che Abby he entred into it, whether we ran full drive to avoid the danger of the ng to paſs
ſhot , and found him already got into the Abby , and rhe Soldiers thar had been ſent _ the Can
out to skirmiſh returned a pretty while before, where he told me that che bottom of the ©
River was very good, and the water no deeper than to the nave of the wheels. Where-
upon I preſently mounted to horſe, and went to acquaine the Mareſchal with whacT had
ſeen, the two Maſters of the Ordnance Balazergnes and Dano being by, for Monſicur de
Caillac was not there, There Duno diſputed it againſt me , affirming he had difcover'd Diſpure be-
all, and I affirming the contrary, till at laſt the Mareſchal ſaid ic was their trade, and © Xe Sicur
thar to undertake a buſineſs, and nor to effe&t it, were only to loſe time and a great ma- Row _”
; ; ers of
ny men to no purpoſe. At which I began to be moved, having been netled by Dwno be- the Ordnance.
fore, and faid to the Mareſchal. Sir 1 have had the honor a great while to know Monſieur |
de Briſſac, and never ſaw him ſo much afraid of Arquebaz ſhot, that he would forbear to
diſcover a place he had a mind to ſee. I take you to be the [ame man, and that yor are not
brezme a Coward for being the Kings Lieutenant, Monnt to horſe, and I will make you
confeſs, after you have ſeen it, that you ſhall take the Caftle without the expence of ten Ca-
non ſhot, We hereupon all in a fume got to horſe, taking Dan along, and leaving Ba-
Iizergues behind, and went to paſs the River above the Abby, into which we entred, and
T had raken with me che Soldier who had ſounded the River. Now to ger into the
high way it was neceſlary ſutddenly to open the Gate, to which the Enemy had ever-
more an eye, and run fifteen or rwenty paces till we got into it, out of the danger of
che Curtain of the Caſtle, The Garechen was ſuddenly thrown open, and I paſt run-
ning, and che Mareſchal did the ſamez bur as he was running they fir'd three Harquee
buzes» with ſome of which T verily chought he had been ſhor, for I heard the noiſe of
a Buller, as when it enters a mans body, and when he came up to me, lookt him in the
face, and ſaw that he ſhak'r his head, and ſmil'd, and firting down by me upon che
ground (tor we were to keep very low) I have ſcap't a ſcouring (ſaid he) for the buflets The Mareſehal
flew betwixt my legs. Ton are very unyiſe Sir, {aid I, to follow me, do you nat perceive that de Briſſac ea
1 ain at being the Kings Lieutenant if you die ? which is the reaſon that 1 would be rid of Robes)
Y0u, and have bronght 308 hither to that purpoſe; ac which he laughr ouly, ſeeing very
well by my countenance, that I was very glad he had eſcap'c the misfortune; for the faulc
would have been laid at my door, though God knows I could nor have help'c it : for
thoſe char go co ſuch Weddings as theſe ofcen bring away red Liveries.
In che mean time Duno and the Soldier arrived, ro whom the Mareſchal engag'd to pay
che cen Crowns I had promiſed him ; bur chathe muſtreturn and do the ſame again in

his

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Bo ox It,

The good for-
rune of Mon-
ficar de Sanſac.

——

his preſence; and he would give him ten more, which the Soldier underiook co do.
Dano then cauſed his Boots to be pull'd off, and went in his doublet only with the Sol-
dier to eter ints the water behind the Abby, for the man had heart enough, and men
of his trade muſt. no more care for a Buller than a Codling, We ſaw them the one af-
cer the other wade down the River, and afrerwards came to the wall of the City ,
into which they went, landing hard by the Gate : Which was not perform'd wichour
infinite danger both for them and us, for ic was there very, hot 3 ſo that I ofcen withe
Monſieur de Briſſac at his Quarters, being more afraid of him than of my ſelf, Seeing
then D#no and the Soldier paſt over, we ran at the mercy oft the Harquebuz ſhot, and
recover d the Town, Whom God defends are well defended ;, for it wasa miraclethat ſome
one of us at leaſt was not pepper'd : bur either my fear or my aftetion made mego more
upright and nimbly than IL was wont, fo that I felt no great pain of my hip. I then
carryed the Mareſchal, and ſhewed him all that Captain Richelieu and I had ſeen before ;
when after he had heard Dano's relation concerning the depth of the River, and found
the truch of what T had told him, he began to break out into ſome paſſionate expreſſions
againſt Dano; burlT told him thar he ought nor to be angry, but intend the taking of
the Caſtle, for tl;ar no one was fo wiſe bur he might be decerv?d, , Whereupon he gave
order to Captain Richeliew to ger togecher chirry or fourty great Wine-pipes, which ar,
che beginning of the njghc he ſhould cauſe to be carried to the plact where Dano ſhould
appoint , and to another Captain to pull down a houſe, to furniſh planks ropur upon
the Pipes after they ſhonld be filled with earth to raiſe the detence ſtill higher, becaule of
the great Tower of the Caſtle, that lookt tnto the recoyl of the Canon, commanding the
other Captain alſo to provide great beams of Timber wherewith to raiſe che whole ſo
high, tharthe Tower might nor look into the recoyl of the Canon. And before we de-
parted from the little houſe which was behind the Caſtle, I ſhew'd the Mareſchal a Rock
where thirty or fourty Harquebuzeers might lye covered ro ſhoot ar the Batclements of che
Tower, when the Enemy thould preſent themſelves to thoor at the Artillery ; for they
muſt of neceſſity ſhew themſelves from the Girdle upward. |

We afterwards went up the River to the Wall of the Town to meaſure what hejghr
the Canon was to mount to get into the City, and found that 1t was not two foot, be-
caaſe the way was very low, When a Gentleman belonging to the Mareſchal came to
us, the ſaid Mareſchal having expreſly forbid that any other ſhould advance farcher than
the Abby, to whom I cauſed che charge to be committed of breaking the wall, and ma-
king it fall into the River, which being done we return'd, and Dano ſtaid with Captain
Richelien. Arthe beginning of the night then came the aforeſaid Gentleman with thirt
cr fourty Pioneers, and after him anocher Genntleman of che ſaid MareſchaPs with four
{core or an hundred more, where they found that Captain Richeliex had already got a-
bove half che Pipes upon the place. Monſieur de Bonnivet and T accompanied Balazergs er,
who drew three pieces of Canon with horſes (the Mareſchal having provided enow to
draw fix) and went on horſeback aboye twenty paces mn the River with the Canan, as
alſo did Balazrrgues himſelf, and the Carters up to the Codpiece in water : we then
turn'd to go down behind the Abby, and ſo went into the Town, vvhere though the
Enemy ſhot very hard, yet could they ſee nothing by reaſon of the extreme darkneſs of
the nighr, and therefore (hor ar random, and the level of fortune, vyhich at this time
ſmil'd unon us ; yet does ſhe not alwayes do ſo, eſpectally upon me : there are ſome in-
deed ſo happy as never to be toucht, as for exemple that brave Cavalier Monſiear de San-

ſac (I do believe there are not two Gentlemen alive, who have been in more' engage-

ments than he and I) and yer he was never hurt that I know of, excepting at the Bac-
tail of St. Denz : vvherein I have not been ſo fortunate as he. Now vvhen vve came
to the place vvhere the Gentleman vvas, vve found che vvallalready broken down, and
crumbled into the River, and thercupon canſed the Pioneers ro breax down two corners of
houſes that hindred the paſſage of che Canon, which preſently came to the Wall, tho-
rough which che horſes encred the Town, and by the help of the Soldiers we thruſt the
Canon in atcer them 35 which being done Balazergues return'd to ferch the other rwo,
which alſo we brought after the ſame manner to the place where Daxo had filPd the Pipes ;
ſo that two hours before day they were,ready to Batter, and the Soldiers lodg'd behind
the rock ro ſhoot at the Battlements.

The Mareſchal in the interim had intelligence brought him that Don Arlro de Cende
was come to St. Stephe, within five miles of us, and would march by night co relieve the
Caſtle, which cauſed the ſaid Mareſchal to ſend us word that he was going to poſſeſs hims

' ſelf of a mountain of advantage, and to fight him by the way , and that in che mean

time we thould do the beſt we could with the fix Companies we had inthe Abby, and
in

PIE 2252, BEER

Book I de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. >

in che Town. The Mareſchal accordingly gain'd the ſaid Mountain by night, and ſer
his. people in order to defend the paſs. | |
At the break of day when we had thought to have given fire to the Canon, the Drum
of the Caſtle began to beat a Parley. There was a Spaniard Governor there whoſe name
was Don Diego, as proud a vain-glorious Coxcomb as could walk upon the earth, and ſv ney DiegoGo2
he was reputed. Monſieur de Bonnivet made the Capitulation, for Toons laid to {leepin vernor of Conr+
the liccle houſe upon a Mactrice the ſaid Sjeur de Bonnivet had cauſed to be brought thi- #eville,
ther for himſelf, till T was call'd ro ign che Capitulation, for Don Diego knew me, he
having been Licurenant to one of the four Spaniſh Companies the King had. when he
cook the County of Oye. The Mareſchal in the mean time ſent out a party of Horſe to
meet Don Arbro whom they found upon his rerrear, by reaſon he had had notice that
che Mareſchal had gain'd the paſs, ſothat about an hour after dinner he return'd back to
us, where he found that Den Diego with his three Companies, one whereof was Spaniſh,
was marcht away two hours b:foxe, There were ſeveral who made ſuit ro the Mareſchal
for the Government of cis place, it being very commodiouſly ſituated for the King's
ſervice : Buc Monſieur &e Bonnivet, and I agreed together co cauſe it to be given to Cap-
tain Richelgen, wi was Lieutenant to one of his Colonel Companies, and accordingly at
our requeſt the Mareſchai as pleaſed to confer it upon him , and moreover writ to the
King to confirm ic, which his Majeſty did, and Monſicur de Bonnivet left with him his
Company for ſome time. | ;
Are theſe ( Captains ) I mean the taking of Lans, and that of Cearteville two things

fir to be omitted, weigh vcll I beſeech you all that we did both at che one place and the

other, and the account I gave of chem both, without truſting to the report of others.
And you Princes, and his Majeſtics Lieutenants, do not ſo much fear your skins, that you:
will not ſearch into depth of things. Why have you that great authority, and thoſe no+
ble Commands ; to fit {Ulf in your Cloſers? Obſerve how Monheur de Brifſac did ; he
needed not be importun'd to go co diſcover, but rather to be with-held g he was all bra-
very and courage. And you that ſhall ſee your ſelves engag'd in a place, learn to be wiſe |
at the expence of theſe Bragadochio's, who ſurrender art the firſt ſummons, and yer pre-
trend to be Rowlands. Whoever 1s ſtour of his rongue, ought to be doubly tall of his hands.
I am very ſure, thatit Don Diego had ſo pleaſed, he might have found us enough to do :
but to loſe a place, and tocarry away no honour, either alive or dead , he that put you
into it does you manifeſt wrong, if he do nor cut off your head. Without all doubr he
mighc have been reliev'd, or ar leaſt he ought to have ſtood an aſſaulc, for we could nor
have carried ic ar the firſt puſh, bur ic would have coſt us very dear. What piritul place {o-
ever you have io defend, it you reſolve to ſtay for the Canon, after it hasendurcd a breach,
It1s very neceilary, that he who commands it for his own honor, ſhall alſo abide an Aflaulc,
if he be not totally unprovided ot all things, aad have no means to make any cucrench-
ment within, | | |

A tew days after the Mareſchal would go take Seve, and writ to me to Alba, that I The Enteryriſe
ſhould make my lelf ready, and that he would paſs by Alba. So ſoon therefore as he had P97 Seve.
given me 1111s notice of his departure, and that I ſhould draw three Enfigns our of Alba
ro carry them along with me, T preſently made them ready, and likewiſe two Culverines,
which he tad writ for alſo. Waiting then in expeRation of his coming, I went in the
mean time to Sarvenal, which is a little Town about four miles from Alba towards the
Langues, and rvo other little places upon rhe ſame Road, where the Enemy had Garriſons,
eſpecially at Sorvenal, where there were any hundred men ſtrangers, After I had a while
batier'd it by the Gate. choſe within began ro parly with me ; bur in the mean while my
people entred by another {ide chrougit a Window wuh Ladders z ſo that whilſt their Cap-
rain was dodging with me about the Capitulation, thoſe within ſaw themſelves taken,
and were thereto: © enforc't to render themſelves upon diſcretion. The moments of a Parly The hours of
arc always dangerous, and it isthen that chey ought che beſt ro man their walls, to avoid a Parly dange-
ſurprizes: for betwi.ct the Frait and the Cheeſe, as the Proverb ſays ; ar ſuch an unexpe&ed 79us for ſurpri-
rime a great miſchic?* may be done. T have ſeen many very fooliſhly ſurpriz'd ; therefore ****
follow the Icalian rule, which is, Note fidar, & no (erai inganato : Donot truſt, and thou :
ſhalt not be deceived : a leifon_that ought to be very much ſtudied by you Governors of
places : for when a woman once endures a Parly, and has patience cohear, farewel Goſſip,
you have already one oor in the ſtirry p. In like manner when a Town once begins tohear-
ken to a compoſition, you may cazamiy conclude it for loſt, Its true, chat you mult not
then give chem leiſure co confider Hherer of it ; for there are certain Catch-dolts, who
make a4 (ſhew of parly, but it 3s only T6 work their own advantape, If you Te oe "outs -
relief, or thar you find your lelves weak , rake them ar their word, make uſe of your

ume,

t1l2

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox 11,

The firvation
Of Seve.

time, and get Hoſtapges betimes if you can, And on the other ſide, you who wonld de.
fend a place, of all things take heed you never open your mouths co parly if you have
not an incention to ſurrender, and are nor neceſſitated ſo ro do : for your Enemy pre.
ſently gets a marvelous advantage by it, *'Tis better the overture be made by ſome par-
ticular perſon, and it is better becoming the Beſiegers than che belteged, though borh the
one and the ocher ought to ſer a good face upon the matter, it will ſoon be ſeen who has
the worſt of the Game, Ar theſe times however be ſure eſpecially to have an eye to the
main chance ; for ſo ſoon as ever it is rumour'd, that there is a ſurrender cowards, thoſe
within inſtead of looking after their defence, think, one of ſaving his money, another his

_ arms, and ſo forth; and thoſe withont ſeeing themſelves defeated of all hope of Booty,

if the Capitulation take efte&t, will try to ſhew you a ſlippery trick ; for then they ap-
proach at greater caſe tothe wall, becauſe of rhe Truce. Remember then thatche hour of
a Parly 1s dangerous.

The other two litcle places ſurrendred upon ſummons, and ſent me theirKeys 5 and
the next day after the Mareſchal arrived, who was very well pleaſed with my exploic, and
ſo we march'r direAly ro Seve. Seve is a little Town very neatly built, and encloſed with
a very good wall. A River runseicher thorough ir, or cloſe under the walls, Tam nor
certain which , for I was never there , bur when Monfienr de Bonnivet and I came to re-
Jieve the Mareſchal, and at this time when we recook it, and then lay there bur one night
only : for the Mareſchal ſent me back in the morning, becauſe Don Arbro with his for-
ces was within five miles of ns, and 1n Alba there was only lefr my Lieutenant, and the
half of my Company. Now there is above the Town a Mountain, on the top of which
there ſtandsa Church, and in the Rock an Hermitage, the entry into which was over a
planck from the Church into the faid Rock, and within were Altars for Maſs, and a

Chamber for the Hermite, but no light into it, ſave only by the door where you come

in, which looks towards the Town; and they had fo order'd the matcer, chat by pul-
ling into them the planck, that lay over berwixt the Hermitage ant] the Church, all che
world conld not take them. They had alſo made another Fort on the right hand, at
the diſtance of ſome rwenty paces from this, which they had contriv'd after the manner
of a pit, and the Counterſcarpes very high; ſo that coming upon the Counterſcarp , no
man could ſhew ſo much as a fingers length of his head wichout being diſcover'd and
kil'd, and they had moreover caft up a Trench that ran along from this Fort to the ve-
ry body of the Charch,

As Signior Franciſco Bernardin and I, who were for that time ſareſchanx de Camp,
came to encamp near ro this place, and being about to lodge the Army, there (allyed onc
rwo or three hundred men, what our of the Fort, the Trench, and che Church, and fu-
rioufly charg'd upon us, I had nobody with me but Captain (harry, with 5o Har-
quebuzcers, and fome few horſe to Guard us. Wherefore the Baron de Chipy , Camp-
Maſter, ſent ro re-inforce. me with Too Harquebuzeers : but I was conſtrain'd to ſend
him word that he muſt ſend me more, for that we were already ar ir, and very near to
one another : at which inſtant of time Monſieur de Bonnivet rewuin'd poſt from Courr, who
hearing the skirmiſh withour alighting, ſaid to the Baron de Chipy, Halt here tif the
HMareſchal come up, and in the mean time I will go find out Monſieur de Montluc. The
Captains follow'd him, and ſome Harquebuzeers en horſe-back, when juſt as we were
embracing, the Enemy came up and charg'd our men, ſeeing which I ſaid ro Monſieur de
Bonnivet, Sir for your welcome alight, and let us go charge theſe people, and beat them back
into the Fort : whereupon every one immediately alighted, and he ſaid to me, charge yors
dire&tly upon thoſe who would recover the Fort, which faid he clapt a Targer upon his arm,
and I catcht up a Halbert, for I eyer lov*d to play withthat kind of Cudgel, ſaying to
Signior Franciſco Bernardin, Camrade, whilſt we charge do you make the Onarters; to which
he replyed, z that all the reckoning you make of the employment the CMareſchal has entru-
fted us withal ? if it be ſo, 1 will be a foul for company , and once play the part of a Gaſcon ;
and ſo alighted, and went on with me to the charge. He was arm'd with very heavy
arms and moreover ape rendred him unweildy of himſelf, which made him that he
could not go ſo faſt as I. Ar ſuch kind of Banquets my body me thought did nc: weigh
an ounce, and I fancied that I did not touch the ground, I had quite forgot my hip.
T then charg'd up ſtraight upon choſe on char fide by the Trench, and Monſieur de Bennj-
wet did as much on his fide, ſo that we thundred them back with ſuch a vengeance, that
E paſt over the Trench pell-mell amongſt chem, and purſucd them, killing all che way as
far as the Church, I never laid ſo about me, nor did ſo much exccucion at one time. Thoſe
wichin the Church ſceing their people in ſuch diſorder , and ſo miſerably cur ro pieces,
quirted the place , and took a licrle path that wenr all along the rock of che Mountain

down

113

—_—

Book II. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.
down into the Town, where one of my men caught hold of him that carried the Enſign ;
buthe difingaged himl(clt very bravely trom him, and leapt into the path, making to the
Town as faſt as he could trip. I ran after him, but he was too quick for me, as well he
might, for he had fear in his heels, The Captain was kill'd, whom they very much e-
ſteem'd, and I believe was a man of threeſcore years old, for he was all over white. They
could nor all recover che path, which made part of them recurn back into the Church,
where they very bravely defended chemſelves. They had made a Raveline before the
Gate, which we gain'd from them, and then they recreated into the Hermitage, and drew
the planck after them like a draw-bridge.
Monſieur de Bonnivet was very roughly handled, for he loſt atleaſt twenty of che beſt
men he had, and had above thirty more wounded : for as our people would throw them-
ſelves ar a venture from the Counterſcarp into the Fort , before they could diſcover the
Fort they were knockt *oth head, and amongſt others we loſt four of thoſe he had broughc $
with him our of France; who came bur too ſoon for them, as alſo two Baſques, as valiant
young men as the earch ever bore ; I had known chem before, but thoſe people have ſuch
uncouth names I cannot remember them, which I am very ſorry for ; but afrer the loſs
of ſo many men the {aid Monſicur de Bonnivet vvyas conſtrain'd to leave this Fort, and
come to me to the Church.
The Mareſchal in the mean time had cauſed all the Camp to make a halt about a mile
off, expeting when Signior Franciſco and I ſhould bring him the Billets for the Armies
Quarters when hearing no news of the one or the other, he ſent a Gentleman to ſee
what was become of us; who found us at the Church, where he told us, that the Ma-
reſchal was diſcontented, and very angry , not knowing where to lodge, nor where the
Quarters were made. To whom I then ſaid, Get you back to him, and tell himz that he has
made two wiſe Quarter-Mafters, who have thought of nothing but how to quarter him and his
Army, but it has been by ſending prople into another world. The Gentleman perceiving by this
anſwer that chere was nothing done, returned back, ir being almoſt night, ſo that the
Cavalry was conſtrain'd to draw into a valley on the left hand, and the Infantry into ano-
ther onche right. The Mareſchal himſelf then came up co us, and could have found in
his heart to have been very angry, but ſeeing what we had done was well enough farisfied,
and began to laugh at the Mareſchaux de Camp he had made. Signior Franciſco Ber
nardin laid the fault upon me, andI again upon him ; bur the Mareſchal ſaid, 7 know the
white-head was too wiſe, and therefore it muſt needs be a Gaſcon extravagance.
Witch the Mareſchal came Colonel Santo Pedro Corſo, and thoſe of the Hermitage ask'*c
for him, becauſe there were many Corſes amongſt them, and the Captain himſelf who
was kill'd ar the Gate was one. The Colonel aflur'd them of the death of the ſaid Cap-
rain, and that if one or ewo of them would come out, he would ſhew them his bedy :
Which they did, and che Mareſchal was till with us, and Raid there all night, for he
knew not where to lye, and a great many were laid down, who-gave me many a black The Hermitage
good-night Afer they had ſcen their Caprain dead, they ſurrendred chemſelves upon endred.
che Colonels word, thar they ſhould march away with dag and baggage, whereupon the
{aid Colonel cntred the Hermitage with five or fix of his own men only , and ſo ſoon as
the day appear'd they wenc our, and almoſt all of them liſted chemſelves under the ſaid
Colonel, {ending their Drum to thoſe of the Fort, to let them know thar they had ſar- TRL Fer ſur.
rendred , and that they adviſed them to do the like 5 which they likewiſe did upon the TO:
ſame conditions; for Colonel Santo Pedro managed the whole buſineſs, We then went The Town ſur2
down, and preſently the Governor ſurrendred the ſame, and at the ſame inſtant march'c rendred,
away with thoſe men he had left; and the Mareſchal lodg'd himſelf there with ſome few
only, that the proviſion might not be devour?d, and to prevent any diſorder in the Town,
@f which he made Captain Lowp Governor, having wich him four Enfigns of foot, and Caprain Lovp:
ſome Lignt-horſe ; which being dove he retir'd back by the ſame way he came, and I
(as I have already ſaid) about one of the clock in the afrernoon came to Alba.
This 1s all thar I did in Piedmont worthy remembrance whilſt I ſtaid there with the
Mareſchal de Brifac « Bar it I hould give anaccount of all che skirmiſhes wherein I have
becn engag'd, I muſt have double paper, and eſpecially that of Andeſan, which was the
greatc{t and molt furious sxirmiſh wherein I have ever been ; all the toor of cwo Armies The skirmiſh
being therein cocally cngag'd, amongſt whom Ihad no more bur four and thirty Soldiers 9f 48433:
of my own Company, toraſmuch as I then lay in Garriſon at Sevillan, and Monficur de
Termes would nor ſuffer my Company to go our of the Town. I covyer'd all my Soldiers
Morrions with yellow Taftata, our of reſpe&t ro Monhieur de Termes, whoſe that colour
was, who for ſo tew men perform'd ſo great and almoſt miraculous fears of arms, char
whiſt any mans memory thalllive, who was then alive, the yellow Morrions of .Jfontlac

wall

— —_—_—O_—  ——

A

g———_—

_ _ —_—_—

14 The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book TOA

will be talkt of in Piedmont : In truth theſe four and thirty were worth five hundred 0-
thers, and I have my (elf an hundred times wondred at what theſe people did z I may
therefore very well ſay, it was a little body, but a very gvod one. I have found chart jr
is of great ule to give your Soldiers ſome particular diſtinRon z for {ceing themſelves to be
ſo diſtinguiſhed and known, it redoubles their courage, I am ſure theſe did very well,
and obtein'd for themſelves ſuch a mark of repatation, thar every one pointed at them
as they marchr along, ſhewing for a wonder the yellow Morrions who had perform*d
(uch noble fears of arms, I haye ſince alſo been in ſeveral other skirmiſhes, which I
will not trouble my Reader withall, for being too tedious : thongh I cannot forbear ma-
1. 61+... king mention of one, which the Baron de 1a Garde may pleaſe ro remember, when he
The Skirmiſh ; : as ;
before Bulten, Prought the Gallies, we being rhen before Bulles, The great skirmiſh was ar his land-
: ing, which continued for two hours, where the Canon-ſhor flew fo thick that they ſeem-
ed volleys of Harquebuzeers, TI had all the Forces of Bulen upon me, notwithſtanding
| which 1 made one of the braveſt and moſt honourable retreats that man could poſſibly
make, The late Monſieur de Gziſe ſaw it all, who had no more bur five and rwenty
horſe, and thercfore could no wayes relieve mez to do which he muſt of neceſſicy have
come down into the plain, wacre he would immediately have been (wallowed up by the
Canon, and no man believ*d that I could poſſibly have made my retreat without mani-
feſt running away ; but I did ic alwayes at four Pikes length, often facing about , and
muſt needs ſay, that I never perform'd any thing from whence I deriv'd more honor
than from this action. Monſieur de Gaife did ſufficiently magnifie it, and commended
me bur two much. Bur I ſhall ſpeak no more of theſe kind of things, and content my
{elf with writing what I perform'd commanding only, wherein ſuch as will do me the
honor to read my book may learn ſome thing as ro the practice of Arms, which is nor al-
What praract rogether {o eaſfie as 15 believ'd, Great and commendable parts and qualicies are required
required ro £0 the making up of 2 complear Captain, Irs not all to be hardy and brave, we muſt
make up a have other pieces 1n our harneſs befides. Neither will T pretend tobe one of che firſt form
- complear Of- of Souldiers ; bur being the eldeſt in this Kingdom, my opinion will nevertheleſs be al-
hicer, lowed a vote in the Chapter, which may ſerve ro enform ſuch as know leſs than I, and
as for the reſt they need no Tutor.
I then lefr Piedmont to go home a little to refreſh my ſelf, and to take ſome repoſe, by
| reaſon of a great diſtemper I was fallen into : but what juſt occaſion ſoever T mighr have
ea Frog de toask its Thad nevertheleſs much ado to obtain leave of Monſieur de Briſſac, though he
uti Gaf. at laſt was pleaſed ro diſmiſs me, upon my promiſe ſpeedily co return, Ar my coming
| com, home I found my ſelf honour'd and eſteem'd of all rhe greateſt perſons of the Country.
My name was up, and therefore for one thing I had done they would perſwade me I had
done four : Report goes cvermore encreaſing ; and alſo ar this time Piedmont was the
only Scene in vogue for a Nurſery of war. I did not however continue Tong idle at home,
my Maſters neither giving me leiſure, nor my own diſpoficion enclining me {o ro do, I
kaving ever propoſed to my ſelf by the way of Arms to arrive to all the degrees of honour,
ro which man can attain and you who are Gentlemen born ought to conſider that God
has ſent you into the world to bear arms for the (ervice of your Prince and Country, and
not to hunt the Hare, and follow after Miſtrefles z when peace comes you may take your
ſhare of plcaſures and delights. Every thing in its due time and ſeaſon,

The End of the Second Book.

U5

THE

COMMENTARIES
Meſforre Blaizxe de Montlac,

MaxreEsCHaAr of

F R A N C F.

Em, ——— —_—_— 9  -_- > Cc wt Aw Eg D-IL I TRIS ei IR EDIT ___- Ira

I rn

The Third Book.

+ Hilft the War was kept on foor in Piedmont, after the manner I ©
have before related, under the conduR of this great Soldier, Mon- P:edmont the
fieur de Brifſſac , who there eſtabliſhed ſo adrn:irable: a Military ney of
Diſcipline, that it might with good reaſon be ſaid to bethe beft **"*
&\ School of War in Exrope 3 they did not ſleep in Picardy, Cham-
Sie gn, and MMetr, which wasat this time befieg'd by the Emperor.
There 1t was that the great Duke of Gziſe acquir'd immortal
glory. I was never more troubled at any thing in my whole life
then that T had not the good forrune to ſeethis Siege : bur a man
cannot be in ſo many places at once. The King, who deſired to diſcompoſe the Empe-
ror's affairs in 1taly, prevail'd ſo far by the praRtices and dexterity of ſome Cardinals of Siena revolcs
his party, and of Monſieur de Termes, that he made the Inhabicants of Sienna to revolt, © the French
which is a very beariful and important City in T#ſcany, inſomuch that the Spaniſh Gars- wn Ry of Au*
riſon which was in it was driven out, and the Citadel raz'd to the ground. So ſoon as 9 FFSs
theſe people had thus ſhak*c off the Spaniſh yoke, and ſaw themſelves at liberty, having
ſet up che Enfigns of France, they were not wanting to themſelves in imploring ſuccours
and afſiſtance from the King , who accordingly gave the charge thereof ro Monſieur de The Sicur de
Strozzy, (che ſame who was afterwards Mareſchal) who by che help and concarrence of S'rozy the =
the King's confederates and friends in thoſe parts drew ſome forces into the field, being ng Erx og
therein affiſted by the Signiors Gornelio Bentivoglio, Fregoſa, and other [taliavs, with the Scare of Sienna,
Sjeurs de Termes, and de Lanſac ; where, though he had all the Forces of the Emperor and
the Great Duke of Florence to deal withall, he nevertheleſs carried himſelf with ſo much
bravery and conduR, as to make head againſt the Marquis de Marignano, who profecu-
ted the War with might and main. Notwithſtanding which Monſieur de Strozzy in de-
ſpight of him took ſeveral lictle Towns belonging to the State of Sienna, the particulars
whereof I ſhall nor meddle withal, foraſmuch as I was not there preſent : but, by what I
have heard, he there perform'd ſeveral very brave exploits s for the Emperor and the Duke
of Flerence defired nothing more, than to drive the King out of taly, our of the appre-
henſion they had, that having got 1n a foor, he ſhould afterwards skrew 1n his whole
body : Bur we never yet knew how to husband our Conqueſts; I know not what we
may do hereafter, though I fear chat matrcr will never be mended , ar leaft I ſee no ſigns
of it yets God grant I may be miſtaken,
Monſieur de Strezzy then ſent to the King to aquaint him, that it was not poible for Want of aC
ke - BD —_ 30s
him boch co keep the field, and to govern 1n Sienna too, and that therefore he moſt hum- yernor in Sieg-=
bly befoughr his Majeſty ro make choice of ſome perſon mn whom he might ſafely confide na. |
rocommand in the Town , ſo long as he ſhould continue 1n the field, The King having
receiv'd this diſpatch, call'd for the Conſtable, Monſicnr de Gxiſe, and the Mareſchal de
R 2 St,

/ mon ron” ns ro 7 _—_— yn AgInY +9;

q
t
|
s
'.
bt
1
F
$3
')
-
y
:

FW

—_

116 The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize

—— ———Y ali coco

Book III,
St. Andre, where he acquainted them with Monſieur de Strozzy's requeſt, detiring theny
to name each of them one for this employment ; for all things paſt chrough the hands of
theſe three, and nothing was determin'd without them. All our Kings have ever had
this trick, to ſuffer themſelves to be govern'd by ſome particular men, and perhaps roo
much, {o that it looks ſometimes as if they ſtood 1n awe of their own ſubjets. Of theſe
the Conſtable ſtood in the higheſt degree of favour , and was ever more beloy?d by the
King than any other , he rherefore firſt nam'd his man, Monkieur de Gwiſe another, and
the Mareſchsl athird, Which having done the King ſaid co them, you have none of you

A diſpute about qd Montluc, to which Monſieur de Gaiſe made anſwer, thar it was our of his head,

Men and the Mareſchal ſajd the ſame, Monficur de Gniſe moreover adding, iff you name Mont -

Moniluc for the 1#c 1 have done, and ſhall ſpeak, no more of him I nominated befire; norlT (aid the Marel-

Government of chal, who has fince related to me the whele debate, The Conſtable then ſtood up, and

Siena. ſaid, that I was by no means proper for thts employment, as being too humorous, pee-

viſh, and paſſionate, ro which the King made anſwer, that he had ever obſerv'd and

known me to be pceviſh and paſſhonare, upon the account of his ſervice only, when I ſaw

h:m not ſerv'd ſo well as he ouche to be, and that he had never heard I ever had a

quarrcl with any one upon my own particular acconnt, Monſieur de Gziſe and the Ma-

reſchal ſaid alſo the ſame, adding moreover that I had already been Governor both of

Montcallier and Alba, without ſo much as any one man's opening his mouth to com-

plain of my Adminiſtration 5, and that alſo had I been a perſon of thar temper, the Ma-

reſchal de Briſſ.c would never have lov'd and favour'd me at the rate he did, nor have
repoſed ſo great a confidence in me as he had ever done. The Conftable herenpon anſwered
very roundly again, and made good his former obje&ion with great vehemency , and
would by all means that the perſon he had nominated ſhould ſtand : for he was impati-
cent of being controverted , and more of being over-rul'd; neither indeed did he ever
much love me, nor any of his. The Cardinal of Loryain was there preſent, who ma

berter remember than I, who 1t was that the Conſtable nam'd : bur (ifT be not deceiv'd)
it was Boccal, who is fince turn'd Hugonot : however 1n the end the King would carry it,

having Monſieur de Gaife and the Mareſchal de St. Andre on his fide, and diſparch't a-

way a Courier to the Mareſchal de Briſſzc to {end me into Avignon, where accordingly

I ſtaid cxpeAting a Gentleman his Majeſty ſent to me, who brought my diſpatch to go

preſently away to Sienna.

Now the Mareſchal had ſome dayes before given me leave to retire to my own houſe,
by reaſon of a fickneſs I was fallen into, as T have ſaid elſewhere; who had no mind to
do it, as he himſelf confeſt to me lince ; and has done me the honor to tell me, that had he
known of whar 1mportance the loſs of me would have been to him, he would nat have ſo
commended me to the King as he had dofie, and thar in his life he never repented any
thing ſo much as the letting me depart from him, telling me of a great many things
wherein he had not been ſo well ſerved after my departure out of Piedmont, Monſieur
de Cofſe, Preſident Biragne, and ſeveral others can witneſs how ofc they have heard him
lament my abſence, eſpecially when matters did not ſucceed according to his deſire. And
if any one will cake the pains to conſider what I perform'd while I was there under his
Command, he will find that what I fay is very true, and chat he had ſome reaſon to
regret me. 1] was alwayesart his feet, and ar hishead. I will not ſay nevertheleſs, chat
any thing would have been berter done for my being there : but however I muſt needs
ſpeak the rruth, and there are who can ſay more if they pleaſe.

Alviceof the He then writ a Letter to the King, and another to the Conſtable, wherein he ſent his

Mareſchal de Majeſty word, that he had made a very ill choice of me to command in Sienna, tor that

Briſſac ro the ] was one of the molt croſs-grain'd chellerick fellows 1n the whole world, and ſuch a

King concern- © as that for half che time I had been with him, he had been neceſſitated to ſuffer

ing his nomi- ; ; BY

naion of the Much from me, knowing my imperfeions. That indeed I was very good for che main»

Sieur de Mont- taining of diſcipline and juſtice in an Army, tocommand in the field, and to make che

luc for the Go- So{diers to fight : bur that the humour of the Siennois confider'd, it would be fire to fire,

vernment of hich would beche only mcans to loſe that State, which was to be preſery'd by gentleneſs

AS and moderation, He moreover entreated the Conſtable to remonſtrate as much to the
King, and in the mean time diſpatcht a Courier to me, who found me very ſick, by whom
he ſent me word, that the King would ſend me to Sjenna ; bur, thar as a friend of mine,

The Mareſchal he adviſed me not co accept of that employment, entreating me not to forſake him, to go

de Briſſac's ſerve elſewhere under another, and afſuring me withal, that if any Command hapncd ro

pollicy to de- he yacgnt in Piedmont, that T had more mind ro than what I already had, I ſhould have
parts on its which were all artifices to detein me.

- : O thar a wiſe Lieutenant of a Province ought to have an eye, and to take heed of loſing

aA 1NAn

Book III: de Montluc, Mareſchal of Frances 197

——i_— en ——_ " "ADEPT

————

2 man in whom he may abſolutely confide, and whom he knows to be a man of valour,
and ought to ſpare nothing that he may keep him for ofcentimes one man alonecan do
much. You muſt cat a great deal of Sale with a man before youcan rightly know him ;
and in the mean time you are depriv'd of him with whom you were throughly acquainted,
in whom you repoſed your truſt , and of whoſe fidelity you have already had ſufficient
proof, The {aid Mareſchal had morcover ſent word to the King, that I was in Gaſcony
very ſick, and in the morning as the Letters were read, the Conſtable, who was mighty
well pleaſed with che contents , ſaid to the King, Did not I tell your Majeſty as much,
you find the Mareſchal to be of the ſame opinion, aud no man living can know Moncluc bet-
ter than he who has ſo often ſeen him at work. To which che King (who naturally lov'd me,
and had ever done ſo , after he had ſeen my behaviour at the Camiſado of Bulten)reply'd,
that althongh all thoſe of his Council ſhould ſpeak againſt me, yet ſhould they prevail nothing
by it : for it was his nature to love me , and that he would n6t alter his eleftion let them all
ſay what they would. Monſieur de Guiſe then ſpake and ſaid, here is a letter wery full of
contradiions : for in the firſt place the Mareſchal de Briſlac ſays that Montluc is croſs-
grain'd and cholerick, and that he will never ſuit with the Sicunois, bat will rine yo ar ſer-
vice if you ſend him thither ; and on the other. ſide commends him for qualities that are re-
quired in a man of command, to whom the truſt of great things is to be committed : fer he
ſpeaks him to be a man of an ex4(t diſcipline, and great juſtice, and fit to make the Soldiers Cholerick men
fight in great Enterprizes and Executions ; aud who ever ſaw a man endued with all theſe the beſt.
good qualities, that had not a mixture of Choller amongſt them ? Such as are indifferent whe-
ther things go well or ill may indeed be without paſſion, and as to the reſt, ſince Sir your Mas
zefty has your ſelf made the Eleflion, 1 humbly conceive you ought not revike it. The Ma-
reſchal de St, Andre ſpake vext, and laid, Sir, what the Mareſchal de Briflac complains of,
you may eaſily corrett, by writing to Montluc, that your (elf having made choice of his perſon
above all others for this employment, he muff for your ſake as much as he can govern his paſ-
fop, having to do with ſuch a fickle-headed people as thoſe of Sienna. To which the King made
anſwer, that he did not fear but that after he had writ mz a letter, 1 would do as he ſhould
command me ; and immediately thereupon diſpatchr away a Courrier to me to my own
houſe, by whom he ſent me word, that alchough I ſhould be (ſick, I muſt nevercheleſs put
my ſelf upon my way to godirealy to Marſeilles, where T ſhould meer my diſpatch, and
ſhould there embark my ſelf with the Germans that the Rhincerce brought, and ren Com-
panties of French foot, to which place he would alſo ſend me money for my journey, and
chat I muſt for a while leave my paſſion behind me in Gaſcony, and a little accommodate
my ſelf to the humor of that people. The Courrier found me at eAgen very fick,and under
the Phyficians hands, notwithſtanding which I told him, that in eight dayes I would
begin my journey, which I did, and verily thought I ſhould have dyed at Tholosſe, from
whence by the advice of the Phyſicians I was to return back again, which I would nor
do : but cauſed my {clf to be hall'd along as far as Montpellier, where I was again ad-
viſed by the Phyſicians to go no further, they aſſuring me that if I ventur'd to proceed Cholcrick
on my journey I ſhould never come alive to Marſeilles : but whatever they could ſay, hy rage more
I] was reſoly'd to go on {o long as life laſted, come on't what would, when juſt as I was oy en. c-
going away there came another Courrier from the King to haſten me, and from day ro
day I recovered my health in travelling ; fo that when I came to Marſeilles I was with-
out compariſon much better than when I parted from my own houſe.

In plain trath the King my good Maſter had reafon to defend my cauſe, for my cho-
ler was never prejudicial to hisſervice, it has indeed been ſometimes prejudicial to my ſelf
and ſome others, who would not avoid nor comply with my humour. I never loſt Place,
Batrail, nor Rencounter, nor ever was the occaſion of loſing any one.of his Subjets 3 my
cboler never fo far tranſported me as to do any thing prejudicial to his ſervice, and if ir
be violent and prompr, itis che ſooner gone : T have ever obſerv'd that ſuch people are ber-
ter to be employ'd than any other, for they have no malice in them, nor no dangerons re-
ſervations, and if they be more {uddain, they are alſo more valiant than thoſe who by their
moderation would appear to be more wiſe : but leaving this diſcourſe I ſhall return ro my
voyage.

= coming to Marſeilles T found that the Baron de 1a Garde was already departed The Siege of
with the Army to go to Argliers, chere to prevail with the King of Argier to convoy him Siena was in
with his Fleer, forasmuch as the (aid Baron had been advertized, thar Prince Aria lay ** year i555,
waiting for him with a ercat Navy to interceprhim by the wayzand the Kings Fleet of it ſelf
was not ſtrong enough to undertake him, which was the reaſon that we delayed thetime
for a few days, So ſoon then as the Baron arrived, having the Arpier Fleer with him, we The Baroo
embarkr onr felyes at Ty#lon, and by che way met cight or nine Veſſels laden wich Corn, 1a Garde.

char

8

——— __—_— . we

| The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox LIT:

The Prjor of
Capra (lain,

The Skirmiſh
before Sienna.

Caprain Mart:
oul de Santa
For,

that came our of Sicily, and was going for Spain, which the Baron cauſed co be ſer on fire,
excepting two that he took along with him tor the ſupport of his Army, and ſo went on
to Port*Hercole, at which place we could nor poſſibly land, foraſmuch as che Marquis de
Marignano lay with his Camp near unto the way by which we were of neceſſity ro paſs
to goto Sienna. We were therefore conſtrain'd ro reimbark our men, anc to fall back,
roland with greater ſafery, near ro Eſcarlin, where Monſieur de Strozzy lay wich his
Camp. Wethere heard nzws that the Prior of Capua had but two days betore been {lain
in viewing Eſcarlin, which was a very great loſs, he being as brave a man 8s liv'd, both
by land and ſea, and a true Servant of the Kings. He was Brother to Monheur de Strozzy,
and jr was ſaid, was kill'd by the hand of a Peaſant, that fir d a Harquebnz ar him from
bchind a Buth, Behold whar a ſad misfortune this was, that ſo great a Captain ſhould
periſh by the hand of a Raſcal with his fire ſtick. And ſo we marcht on to Bonconvent,
Monſieur de Strozzy going always a lictle before us for conveniency of viftual, and chere
all the Army joyn'd together.

Before the Germans and the French arriv*d at the ſaid Bonconvent, Monſieur de Stroz-
zy went our in the morning before, with the three chouſand Griſons (of which Mon-
fieur de Foxrcavanx was Colonel) and the Ttalians, to make room for the Germzns and
French who had need tolye and reſt an hour or two. I wentover night co wait upon Mon-
fieur de $trozzy, and in the morning departed with him, that I might come betimes to
Sienna; where we found Monſieur de Lanſac, who at our coming treated Monſieur de
Strez,zy, Monſieur de Fourcavanx and me ar dinner. At the coming up of the Griſons and
Ttalians there hapned a great skirmiſh at St. Bonde, a Monaſtery of Nuns near unto $7,
Mark another Monaſtery of Religieux. The Mareſchal de CMarignano lay with his Camp
ar the Palace of Dzau, which is upon the road to Florence, within a little mile of Sienna,
and this very morning had raiſed his Camp to go to St, Bonde, there to afſaulr Captain
Bartolmeo de Peſera, whom Monſieur de Strez.2y with his Company had quartcr.d at char
place, The ſaid Marquis had lefc his /talians ar the ſaid Palace of Dias, and taken all his
Spaniardsand Germans along with him, and as we were ar dinner the skirmiſh began
very br'sk and round at St, Bonde. The Griſons and Italians halted at la Palaſſor, half a
mile from Sienna, and our 1talians alſo, by the command ot Monſieur de Strozzy, to the
end that he might both the ſooner determine where he ſhould lodge the Army, and al-
ſo becauſe he would , that before they ſhould be lodg'd, the Germans and the French
ſhould be come up, that they might all at once fit down in their Quarcers : but before
we had madean end of dinner, we heard ſome lirtle pieces go off at Sr. Bonde, that the
Marquis had thither taken along with him. Ar which I ſaid ro Monſieur de Strozzy,
Sir, the shirmiſh grows very lcnd, and is mixt with Artillery, they will deprive you of Captain
Bartolomeo de Peſera, pray let ws go ſee what they are doing; to which he replyed, let x
go then, and we muſt go howewtr to ſee where we are to lodge the Camp. Monſieur de Lan-
ſac ient me agray Turk, for Thad not brought my horſes by ſeaz and I then asked Mon-
fienr de Stroz2y if he were pleaſed thar I ſhould go fee whar the buſineſs was, whilſt he
with Meſſiears de Lanſac and de Fourcavang went to take order about lodging the Camp ?
to which he anſwered, with all his heart; and ſo we went out at the Port St. fark. I
went then directly to the place where the skirmiſh was, and they a htle on the right
hand to ſee where they ſhould lodge the Army. So ſoon as I wason the other fide the
Trefle, where theskirmiſh was, I there found not ſo much as one Captain ſo thar che
Skirmiſh looke like a very diſorderly buſineſs, and the Enemy had got che advantage of
our people ; for they had drawn them from the lictle hills near unto Sz. Bonde, and driven
them to the Medows that lye upon the banks of the River Treſſe. Ar my arrival I aske
for the Caprains, but mer not one that own'd that title, from whence a great diſorder
enſu'd : bur upon the inſtant I ſaw one coming upon a gray horse, and gallopt pre-
ſently up to him, to ask him if he wasa Captain or no, who told me he was; I chen
askr him his name, to which he made anſwer, Jo nj chiamo Marion de Santa Fiore, and
I ſaid to him. Signicr Capitano To mj chiams Montluco audiamo enfiemiz Now all the Army
had already heard that I was coming with the recruits; ſo that though we had never
ſcen one anothers faces before, yer we knew one another well enough by our names, 1
entreated him then to rally his men, and give a charge upon the Enemy, to beat them
back again up the Hill, which he did, and we accordingly drave them up to the very top.
In the mean while the skirmiſh extended it ſelf all along che ridge of a Hill, and by the
Vineyards dire&ly to the Pallaſſot, which 1s a lictle Palace, behind which were the Griſons,
and on the back of the Mouncain a little further che Arullery playd, which che Marquis
had brought to St. Bonde. There all the 1talian Caprains, and Signior Cornelio Bentivoglio,
who was there Colonel, were at the corner of the Vineyards looking towards St.

Bonde,

Book III. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. | TY |

Bonde and St. Mark, behind alittle Oratory , by which they were covered from the
Canon thor.

Now berwixt [2 Pallaſſot and the little Oratory it might be about three hundred paces,
and Signior Marloyl and I ſo ruffled the Enemy, that we drave the skirmiſh all along
che ridge of the Vineyards direQAly upon them : I had brought with me Captain Charry,
who was my Lieutenant at eMba, with thirty good Soldiers, almoſt all Gentlemen, who
would by no means be left behind with my brother Monſieur de Linux, to whom the
King had given the government of Alba, at the humble requeſt of Monfienr de Yalence
my Brother, and I had preferred in his behalf, About which there hapned a very great
diſpute, for the Mareſchal de Briſſac deferr'd to accept him till he had firſt had an anſwer
from me5 who ſo ſoon as he underſtood the King's reſolution to ſend me to Sienna, he The Sion 4;
ſent me another Courier, entreating me not to quit the Government of Alba, and that nat” rfg
I might name, either my own Lieurenant, or any other to command in the place till my qo of Atha,
return, aſſuring methat he would accept whomſocver I ſhould appoinr, and in the mean
time would take care that my pay ſhould be kept for me, ſo that I thould nor loſe fo
much as a denier ; advi{ing me withal to conſider, that the Command the King gave me
at Sienna would not bt of fo long continuance as that of 41ba. Bur I moſt humbly be-
ſought him to approve of my Brother, aſſaring him that he would be as much his afte-

Qtionate {crvant as I was, and that if itſhould pleaſe God I ever recurn*d frem Sienna,
I {wore to come and find him our, and to ſerve him in the condition of a private Soldier,
though the King ſhould nor pleaſe to conferre any command upon me , that I might have
the honor to be near his perſon, Now to give you an account of the humour of the Ma-
reſchal, T will fay and maintain, that he was one of the braveſt Gentlemen, and the beſt
Maſters that has been theſe fifty years in France, for ſuch ashe knew to be zealons and
affeRionate to the King's ſervice ; and if Preſident Birague will lay his hand upon hus
heart, he will ſwear the ſame. He was a man that had evermore a greater regard to an- CharaRer of
other man's profic than his own, a man could never loſe any ching by him, bur every the Marelſchal
man had his ſhare beth of advantage and honor, and as to the reſt, he lov'd and honor'd fe Prifbac,
a worthy man, even to the meaneſt Soldier. The beſt men he knew by their names, and
would give ear to the advice of all, without relying too much upon his own head-piece
as Monſieur de Lautrec Was too much enclin'd to do, But to return to the Skirmiſh, I
found ar the Oratory Signior Cornelis, and Colonel Charamont, whom TI had not before
ſeen, ſince my arrival. Betwixt the ſaid Oratory and 1a Bonde there is a great High-way,and
by the fide of ir two little houſes, ſome ten or twelve paces diſtant from one another. In this
High-way we gave the Enemy a charge, and gain'd from them the two houſes, into one
of which Captain Charry put himſelf, and our 7talians into the other, they there conti=
nued about three quarters of an hour, almoſt alwayes fighting, inſomuch that che Mars
quis ſent thither all his Spaniſh Harquebuzeers , and even the 1talians who were at their
Fort of St. Mark, and planted fix Enſigns of Spaniſh foot upon the great High-Way to
maintain the fighr. Now the hotteſt of the skirmiſh was on the right hand, and on the
left amongſt the Vines, ſo that the Cavalry could do nothing. Signior Cornelio then by
the advice of his Captains was about to retire, when I remonſtrated to him that he mult
by no means offer to ſir, till firſt he had ſome horſe, and alſo the Griſixs ro make good
his retreat , ro whom I would preſently go, and entreat them to come up half way be-
twixt the Pallaſſor and the Oratory , and would likewiſe go to requeſt the ſame of
the Count de la Mirayda, who was Colonel of the horſe, and had halted in a
Valley behind a lictle Wood near unto 1a Pallafſot; which they approv'd of very well;
and ſo I preſently ran to the Griſons, entreating them to advance but two hundred paces
only ; bat the Colonel that commanded under Monſieur de Foxrcavanx would by no
means be perſwaded toit, Ithen {purr'd up to the Count, and pray'dhim to {end ouc
tour Cornets of horſe, which he preſently did, and they were the Count de Pontavala,
(crnelio, Foby, che Baron de Rabat, and my Nephew Serillac, who commanded che Com -
pany of Monfieur de Ciplerre. Now asthe Cornets were advancing at a good round gal-
lop, 1 ſaw Signior Cornelio, who at the importunity of his Captains was again beglning
to retire, and preſencly ran to him , remonſtrating that che fix Enfigns were upon cheir
march, and that they were Spaniards, whoſe colours being ſo large, it was a ſign che Mar-
quis was there in perſon with all his Army, who would infallibly charge him ſo ſoon as
ever he ſhould begin to deſcend the Hill, entreating him therefore rorerurn back to the
ſame place, which he did, being departed from it nor above thirty paces. Then recurn'd
ro the Corners, and opt them in the mid-way berwixt che Pallafſor and che Oracorys
which having done, I once more went to the Griſons , who after I had made chem ſens
fible of che danger we were in to loſe all che Officers , aroſe and began co ſtrike * their
rums,

ki Md AMS

—_— —

{20 © The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book Il.

Drums, and marcht up cloſe by the Horſe, The Marquis ſceing che Cavalry and the Gri-
ſons begin to appear in the field, thought it now convenient to withdraw his fix Enfigns
our of the great High-way ; there was not one Officer of ours on horſeback bur my (elf
and Sipnior Mariowl, who never ſtirred from my fide, ſo thar I could plainly ſee all che
Enemy did : Ichen faid to Signior Corwelio , Look you Sir, the Spaniſh Enfigns having
diſcovered our Cavalry, and the Griſons are facing aboxt|, now charge them home, for
now it is time : which being ſaid, Signiour CMarieal alighted, and clape a Target co his
arm, having his ſword in his hand; I then aid ro Captain Charry, that he was now to
ſhew what he had ever been, and muſt let theſe ſtrangers ſte what a Gaſcon conld do, bid-
ding him be ſure to charge in before them all. Monſieur de Fowrcavanx had brought four
hundred Italian Harquebuzeers from Par ma, very brave men, who were drawn up cloſe
by che Oratory (for my part) I will not make my {clt more yalianc than I am, for I a-
lighted not, 1 already began to play the King's T.icutenanr, and we divided the men to
the right and left, all along a grear High-way, and there we made our charge, which
was a brave one, if ever any was, and ſuch that we drave chem as far as a deſcent on the
left hand of St. Bonde, where the Marquis ſt5od with the remainder of his Spaniards and
Germans, and bing the Spaniard: {tood juſt upon the edge of che aſcent, thoſe who were
put to flight ruſht quite through chem, and both one and the other ran full drive upon
the Germans. The Marquis who ſaw the torrent of chis diſorder coming npon him) be-
pan, as well as he could, to retire by a Valley, without found of Trumper, or beac of
Drum. Thoſe who were come our of St, Jfarky, retreated alſo in very great haſte, car-
rying off with them the four little pieces with which they had batrer'd Sr. Bonde, into
their Fort. The Marquis told me after, when I came out of Sienna, as he accompanied
me two miles fromthe Town, that had we follow'd the purſaic we had pur all his Army
zo flight , and given him a total defeat : bur we were not aware of his diſorder z we
chought our {clves very happy, that we had come oft ſo good cheap ; and our Enemies
rhought themſelves happier than we.
Monſieur de Strozzy, who wasin a Valley on the other fide the Port Se. Marb, as he
was conſulting with Meſſteurs de Lanſac and de Fuxrcavanx about the firuation of the
Camp, keard very well that rhere was a very great skirmiſh; bur he knew thar all the
Captains were there, and thatT wasalſo gonethither ; neither did they ever imagine ic
had been half ſo ſharp as it was 3 bur in the end hearing ic grow ſo loud, they lefe all
and came gallopping to us; yet could they not come time enough to the charge, which the
{aid Monſieur de Strozzy was very much troubled at, and ſomething diſcontented that no
norice had been given him of the fight, and Monſieur de Fourcavany was the ſame, fora(-
much as the Griſens, of which he was the chief Officer, were come up juſt ro fight, and
that his Harquebuzeers had fought, Bur I excus'd ir to them both, telling them thar
T had never a horſe-man with me, but Signior Marionl, and that he was too brave a
Gentleman to leave the skirmiſh, having beſides three or four Enhgns under his com-
mand, wherefore it had nor been poſſible for me to ſend them word. Now Monſieur
de Strozz) ar hisrifing frem dinner had ſcnt away Signior Roberto his Brother in all haſte,
to cauſe the French and Germans to advance, which he did, and found the Germans be-
The Germans ginning to drink, and conſequently could not ſuddainly ger chem from the Tables; for
are eating and the ſaid Signior de Strozzy had cauſed meat to be ſer ready for them upon the great
;:rinking in the High-way, which had he not done they had held on their march, and juſt in the nick
midſt of the hq comeinto the heat of che fight, and ſo the Battail had been won; but we muſt ſay
Fermith, with the /talian. Fa me indevins, @ 10 ti daro denari. This was that which was done
the firſt day that I arriv'd ar Sienna, where I ſo fignalyz'd my (elf ro the Siennois, and
all the Italian Captains, that knew me not before, as purchaſed mea very great eſteem,
both with the Inhabitants of the City and the whole Army ; for by running up and
down amongſt the foot now here, now there, ordering theſe on the one (ide, and thoſe
on the other, I gave them to underſtand that this was nor the firſt skirmiſh by a hun-
ered wherein I had been engag'd.
The Mareſchal then lodg'd his Camp betwixt Porto Novo and Porto Taffo, in the
beautiful Suburbs that are there, and not only there, for I dare boldly ſays thar if the
Suburbs of Sienna had ſtood altogether, they would have been bigger than the City ; for
in the Suburbs were more gcodly Palaces, and finer Churches and Monaſteries than there
werein the body of the Town. The next morning Monlicur de Strozzy carrie us u
A Confulcati- tg char part of the wall looking towards the Enemics Camp, where we fell into conſul -

on ay Ton Si- tation, whether or no it were good to hazard a Batrail 3 and there the opinions were va-
enna abour

Eobcias's Bate rious, ſome thinking ar the beſt, and others conceiving it nor convenient fo to do. Thoſe
_ : ' who were of opinion thar we onght nor co fight objeRted, that we could not go to the

Palace

——w_ te —_—___S_

Book II. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 121 4

| n—_ — C—— A —_— _— _
—— — -

———_LELNEDD CE LL I”

Palace of Dian, wichour paſſing cole by a little Fort the Marquis had made , berwixc
che lircle obſervance and the aforclaid Palace, where there was three or four pieces of grear
Artillery (as it wastrue ), and char leaving that behind, we ſhould alſo leave our own
Fort of Camolia naked of detence. TI then proponnded that for any harm the Artillery
of the lirtle Fort could do us, we could paſs by a liccle before day, and might leave an
Enſign or two to bridle the little Forc from daring to ſally out, and as for the Fort of
Camolia, we could leave three or four Companies of the City to keep them likewiſe in The Sicur de
aw, and that I on my part with the reſt of the Forces of the City would go out by Porto Montluc's ad-
Fontelrands, and ſhould by break of day be got to the top of a litcle Mountain, ready to Y'E:
preſeur my ſelf in the Plain ac fo opportune a time, thar juſt as our Camp ſhould appea
near to theirs, I ſhould at the ſame inſtant be gor fo near them, thar they muſt of ne-
cefliry enter into ſome apprehenſion, to ſee us come the one on the one (ide, and the 0-
cher on the other. |

The Sjennois made account that they conld draw four thouſand good men out of the
Town. There were ſome who approv'd of my propoſal, and of the Siennois allo which
was to fight; and others were of a contrary opinion. The Game could not be plaid
without being luſtily diſpuced, tor the Marquis had three Terwa's of Spaniards, namely The Forces of
thar of Sicily , that of Naples, and that of Corſica (which we call Regiments) the rwo the Marquis of
firſt compoſed of old Soldiers, and that of Corfica of new-railed men (wherein neverthe- alt oe
leſs there were very good Soldiers ) together with two Regiments of Germans, cach of them
containing twelve Enfigns, and four or five thoutand 7talians. As to the Cavalry I
chink ours would have beaten theirs, for we had very good Officers, and very brave Lights
horſe; and for the reſt, our Army conſiſted of ten Enfigns of Germans, ten of Griſons, The French
fourteen of French, and betwixt five and fix thouſand Italians, Of all this day Mon- Forces,
fieur de Strozzy could nor reſolve what to do, by reaſon of the diverſity of opinions, ne-
vercheleſs T think he was reſolv'd the nexr day to have fought them ; for the Siennsis
were ſtark mad of fightine, and I do believe fighting for their liberty weuld have playd
the devils : But the Marquis cither had ſome knowledge of his intent, or elſe his deſign The Marquis
was not to ſtay any longer there ; for he departed an hour before day in the morning ; ſo 49 Marignas
that had God inſpir'd Menfieur de Strozzy, that he had this day gone our to fight, we had diſlodges his
in the morning found them all diflodg*d, and had fought them upon their retrear, and TT
in diſorder 2: bur T muſt repeat what I faid before, Fa me indevino, & io ti daro denari,

The Marquis took the way towards Marchant, where the Mareſchal had lefe four
Enſigns, orelſe the Marquis held itz who went to another place hard by, and Monſieur
de Strozzy direaly to Manchaut, I do not certainly remember whether : bur ſo it was
char their Camps lay eight-or nine days within ſeven or ezghr miles of one another, the
one going to take ſome place, and the other following after to relieve ir, Nevertheleſs
che Marquis at laſt arrived before CMauchant, and began to batter either to take or re-
rake it, I was notthere, for Iſtaid behind ar Sienna, according to the King's intention,
and in relation to my command z yer had it not been for a ſickneſs that I began to fall
:nco, I do believe Monficur de $trozzy would have taken mealong with him, and have
left Monſieur de Lanſac Governor, as beforez bur in the end, as Monſieur de Strozzy
march't away, Monhcur de Lanſac took his way towards Rewe, to acquir himſelf of his

F
mn

Commiſion of Ambaſiador. So ſoon as the Marquis was ſenſible of Monſieur de Strozzy's Monſieur de

coming, he gave place, and drawing off his Arallery, plac'c himſelf a liccle on the right £44/ac goes

hand, ar the diſtance of a hundred and fifty or two hundred paces from the Town , >a 4@

where he made his advantage of two or three lictle Mountains, under which he entrenche yy

himlelf on that fide by the Fountains. Monſieur de Strozzy then came and encamprt his

Army all along a hollow way that there was Eerwixt the Marquis and the Town. Now

Monſieur de Strezzy plac't himſelt fo near 1n detign to fight che Marquis, if he could

once tempt him out ot his Trenches, and there they lay ſeven or cighc days to fee which

ſhould fiſt diſlodge. The Marquis «new very well, that in caſe he thould firſt move,

Monſieur de Strozzy would infallibly fight him ; and therefore would by no means be

drawn to do it, being expreſly forbid to put any thing to hazard, as we were after cold

by Den Juan de Luna himſelf, who was preſent with the Marquis at thar time, and in

his own perſon, a very brave Spaniard, Ion Tuan de
Now berwixc the two Camps there was no more than the breadth of one lictle field, Luna

and that not above fifry paces over, wherein there daily hapned skirmithes berwixc the

foor of both Armies, and fo diſadvantageous to us, that we always came off with che

worſe, by reaſon of the Artillery the Marquis had planted apon the chree foremencioned

Ile Mountains; fo that Monſieur de Strozzy loft more men by their Canon than by

Hen {moller thor The fad Sieur de Strozwy was poſtclt of one Fountain only , upon

A

8 w hik

.
{ of
ROO
V4
#8
: on
43
be v
”
$i

"I |
j , 4
-w

E..

bt

4

:

#

fieur de Stroq-

- = =
CO ITT IN" "I

122 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox IIF.

which the Arullery from one of che Mountoiners contomually playd , and killd a grear
many men ; ſo that rhey were conſtrain'd co fetch all their warer by nighc; neither could

The King he ever draw up his Cavalry into Batralia, bur that the grear ſhot did great execution up-
very much an-

OR = horſes kild, inſomuch that our Cavalry was infinitely diſcourag'd, and che foot allo very

non, much baffled and our of heart. Notwithſtanding all which Monſieur de Strozzy per-

on them, and I was cold thar in three or four dayes time he had above fixſcore men and

ffted obſtinace nor to remove his Quarters, and thar both out of che hope he had char

che Marquis would fuſt diflodge, and give him an o7porrunity to fight him, as alſo out

of punCilio , thar he would nor give him that advancage , as the firſt ro forſake his

ground. Both the one and the other of theſe Generals had mettle enough, and both of

them hac| glory in their proſpe& : bur ir 1s better ro do one's Maſters bnfineſs, than to

ſtand upon njiciries of honor ; I mean if there be no manifeſt ſhame 1n the caſc, 5

Monſieur de Strezzy every day ſent an account of all he did, both co me aad to che

Senar, as we alſo met every day in Council to debate upon what he writ to us, and I eye-

ry hour adviſed, and entreated him not to conſume his Forces wich continual loſs, which

would encourage the Enemies Soldiers, and diſhearten his own : the Lords of che Senate

likewiſe counſcl'd h'm the ſame bur he had fo palſionate a defire to fight with the Mar-

- quis, that chat longing alone blinded his judgment, and deprived him of the knowledge

of his daily lols. I dy*d with defire to go to him, bur the Senate would by no means

conſent unto it : atJaſt he writ me word that within two dayes he would retire in the

face of the Enemy, dir-Aly to Lefignano, whereupon I 3mmediately diſpatchr away a

Gentleman to him, who was preſent when the Letter came, called the Sieur de Leſcaſſan,

by him entreating and conjuring him not to make his retreat by day, fince the loſs in the

skirmiſhes had hapned on his fide (for by ill fortune our people had loſt more the ewo

laſt dayes, than ofall the time before,) and that whoever might adviſe him to the con=-

trary, I begg'd of him to be ruPd by me, and to retire by night, for it was no more than

The S'cur d; £990 miles tro Luſiegnano 3 beſeeching him withall to remember that King Francis had re-
Montiuc's ad- treated from before Landrecy after this manner, and was ſo far from being condemn'd
vice co Mon- for ſo doing, that on the contrary he was highly applauded for it, and it was lookt upon
> 0 by allche Princes and Potencates of Chriſtendome for the mcſt prudent thing he ever did ;

hn te _ al yet had he ſuſtain'd no loſs by skirmiſhes, I gave him moreover to underſtand, tha:
trear in the hitherto I had never ſcen a good retreat made after this manner, neither by Friend nor
face of the E» Enemy, if they who made it wer? cloſely purſued. I further repreſented to him the re-
m_—_ treat that Meſſieurs de Montegean and de Bojſſy would make ar Bripnolles, who would
not be perſwaded to retire without ſeeing the Enemy, for all the Captains who were pre-

{ent with them could do or ſay, which was the cauſc they were defeated within leſs than

half a mile of cheir Quarters. I alſo ſet before him che excmple of Monſieur d' «Awne-

baut, at that time Mareſchal of Franze, at Theroanne, of Monſieur d' Auſſun at ( arignany

Recrears atthe 1,94 ſeveral others : and that fince ſo great a Prince, and fo great a Soldier, as King
eg rrhonhoa Francis was, had by all the world been commended for that diſcreet way of proceeding,
FS" bis ought co take him for his preſident, conſidering alſo thar ſo many valiant Leaders had
loſt themſelves in retreating at the head of an Army; and that by ſuch a lofs (if it ſhould

ſo unhappily fall our) he might gueſs what would become of the City of Sienna. In

ſhort Monſieur de Leſcuſsan brought me word) that once Monfieur de Strozzy was re «

Thom. d*Albene ſolv'd ro do it after this fort, and had it not been tor one unlucky tellow called Thomas
the cauſe of ,P 4/beye he had with him, he had rerrcated after the manner 1 adviſed 3: bur as there
pong - are ſome men in the world , whom God has appointed to do good, ſo has he created 0-
PAS thers to do miſchief, ashe did this Thomas ; for he repreſented to Montienr de Strozzy
ſo many things , and fo preacht what a diſhonor 1z would be co him ro ſteal away by

night, that in the end he made him to alter his determination ; who thereupon ſent me

word thathe was reſolv'd ro make his retreat in the face of the Enemy : Whereas before,

to let me {ce thar he was reſolv'd to follow my advice, he had at one of che clock in che

night ſent away two pieces of Canon he had with him flraighe ro Lafignanos ar which

place I do believe they were already arriv'd (for it was but two lictle miles) betore he al-

tered his reſolution. Ir was four of che clock in the morning before Monſieur de Leſ-

cnſſan parted trom him, who brought me his dererminarian, and arriv'd at ſeven of the

clock inthe morning a 1s mode de France. This hapned to be in Azgaft, and preſently

T ſent to the Senate, deſiring chem all ro meer me ar the Palace, for thac I had ſomerhing *

The Sicur ds of importance to deliver them, which chey did, Now my ſickneſs was ſtill more and
Montluc fick, more encreaſt upon me, and was at laſt curn'd intoa continued Feavor, with a Flix, not -
withſtanding which abour nine cf the clock I came to the Palace, where I began-a Speect:

ro them in Iralian, which I ſpoke better then than I can write it now, which is one _

on

Book III. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 123

—_—

ſon why I have here ſet it down in French, as alfo to the end that che Gentlemen of
Gaſcony, who few of them underſtand that Language, and ſhall read my Book, as Iam
confident they will, may nor be put to the trouble to have ir interpreted co them. I very
well remember whac I ſaid, and do truly believe I do not miſs ten words, for my dif-
courſe was only what was diftated to me by nature, without any help of Arr.

6 Gentlemen, I have requeſted you to this Aſſembly, that T might remonſtrate to The Sieur de
« yon four things, which I conceive to be very important to your conſervation, and haye Yontiuc's Ma-
& been moved fo to do, by reaſon that Monſieur de Strozzy has this night ſent me word os. ge =
« by Monficur de L'Eſcaſſan of the reſolution hehas taken this morning to recrear in o- £0 OE
y 5 na,
<© pen day ro Lnſfignano, 1n the very face of his Enemy» You all know very well what
& perſwafions and 1ntreaties we have uſed, that he would take heed of retreating after this
« manner, and particularly what arguments and exemples T laid before him by the ſaid
« Sicur de FEſcuſſan, which he relifht very well ar firſt, and was once reſolv'd to do as
« King Francis did before Landrecy ; nevertheleſs, by T know not what misfortune, he
« ſuffers himſelf to be carried away by a man he has with him, one Thomas d' Albene,
« who has made him alter his determination , by making him believe that to recreac by
&* night would be diſhonourable to him : God grant the ill counſel of this man do nor
< proye diſhonourable and ruinous both ro him and to you alſo. Now Gentlemen, whilſt
« we are 1n expectation what will be the iſſae.of this Batrail, T have four things to remon-
« ſtrate ro yon. The firſt, and which moſt nearly concerns you, is, that you will pleaſe
«to call ro mind, that you are Soveraigns in your own Republick, that your Predeceſſors
*from Father to Son have left you this honorable Title : thar this War aims at nothing
< bur the ruine of that Soveraignty $ for if the Enemy remain viRorions, you are to hope
« for noother, than from Sovcrajgns to be converted into Subjects, and Slaves; and that
« therefore it 15 much better for you to die with your arms in your handsin the defence
« of this honorable Title, chan camely to part with your Birth-right, and tooutlive the
« loſs of your Priviledges and Liberty with ſhame and infamy. The ſecond is, that you
& will conſider the friendſhip the King my Maſter has towards you, who pretends to no
© other advantage from you, than that your amity be reciprocal te his, and that ſince he
« has generouſly taken you inco his protetion, you will have this confidence in him,
« that he will never forſake you : for ſhould you go leſs in your reſolution for one little
« blow of fortune, conſider with what contempt the whole world will look upon you 3
« there is not a Prince upon the earth char will aid and aſſiſt you, ſhould they once diſcover
« you to bea mutable and irreſoluce people. Por all theſe confiderations therctore I b:- The Sieur de
« ſeech you to continue firm and conſtant , and approve your ſelves magnanimous and *ontiuc Ig
« faithful in adverſiry, when you ſhall hear news of the loſs of the Bartail, which I ve- \ wo mo bery m
« ry much fcar you will ſoon do, conſidering the reſolution Menfienr de Strozzy has ras _
« ken, though God of his goodneſs divert the misfortune. The third is, that you will
« confider in what a height of reputation your forefathers liv'd and dy*d, which allo
« they have left you to inherit, that you may for ever carry the name of the moſt vali-
«ant and warhke people of all 1taly, and have moreover lefr behind chem honorable
« memory of the Bartails they have won of thoſe of their own Nation. You allo derive
& your ſelves from the ancient warlike Romans, and pretend to be their crue legitimare
«Sons, giving their antient arms, which is the Wolf with Romulusand Remnr, Founders
« of their proud City,the Metropolisof the World. I rhcrcfore moſt earneſtly beſeech you Monſieur de
« Gentlemen, that you will call co mind wko you arc, and whar your Progenitors have i Pg IS a"
« eyer been 3 which citle of honor ſhould you once loſe, what a ſhame and infamy would ; "1. men
© jrbero your famous Anceſtors, and whac cauſe will your children have to curſe th2 for the $ionwi
& hour that ever they were deſcended of {uch Fathers, who have abandon*d their Liberty, are notdeſcen-
« to ſubmir their necks to rhe yoke of {ervicude and ſubjetion ? The fourth thing 1 ded from rhe
« have to trouble you withal is ro remonſtrate to you, thar as I have an entire confidence, och roomy
&« you will manifeſt your valour and vertne upon this occafon, you in order therennto "Fog ws
&« will ſuddainly think of making proviſion of all things neceſſary to the conſervation of
« your City ; for the Battail I already give you for loſt, not that ir will nevercheleſs pro-
« ceed from any default in Monſieur de Strozzy, bur from the loſles we have ſuſtein'd
< inthe ſeveral skirmiſhes thar have been fought before Zſauchant, it being impoſtible
&« by reaſon thereof, but rhar our people muſt be mightily Creſt-fallen and dejeRed, and
« thoſe of the Enemy in ereattr heart and conragee *Tis an cfte& of viRtory to be exalc-
«ed, and fcar is the iſſne of misfortune and diſgrace z neither do the little loſſes in $kir-
« mithes, which are the wſual forerunners of a Bartai), ever portend any ching bur diſaſter
* and ruine, On the other fide allo, rhoſe who recire mult of nec:fitry ſhew rheir backs
S 2 | 10

— _— ———

124 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize  Boox In.

* to the Enemy ; where, although they often face abour, yer muſt chey ſtill make for.
© wards, where it will be impoſſible bur they muſt meer with ſome hedge or ditch, o-
« ver which they muſt of neceſſity paſs in,_diforder ; for upon a Retreat every oye will
Fcar ever ac= © ſtrive to be foremoſt, becauſe fear and terror are the ordinary concomitants of thoſe
companies a * who would retire; and for never ſo little diſorderly haſte they ſhall make all will he

n——_

Kerreac. &« loft, if the Enemy have but half the courage thar men ſhould have, Remember (Gentle.
The Batrait' of ©© men) the Battail that Hanxibal gain*d of the Romains at Cannee near to Remr, The
Cannee, *© Romans who were at home in the City never ſuſpe&ted it poſſible that their people

© ſhould be beaten, and therefore made no kind of provifion, nor took any order in
* their affairsz ſo that when news came of the defeat, they were ſtrook into ſo great a
© terror, that che Gates of Rowe remain'd for three dayes and three nights wide open,
"© not a man ſo much as daring togo ſhut them 5; ſo that had Hannibal purſued his yi«
* Gory, he might without any oppoſition have entred the City 3 as Titus Livie reports
< in his Hiſtory. Therefore (Gentlemen) give preſent order for the ſecuring of your Gares,
* and appoint men to guard them, which you muſt alſo. chooſe our of thoſe of beſt re.
£ pure for the braveſt and moſt faithful amongſt you : In che nexc place cauſe procla.
© mation to be made throughout the City, that all choſe who have Corn or Meal ac the
* Mills, ſhall make haſte to ger their Corn ground, and bringit all inco the City, Cauſe
* alſo all thoſe who have grain, or any other ſorrs of proviſion in che Villages immediacely
& to fetch it into the Town, upon penalty of having it burnr, or put to ſack if by to mor-
© row night it be not all broughc wichin the walls 5 and alÞchis co, the end chac we may
& have wherewith to ſupport our ſelves, and maintain the Siege till the ſucconrs the King
& will ſend us (hall arrives for he 1s not ſo inconſfiderable a Prince, but that as he has hag
© the power to ſend you theſe aids tharare already come, he is yer able to ſend you more ;
&« and moreover command your three Standardebearers to have all their Companies in a
& readineſs at the beat of Drum. My Fever preſſing upon me, I am conſtrain'd to retire to
© my lodging, in expearion of ſuch news as God ſhall pleaſe to ſend us, and you I hope
& in the mean time will take preſent order about ſuch things as I have put you in mind
& of, in which aſſurance, for the ſervice of the King my Maſter, and particularly your
© own, I make you a tender not only of the lictle experience God has given me, bur'more-
« oycr of my life tor the defence of your City, and the ancient priviledges thereof, ,

Thus then I departed from them, who immediately reſolv'd to have patience in what
fortune ſoever God ſhould be pleaſed to ſend them, and to eat to their very children,
before they would for any misfortune that ſhould befall chem, depart from the Amity
and Prore&ion of the King of France. I perceived both by their countenance and their
ſpeeches, thar they were a people very well reſolv'd to defend their liberty, and to pre-
ſerve inviolate the friendſhip they had promiſed and ſwornto me. A reſolution at which
indeed I was mightily well pleaſed. They immediately then cauſed proclamation to
be made, upon which every one ran to the field to ferch in what they had, and abour
five aclock in che Evening arrived Captain Cambas, Camp-Maſter to the French Infancry,

Monſieur 4& WÞ9 came to bring me news that the Bartail was loſt, and Monlienr de Strozzy wounded

Strozzy de- to death, whom they had laid upon Poles ro carry him to Mortal/in, and that chac very

feared the 3d night all thoſe of the Army who had eſcap't the Batrail would be ar the Gatesof Sienna,

of Auguſt Tleave any one to judge what a condition I was in, being fick of a Fever and a Diſſente-

"5" ry, {eeing our General dead, or what was as bad, it being not above fourteen or fifteen
dayes ſince I arrived in this Republick, not having any acquaintance with any one perſon
in the City, and conſequently not knowing who were good Frenchmen, and who were
not. Time is requir'd to the knowledge of men. Monfieur de Strozzy had left me bur
five Italian Companies, of which I did not know ſo much as one Caprain, and thoſe he
had left in the Citadel and rhe Fort of Camolia, which were the Keys of the City. Ichen
ſent Captain Cambas to carry the news to the Senate, who were norhing diſmai'd at ir,
buc told him that three or four dayes before I had remonſtrated to them, thar this re-
treat would be dangerous and that although by what I had ſaid to them they had given
the Bacrail for loſt , they would nevertheleſs nothing alter che good inclination they had
for the King, nor deſpair of being reliev'd by him. |

Do nor think it ſtrange (fellow Caprains) if foreſeeing the loſs of a Batrail, I alſo fore-
rold it tothe Sjenvois , which I did, nor to diſhearten, but to aſſure them, to che end
chat che ſudden news thereof might not ſtrike a general aſtoaiſhmenc throughour the whole
City 3 *cwas this made them reſolve, this made chem take counſel to prepare chemſelves ;
and in my opinion men do berter in expeRing the worſt, than in being over confident of
their Fortune, Upon what I had (aid to them every one put on a reſolution to die = che

| detence

Ct AA 1 A 1 AA A I A PN I STO AA ts

er po oo oaenqQ ay Re - + a —m_

Book IIl. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. Y -

125
defence of cheir wall, and every thing was preſently brought ir to the City. Ar break of
day in the morning the Infantry arriv'd, for che Cavalry were gone away with Monſieur
de Strozz); neither had there indeed ar Sienns been any thing for che horſes to eat, Co-
lonel Rheincrec, and Signior (ornelio Bentivoglio came to my lodgings, where amongſt us
it was determin'd, thar the Rheincrce ſhonld our of ten Enfigns that he had make ſix,

Signior Cornelio ſix of /talians, and Captain Cambas ix of French , and chat all the reſt
ſhould be ſent away to Montalſin. The Foot were never permitted ro enter the Town,
cill firſt the Ele&ion was made, and with the remainder we alſo ſent away five Enfigns of
Italians to goe to the ſaid eMontalſin : to which place I writ to Monſicur de Strozzy
(upon the aſſurance Signior Cerpelio had given me that there was yer hopes of. his life)
co give him an account of the oder I had taken, which he did alſo very well approve. RE
The Marquis knew not how to follow his victory, which if he had, all the Army had The Marguis
been cut to pieces, and all the earth could not have fav'd Monſieur de Strozzy from be- de Marignas
ing pur. to a cruel death by the Duke of Florence. *Tis the ordinary faulc of Conque- mn gs _
rors. You Generals of Armies therefore char ſhall come after us, learn to be wiſe at rhe bis Yieory, -
expence of ſo many others, and ſuffer not your ſelves to be fo far tranſported with joy _
for the winning of a Battail, that you forget ro improve it to the urmoſt ; follow your blow,
and do not give your Encmy leiſure to recolle& himſelf. The Marquis came not till che
next day to Leſignanc, for he fear'd Iſt Monſieur de Strozzy might again rally his Army,
conſidering thar he had loft none of his horſe, and not knowing him to be wounded,
and came not of three dayes before Sienng,
I ſhall not undertake to give any account how this Battail was fought, nor how it
was loſt; both becauſe I was not preſent there, and: thar alſo there is ſome diſpute about
it, and various reports made of thoſe who had done well andill. Tis 1s ikea rial at
Law, all parties muſt be hcard before judgment be pronounced : for I have heard the |
French and the Lanſquenets accuſe the Griſons and Ttalians for behaving themſelves ill in 0
this Battail (though they deny it) and the Cavalry much worſe. Others ſay, and affirm Diſputes abous
that there was treachery in the buſineſs : for my part I can ſay nothing to'c, for I know *** !ols of the
nothing but by hearſay ; bur ſhall ſtick to what I ſaid before, that theſe recreats by day m_—_,
in the face of an Enemy are dangerous, and tg beavoided, if poſſible ; or if nor, *tis bercer
co lay all at ſtake, | 1 ED gd :
Monheur de Strezzy ay thirteen days without diſcovering any hopes of life, which The diligence
notwithſtanding he fail'd nor to ſend out Captains towards Romania to raiſe new PFor- dr opt ae
ces, and to furniſh all the Garriſons upon the Sea Coaſt, and abour Xſontalſin with foor *'V:
and horſe, He was a man of greacvigilancy, diligence, and wiſdome z bur 'ris umpohible
co bealwayes forinnate. Now ſeeing my ſelf reduc't to thelaſt extremity, at the door of The Sicur de
death, and given over by all my Phyſicians, I afſign'd over the Government of the City Montluc flick
to Signior Cornelis : but Monhieur de Strezzy hearing of my deſperate condirion, ſent yay ge
away poſt to Rowe for Monſieur de Lanſac to come and command there; who accord-
ingly being come as far as Aontal/in, he was there adviſed ro go by night, and on foor
with two Guides and one Servant, and to balk che great high-wayes, by which means he
might the better efcape the Enemies Guards : bur as he was come hard by Sienna, he |
was there met by ſome Soldiers who were going to the warre, by them taken and carried The Sicur de
ro the Marquis, and by him fent away to Florence, where he remained priſoner during all Lay Wen
the rime of the War, and a good while after. The faid Sicur de Lanſas was in this ve- YT -
ry illadviſed, for he might have paſt well enough, had he known how to carry his buſi-
neſs, Had hecome I do certainly believe I had died; tor I had then had nothing to
do, whereas my mind was ſo wholly taken up with thecare of my buſineſs, that I had
not ſeiſure to think of my diſeaſe, Menfieur de Fourquevarx was wounded, and taken
priſoner at this Bactail, and Caprain Baferon Colonel of the French Foot, with ſeveral 0-
thers, to the number of berwixt four and five thouſand. ?Twas ſaid that Monſieur de
Strozzy in his own perſon, behav'd himſelt Like a brave and valiant Leader. And this
was the ſucceſs of this unforcunate Battail.
This Hiſtory may ſerve for exemple ro ſuch as have a vanity in making retreats in the
face of an Enemy, and I ſhould eyer adviſe that chey would rather put it to che puſh of
a Bactail, than to retire afcer this manner ; for I find nothing 1n the whole practice of
Arms ſo difficult as a retreat. Of this char of the Conſtable ar St. Qaentin gives us more-
over ſufficient proof ; a man who 1n his time had known both how ro thew, and reach o-
cher Commanders what they ought to do, though ſuch was his misfortune here, that he
could nor make uſe of thoſe preceprs himſelt had ar other cimes given to others, Though
I muſt nevertheleſs needs ſay, that had he been well ſeconded by che Caprains of Foor,
who were withoar with him, he might perhaps have made hus retreat ; for they had only

needed

Pony 2666. a4 Oe

|
;

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book 1IF.

The Conſtable
defeated at St,
Qurnin.

The Marquis
de Marignan
before Sienna,

The hopes of
rhe Maiquis of
HA Than.

The Sicur de
$1703FJ $93 to
relicye $4444,

Mogſicur de
$1037) 18 very
grcat dangee-

necced ro hazard three or four hundred Harquebuzeers with the Mareſchal de St. Andre,
who might very well have kept the Count 4's Aignemont from ſeeing the diſorder thac was
amoneſt the Baggage, which was yet mixr with the horſe, and he would never haye charg'd
the ſaid Mareſchal, had he been ſuſtein'd by the Harquebuzeers, foraſmuch as the ſaid
Count had no foor at-all, and the Conſtable had had above half an hours time wherein
to be gaining ground, as he had already begun to do , and had recover'd the wood to
fave his Infantry , and fo had retir'd with all che Cavalry to 1a Fere, by which means
they cou!d have loſt no more than the Harquebuzeers, and part of the Mareſchal's horſe
only 5 which itchad been much better ro do, than to loſe the General, and all, as they did,
I have ſince talkr with ſeveral of the Foor Officers, who are yer living, and remon-
ſtrared ro them whar a riddle this bufineſs was to all men of underſtanding, telling them
that I at theaoce of cightcen or ninetcen only had very well diſcover'd in the retreat of
Captain Carbon and Montficur de Grammont, at St. Fean de Luz, thata (mall parcy was
fo be hazarded to ſave all, of which 1 my ſelf had had experience, as I have writ in the
reginning 2 bur they excuſed themſelves upon the Camp-Maſter, and laid all the blame
rohim, which was all chey had to ſay for themſclves, All theſe exemples Ihave ſer down
that they may b» of uſe to others tor thetinic ro come, and cannot forbear often to repear,
and much to inſiſt upon the faulc commicied by theſe kind of retreats, by reaſon of che
great inconveniencics that enſue upon them, to the lols of a Battail, It were not worch
io much repentance, if they were reſolv'd upon a Battail, and to fight it our, that every
one might do his beſt : bur co be beaten when they have a mind to retire, and apparently
decline fghting is intolerable.

You Generals and Lieutenants of Provinces may here ſee of what importance theſe errors
are; when thar of St. Qzentin put the whole Kingdom in danger, and was the occahon
char we quirred all our Conqueſts ; and this pur the King's affairs of /taly ina very 1
condition. Be not then altham'd to cover your defigns with the ſhades of nigar, which
is ſo fer from being ſhamefal, that it is on the contrary honorable to fool and deceive your
Enemy,rhat watchcs an opportunity to do you a miſchief; and who when the day appears
{hall find nothing bur the empty neſt, and the birds flown and gone : it is a much grea=
ter ſhame and diſhonor to you co be beaten curning yous backs. If you be fo nice of your
honor fight in good carneſt in God's name; fic ſtill in your Fore, if it be a place of the
leaſt advantage, and there quietly expeR eicher till your Enemy ſhall be weary of wait=
ing upon youy or that he comes to atraque you in your Camp, and ſo you thall be ſure at
leaſt to play your game above board as they ſay.

Now the Marquis lodg'd the Tertia of Corficaat the little Obſervance, the Tertia of
Sicily at the Charcreux , where he emtrenche them ſo well, char we could by no means
come to them, and himſelf with the reſidue of his Camp remain*d at Avrbeirotte, and
part of his Cavalry were quarter'd at Bonconvent. He truſted to the Garriſon he had in
the Forc St. Mark every night to go the Patrouille, and ſo ſcour the road on that fide
cowards Fontebrando, that no proviſion ſhould enter into Sienna ; yer conld he nor order
it ſo, bur chat there entred Cows and Buffles for fix weeks together. I think the thing
that made the Marquis proceed with ſo much leiſure and moderation, was thar he waited
for my death , and that of Monſieur de Strozzy 3 making account that we being once

dead, and Meſſieurs de Lanſac and de Fourguevanx taken priſoners, our people wanting

a French-man to head them would deliberate to retice : Monſieur de Strozzy nevertheleſs
recover?d, and being rold that T was dead (for by reaſon I had for three dayes been look'c
upon as a dead man, no one entring into my Chamber but the Prieſts to rake care of m
ſoul, for my Body was given over by the Phyficians, they had ſent him ſuch word) Mon-
eur de Strozzy, I'fay, ſeeing Monſieur de Lanſac taken, and me dead, would venture co
come ſrom Montalſin and to put himſelf into Sienna. According to this reſolution then
he departed in the beginning of the night from 2ontal/n , with fix Companics of foor
an two Troops of horſe, one of which was commanded by my Nephew Serifac, who be-
fore he ſer out bechought himſelf to borrow three or four Trumpets of his Companions,
fearing that would fall out which did ; for Monſieur de Strozzy could not fo ſecretly de-
part, but char the Marquis had inrelligence of his defign, and with all his Camp lay in
wait {.- > 'm about Foptelrando, and all along the River Treſſe,

Monficar de Strozzy had placed all his Foor before, and his Cavalry behind , being
himſelf mounted upon a very little horſe, and having his leg ſuſtain'd in a Scarfe faſtned
ro the prmmel of his Saddle, and with him was the Biſhop of Sienna, So ſoon as our
Ttalian Foot came into the Enemies Ambuſcado, they fell upon them with fo great fury,
and fo ſudden a terror, that withour much reſiſtance they betook themſelves to flight,
and bore Monſieur de Strozzy over and over, who with the Biſhop got amongſt the ruins

of

Book Ill. * de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. I,

of ſome old houſes, where he ſtazd holding his horſe in his hand. The noiſe was ſo

- greatthat it was heard to Sienna, it being not above a mile off ac the furtheſt, The Ene-

my follow'd their victory with great execution, when Seriflac with his Trumpets charg'd

chrough the middeft. of them 3 who hearing ſo many Trumpets, and ſeeing the horſe faln

in amongſt them, faced abour in rout and confuſion, and ran full drive upon the Mar-

quis, who ſeeing the diſorder was conſtrain'd to recire to Arberiottes Now thoſe who |
had given the charge, and who alſo had receiv'd it, were Spaniards and [talians mixc The flight and
rogether, inſomuch that our people fled on the one fide, and the Enemy on the other, fright of both
Two er three hundred 1talians of ours recover'd the walls of Sienna, others fled away ER
twelve miles from thence , and old Capcains roo, whom the Mareſchal very much e-

ſteem'd 3 bur the braveſt men in the world having once loſt their judgment, and giving

all for loſt , know not where they are, By this you may ſee how great the dangers of

war are, and how infamousa thing ir is to run away, without firſt ſeeing an apparent

danger, During this buſtle the day began to appear, when Serifac remaining upon the

place, found he had loſt no more than three or four of his Troop only, who were allo run

away with the Foot : bur I bclieve there were not many left of the other Troop, they ha-

ving only a Lieutenant to command them. Monſieur de Strozzy hearing now no more

noiſe, with much ado again mounted on horſeback, beginning to diſcover our Cavalry,

and was looking if he could find Serillac amongſt the dead bodies : when feeing him

come to him, 1 leave you to judge what joy there was both on the one fide and on the o- Seriliac and
ther, and ſo they marche together ſtraight towards the City. Now I muſt needs ſay <onn ae
that Monſicur de Strozzy herein committed one of the greateſt follics that any man in his ©" TE
command ever did, as I have told him an hundred times ſince 3 for he knew very well,

that had he been taken all the world could nor have ſay*d him from being put to an ig-

nominions death by the Duke of Florence, ſo profeſt and inveterate a hatred he had con-

eiv'd againſt him. And although Serillac be my Nephew, I may wich truth give

him this honor and commendation, that he was the only cauſe of Monſieur de Strozzy's

ſafety ; which I may the better be bold co write, becauſe Monſieur de Strezzy himſelf

told me ſo. His Troop indeed was a very good one, being for the greateſt part Gaſcons

and French ; for it was the old Company of Monſieur de Cypierre. Of Captains there

came to the Town only Caraffa, who was fince Cardinal, and another, as I was told,

whoſe name I have forgot, and two or three hundred Soldiers, whom Monſieur de

Strozzy would not ſuffer to come into the Town, bur that night ſent them away with

the aforeſaid Captain, and kept Caraffa with him.

So ſoon as Monſieur de Strozzy came into the City he preſently enquir'd how TI did,
and was anſwer'd, that for three or four dayes they had begun ro conceive ſome hopes
of my life, whereupon he came and alighted at my lodging , the Biſhop and the ſaid Monſieur ge
Gentleman being with him, where he found me ſo miſerably worn away, that my bones Strozxy goes to
had pierc'c chrough my skin 1n ſeveral parts of my body. He comforted me atter the wk the ieur
beſt manner be could, and there ſtaid rwelve dayes expeting how God would diſpoſe _ "”
of me; when ſeeing me from day to day recover ſtrength, and grow into a better poſture E
of health, hereſolv'd che thirteenth day in the beginning of the night ro depart, withour
acquainting any one with his intention but my ſelf only, A little before he cook horſe
he and the Biſhop came to take their leaves of me, knowing very well chat his being
there wonld cauſe the Marquis to proceed with greater vigour againſt che Town, and
alſo that being abroad he might find ſome way or other to relieve me ; where at parting
I promiſed and aſſured him to hold out to the laſt gaſp.

The Mareſchal had fer Guards upon all the Roads to catch him, bur he choſe to retire Monſieur de
by a way , by which of all other che Mareſchal never ſuſpeted he would attempt to Stroxgy gors
paſs ; for he went out at che Port Camogiia, from whence he deſcended on the right hand W* of Sienve.
down into the Valley, leaving the Fort of Camoglia above, and going all along by the Ris
ver towards the Palace of Dias. During his ſtay in Sienna he perfeRly recover'd of his
wounds, ſo that he arm'd, and mounted himſelf upon a good horſe, He met by the way
fourty or fifcy of the Encmies foor, which gave him ſome alarm, bur he {till held on his
way , without loſing any bur ſome few ſervants only belonging co ſome Gentlemen
who went our of che City to attend him. Ir was not however without peril. In
a few dayes he eſcap't three great dangers. A little after his departure I recover'd m
healch, and cauſed my felt to be carried ina Chair about the Town, The Marquis lo-
ſing no cime , ſhut us up on every fide, and every day we had very handſome skir-
miſhes: bur I knew very well that che Marquis would have me for want of bread ;
which was che reaſon that I madethis Harangue to the Captains, whom I had aſſembled
roperher to chat efteR,

« Gentlemen)

7 :
_ £

0 OT OO OO er TT IE OT I IE DOI.

VL EPS.

_—

128

——_— A

"The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book 111,

The Sicur de
Montluc's Hi

rangue (0, the CC

Captains of
SLeands

The Germans
anſwer.

The reſolutien
of rhe Captains
and Soldiers,

The Sicar de
Mont liic's
Speech to the
$12111038+

© Gentlemen, I believe there is none of us who does nor defire to come oft from this
Siege with honor and repute; the thuſt of honor has brought us hither, You ſee we
are here ſhut up for a long time , for we are not to imagine chat the Enemy will evcx
&« riſe from before us, till he have us by one way or another, ſeeing upon the reducing of
&« this place depends his victory. You ſee alſo that the King 15 at a grear diſtance from
&« us, and that therefore of a long time it will not be poſſible for him to relieve us, for-
« 45much as he muſt of neceſſity draw our ſaccours from Germany, and our of his own
« Kingdom of France, the [talians themſelves without the help of others nor being ſuſ-
« cient to raiſe the Enemies Sicgc, who have not only the Forces of 1taly, but moreover of
&« almoſt all other Nations. Now in expeRarion of this relick we are to have a long pati-
& ence, in husbanding as much as is potlible our provifions 1n order whereuntoT am to
&« tell you,that I have deliberated co leflen the Size of bread from four and twenty, to twen-
&© ty onnces. I know very well the Soldiers would murmur art this, if you did not remon-
© trace tothem how far we are diſtant from the King; that is Majeſty cannot fuddenly-

cc

2.9
* relieve ns, and that you will rather die of famine, chan chat it ſhall be laid in your

<< ith, that had you had the patience to leſſen your dier the Town had nor been loſt. Ic
&« would be an infamous repro:ch to have it faid, thar you fil'd your bellies to ſtarve
« your honot 5 you have not (ur your {clves up. within theſe walls ro occation the loſs
<« and ruine of the City, bur to defend and to fave 1r. Repreſent to them that they are
&« here amongſt ſtrange Nations, where they may ſet a mark of honor upon their own.
« What ploiy do men acquire, when they nor only obrain honor and cſteem for their
« own particular perſons , but moreover for the Nation from whence they come? *'Tis
&« whata generous heart ſhould principally propoſe to himſelt for the reward of his do-
<« jpg and ſuffering. You Germans ſhall return home proud of the hardſhips you have
<« ſuſtein'd, and the dangers you have undergone, and 'we Frenchmen alfo : and as for
<« you who are [talians, you ſhall acquire this renowy, with invincible courages to have
<« tought for the liberty of your County, a reputation we can none of us obtein, but by a
«long patience, in giving the King my Maſter time to relieveus 5 and believe I beſeech you,
& chat his moſt Chriſtian Majeſty will in nothing fail of the friend{hip he has promiſed
«and ſworn to you. If you remonſtrate all this to your Soldiers, and that they ſce and
© know, that you your ſelves are thus reſolv'd, I am afſur'd they will follow the ſame
&© waycs you takes, Therefore, Gentlmen, never think to excaſe your ſ{clyes upon chem; I
& have never known a mutiny happen (and yet I have ſeen many ) thorough Soldiers alone,
« if they were not by their Officers ſet on, and encourag'd to it. If you lead chemrhe
« way, there is nothing they will not do, no incommodity they will not ſuffer. Do it
{© then I beſeech you, or reſolve betimes to diſcover the bottom of your hearts: and plain»
«]y tell us you have no mind to undergo the length and inconveniencies of a Siege, thar
<< {ach as had rather diſhonourably ſpend their time in eating and drinking, than ſtake
& their perſons upon an account of honor, may depart, and not divert others from nobler
&« reſolutions. Now becauſe the Germans did not underſtand my Gibverith, I bad che Rhejn-
croc's Tnrerpreter tell his Maſter whar I ſaid, which he diJy and the Rheincroc made an -
ſwer, that both he and his Soldiers would put on the ſame patience that we our ſelves did :
and that although ir was ſaid of the Germans, that they could not endure without eating
and drinking their fill, both he and his upon this occaſion would manifeſt the contrary,
I was in plain truch the moſt afraid of theſe people, becauſe they love ro make good chear
more than we. As tor the /tallan he is more enur d 1o hardſhip and ſuffering than we
are. Thus then every one retir'd to his own Quarters to call their Companies together,
to whom they accordingly remonſtraced the ſame things that T had repreſented ro them
before. Which having heard the Soldiers all held up their hands, and {wore they would
ſuffer to the laſt gaſp of their lives before they would yield, or do any thing unbecoming
men of honor. I then ſent to the Senate, entreating them the next morning to aſſemble
all che chick men of the City to the Palace, ro hear a remonſtrance I had to make to them,
that concern'd chem and their affairs, which they did, and there jn 1talian I made them
this following Oracion. 4

© Gentlemen, had Almighty God been pleaſcd ſooner to reſtore to me my health aad
« memory, I had ſooner thought of what we are to do for the conſervation of your h-
i berty, and the defence of this City. You have all ſeen how I have by ſickneſs been re-
«< duc't to the very door of death, and how God ar laſt has rather by miracle chan any
© operation of Narure raiſed meup again, to do yet more ſervice tor this Republickin ſuch
© and ſogreat a neceſſiry, Now, Gentlemen, I very well ſce, rar the conſervation of
« your City and Liberty conſiſts in nothing but the making vour provitions hold out;

« fox

Mi. 4.4. At Me. IE_ tt. —___

Boox Ill. 6 Montluc, Mareſchdl of France:

ea ante. Sa
y—onnrn— ———R—— ed RR — ——

« fr ſhould che Marquis attempt to have us by force, we ſhall I hope give him ſuch an
« entertainment as ſhall make him curſe the hour char ever hecame to beſiege Sjenna :
& þuc I perceive he has no mind to go that way to work ; on the contrary he intends to
« reduce us by famine ; againſt which we muſt if poſſible provide, and defeat him of that
« expeation. I yeſterday called together che Colonel of the Germans and his Captains,
« Sjpnior (ornelio here preſent with his, and Combas alſo with his Prench Officers; to
«© whom I remonſtrated, that to prolong time, and co give the moſt Chriſtian King lei-
« {are co relieve us, it would be neceſſary to leffen the Soldiers bread , from four and
& twenty to twenty Ounces. Telling them chat ſo ſoon as all the world ſhould know,
| «& agg particularly che King, that we are reſolv'd ts hold out to the laſt morſel, ic will in-
| E (;re his Majeſty to fall ſpeedily in hand with levying of ſuccours, that ſo many brave men
|  «& ay not beloſt, and thar he may not ſeem to abandon thoſe he has taken into his pro-
« tection in 2 time of the greareſt neceſſity and danger. Now, by what I have been cold
« ,ou have, during the time of my extremity, raken account of your proviſions, and have
« only found ſo much as tolaſt co the fifteenth of November. Of which you have alſo
| © ſent word ro his Majeſty, a thing that may very well give him occaſion to grow cold
« ;q ſending us relict, contidering the great diſtance berwixt him and us, and chat alſo
« Winter is drawing on. Armies do not fly, nor ride Poſt, His ſuccours will be worthy
|  « agreatPrince, ſuitable to the friendſhip he bearsto you, and ſufficient co force the Ene-
| « my from your Walls, and cherefore cannot ſo ſuddenly be ſer on foot. Now (Gentlemen)
|  & after I had remonſtrared thus much to the Captains, I found them all ready to ſuffer to
« the laſt gaſp of cheir lives, and Nation for Nation went to make che ſame Remonſtrance
« to their Soldiers, whom they found all willing to have patience, and ſo have both pro-

| 6: rniſed and ſwern, See then what you Sjennois ought to do, ſeeing it concerns the loſs Order propoſ'd

« of your Liberties and Seigneuries, and peradventure of your lives; for you are to cx- * the Sicur de

=o : ontluc to the

« vect no good uſage, having pur your ſelves under the King's proteCtion, I beleech you gum.
« therefore, that ſince we who have nothing here to loſe, neither wives nor fires have |

&« ſhew'd you the way, you will confider of it, to regalate the expence yz and appoint
&« Commiſſaries to take an account of all the corn you have in the City, and alſo of the
& mouths; and this being done, begin toreduce your bread to fifteen ounces, for ic is nct
« roffible , but you muſt have ſome little conveniency in your houſes, that the Soldiers
' «cannot have, And of all this good order I ſhall advertize the King's Miniſters at Rope,
i ©< and from thence ſhall canſe a Gentleman to go on forwards to the King himſelf, co the
|! <endthar his Majeſty may judge what time he may have wherein to relieve us, and for
<« the reft rely upon me, who will have no more priviledge than the meaneſt Cirizen. The
« Faſt that we ſhall keep ſhall nor only be fox our fins, bur alſo for the ſaving of your
« lives; for the conſervation of which I will willingly lay down my own. Credeze Signi-

orl, che ſin ala morte,, io vi gardaro quello che vi o promiſſo, ripe) ate vi ſopradime.

They then rerurn'd me very many thanks for the good advice I had given them, which
only rended to their own preſervation , entreating me to retire ro my todging foraſmuch
as they would go into the great Hall, where all che moſt eminent perſons of che Ciry were
aſſembled, to whom they would give an account of what I had ſaid to them, and char
within two hours by two of their Senators they would return me an anſwer, and ſo I
departed from them. They were as good as their words, and my Propoſition being re-
preſenred in this Aſſembly, they at laſt all with one voice reſoly'd ro eat to their very
wivesand children rather than not to waic the King's pleaſure, upon the confidence they
repoſed inhim of a certain relief, and immediately went abont taking of order for the
contraQting the allowance of bread, and for the taking an Inventory of both Corn and
other proviſion, which in five or fix days was diſpatch'c. I then ſenc away Monſieur de Monficur Je
L' Eſcuſſan, but wich very grear difficulcy, for che Marquis cauſed ſtri& Guard to be kept E'Eſcyſtan ſenc
to hinder any from bringing us in any proviſions, and as many Countrymen as were ta- ©9 the King ro
ken arrempring ſo to do, were immediately hang'd wichour mercy. L'Eſcuſſan went NT _
firſt ro Afontal/in, there to give Monſieur de Strezz3 an account of all proceedings, that of 53m.
he mighc give notice thereof co che King's Miniſters ac Rowe, and from thence went to | |
his Majeſty co repreſent unto him che miſerable condition of the Siennois, as I had given
him in charge to do, and chis might be about che middle of Ofober.
From this time forward 1 could do nothing worch ſpeaking of until Chrifimas Eve,
| ſaving rhac a lirtle afcer che departure of che ſaid  Eſcufſan, we again abated the Soldiers
| bread to eighteen ounces, and thar of the Ciry to fourteen, though all che while there
| werefrequenr skirmiſhes, and very handſomely foughe on both fides. Upon Chriſtmas
Eve, about tour of the clock in the afternoon, che Marquis de arignane by one of his

Trampetrs,

NO ISS

Pe at One cas. a
6 * Taber b ,

nat > 1.592 he

130 The Commontarics of Meſlite Blaize Bo ox UI.

Trampcts ſent me half a Stag, fix Capons, fix Partridges, {ix Borachio?s of excellenc wine,
and fix loaves of white bread, wherewith the nexr day co keep the Feaſt, I did nothing
wonder at this courtefie , becauſe in rhe extremity of my ſickneſs he had permicred my
Phyfitiansto ſend men through his Camp to fetch certain Drugs from Florence, and had
himſelf three or four times ſent me a very excellent ſort of Birds, a lictle bigger than the
Beccaficco's chat are taken in Provence, He had alſo ſuffer'd a Mule to enter the Town
laden with Greek wine, which was ſent me by the Cardinal of , 4rmagnac, my people
having ſcnt the Cardinal word, thar in the heighc of my ſickneſs I talkt of nothing bur
drinking a little Greek wine. Whereupon he ſo order'd the buſineſs, that the Cardinal
de Medici writ to the Marquis his Brother to ſuffer it to come in to me, ic being ſentun-
der pretence of making mea Bath. The wine came ara time when Þ was at the laſt gaſp,
and ſo was not deliver*d to me ; but the half of it divided amongſt the big-bellied wo-
men of the Town, Whileſt Monſieur de Styzzzy was there I gave him three or four
bottles of it, the reſt T drank as they do Hippocras in the Mornings. All theſe civili-
ties I had receiv'd from che Marquis before, which made me nothing wonder at the Pre-
ſent he ſent me now : Part of which 1 ſent co the Seigneury, part to the Rhejncroc, and
the reſt 1 reſerv*d for Signior Corneliv, the Count de Gayas, and my ſelf, becauſe we com-
monly atc cogether. Such little civilicies as theſe are very gentile and commendable, even
berwixc the greateſt Enemies ; if there be no thing particular berwixt them, as there was
not berwixt us two. He ſerv'd his Maſter, and I ſerv'd mine: He attaqu*c me for his ho-
nor, and I defended my ſelf for mine. He had a mind to acquire repuration, and ſo had
IT. "Tis for Turks and Sarzzens to deny an indifferent courtefie even to an Enemy : bur
then ic muſt nor be ſach aone, or of ſuch importance as to break or endammage your
delign,
The Marquis But whilcſt the Marquis carefl 'd me with his Preſents, which I only payd back in
of Marignan thanks, he was preparing for me another kind of feaſt ; for the ſame night abour aa hour
Pons Scalado Afrer midnight he with all his Army gave a Scalado to the Cittadel, and to the Fort Ca»
y nighr ro the ; += gi | C £
Giradel ang liz, Tisa ſtrange thing, thatabove a month before my mind gave me, and ſcem'd
the Fort of Ca» £0 preſage that the Marquis would give me a Scalado, and the Caprain St. Aubas would
mis, | be cauſe of the loſs of the Fort. This was evermore running in my head, and that che
Germans allo would occafion the loſs of the Citradel, into which an Enfign of that Na-
tion every night entred, to keep Guard theres and that was the reaſon why I plac'c an
Enſign of Siennois in Guard overagainſt the Gate of the Cittadel. Signior Cornelio pre-
vail'd fo far with the Rhcineree, thar he promiſed him that in caſe of an Alarm, and thac
the Enemy ſhould offer an affaulc to the Cittadel, the German Captain that he plac
there every night upon the Guard ſhould from him have command to ler in the Siennois to
help to defend ir, chough Ichink he chat night forgot ſo tro do, Every night I went to ſee
a Company of French Foot mount the Guard in the Fort Camoglia, and another of Sijey-
nots betwixt the Fort and the Gate of the City, under a great Market-houſez which on
the two ſides was encloſed with a little Trench 5 bur in the front of it, which went dis
realy to the Fort, it was all plain with the pavement, and it might he from this Court of
Guard to the Fort threeſcore or fourſcore paces, and as much to the Gate of the City, I
plac't this Guard there for two reaſons, whereof one was to relieve the Fort if occaſion
ſhould be, as the other Company of Siennois was to do the Cittadel, and the other to
watch that the Enemy did nor ſtorm the Wall of che City ; foraſmuch as on ihe left hand,at
the going out of che Town,the wall was very low, and moreover a part thereof fallen down.
The Sieur de I had ſeveral times before ſaid to Signior Cornelis, and to the Count de Gayas, ſeeing Captain
Montluc preſa- St. Auban's Company enter into the Forr, theſe words. Would you believe that ic ecer-
ges ſome diſt» nally runs in my mind chat we ſhall loſe this Fort thorough the defaulc of Caprain Sr,
_ Hrbar oe Anban and his Company ? I never ſaw him enter into it, that it did not pur me into a fic
St. Aubas a Of an Ague, out of theill conccir I had of him, I could never fancy him in my heart, be-
German Cap- cauſe he never had twenty men. of appearance in his Company, for he valued a Teſton
tain, more than the braveſt man under the Sun, and as to himſelf he would never ſtir from his
lodging, for any thing either I, or any of his compamions could ſay ro him. I could have
wiſhr him: far enough off, I had ſo ſtrange an averſion to him. And theſe were the rea-
fons why I ever fancied that this man would bring upon me ſome miſchict or other.
Deſcripcioa of * Our Fort of Camoglia was cnviron'd with a dicch of a Pikes lengrh in wideneſs, and
che Fore Camo» as much in depth, and not much more onthree fades ; and in the front of ic which but-
plide red direQly upon the Sienmis Court of Guard, nothing bur a little Rampire of fix or (c-
ven foot high, and no more z and about the middle of the Rampire there was alittle lenct
or half pace , where che Soldiers had ſo much room only as to ſuſtein themſelves upors
their knees, The Enemy had another Forc chree times as big as ours, and jult oppofire

f

&

Tas

et anti BA a ONS FC ATTN TE IF
* L -
SC. A

- ws Late. bk —_— EN ITE RIA

—JC—... ttt oo Kok MMouM TY Y CCI = —_- -y a

of France. 130
toir, within-an hundred and fifty paces the one of the other. So that neither they nor
we durſt pop up a head without being hurt from that Quarter z and in ours there was
4 lictle Tower exatly overagainſt cheirs, where for greater ſecurity we had evermore thres
or four Soldiers which ſerv*d us for Centinels, and who got up into it by a lictle hand
ladder, as they do into a Pidgeon-houſe, The ſaid Tower had been broke through on thar
3de towards the Enemies Fort, and we had there plac't barrels fill'd with earth, for the
ole had been made by the Artillery from their Fore, Which Fort of theirs Monſieur
de Termes had cauſed to be made 3 but when he went away it was not wholly finiſh'c:
nevertheleſs when the Duke of Flerence broke with the King, the Marquis in one nigh
made a very long march, carrying a great number of Pioneers along with him, and poſ-
ſefling himſelf of it { for there was no Guard kepr there ) immediately put it into de-
fence. |

Now, as I have ſaid before, at one of the clock in the night the Marquis at once The Scalado;
gave me a Scalado both to the Gitradel and che Fort Camog/ia, where by ill luck the Com-
pany of St, Auban was this nigut upon duty, The Marquis with the Spaniſh and Ger-
»4n Foot aſlauled the Citradel, where by good fortune they had bur three Ladders
long enough, and ar che very firſt ſo overcharg'd thoſe three with men, that one of them
broke. Our Germans dcetended, and the Sieunois preſented themſelyes at the Gate, as
they were appointed to do. But the Captain of che Germans who had the command of
the Gate would by no means ler them in. This diſpute laſted for above half an hour, The Citadel
during which five or fix of the Enemy entred , and forc'e che Germans, who began to {caz'd.
curn their backs and fly. They then open'd the Gate to the Siennois, who ran to the
head of the Citcadel, where the Enemy began to enter, and met thele five or fiz, who
were already entred, whom they cut in pieces, two of them being the Marquis his Kinſ-
men, one whereof did not immediately die; and this cool'd the courage of the reſt
who were upon the point to enter. Actthe ſame time they gave a Scalado to the Fort
Camoglia. Ste Anban was inthe City, 1n bed at his eaſe, and his Lieutenant call'd Come
bercy was at the Fort, a young man of no experience 3 but that I think had he had good
men in his Company would have done his duty, They are both of them turn*d Hugo»
nots ſince, So ſoon as the Enemy preſented their Ladders by the three Courtins, all his
Company betook them to their heels, and che Enemy conſequently entred in ; and of -
the four that were in the Tower, three threw chemſelves headlong down, and the fourth The Fort Cas |
beat down the barrels from the hole, and drew the Enemy in. This Rogue had been moglie ſeaz'd
taken a few dayes before, and had remain'd above ten dayes priſoner, and I do belicye Þy «he Enemy]
it was upon his account that the Marquis reſolv'd upon this Scalado z for he went away
with them, and we never ſaw him afters Now Signior (ornelio and the Count de Gayas
were lodg'd near unto the Port Caroglia, who immediately upon the Alarm ran to the
Gate, where they found the greaceſt part of the Company of the Siennois before it, and
the reſt were firing at the Enemy, who fallyed out of the Fort to fall upon them. Signior
Cornelio then left the Count de Gayas ar the Gate, and came running to give me the Al-
arm, where he met me coming out of my lodging with two Pages, each of them carry-
ing two Torches, and whom I immediately ſenc back, bidding him both he and tbe
Connt de Gayas to go out, and of all things to rake care that the Sjennois did not for-
ſake their Court of Guard, and to encourage them the beſt he could, for I would pre-

Boox Ill. = de Montluc, Mareſchal :

| ſemtly come out afrer him. He did as Ibid him, and camein fo opportune a ſeaſon, thar

he found all abandoned, and gave the Enemy a charge with the Slenzojs, and bear them

back into the Fort they had taken, The Alarm was already throughouc the whole City,

and ſome ran to the Citadel, and others ro che Fort of Camoglia, As I arriv'd at the

Gate there came to me /a Maliere and / Eſpine, both on horſeback, che one being Muſter-

Maſter, and the other Treaſurer, whom I commanded, the one to the Port St. A4ark ,

and the other to Porto Nuovo, and that by the way as they went they ſhould cry our v1-

Rory, the Enemy 1 repul('s, Which I did, fearing leſt ſome in the Town might have
intelligence with che Enemy, who hearing this cry would nor dare to diſcover themſelves,

In the mean time I was ar the Gate of the City , ſending our the Captains and Prench A device co
Soltliers to ſuccour Signior Cornelio, and when I ſaw there were enow gone our, I com- Þi%ak Incelli«
manded the Lieutenant of Captain Lsſſas to ſtay at the Gate, and to ſhut the Wicket ſo 526%
ſoon as ever I was out, and that in cafe I ſhould be beaten back, he ſhould by no

means open it, bur rather ſuffer us all co be killed without, and me in the firſt place: I

chen went out With my four Torches, and found Signior Cornelio, the Count de Gayas,

and the ocher Captains Thad ſent our , who had recovered the Rampire, and had pla-

ced the Soldiers upon the little half pace upon their knees, who ſhot ac the Enemy inco

the Fort, and they again at ours, Who could not put up their heads withour being diſco=

” 2 vered,

= " Py FO CIS” ome OS

. WP. " 3 ) b
21a oat ill latte. Abo A ne ttt Sono aa ni Gann

or ir TT Tn rr a

ww TC RU gr rt ry rr no” a. Es
.

— — II rn = — ——_— grmgem

ko dee on itn, Goats. hon bates eee ee Y

. a ".” A ERS 5
* - Bo oo $4 I WEI S.9 7 :
"> Sd 3\r-  OERIBGEN WORDS 5% y

132

| The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox 11],

The Fort 7
cover'd by the
French.

vered, and onthe other two {idesthe Enemy aflaulcedy and ours defended. Now whilſt
I was putting the men our at the Wicket St. Azban {lipr by wichour my ſeeing him.
The Gate into the Fort which we had loſt was contrived after the manner of a hole,
having one ſtep forwards, and another on one fide , waving and winding to and fro,
and ſo ſtraight that one man only could enter a breaſt, In this Entry I found Caprain
Buurg, who was Enſign to Captain Charry, Signior Cornelio, and the Count de Gayas cloſe
by him. Monſieur de Baſſompierre Maſter of the Ordnance was always with me, and
one of his Canoneers. 1 ſaw very well chat the fight was like to continue, and fearing
I:ft our powder ſhould failus, bad Monſieur de Baſſompierre diſpatch away wo of hjs
Canoncers to fetch more, which he did, and I dare boldly ſay, he was as much the cauſe
of our ſafcry as all our fighting, as you ſhall hear. Thoſe thac we fonght wichal were
Italians, for the Spaniards and Germans ſtormed the Cirtadel. I continually ran firſt to
one, and then to another , crying out to them Conrage friends, courage camrades, and
preſently on thart fide on the right hand of the Gare, where the three torenamed ſtood,
I ſpyed St. Auban, ro whom (running ro him, and ſetting the point of my ſword to his
throat, I ſaid Rogwe ! Son ef a whore | thin art the cauſe that we ſhall loſe the City, which
mtwithſtandirg thin ſhalt nezvr Hive to fre, fer 1 will at this inſtant kill thee if thou duſt
not immediately leap intothe Fort : to which (luftciently terrified) he made anſwer, Yes
Sir, 1 will leapin, end then called co him Znſſan, Bligm, and {ombas, who were his
Companions, {:ying to them, (ome on Carmrades , ſecond me, 1 pray leap in after ms :
to which they made an wer, Do thou leap, and we will follow 5 whereupon I ſaid to him,
Teke this no care, I will fullow thee my ſelf, and we all ſer foot upon the halt pace wich
him, and jmmecinicly after this fiſt ſtep, without any more d:laying ( for it he had
he had dice tor's | he threw him(elt deſperately in, having a Target upon his arm,
2ud Lis Coityaeutons ao, for he was no foonct 1n the atr, but the reſt were alſo wich
him, and jo all fon 3raps in together, and it was within ewo ſteps ot che Entry, thar
le Bourg, Sigmor Cornetia, and the Countde Gayas difputed. I then immediately made
fifteci or twenty Suldicrs leap in ater the four Caprains, and as all rheſe were within,
le Boarg, Signior Cornelis, and the Count de Gayas paſſed and ented into the Forte, T
cauſed che Torches co be fet upon the Rampire, ther we might ſee, and not Killone ano=-
ther, and my ſelf enixed by rhe ſame way Signior Cornelis had gone before me, Noe
neither Pikes, Halberts, nor Harquebuzes could ſcrve us for any uſe hore, for we werear
it with Swords and Stcelerto's, with Which we made themleap over the Curtains by the
{ame way thcy had entred, cxcepting thoſe who were killed within. There were yet how-
ever ſome remaining in the Tower, when Captain Charrycame up to us, though bur eight
days before he had received an Harqueburz thot in his head, and ſuch a one as that there-
upon we had given him for dead, norwuhſtanding there he was with his Sword and Tar-
get, and a Morrion upon his head, cverihe Cap that cover'd his wound 2 a good hearcr
will ever manifcſt it ſelf 5 for thongh he was deſperarcly hurt, yer wonld he have his
ſhare of the fight, T was at the foot of the Ladder, and had ſent Signior Cornelio and
the Count de Giyas our of the Fort, to encourage thoſe who defended the Flanks, bidding
them cake the one the one fide, and the other the other, as they did, and found work
enough to do. I then took Captain Charry by the hand, and ſaid, Captain Charry, I have
bred you up to die In ſome Lrave ſervice for the King, you mnſt monnt the firſt 5 which laid,

The courage of he (who was certainly a man of as much courage as ever any man had ) without any

Captain Cher-
YY,

more diſpute began to climb che Ladder, which could not be above ten or twelve ſtaves,
and he was to enter by a Trap- door above, as I have ſaid before. I had very good Har-
quebuzcers, whom I made continually to ſhoot ar the hole of this Trap-door, and par
two of the ſaid Harquebuzcers upon the Ladder to follow after him : I had rwo Tor-
ches with me (for the other two Signior Cornelio and the Count had taken along with
chem) by the light whereof we ſaw fo clearly, that the Harquebuzeers did no hurt to
Captain Charry, who mounted ſtep by ſtep, {till giving our Harquebuzeers time to fire,
and ſo ſoon as he came to thruſt up his head into the Trap-door, they fir'd two Harque-
bazes, which pierced through his Targer and Morrion without touching his head. The
Harquebuzeer who followed nexc after him diſcharged his Harquebuz under his Tarect,
by which means Captain Charry advanced the laſt ſtep, and ſo they all three leapt in che
one after the other , where chey k1IlPd three of the Enemy, and the rſt leap our ac the
hole. Thote in the Flancks were allo beaten off, and ſo our Fort was regain'd on every
ice,

Now the Marquis had givenorder to him that commanded ar the Scalado of the Fort,
which was the Governor of their Fort of Camoglia, that in caſe he the Marguis ſhould

\ »
1

firſt enter by the Circadel, that then he ſhould come away to him with all lus 1talians,

and

-- \F > _ = =
Lee wo WER:

"I" _E 7

DL ——

Book III. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

and if alſo he ſhould firſt gain the Fort, that then he would come with his Spaniards
and Germans to relieve him, According to chis Agreement, ſo ſoon as the Governor of
the Forc had gain'd ours, he preſently ſent to acquaint the Marquis with ic 3 bur here
beipg ſeveral lictle valleys berwixt the Curtadel and the Fort Camoglia, the ſaid Marquis
could not come ſo ſoon as he would, though he had made ſo good haſte, that when we
had thought all had been ar an end, we ſaw their whole Camp coming upon us, having The Marquis
above an hundred and fifty corches with them, at which time by good fortune Bafſom- **  Harignan
pierr's two Canoneers return'd with the powder, which. in great haſte we divided a- mom "* eo
moneſt the Harquebuzeers , for they had none lefr, and turning abour, I bad him ſend at the Fort C-
them again for more. Ar the ſame inſtant /a CMoliere and Z Eſpine returned to me, moglia.
when I immediately ſent back /2 Moliere to the Standard- bearer of St, Martin to ſend
me two hundred of the beſt Harquebuzeers he had, and ſend them by the Son of Iifſer
Bernardiz, a young man that carried a Colours in his Regiment, full of courage, and of
whom I had caken particular notice in ſeveral skirmiſhes, who accordingly came 1n all
haſte, and found us at it with the whole Camp. I then lefr Signior Cornelio and che
Count de Gayas with the other Captains to detend the Port, and my ſelf, Baſſompierre,
and the Muſter: M:ſter went along the Flancks, doing nothing bur 1un up and down
from place to place to encourage our people. It might be about three hours after mid»
night when we rebegan the fight, and ir laſted ill che day took them off, They there -
commited one of the greateſt pieces of folly that ever men did ; for by the light of ſo ma-
ny torches we ſaw them more plainly than if ic had been broad day, whereas had they ta-
ken the advantage of the night, and advanced with few lights, they had pur usa great Error of the
deal more hardly co*r than they did. The two hundred Sjennois Harquebuzcers, that the Marquis.
Son of Msfſer Bernardin brought, did us notable ſervice, as alſo did the Powder that Baſ<
ſompierre ſent for, for we had uſe for it all befoxe we parted, by reaſon of the long con»
rinuance of the fight, where it was well aſſaulted, and berter defended.
This was the iſſue of the fighr, the greateſt, and of the greateſt duration without a
Battail wherein I have eyer been, and where I believe God Almighty did as much affiſt
me, if not more, preſerving my judgment all the while entire, as at any time in my whole
fe ; for hadT fail'd inthe leaſt particle of command we had all been loſt, and the City
to boot ; for on that fide we had not fortified ar all, and: all our confidence was in
this Fort : I proteſt to God, that for acleaſt three months after my hair ſtood an end, fo
oftas I called ro mind the danger we had been in. The Enemy there loſt fix bundred
men killed and wounded, as we were enform'd by priſoners we took, and we loſt bur an
hundred and fifry in all beth hurt and ſlain. That which made them loſe ſo many
was the light of the Torches, which gave our men ſuchaim that they could not mils, c-
ſpecially being within a Pikes diſtance or two at the moſt of one another, which made a
great incongruity in the Marquis, as I ſaid before : for we having bur little Light, and
they ſo much, we diſcovered them fo plain, as gave us a mighty advantage. So ſoon
as it was fair light day we went to take a view of what dead we had in the Fort amongſt
theirs, where I found my F alet de Chambre and my Groom, who borh leapt in after che
Captains; in my life I never had two better ſervants. Signior Cornelio and the Count de
Gayas went likewiſe to viſit the Cittadel, for I was no longer able to ſtand, being yer {o
weak with my great ſickneis, thar with a puff one mighr have blown me down-z fo that
I wonder how I was ever able to rake ſuch pains : bur God redoubled my forces in time
of need; for in truth during all bis great and cedious fight I never ceaſed running and
Skipping, now here, now chere , withour ever feeling my ſelf weary, till there appeared
no more an Enemy to moleſt us. They came and gave mean account of all char had paſt,
and there found a Kinſman of the Marquiſs, who was not yet dead, whom they cauſed
to be carried to their Lodging, and his wounds dreſſed.
I will not forget to inſerthere for an Exemple to others, that if ever man was well (e-
conded in a time of ſo great danger, I was, and would for no conſideration deprive the
Chiefs who were there of their due honor, nor the common Soldiers ; for from the time
chat Signior Cornelis and the Count went out before me and charged the Enemy 3 neither
after 1 was gone out co them did ſo much as auy one man ever offer to come 1n' again (as
Lnuſſan's Lieutenant, whom I had letr ar the Gate, ſwore tome) excepring Boſſorapierr's
rwo Canoneers, who were ſent for powder, All the whole City remain'd in arms during Loyalty of the
the whole time of the fight, and I will give the S7ennois chis conmendation, with truch Sieanoiss
(as God is true) thac there was no ſo much as any one man, whoſtaid in the houſes, and
who did not take arms, both young and old, nor a man that diſcovered the leaſt afte-
Rionto the Emperor 3 which gave me a great atſurance of cwo things, one of their Loy-
alty, and the other of their Conrage, Taree dayes after the Marquis ſent me a Trum-

per

The Emperor
complains of
the Marquis
his ſlow Pro.
ceeding a-

gainſt Srenxa,

Wor vox »
EaeL 4 ite Rs ah et ae
#3 :2akes, ER \ FTW 2s
a

WA I Se w—_— wo wes IA FO ITEIeo Yee ye our

30

'F The Siexnots

6} frighred wih

Fi the coming of

| the Ariillgrye
|

their Camp.

Methinks you Governors of places ought here to take a fair exemple to preſent your
{elves to the fight : For there are ſome who ſay, that a Governor, or a Lieutenant of a
Province never ought ro hazard his own perſon, arguing that if he chance to miſcarry all
is loſt, I grant chem, that he ought nor ro expoſe himſelf ar all times, and upon every
light occaſion, hke an ordinary Captain ; but when all lies ar ſtake, whar is Ic chat you
are made Governors and Licutenants for ? what queſtion will be made of your courage?
and how will your honor and reputation be brought iato diſpute? Will it think you ac-
quit you to ſay, I would not hazard my ſelf in the fight, leſt Tofing my ſelf I ſhould
loſeall ; cſpecially in the night to relieve a Fort or a Citadel, conſidering I was how-
ever able to defend the Town? This excaſe will not ſerve your turn; and believe me
the loſs of a Fortis of ſo great importance, that your Enemy has by that means one
foor upon your throat already, you are therefore to die, or to recover what you loſt,
as I did, having at my going our cauſed che Wicket to be ſhur, to take from us all hopes
of retreat, being reſoly'd to dic or to expel the Enemy, and alſo letting chem alone with
cheir Conquelt I had been infallibly loſt,

And you Captains my Camrades, take notice and exemple by St. Auban, that you
may value valiant men above money, for the love of money will lead you to the loſs
of your lives and reputations, and valiant men about you will defend both one and the
other, and preſerve you from danger and diſhonor. Admure, aud follow as near as you
you can the great heart of Charry, who although half dead, would yet come to the fighr,
and preſented himſelf co enter the firſt, and paſs by a Ladder through a hole, chan which
a more dangerous paſſage could nor poſſibly be ; for in ſuch a place an Enemy has a
mignty advantage. No danger nevertheleſs could deterre this braye Soldier from run-
ning the hazard, To conclude, I ſhall tell you Governors of places, chat whenever you
entertain an 1] opinion of an Officer, you provide againſt his remiſneſs , cowardiſe, or
infidelity, as I did, by placing the Companies near co the Forts. Bur I had done better,
$t, Anban being ſuſpeed to me, fince I could not totally rid my hands of him, to have
employ'd him in ſome other place. Ir has fince taught me to be wiſer, and Thave found
advantages by ir, having never fince that time entruſted any man of whom I had a miſ-
like, There are waycs cnow to ſhake them off, wirhourt cither offending any other, or
difincouraging the party himſelf.

A little after, as we underſtood, there came a Gentleman of the Emperor's Bed-
Chamber, who brought letters ro che Duke of Florence, and to the ſaid Marquis, where--
in he writ them word, that he thought 1c very ſtrange this War ſhould continue ſo long,
and that he very well knew Siexna was not a place to refiſt Canon, but that ir was the
Marquis his cuſtom evermore to ſpin out a War 1n length, In anſwer whereunto the
Marquis remonſtrated, that he had done all that in him poſſibly lay, and knew very
well chat Artillery would nor take the Town , for I had valiant men wirhin, and the
whole City were reſolute to ſtand co me to the laſt, ſpeaking more honourably of me
than 1 deſerv'd, commending my vigilancy, and the proviſion I had made for my de-
fence, ſo that he very well knew by the good order I had taken in the Ciry, he ſhould
buc loſe ſo much time by attempting to batrer. Notwithſtanding the Gentleman being
come from the Emperor to this effe, and having already ſpoke with the Dake of Flo-
rence, they together order'd it ſo, that they made the Marquis art laſt reſolve upon a
Battery. He had vefore omitted nothing that a good Soldier ought ro do, having coop'c
us cloſe in, without any hopes of relief, and yer he was accuſed of a delign to protrat
the War : Bur it is the ordinary reward of a man's endeavour, when things do nor ſuc-
ceed according to the appetite of ſuch as talk of chings ar cheir eaſe, The defires of thoſe
we ſerve and fight for run a great deal faſter than we are able to follow.

About the wentich of Fanwary we had notice thac the Arcillery ſer out of Florence,
to the number of ſix or eight and twenty Canon, or double Culverine to come to the
Camp. The Siennois hearing this news were fo curious asto ſend our a ſpy, that they
might Ee certain of che ruth of chis report, who at his return bringing them word back,
that the Artillery was already come as far as Lu/ignano, it pur the whole City into ſome

apprehenſion,

bp , Sd £5;
X ohed * 1) IISSSS
. Bs <A n
LL

- ONO WEE IIS 5c 7;
* 4 G Xt LE 4g I = _ > © % 3, ER OS4x; 6 bes = C o

W_nYEY OTH ” pon, AS
_— SF 4 Me gets

4 TEE ei LE Sr RN

Lo em tf GCE EO neo ito oa a6 oi AMT. ia. _a:iqnrrct

«£4 ate. thn... 4

Book III, de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. F_

apprehenſion, and made chem reſolve the nexr day to afſemble all the Gentry and the
chick of the City to the Palace, there co determine amongſt themſelves, whether chey
ſhould abide the aflaulc, or ſurrender upon compoſicion. Now I was not to huffe and
vapour with theſe people, for they were ſtronger than I : I was therefore neceſſicated to
win them by gentle remonſtrances, and civil perſwaſions, without the leaſt heat or ſhew

- of anger, and you may beheve it was not without great violence co my own nature, that

I proceeded afrer chis manner, contrary to my diſpoſition, and the image che Conſtable
had repreſented of me to the King, as he had ſeen me in my younger and more precipi-
cous age, A prudent and ſtaid Governor, when he is amongſt ſtrange Nations mult cry as
much as in him lies, to conform himſelt to the humour of the people with whom hehas to
do, With che Germans and Swiſs you muſt be cholerick and rough : with the Spaniards you A Governar
muſt obſerve their ſtarchr face and formality , and pretend to be a little more religious ought to con-
and devout than you perhaps really are : with the 1talians you muſt be diſcreet and cir- form himſelfro
cumſpe&, neither to offend them in themſelves, nor to court their wives: as for the French os —_— of
man he is for any thing : bur ſo it was that God gave me the grace, who am a Gaſcon, wh * \gieg
ſudden, cholerick, willful, and froward, fo to deporr my elf with chis jealous and mi- placed.
ſtruſtful Nation, chat nor ſo much as any one Citizen could evcr complain of me. Now as
all che Gentry and the Heads of the Corporation were going ro the Palace, Mifſer Hits
roniro Hiſpano, a Gentleman of Sjenna, a principal man in che City, and one of the eighc
of the Council of War, before he went to the Palace, came in all haſt co ſpeak with Sig-
nior Cornelis, where he told him that all the chief of the Ciry were ſummon'd to repair
ro the Palace, and that ic was to determine, whether they ought to ſtand our a Batrery,
or toenter into Capitulation with the Duke of Florence, and the Marquis of ZAfarignano,
and that he had already heard that the major part of chem had voted, chat they ought ro
condition, and not to endure a Battery, and an Aſſault, for fear they ſhould come by the
worſe; that he was now going thither to them, wherefore he entreated him ro give me
notice of it. Hereupon Signior Cerneliocame to me, and found me ready to take horſe
to go view the Guards : but ſo ſoon as he had told me the news we both went up into my
Chamber, where we long debated by what means we might divert this blow 5 and whilſt
we were in this deliberation came Signior Bartolomeo Cavalcano, who told me as much
as I had heard before, and morcover, that he thought the reſolution was already raken
throughout the whole City, and that he only went to the Palace, to caſt in his lor, and
that after the Jots ſhould once be caft it would be too late ro ſpeak.
We were all three in a very great ſtraight, they which way to adviſe me, and I was as
much to ſeek whad advice to take. In theend I reſoly'd to go to the Palace, anc to take
with me the Rhjnecroc and his Captains, Signior Cornelio with his Italians, and Captain
Combas with the French Officers. Our Germans began to ſuffer much tor want of wine,
and their bread was very ſmall, for as for fleſh there was no more talk of any, unleſs of
ſome horſe, or ſome aſs, that was expoſed co ſell in the Butchery, and as for money there Great ſcarcity
was no ſuchthing in natures for Monſieur de Stroz.zy had no poſſible means to ſend any *f 2!! rhings in
In to us : all which confider'd, it put usinto ſome fear, leſt the Germans ſhould joyn with _
the City to enter into compolition, which was the reaſon that I defired Signior Cornelis
to go tothe Rhineercc, and entreart him from me to bear me company to che Palace, and to
bring his Captainsalong with himy and that he would inthe mean time leave his Licy-
renants and Enfigns every one in his own Quarters, to the end there might be no ſar-
prize about the Walls whilft we ſhould be at the Palace 3 I withr him alſo himſelf co do
the ſame, and order'd Captain Combas to come likewiſe, which being done, I ſent Bartolo-
220 in all haſte to the Palace, to try if he could ſecretly gain any one to his party char
might help to break this deſign : for IT had an opinion, rhat it 1 could bur divert chis
one blow, I would deal with fo many people afterwards, that rhe blancks ſhould be che The Sieur de
Qrcater number in the Lottery , and ſo they all went our of my Chamber without be- Montlac's pran
ing farther acquainted by me what intended to do, _”_
I was yet fo extreamly lean, and worn with my late ſickneſs, and tlie cold was ar this
time of the year fo very great and ſharp, that I was conſtrained ro go continually with
both my Body and my head ſo wrapt and muffled up in Furrs, thac as they ſaw me go
up and down the ſtreets of the Ciry, no one had any hopes of my recovery, believing
thac my inwards were decayed and periſhed, and that I would fall down and die on a
{1dden. Whar ſhall we do ſaid che Ladies and the Citizens Wives, what will become of
as if our Governor ſhould die? we ſhall all be loſt 3 for next after God all our hope is
in him ; it is not poſſible he ſhould eſcape, 1 do verily believe tha che prayers of choſe
good women redeem'd me our of the extremity and languithing weakneſs I wasin, 1
mcan thar of my body ; for as to the vigour of my mind, and the quickneſs of my un-

deſtanding,

4a.

—_ O_o
wy —  — —
-

———_—

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Bo ok III.

A pleaſant Sale
ly of the Sicur
de Moniluc,

Of whar rhe
Senate of Sjen=
24 conliſts,

Harangue of
che Sicur de
Montlac to the
Siemmois.

nderſtanding, I never perceived any decay there. Having then before been accuſtomed
rogo ſo wrapt and muffled, and obſerving what moan the people made for me, to ſee
me in ſo lamenrable a plight, I call'd for a pair of Breeches of Crimſon Velvet, which I
had brought from Alba, laid over with gold lace, finely cur, and very neat, for I had
made them at a time when I was forſooth in love, We had there leiſure enough for thoſe
follies whilſt we lay in Garriſon, and having little elſe to-do, it was fit co give the Ladies
ſome part of our time. I pur on a Donbler of the ſame, under which 1 had a Shirt fine-
ly wrought with Crimſon filk and gold twiſt very rich : (for in thoſe dayes they wore
the neck-bands of their Shirts a good way falling over the collar) I then took a buffe
Ccllar, over which I put on the Gorget of my Arms, which was very finely gilc. I at
that time wore gray and white, in honor of a fair Lady ro whom I was a Servant when I
had leiſure 3 I therefore put on a Hat of gray filk of the German faſhion, with a great
filver Hatband, and a plume of Heron's feathers, thick ſet with filver ſpangles ; the Hats
they wore in thoſe dayes were not fo broad as they wear them now : I then put on a
ſhort Caſſock of gray Velvet garniſht with little plairs of Silver, at ewo fingers diſtance
from one another, and lin'd with cloth of filver, all open betwixt the plaics, vvhich I
vvore 11) Piedmont over my Arms. Now I had yettwo little bottles of Greek wine lefc
of thoſe had been ſent me by the Cardinal of «Armagnac, vvith vvhich I vver my hands,
and vvith them rubbed my face, till I had brought a little colour into my cheeks, and
then drank a ſmall draught with alictle bit of bread , after which I look'c my {elf in
the Glaſs. I ſwear co you I did not know my ſelf, and methought I vvas yer in ;Pjed-
mnt, and in loveas hererofore, At which I could not forbear laughing, for methoughe
1 had goton a ſudden quite another face.

The fiſt that came to me vvith his Captains vvas Signior (ornelio and the Count ge
Gayar, Monficur de Boſſompierre and the Count de Biſque, whom I had alfo ſenc for;
vyho finding me dref{'d after this manner, all fell a langhing. I ſtratced up and dowa
che room before them like fifreen Spaniards, and yer had not ſtrength enough to have
kill'd a Chicken, for I vvas ſo vyeak as nothing more. Combas and the French Cap-
tains came alſo, and the vvhole Farce tended to nothing but laughter for all the compa-
ny : the laſt char came vvas the Rhinecroc and his Captains, vvho feing me in this po-
ſture, lavght to that exceſs chat he ſobb'd again, when pulling him by che arm, I ſaid to
him, What Colonel, do you think me to be that Montlnc that goes every day dying through
the ſtreets ? No, no, you are miſtaken, that fellow's dead, and I am another Montluc ſprung
wp in his room. His Interpeter told him what I ſaid, which made him laugh Rill more,
and Signior Cornelio had already acquainted him with the reaſon why I had ſent for him,
and that it was.neceflary by one means or another to diſpofſeſs the Siennois of their fear.
Thus then we went all on horſeback to rhe Palace, where ſo ſoon as we were gotup to
the top of the ſtairs, we found the great Hall full of Gentlmen, and ſuch orher Burgers
of the Cicy as were. of the Council. Within the great Hall on the lefe hand there is a
lefſer room , into which none were to encer bur the Captains of the people, the rwelve
Counſellors, and the Eight of the Council of War, all which are called the Magiſtracy.
Thus then I entred into the great Hall, where T pur off my Hat to them, bur was known
by no body ac firſt ; chey all believing me to be ſome Gentleman ſent by Monſieur de Stroz.-
z) into the City to command art the Aſſault, by reaſon of my great weakneſs. I then
entred into the lictle Hall, with all che Colonels and Caprains after me, who kept ar di-
ſtance by the door whilſt I went and fat down by the Captain of the people, in the
place vvhere thoſe vvho repreſented the perſon of the King vvere uſed ro fit, as I my ſelf
upon that account had ofren done. In going up with my Har in my hand, I ſmil'd
firſt upon one, and then upon another, chey all vvondring to ſce me, and tvyo had al-
ready dcliver'd their opinions, vvhen I began to ſpeak ro them in /talian tothis effeR.

© Gentlemen, I have been told, that ſince the time you have been certain of the truth
© of the Enemies bringing up Artillery to your walls, you have entred into ſome debates
© which have rather begot amongſt you fear and aſtoniſhmenc, than any noble reſolution
© rodefend your City and Liberty by Arms. Which I have thought very ſtrange, and
© prearly wondred aty not being able to perſwade my {elf ro believe any ſuch thing.
© However in the end Ireſolv'd with the Colonels and Captains of all the three Narions
© the King my Maſter has in this City, to come to you to this place, and to underſtand
«* from your own mouths the cruth of all char has paſſed. Now I befiech you Gentle-
* men weigh and conſider well what you ſhall determine _in his Council co which you
© arecall'd ; for upon this Council, and the reſolucion chac ſhall be che iſſue of ir, de-
© pends all your honor, greatneſs, anthority, and the ſecurity of your Stare, your lives

© anc}

MEIIIITP rw

CAA A.
J—_—_

Boos III. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

© 1nd honors, and the conſervation of your ancient liberty ; and on the contrary, all the
* ſhame, diſhonor and reproach, with a perpetual infamy to your poſterity , and diſ-
© honor to your famous Anceſtors, who have lefe you for inheritance the Grandeut
«you now poſſeſs and uphold, having chemſclves ever defended and maintain'd it by
«Bartels, with their weapons in their hands, againſt all choſe who have attempted co
rake it from them. And now when you ought to have purchaſt the occaſion chat
« preſents ir {elf ar the price of half your wealch , that therein you might to all
« Chriſtendom manifeſt and approve your ſelves the true legitimate Sons of thoſe
« Ancient Warlike Romans, and of thoſe Noble Anceſtors, who have ſo often, and ſo
«bravely fought to aſſert and maintain your liberty, 1s ir poſſible that ſo great and (o
eoencrous hearts as thoſe of the Siennois {hould enter into aſtoniſhment for hearing
« talk of Canon ? will you be afraid for this? I cannot think that this proceeds from you,
« who have given ſo many, and ſo ample teſtimonies of your valour ; neither is ic out of any
« want of friendſhip to the moſt Chriſtian King, nor our of any diſtruſt you have in
« him,- that he will not certainly relieve you, neither can it be our of any difidence you
© have in one another, by reaſon of any faionsin your City, for I have never obſerv'd
«the leaſt diviſion among you 2 Bur on the contrary, the greateſt unanimity for the con-
« ſervation of your libercy and Republick. I have ever ſeen you reſolute ro dye
« with your ſwords in your hands, rather than ſuffer it to be raviſh'd from you, I have
© ever ſeen all men of all conditions move with the ſame motion, and inſpir'd with
« the ſame reſolution. Neither can it be for want of conrage, for I never ſaw you fally
© out to skirmiſh, that ſome of your young men did not evermore fignalize chemſelves above
<oar people, though much older Souldiers than they, who ina longer pratice of Arms
© have perform'd as worthy to be prais'd and eſteem'd of all, I cannot then believe
© chat men who do ſo well, ſhould for the noiſe of Canon, which brings more terror than
© harm, enter into aſtoniſhment, and reſolve to ſurrender themſelves ſlaves to that inſo-
©lent and inſupportable Nation of the Spaniards 3 or your neighbours, your ancient and
© profeſſed enenemies. Since then this apprehenſion cannot proceed from any defect in
Cyour ſelves, it muſt of ncceſſicy proceed from me, who have the honour to be Lieucenanc
© forthe King of France your good Friend and Proreor. It as ro what concerns me, you
£ ayprehend, that I ſhall want healch and vigour to uadergo that roi] and labour that will
© be neceſſary, and requir*d at the time when the Enemy thall afſaulr ns, by reaſon of
©the weakneſs whereia Tnow am, through my great ſickneſs; that conſideration onght
© not to beget in you theleaſt diſtruſt, arms and legs do not do all : The great Captain
© Antonio de Leva, goury and impotent as he was, has won more viRories in his chair, than
© 2ny other of our Age has done on horſeback. God has ever been pleas'd to preſerve
© my judgement, to preſerve you. Have you ever known me fail? Was I then ſtrerch'd
© at caſe in bed when the Enemy gave you the great Camiſado, and Scalado? Do bur
© mark I beſcech you, Gentlemen, thegreat grace God was pleas'd to ſhew me on a ſudden,
© ſupplying me wich as much ſtrength as I had never been fick ; by which you may per-
Eceive, that Almighty God loves us, and that he will not that either you or we periſh. I
© feel my {elf Rirong enough now to wear my Arms, you ſhall no more ſee me ſwarh*d and
© furr*d up as before, If perhaps you doit our of fear of my incapacity, or litcle experi-
Cence, you do therein a great wrong to the King, char being as much, as to give all
© che world ro underſtand, that His Majeſty has hither ſent you a man void of all abili-
©ty, and poorly experimented to know how to order what fhould be done for the de-
£ fence of your City ?. Whar ? do you believe the King has ſo lictle kindneſs for you,
© as ro ſend me hicher, had he nor had a grearconfidence in my capacicy, and beforchand
© made ſufficicnt tryal elſewhere boch what I am, and whar I can do? I ſhall cell you
© nothing of my ſelf, ir would not become me to be my own Trumpet, ſomething you
© have ſcen your ſelves, and the reſt you may have heard from otherss You may then wr::ll
$ judg2, thar the King has not fingled our me, amongſt ſo many Gentlemen of his Kirig-
*dom, and has not {ent me to you, without having well weigh'd what I am able ro do
* by che long experience he hashad, not only of my Politicks in point of Government,
©of which you may hitherto hare taken ſome notice: But moreover, of my cond1R in
© matter cf Arms, when an Enemy would carry a place by fine force, Do you fear, Gen-
$ themen, my courage will fail mein time of need? what then do all choſe teſtiraones 1
f have given you fiuce my coming hither being fick avail? You have ſeen me ally our
© from che time I have been able ro mount ro horſe, co go to ſee the skirmithes ſo near,
*thar my {If commanded them. And haveyou alrogecher forgor the day, that I en*
Fred into this City, and the great sKirmiſh I then made? Your people ſaw it, and
© had a (hare in che fight; and upon ( briſtmas- Eve yea greater, where Che fight laſt-

ed

Commendati-

on of Antonid

de Leva,

et we ue On UDO B42.

_ —_—_ —

138 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox Ill

v5 *ed for fix long hours cogether ? Did I not cher fight in my own perſon? Did you
| * not then ſce, that I neither wanted judgement ro command, nor valoar to fight? Iam
1 * albam?*d toſay ſo much of my (elf 5 but ſeeing you all know irto be trac, I need not
"| | * bluſh to ſpeak ir, I will tcl you nothing, buc whar your ſelves have ſeen, I am no
| © bragging Spaniard, I am a Frenchman, and morcover a Gaſcon, the moſt frank and
* plain dealing of all that Nation. Now methinks, Gentlemen, you have ſo much ex-
* pexience of your f{c]ves, as will render you worthy of a perpetual reproach , ſhould
* you g0 lels 11 your reſolution, beſides the ruine it would infalliby bring apon you,
* Methinks you ought to know me (ufficiently, having been {o long amoneſt you, and
* that I have omitted] nothing of what che King propos'd to himfelf, I ſhould perform
* for his (ervice, and yours in the greatcſt necelfiry and dangers All this thar I have
| *remonſtrared to you, as well for what concerns your own particular, as whart relates to
| * my {elf , ought to make you lay afide all apprehenſion , and to aſſume the courage
| ; *and magnanimity that your Predeccfſors and ſelves who are now living have ever had.
| * Wherefore I beſecch you, that you will nnanimonſly take up ſuch a reſolution, as va-
.*lianr men, ſuch as you are, ought to rake, that is, ro dye wich your weapons in your
* hands, rather than to looſe your Sovercignty and the liberty you have ſo lons exercis'd
* and enjoy'd. And for what concerns me, and theſe Colonels and Captains, whom you
© fee preſent here, we ſwear 1n the preſence of God, that we will dye with you, as at
* this inftane we will give you aſſurance. Ir is nor for our benefit, nor co acquire Riches,
* neicher is ir for our caſe, for you fee we ſuffer boch chuſt and hunger + ir is only in pur-
*ſuanceof our duty, and to acquir our {elves of our Oath, to che end char it may one
© day be ſaid, and by yen, «chat it was we who defended the liberty of this City, and
© that we may be called Conſervatorsof the Liberty of Sienna.

I chen roſe up, bidding the German Interpreter to remember well all I had aid, to
repcat it to the Rhinecrec, and his Capigins, and then directed my ſpecch to the Colo-
nels, and ſaid to them, Signori mi & fratalli juriam tutti & promettiamo inanzi Iddio,
che n0i murirems tutti Farme in mano conefſt lors, per adjutar li a defſendere lor ficureſſu &+
3 | liberta : & ogni ano di noi s 6ligi per le foi Soldati, & alſate tatti le woſtre mani,

Which being ſaid, every one held up his hand, and the Interpreter told ir to che Rhine.

The Outh of crec, who alſo held up his hand, and all che Caprains crying, [o, io hwerlie, and theother,

FT rhe Soldiers, Ogy, o#y, we promiſe to do it, every one in his own Language. Whereupon the Cap-

q Fereigners. tainof the people aroſe, and all che Council, returning me infinice chanks; and then

3 turn'd towards the Captains, whom he alſo very muchchank'd, and with preat chear-

fulneſs. They then entreated me, that I would retire tomy Lodgings, till ſuch cime

as they had ſpoken with all the Council, who were inthe grear Hall withour, and given

| them an account of what I had remonſtrated to them ; which I accordinely did, and ar

my going out of the little room, I there mer with CMifſer Bartolomeo Cavalcang , who

knew nothing of the Propoſition I had mace (tor he enrred nor into the Council Cham«

ber) who told mein my ear, that he chought chey had all craken a reſolution, no: to en-

dure a Battery, T then carried him back with me co my Lodgings, and three hours

after, came four of the Magiſtracy, of which Mifſer Hieronimo Eſpano was one, having

in charge from all the Sijgnenryin general, to return me infinite thanks ; *an'] };e told me,

chat Miſs Ambroſes Mitti had made a ſpeech in the accuſtomed chair, which isin

R the middle of the great Hall, againſt the wall, giving chem to underſtand, whar a Re-

i |: monſtrance I had made to chem, wherein he forgor noching (tur he was a man of great

\ | Eloquence and Wiſdom) and the Oath chat all the Colonel; and Caprajushad taken, final-

it | ly exhorcing them to reſolve all ro fight. I do not remember whether they put it to the

| * That is a cx. * Balorte, orf they held up their hands as we had done: But they all four afſur'd us,

| ſting of Lots that they had never ſeen a ereater joy, then what gencrally appear'd amongſt them, after

by liutle Balls, che Propoſition of the ſaid eAmbroſia CMitti, Telling me morcover, thar after I had been

in uſc in moſt ;,, the (aid Hall, and made an end of the forementioned Haranzue, the ewo Gentlemen,

a Cities of Italy. 4. had dcliver'd their Opinions before, that they ought co capiculate, and come to a

compoſition with the Enemy, had requeſtcd the Senate to do them thac tayour, as to con»

1 ceal what they had {aid,and rake no norice of it, butgive them leave to vote anew ; which

} [ p | being accordingly done, they again deliver'd their opinions, that rhey ought ro fight, and

| The reſolution ENFcr 1nro no kind of compoſition, bur rather dye with cheir Arms in their hands, Ichen

of the Sienvis, told Miſſer Hieronizzo Eſpane, that I would retire my ſelf for all that day, and for all

| 4148 | char night, to write down the order of the fight; which having done, I would imme-
Ti diatcly ſend it ro the Germans in their Language, and co the French in cheirs.

— — cw cw 0... ECt >
RY

SSIS lb ide oe ind MT bb ms.”
—— wx ot p<

TTL Roo Sid 3o wg Ta OWE

3% 48
— ns _ =
BT

Governors

* 48

Boox [ll. de Montluc; Mareſchal of France. izg Y

-—- 4-4
—_—  — — ——cc—— Ac. cw = oo. _

I—r—t roy HS are eee,
—

Governors and Captains, you ouzhr torake ſome example here, foralmuch as there
are ſome, who ſay, they have ſurrendred a place, thar the Soldiers would not defend, and
| moreover, that che Inhabitants of the Town went abour to betray them, and by char
"means compell'd them to Capitulate, Theſe are mere excuſes, believe me they are mere

excuſes. The thing that compels you , 1s your own want of experience, Gentlemen

and Camrades, when ever you ſhall happen to be ar ſuch a Wedding, pur on your beſt
Clothes, make your (elves as fine as you can, waſh your faces with Greek wine, and rub a

good colour into your cheeks, and ſo march bravely chorough the ſtreers, and amiongſt che
Soldiers with your faces ere&, having nothing in your months, bur that very ſoon, by Gods

help, andthe ſtrength of your own Arms, you will in deſpite of them , have che lives

of your enemies, and not they yours; that it 15 not for them ro come to arraque you 1n
your own Fort z thaticis theonly thing you defire, foraſmuch as upon that depends cheir
ruine, and your deliverance. And by carrying your ſelves after thac manner, the very

' women will cake courage, and much more the Souldicrs : Bur if you ſneak up and down
with a pale face, ſpeaking to no body; ſad, melanchollick and nenſive, though all the

City, and all the Soldiers had che hears of Lyons, you will maxe them as timerous as
ſheep. Speak often ro thole of the City 1n four or five words, and likewiſe to the Soldiers
ſaying to them, Well friends, are you nor in heart ? Ilook upon the viftory as our own,

and hold the death of our Encmics already for certain ; For IT have I know not what Pro-

herick ſpirit, which whenever ic comes upon me, Iam always certain co overcome, whicti

I have from God, and not from men. Wherefore rely upon me, and reſolve all of you

ro fight, and to goout of this place, with honor and repuracion. ' You can dye bur once,

and *cisa thing that is predeftin'd, 1f God has appointed it fo, it 15 in vain for you to fly.
Let us then dye honorably ; but there 15no appearance of danger for us, but rather for
| our Enemies, over whom we have the greateſt advantage imaginable. And who Gover-

2 - KR NS

nors and Captains, would you have dare to fay he is afraid, ſeeing you fo bravely reſolv*d 3
Let me tell you, chat though they trembled before, they will lay afide their fear, and the
moſt cowardly will become as bold as the molt couragious of rhe Company, The Soldier ,. .,
is never aftonitſh'd, ſolong as he ſees the confidence of his Chief continue firm and un- | rings we
: x pene upon the
ſhaken, As the Chief rherefore carries away all the honor, and the reſt have norching, Ch; e.
but what he ſhall give them, in his report of their valour co the Prince; ſo ought he to
reſolve never to diſcover the leaſt {hadow of fear: For behaving himſelf after that teatleſs
manner, the Soldiers themſelves will be ſufhcient teftimonie for him , fo char the repura-
tion he ſhall have acquir'd, ſhail remain indiſpurably his own, without any one being able
co contradict ir, I do not then adviſe you any thing, T have not firſt tryed my (clf, nor
only here, but in m other places alſo 3 as you will find in this Book, if you haverthe
patience to read ir, Now this 15the order ſer down tor the fighr, and for all the whole
City, all which particulariries I repreſent ro you, without conrenting my {elf to fay, thar
Sienna was befieg'd, where I niveor ten months ſuſtain'd che Seige, and was ar laſt con-
ſtrain'd co Capirulate ty Famine ; for of ſuch a General accouncas thar, a Kings L:euce-
nantz a Captain, or a Soldier, can make no benefir, This is the Hiſtorians way, and cf
theſe kind of Writers, there are bur roo many : I write of my ſelf, and will inſtrat oche; s
that come after me; for to be born for a mans ſ{e!t oaly, 15 in plain Englh to be born a
Beaſt.

I then order'din the firft place that the City ould be divided into eight parts, of The order a:
which the eight of the Council of War thould have every one a part ; that every one of Sicnca for the
che Council of Eight ſhould apvoinr a perfon for whom he ſhould himſelf be ref Donfible, Forcificarion.
5 to take a Liſt of the Quarter !hould be ailign'd him, how many men, women, and chil -
| dren there were in that divition, from tv clve che males ro fix'y, and the females to fitry
years of age, which were co carry Baskets, Barrels, Shovc's, Picks, and Mattocks, and that
each one of his own Quatter ihould make Cavrains of every Trade, wichour mixing
them together + that every one ould be commanded npon pain of deach, ſo ſoon as
ever their Caprain ſhould ſend for chem to come ro the place appointed immediately is
haſte aways as alſo the women and children ; nat every one ſhould forchwich make pro-
viſion of ſuch things as were proper for his or her employment, and char the Maſters of
Men-fervants and Maids, or their Miſtreſtes ſhould be obliged ſpeedily ro take order, tha:
their Men and Maids be forniſhe with +cols and ncenfils wherewith to labonr ac the
work, for which chey (hail ve appointed, upon pain of ewo hundred Crowns, aud the
City to furniſh the Poor, W ho have not wherewich to buy them, ar che expence of che pab-
lick Treaſure : char the ſaid Depuries (hail make their Catalogues, and (hall go from
houſe to houſe to Regiſter their 5eople ; and that fo ſoon as the Captains, every one in his
own Quarter fhould cry on: Force, Forces every one both men and women thonld rut

LI 2 Po

The defign of
the Ayhor,

- 14©

The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book II.

Order for the
Fight,

| * A Trench

| within the wall
of aCiry to res
tire into in Calc

[1 of an Afſaulr,

Centinels per-
dues,

ad , MES
wt - A? a CS

eg «2 A þ Ve
——  ——— ——
> .

ton or ro
py - .
CLEA 8 - -_

LO RED

——— y
2 Be IS tn ls
:

no SET ES, ads. ES £
92% Fre.: Let: - 7 EEE RNS g : :
- SE Pager” Se

co their tools, and preſent themſelves ar che place ro which the Caprain ſhculd lead, or
appoint them to come ; and rhat the Deputies ſhould deliver in the Liſts of all both men
and women, they ſhall have found in their reſpective Precin&ts ro each of the Eight of the
Council of War, Quarter for Quarter 3 that the old men and women above the fore-
mentioned Ages ſhall remain in their Maſters houſes, to get mear, and to look to the
houſe. Thar the ſaid Deputics ſhould take a Liſt of all the Maſons and Carpencers,
who ſhould be found in their Quarter, which Liſt they ſhould alſo deliver to him of
the Eight of the Council of War by whom they ſhall be depured, And this was the order
tor the Laborers and Pioncers.

The order for thoſe who bore arms, was, that the the three Standard bearers, namely
of St. Hartin, of Ciotat, and of (amoglia, ſhould forthwith taxe a view of all the Com-
panes, which were four and rwenty, and examine every mans arms, if they were in good
order for fight, and if not ro make them preſently to be repaired : that they ſhould re-
fine all the Powder, and cauſe grear ſtore of Buller and March co be made : thar che three
Standard-bearers ſhould every one keep in hts own Quarter wichour ſtirring hence , cill
one of che Eight of War ſhoald come to give them order what to do; that the anticnc
Geniln: mn who were nor able to bear arms, nor to work, ſhould preſent themſelves to
ſollicic the Pioneers of thac Quarter where their houſes ſtood, and to aſſiſt the Caprains
of the {aid Pioneers. Now I had ever determin'd, that if ever the Enemy ſhould come
to aſlaulc us with Artillery, to encrench my {ſelt ar a good diſtance from the Wall, where
the! Battery thould be made, to ler them enter at pleaſure, and wade account to ſhut 1
the two ends of the Trench, and at cither end to plant four or five pieces of great Ca-
non, loaden with great chains, nails, and pieces of iron. Behind the * ReciradeT inten<
ded to place the Muskets, together with the Harquebuzcers, and ſo ſoon as they ſhould

be entre in, to cauſe the Artillery and ſmall ſhot to fire all at once, and we at the two

ends then to run in upon them with Pikes and Halberts, rwo handed Swords, ſhort
Swords and Targets. This I reſolved upon, as lecing ir alcogether impoſſible for the
King to ſ{cnd us relief, by reaſon that he was engaged in ſo many places, that it would
not be poſſible for him to ſer on foot Forces ſufficient to raiſe the Siege, neicher by ſea nor
by land 5 and Monſficur de Strizzy had no means to relieve us, wherefore I would per-
mit chem to enter, and make little defence at the Breach, to the end that I might give
them batcail in the Town, after they had paſt che fury of our Canon and ſmaller ſhot :
For to have defended the Breach had in my opinion been a very eafie matter ; but then
we could not have done the Enemy ſo much miſchief, as by letting chem enter the
breach, which we would have pretended to have quit, onely to draw them on to the
fight,

For five or fix dayes before the Artillery came I every night ſent out two Peaſants
and a Captain, or a Szrjcant, as Centinels perdues, which is a very good thing, and of
orcat ſafety; bur take heed whom you ſend, for he may do you a very ii] rarn. So ſoon
as the night came the Captain fer a Peaſant Centinel ar ſome fifty or fixty paces diſtanr
from the Wall. aud cither 1n a ditch or behind a hedge, with in{tcuctions, thar ſo ſoon as
he thould hear any thing he ſhou!d come back to the Captain at che foot ot the Wall,
which Captain had in charge from me, that immediately upon the Penſanr.s ſpeaking
co him they ſhonid clap down upon all four, and fo creep che one after che ther to the
place where rhe Peaſant had heard the noiſe, or rather fall down upon their bellics cjoſe
to the carth, ro diſcover if there were not three or tour who came to view £257 place, and
to obſerve if they did not lay rheir heads together to confer ; tor this 15 © corivn Gen
that they came to view that place in order tothe bringing up of Arallery. To do which
as it onght to be done, they ought tro be no other than the Maſter of {te Ordaance,
the Colonel or the Camp: Maſter of the Infantry, or the Engrnecr, che Matter Cartcr,
and a Caprain of Pioneers, to the end that according to what ſhall be reiolved upon by
the Maſter of the Ordnance, the Colonel, and Canoncer ; the Maſter Carter tay alſo
rake notice which way he may bring up Artillery to the place; and che Canoneer ought
to ſhew the Captain of the Pioneers whar is to be done for the Eſplanade, cr plaining of
the way, according to the determination of the reſt. And this 1s the diicovery that 1s
ro be made by night, afrer you have difcover'd a Little at diſtance by day for if thoſe
within be an Encmy of any fpirir, they ought either by skirmiſhes, or by their Canon
co keep you from coming to <liſcover at hand, The Captain had order to comegive m2
a preſent account of what he and the Peaſants had heard or fcen, and to leave che Pea-
ſans ſtillupon their perdue, and a Soldier in his own place till his recury. Three times
the Enemy was diſcover'd after this manner, and immediately woon the norice, having
alſo the Liſt of the Eight Quarters, and of the Eight of War who commanded thoſe

Quarters,

Book {IlI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 141

Quarcers, I ſuddenly acquainted Stgnior Cornelio, who could preſently cell me both che

Quarter againſt which it was, and the Gentleman of the Eighe of War that comman-

ded it. I had never diſcover'd my intention to any one, but to Signior Cornelio onely,

who was a man of great wiſdom and valour, and in whom I repoſed a very great confi-

dence 3 who, ſo ſoon as he knew that I meant to give them Batrail in the City, we did

nothing of one whole day but walk the round both within and without, taking very good

obſervation of all che places where the Enemy could make a Battery, and conſequently

by that knew where to make our Retirade, And fo ſoon as ever notice was given me

by the Captain who ſtood Centinel without the City, I preſently advertized the Com-

mander of that Quarter, and he his Deputy, and his Deputy the Captain of the Pjo-

neers, ſo that in an hours time you might have ſeen ar leaſt a chonſand, or twelve hun -

dred perſons beginning the Retirade. Now I had order'd the City to make great pro-

viſion of Torches , {o that thoſe who kad diſcover'd were hardly return'd co the Mar-

quis, but that they ſaw all char part within the Town cover'd wich torches and people,

inſomuch chat by break of day we had very much advanc'c our Trench, and in the morn-

ing ſent back thoſe to reſt, calling in another Quarter to the work till noon, and another

from noon till night, and conſequenty others all midnight , and ſo till break of day,

by which means in a lirtle time we performed ſo great a work, that we could by no means

be ſarpriz'd. After this manner I ſb&ll curn'd the defences of che Town towards the

Marquis his attempts, who lodg'd at the houſe of Guillet the Dreamer, and Signior Fer- * A phraſe 6g-

nando de Sylva, brother to Signior Rigomez (who- commanded on that fide towards the Pifying rhar a

liccle Obſervance, with whom I had ſome diſcourſe upon the publick fai:h, the Friday la ” oh

before we departed our of the City, berwixt their Quarteis and the Fort Camoglia) told Ennt "ea

me that the Marquis had ſome jcalouſie, that ſome one of cheir Council berray'd to me whac to do,

all cheir deliberations, ſceing he had no ſooner defen'd to batter any part, but thar we which is pro-

alwayes fortified againſt that place 3 for by nighr the leaſt noiſe is eaſily heard, and ſo P*ly to liear
: : | | the houſe of

great a buſtle cannot be concealed ; and becauſe he told me thar he had compiled a Book of  -,,, Pap

the particularities of the Siege of Sienna. he entreared me to tell him by what means I ſo preamer.

continually difcover'd their intentions , whereupon I told him the crurh,

Bur co recurn to our {ubjeR, the Marquis in the end came and planted his Artillery A new Enters
upon a btle Hill berwixt Pore Oville and che great Ooſervance, The choice of this place prize upon
put me, who thought my ſelf ſo cunning, almoſt to a nonplus, foraſmuch as at Port O- SICIOA,
ville there 1s a very ſpatiotis Antiport , where the houſes of the Cicy do almoſt couch,
having nothing buc the ſtreet berween, which made ic impoſſible for me of a long time to
make the neceſſary Retirade, to do which I muſt be conſtrain'd ro beat down above an
hundred houſes, which extremely rroubled me 5 for ir is to create fo many enemies in our
entrals, che poor Citizen lofing all parience to ſee his houſe pulled down before his eyes.

I gave to tne Count de Biſque the charge of terrafſing up this Gate, for which uſe we
cook the earth our of the Gardens, and vacant places thar lie a lictle on the lefc hand. O
the rare exemple that is here , which I will commit to writing, that it may ſerve for a
mirror to all choſe who would conſerve their liberty. |

All theſe .poor Inhabitants, without diſcovering the leaſt diſtaſte or ſorrow for the The noble re=
ruine of their houſes, put themſclves their own hands firſt to the work, every one co- 10)urion of the
tending who thould be moſt ready to pull down his own. There was never leſs chan atronte
four thouſand ſouls at labour , and I was ſhewed by the Gentlemen of Sienxa a great
number of Gentlewomen carrying of Baskers of earth upon their heads, Ic (hall never be The praiſe of
(you Ladies of Sienna) chat I will not immortalize your namcs ſo long as the Book of the Ladies of
Meontlac ſhall live ; for in tru.h you are worthy of immortal praiſc, if ever women were, Stn,

Ar the beginning of che noble reſolution cheſe people took to defend their libercy, all the
Ladies of Sienna divided themſelves into three Squadrons ; the firſt led by Signiora For-
tagnerray who was her {elf clad in violet, as alfo all thoſe of her Train, her accire being
curin the faſhion of a Nymph, thort, and diſcovering her Buskins 3 che ſecond was 1a
Sipniora Piculhuomini atcr'd in carnatian Satin , and her Troop in the ſame Livery ; che
third was [a Signiora Livia Fauſta, apparclled all in white , as allo her Train, with her
white Enfign, In ther Enfigns chey had very fine devices, which I wonld give a good
deal I could remcmber. Theſe chree Squadrons conſiſted of three thouſand Ladies,
Gentlewomen, and Cit17ens, their Arms were Picks, Shovels, Basxers, and Bavins, and
in this Equipaze chey made cheir Muſter, and went to begin the Fortifications, Monheur
de Termes, who has otten cold me this ſtory (tor I was not then arriv'd ac Sieuna) has
affur'd me, thar in his life he never ſaw fo. fine a fight, I have fince {cen their Enſignes,
and they had compoſed a Song to the honor of France, for which 1wilh I had givenche

(

beſt horſe I have thac I mighc inſert here.
And

a Ld
* of _— _" 4 4

ou”

. OS

ds _ to,

* _ air tit. oven > + —— F ws te ns bd aÞ_
EE EE CC COS CINE EET INTE

ai Dnahgecc - Alt

cnrE_—_—

142

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize | Book It :

Of a young
Mailof Siena,

The order and

defign of the
Figh!,

Aud ſince Tam upon the honor of theſe women, I will thac choſe who ſhall come
afcer us admire the courage and virtue of a young Virgin of Sienna, who, though the
was a poor mans daughter, deſerves notwithſtanding to be rank*c with thoſe of the no-
bleſt Families. I had made a Decree at the time when I was Dictator, that no one
upon pain of ſevere puniſhment ſhould fail ro go to the Guard in his carn. This young
Maid (ceing a Brother of hers who was concern'd ro be upon duty, not able to go, ſhe
rook his Morrion and pur it upon her head, his Breeches, and a Collar of Buff, and put
them on, and with his Halberc upon her neck , in this equipage mounted the Guard,
paſſing when the Liſt was read by her Brochers name, and ſtood Centinel in turn, with=
out being diſcover'd, till the morning that it was fair light day, when ſhe was conducted
home with great honor. In the afternoon Signior Cornelio ſhew'd her to me, |

Bur to return to our ſubje, it was not poſſible of all that day, nor the night follow<
ing for the Count to perfe& his Terraſs , nor we our Retirade, art which we wrought
excceding hard, leaving about foreſcore paces to the Marquis, it he had a mind to enter
there, We had made a Traverſe by the Port Oville, where we had plac'*c threegrear
Culverins, laden as T have ſaid before, at which place were Sigator Cornelis, the Count
de Gayas, and three Canoneers, who were there lete by Monfieur Baſorpgerre. On the
right hand upon an Eminence was che great Ovitrvance, betwixt which and the walls we
hid planted five pieces of Canon ram'd with the ſame, which the ſaid Baſſompierre com-
mandcd jn his own perſon 3 yer both the one and the other were ſo well conceal*d, that
the Enemy could diſcover nothing from che Iitcle hills about us. Well did they perceive,
that above at the Obſervance there were people z for they had evermore a clap ar that :
but we were all bzhind a Trench we had caſt up berwixt che Obſervance and the Wall of
the City, capiſt, and ſquat, ſo char we could nor be ſeen, The Soldiers were all before the
houſes, chrough which they had pierc'c ſeveral holes ro come, and go under cover. Be-
hind che Retirade, which was not much above the height of a man, they were alſo ſhel-
tred from being ſeen. Signior Corne.is was alſo under cover, by reaſon that he lay in a
low place, and unger the thelcer of a very thick wall, which join'd to Port :Qvi/le, The
order of the fight was thus.

Signior Cornelio had with him one Enfign of Germans, two of French, four of Italians,
and four of Sjezn9is, having alſo the Count de Gayas to afiſt him 3 and with meat the
Obſervance was the Rhinecroc, with three Companies of Germans, two of French, two of
Italians, and four Enſigns of Siennois. Inall the two Troops both of Signior Cornelio's and
mine there was not ſo much as one Harquebuz, but Pikes , Halberts, and two hand-
Swords, (and of thoſe but few) Swords and Targets, all arms proper for cloſe fight, and
the moſt futious and killing weapons of all other ; for to ſtand popping and pelting wich
thoſe ſmall ſhot isbut ſo much time loſt 5 a man muſt cloſe, and grapple collar to collar,
if he mean to rid any work, which the Soldier will never do ſo long as he has his fire
arms in his hands, but will be alwaies fighting at diſtance.

All che nigh the Enemy were placing Gabions for fix and twenty or ſeven and ewen=
ty pieces of Ordnance, and by break of day they had planted ewelve, as they would in that
time have done all the reſt, had it not been that they had been neceſſitated to draw their
Canon up to this Mountain by ſtrengch of hand, The Wall is good enough, which not long
ſince by one of the-two Popes Pins's, who were of the houſe of Picolhaomini, and of the
Order of the people, had cauſed ro be made. At break of day they began their Battery

The Battery of within a foot of two of the bottom of the Walls, at the diſtance of abour an hundred

the Imperial-
iſts,

paces ; which they did to cur the Wall by the bottom, making account the next day with
the reſt ofthe Arcillery in a ſhort time to beat down the whole wall : but for all thac
che Count de Biſque ceaſſed not continnally to fill che Antiport, leaving us Flanckers, fo
that we could ſee all along the breach, About noon they gave over their Battery below,
and began to batter the middle of the wall, when fo ſoon as I ſaw them begin to let in
lioht, I left Signior Cornelio , who continually went up and down from place to place,
and took Monficur de Baſſompierre, wich whom I went to the Fore Camoglia, from
whence we could plainly {ce into the recoyle of cheir Canon :; bur 1 ſhall leave this dif-
conrle to finith the Order. »

I Iefc a French Company at the Fort C:moglsa, anorher at the Ciradel, there being al-
ready ewo Companies of Sirnnojs at each, more than two Companics of Germans at the
place, each a part by rhemſelyes z one of Italians at the Port St. Mark, ani all along the
wall towards Fonde-brando, Siennois, and rowards Porto Novo the lame, having given
che word to the ewo French Companies, that in cale I thould ſtand in need I would ſend
for them, leaving the Siennc: {till in the Cicadcl, and in the Fort. The ſame Inſtruti-
ons I left with the Germans, and had taken order that from fix hours co fix hours we

would

2 ft
dd At

Boox II. de Montuc, Mareſchal of France, 143

would change the word, as well by day as by nighr, co the end] char whillt every one
lay cloſe at his poſt, if chere ſhould be any Trayror amongſtus, he might go co no place
where he mighe have any Intelligence with the Enemy, to draw men from thacr Part to
weaken that Poſt, ro carry them to another : but thar no one thould be belicy*d if he did
not bring the word, in changing of which it ſhould be carried co che Siexneis by two of
che Council of Eight, by the one to the one half, and by the ocher ro the other 3 fo char
nnſeſs thoſe themſelves brought the word they were nor to ſtir from their Poſt. I was
eyer afraid that che Marquis had ſome intelligence in the City, which made me rake this
courſe co prevent him. The Germans who were ar the great place had the ſame com-
mand, and morcover that an Officer, or a Serjcant of the others ſhould come co ferch them :
wo which end rhere were lix Serjeants choſen out of our /talian and French Companies,
whohad in charge, thar during the time of che Battery, or of an Aflaulr, they thould
conzznually be moving along the Curtain of the Wall co the Qaaricrs I had appointed,

4nd never co abandon their Quarter, Tr was alſo ordain'd that no ove upon pain of
death, of what Nation focver, not ſo much as the Sjennois themſelves ſhould dare ro a-
bandon the Retirade, being of che number of thoſe who were there appointed far the fizhr,
and che ſame was carried quite round che walls of the Ciry. Ir was allo order'd, har ot
eight of che Council of War, four were continually to remain with me and Signior Cor -
nelin, to the end thac the two who remain'd with him might go continually on hoxſe-
| back with the word, to ferch ſuch ſuccours as Signior Cornelis ſhould ſend fr, to relieve
him if occaſion ſhould be, and my two the like; char js ro ſay of che Caytains of the

City, and he other four ſhould go to the places where the fix Serjeants were appointed to

be, ro the end rhir chey might joyntly encourage the Soldiers to fight, if neceſſ:y ſhould

require. And there where there was no buſineſs to- be done, and thac any c2me to them

wich the word tor ſuccours, they ſhould deliver him the one half, and keep the reſt to

defend that Poſt. Thar the Officers of che King, as Controulers, Commiſlaries of victu-

al, Treaſurers, or their Depurics, ſhould ordinarily be, part by day, and part by night,

ill on horſeback, riding up and down the ſtreets of the City , and rhat from hour co

hour one of them ſhould bring me news how all things ſtood in the body of the City,
and about the Walls, bringing us ſtill ſome token or another chart they had ſpoke with
the four of the Council, and the Serjeants who were depured with them. Tais was the

order I gave, atleaſt as muchas I remember, never tailing my ſelt every day to vific the

Companies, and to encourage the Inhabitants to do well.

I now return to what we did ac the Fort Camaglia : Monſteur de Baſſomplerre ran to
fecch a Canon we had in the Citadel ; buras he went our to remove it the Carriage broke)
ſo that inſtead of it he brought a Demy-Canon , whitha Siennois the {31d Baſſumpierre
had entertcin'd inthe quality of a Canoneer evermore ſhot in, and fo v ell chat he could
hic with tas ſmall a mark as if it had been a Harquebuz. He was aſlifted by ſome 7talian
and French Soldiers of the Citadel to bring it , whilſt I was making ready a Plattorm
wich che Soldicrs of che Fort, vll my Company of. Pioneers came, which I had ſent for
in all haſte,an in leſs than an hour and a halt we diſpaccht 3t,where I mounted my Demv-
Canon. I gave ten Crowns to our Siennois, that he might make ſome good ſhots with
thac Piece here, as he had done ſcveralat the Ciradel before, The Encmy had plac't Ga-
bions on the Flanck of their Barcery cowards us. Bafſompierre and 1 went a liccle on the
right hand, and obſery*d rhe Baller in the air like a har on fire, flying very wide on the
right hand, and the fecond as much on the left , which made me ready to eat my own
fleth for rage ; Monfiear de Baſſompicrre always aflur'd me, that he would preſently rake
his level righr, and (t:]] went and came to and tro berwixt him and me. The third thor
light upon the bottom of che Gabions, and the fourth playd directly inco their Artillery,
and there kill'd a great many of their men, whereupon all thoſe thar alliſted fled behind
a little houſe- which was jn the rear of their Canon. At which I ran and cook him in
my arms, and ſeeing him with his Linſtock ready co fire again, faid to him, Fradel mis
da li da ſeno, ptr dio facio, ti preſente dalteri dieci ſcondi, & d rene biechier de ving Greco,
I chen lefe hum che French Captain, who had the Guard of the Forr, to furniſh him ;
continually wich ſuch things as he ſtood in need of, and Monſieur Baſſompierre and I
return'd to our Poſt. There then advanc'c a German Enfign to the Pnenuies battery, who
came along by the ocher Gabionade wich his colours flying, and this might be aboat four
of the clock in the afternoon, we could ſee him march from behind the Obſervance, and .
was no ſooner come to the Artillery , but our Prece fir'd and kilPd che Enſign, upon
which the Germans immediately fled away, retiring co the place from whence chey came.
And this Sienzois made ſo many brave thots, rhat he diſmounred them fix pieces of Ca-
non, and their Arnllery remain'd totally {dbandon'd till the beginning of che night, wich-

our

— a Sl = AR EAT I EI;

=

PRO

14:11
10 |
if
(hl
FN
[0 3
#t 4

144

WAS

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize

mY

'I be Marquis
draws of his
Canon,

The Marquis
his reſolution,

The Marquis
his danger and
fright.

The Germans
can no longer
endure the
want of bread
aud Wine,

out playing any more than two pieces of Canon, that were covered with Gabions, and
flanckt towards the Fort Camoglia, which our Artillery could not tonch, becauſe they ſhor
over by reaſon of the height of the Gabions, and in the twilight they mate ſeven
eight ſhots at the Obſervance where we were, and the houſes adoyning and of all
night after ſhot no more, We work't exceeding hard all nighc to finith our Retirade,
and the Count de Biſque was no leſs diligent at the Antiport , ſo that two honrs before
day all was perfefed , and every one ſettled in his Poſt where he was to fight, That
which made ns make ſo much haſte, was, that we heard a great noiſe at their Artillery,
and thought they were bringing up the reſt, which made me put out a man to diſcover
their Battery, who brought us word, that they had cut above fourſcore paces of the wall,
within a ſpan or two of the botrom, and that he believ'd 1n a few hours they would have
beaten it totally down, which we did not much care for though they did, for we hop*d
to ſell them their Entry very dear and about an hour before day they ceaſed heir noiſe,
which made us think that they only expeRed the break of day to give fire, I then
mounted upon the wall, having Captain Charry always with me, who by main force
would needs have me down when the day began to break, and ſoon after I perceiv'd, thac
at the Windows of the Gabions there was no Artillery, and that inſtead of planting
more they had drawn off choſe there were, I hen called our to Signior Cornelio, that we
were out of danger of an Aſſault, and that the Enemy had drawn off their Canon ; art
which news every one began to come upon the wall, where the Sjennois ſufficiently rated
the Enemy in their language, ſaying, Coloni marrant , venete qua vi metterems per terra
vinti braſſidi muri; They were conſtrain'd to ſtay three days ar the foor of the mountain
to repair their Carriages, which the Demy-Canon we had brought ro Fort Cameglia
had broken and ſpoild them,

Now (as I have already ſaid) the Gentleman of the Emperors Bedchamber had all
the while kept a great deal of clutter what Canon would do ro the winning of the
Town : bur after he had been an eye witneſs of all that has been related , and chat the
Marquis had remonſtrated to him that the Retirade, and choſe orher Fortifications I made
within, was to let him enter, and to give him Bactail in the Ciry (for if I knew whar
he did, he wasno leſs enform'd of my proceeding, there being evermore one Traytor or
another amongſt all people) he then was of the ſame opinion with the Marquis and the
other Captains, that the Town was neyer to be taken by force ; but that it was to be re-
duc't to famine, and therefore thought it convenient char the Artillery ſhould be ſenc
back to Florence. He then return'd back to his Maſter to give him an account of whar
he had ſeen, and that the Marquis could do no more than what he had already done,
I donot know whether or no he acquainted the Emperor with the fright he had been in,
which the Marquis himſelf gave me a relation of at my going out of Slennay as he went
along with me above two miles of my way, where he cold me, that at the rime. when
their Artillery was forſaken , by reaſon of the Haveck our Demy-Canon made amongſt
them, he was cloſe by the fide of the ljctle houſe in his Litter, being chen very lame of the
Gout, where his Litter being ſer down upon the ground, this Gentleman of the Emperor's
was talking to him, having his hands upon the Cover of the Litter, and his head withe
init, whiſpering with the ſaid Marquis; when our Governor ſeeivg the Artillery aban-=
doned, and every one retyr'd under the ſhelter of the little houſe made a thor ar it, with
which a part of the wall, which was of brick fell upon the Litter, ſo that the ſaid Gentle-
man was by it beaten down upon the Marquis's Legs, ſo aftoniſh'c as nothing more, and
che Marquis ſwore to me,, that in his life he was himſelf never in ſo much fear of being
kill'd, as at chat time : that they drew the Gentleman out from off his legs, and himſelf
after with much ado, all the Litcer being full of the ruine, and covering of che ſaid houſe.
And the ſaid Marquis moreover told me, that ac the great fright he was in his Gouc left
him, for the whole ruine fell at once upon him, and upon the Gentleman, who veril
thought himſelf to be kilPd. I have often heard that the apprehenſion of death has
cur*d many diſeaſes; I know nor if che Marquis his Gout be recurned fince, but he aſ-
ſ\ur'd me he had never had ir after from that trighr, cill the time I ſaw him, IE it be re-
turn'd or no I leave others to enquire. |

This might be abdur the middle of Janzary, and not above eight dayes afcer we be-
gan to perceive thar the Germans grew very impatient at the little bread they had, ha-
ving no wine, which was the moſt inſapportable of all, The Rhinecroc himſclf , who
was ſickly, could no longer endure, there being nothing to be had unleſs it were a little
horſe-fleſh, or a piece of an Aſs. Signior Cornelio and I then began to contrive which
way we might ger theſe Gerwyans out of the City , and conceited that if they were gone
we could yer keep the Town above two moneths longer, whereas if they ſtaid we ſhould

bs

Book It.

—_—_—
* aa
TR Tr oa a

i
woos

Boos III. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

OY Ot. > OO CG CHA ty 6 ey oe en

Ee ce

HOPE ; lt tO AY TOTES Vw oo, oe ”<CG e_ e t-e_— _—

20.

be neceſſicared ro ſurrender : we therefore concluded to lend a man privately co Monhieur
le Strezz) to remonſtrace all chis ro him, and to cncreat him co ſend for them after
the moſt plauſible manner he could (which I alſo directed him how to do) and lent to
him Captain Ceſſeil, who 1s now my Enſign, very well inſtruted. Ir was with exceeds
ing great difficulcy chat he was to paſs, which that he might do, we were to fight wo
Courts of Guard, by reaſon that the Marquis had already caſt up a great number of Tren-
ches, which came up cloſe to the walls of the City on every fide, Of theſe Captain
harry fought the one, and the Count de Gayas with a Company of 7talians che other ;
{o tha whilſt they were fighting he got over the Trench, and recovered the rear of the
Camp with his Guides, and two dayes after rerarn'd in Company with an Italian Gentle-
man call'd Captain Flaminio, who brought Letters to the Rhinecroc, and to me allo
wherein Monſieur de Strozzy wric to me to ſend the Rhinecroc with his Companies
out to him, for that he intended to ſer on foot aflying Army , having with him greac
tore of 1talian horſe and foot , and that without ſome of rhoſe Tramontane finews he
ſhould never be able to relieve me, and that he would proteſt againſt me if the Cicy was

, tp : Mont! b
loſt. To the Rhinecrec likewiſe he ſent very obliging letters, having before-hand made ofthe Ger-

Captain Flaminis very perfe& in his Leſſon« The Rhinecroc upon the receiving cheſe or-
ders broke our into very great complaints, ſaying that Monficur de Strozzy reduc'd him
to the greateſt extremities, and thar it was impoſſible for him to get away without being
defeated : but that he would however ſpeak to his Officers , which he did, and which
begot a very great diſpute amongſt chem. Ar length one of chem in whom he repoſed
the greateſt confidence, and who ſerv'd him in the quality of Camp- Maſter, remonſtra-
ted to himy that he had much better hazard wich his ſword in his hand to make his way
chrough che Marquis his Camp, than ſtay to die of famine, or by a Capitulation to ſur-
render himſelf to the Enemies diſcretion, which however in a few dayces he muſt of ne-
celfity do z for there was nothing lefc ro ear, and their Soldiers began to murmur, inſo-
much thar they evermore expe&ed when a great part of them ſhould go give cthemſelyes
up to the Enemy, which made them reſolve to depart. .. The Rhinecroc was not much to be
blam'd for his unwillingneſs, ir being a very perilous Journey, for at the very fallying our
of the Gate, he was of neceſſicy to fight ſeveral Spaniſh Guards, and half a mile from thence
another, art a Trench the Enemy had caſt up near unto a certain Mill, which was in his
way. Upon their derermination to depart, I gave expreſs charge that no one living ſhould
ſpeak of this ſally, cauſing the Gates of the City to becloſe ſhut, and ar the beginning of
che niphr they all came with their Baggage co the great place before Porto Novo.

The Sienneis, who underſtood nothing of all this, at che ſeeing the Germans 1n this
marching poſture, began in all haſte to repair to the Pallace in very great deſpair. I then
caus'd three Companies to fally out, two of French, and one of Ttallans ; the fuſt where-
of was led by Captain Charry, the ſecend by Captain Blacon (who fince dyed a Hugonor at
Xalntonge ) and the third by the Count de G ayas. Captain Charry had order to fight the farſt
Court of Guard, which was in a grear ſtreer of the Suburbs, the ſecond was at che Au-
g#ſtins in the {ame ſtreet, and the chird at S. Lazaro, They had in command from me,
never to give over tll they had fought all the chree Courts of Guards, and the Count de
Gayas took the way on the outſide of the Suburbs on the right hand all along by the houſes,
(UII marching ſoftly on to rallyour men together, as they ſhould be ſeparated and ſcarter'd
by the fighr. The Tertia of Sicilylay at the Charter-houſe, conſiſting of very good Soldi-
ers, and the Rhinezyroe at the going out of the Gare took on che right hand, entring into
a valley, and the Count de Gayes remain'd upon the eminence moving ſtill ſoftly on,
which produc'd two effeRs for the relief of our people, the one as has been ſaid, by ga-
chering our ſquandred men together, and che other ro ſucconr the Rhixecroc alſo, if he
thould ſtand in nced 3 and ſo we began to open the Gare, ir being aboat one of the clock
in che nighr, Captain Charry marched our firſt ( for it was he who alwayes led che
clance ) Blacon after him, the Count de Gayas next, and then the Germans, who in a trice

pur themſelves into the Valley. We immediately heard the fight berwixt our French and The Fight be:

the Spaniards : Captain Charry routed the two Courrs of Guards, the one after the 0-
ther, and beat them up as far as that of St. Lazarsz whereapon thoſe of the Charter-
howſe came our to relieve their people, and came to the Auguſtins (where Blacon had made
a haltexpeRing Captain Charry) and there clapr in berwixe chem; Caprain Charry having
done tis buſineſs, thought to rerurn ( hearing very well that they were fighting with
Blacon ) and mer the Enemy , which redoubled the fight, The Count de Gayas could
not come to afſiſt him, by reaſon that IT had expreſly forbid him to engage in che fight,
till he ſhould firſt be ſure that the Geymans were out of danger 2 butin the end he was

conſtrain*d to do as the reſt did 4 our two French Companies being driven upon him,
8 Sos The

A device of the

the Sieur de

MANS.

The Germans

go our of Sie

£974,

twixt the

French and the

Imperidlifts.

.

my co wy ws
"> dA i” EP 6 ma CSE TEES TAIT —

En I es Cn ei th
be CHE te 2

_—
SY

=” ORD De Ft
22: IE 4585" = þ : —_—
_ i LEY =
— = oe

_— A
——

RT _— eee eh EE. Har P—_

"The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox tt,

Speech of
Monſieur de
Montluc to the
S1ennise

The Germans
by no means
proper for a
hhiepe,

The Sieur de
Montluc cholcg
DiRaror ar
Signaa for a
monthe

The Fight continued above a long hour. Signior Corne.io and I were without the Gate
by the Portcullis, and nothing was open but the wicket, and there as the Soldiers caine one
afrer another, we pur them in, when ona ſudden we heard the fight coming towards us,
{-me crying France, and others Spain, when at laſt they all came up pel mcl rogecher to
the Portcullis, We had torches within the Gates, and through the wicker ſaw a liccle lighe,
by wich we drew the Soldiersin. I muſt nceds ſay, there were very valiant men, borh
on the cne ſide, and the other ; for not ſo much as euher Freach or [talian, ever once ran
fuciouſly upon us, bur {til fac'd about at the Porteullis, and never reiir'd, bur ſtep b
ſtep, vill we pull'd chem in. All the three Captains were wounded, and we there lofh
what ſlain, and wounded above forty of the beſt Soldiers we had, both French and 1ta-
lians, and intheend we gor in all the reſt of our people, And becauſe before the Sally,
the Siennots were aſtoniſh'd ac the departme of the Germans, I made Signior Cornelis to
g0 about to the ſeveral Guards, and to the Forts, to reaſſure our men, for no one knew
thar the Germans were to go away, and I my ſelf wenc to the Palace, where I found all
the Senate in a very great diſtraCtion, to whom I ſpokeas followerh 2

© I ſee well (Gentlemen ) that you have here aſſembled your ſelves upon the occaſion of
* ihe Germans departure, and that you are entcr'd into ſome apprehenſion and jealonſfie,
* thar by chat means your City will be loſt : Bur I muſt cell you, it is the conſervation, and
© not theloſs of your City ; for thoſe fix Enſigns devour*d more, than the twelve of che
* Italians and French, On the other fide, I know you muſthave heard that the ſaid Gey-
© mans already began to mutiny, being no longer able ro endure, I alſo diſcover'd well
*cnough, that even cheir Captains were not liketo govern them, themſelves apprehend-
© ing that they would go over to the Enemy, and you your {clycs have for five or fix days
* laſt paſt heard the Enemy call our co us at the very foot of onr walls, that we wereloft,
© and that cur Germans would ſoon be with them, Yer did nor this proceed from any 'de-
* faulc in their Officers, but from the impatience of the. common Soldiers, who were no
* longer able co ſuffer, Now (Gentlemen) ſhould you appear dejeted upon their depar-
* ture; the world would fay, that both your courage and ours, depended only upon
* theirs, and fo we ſhould diſhonor our ſelves, to honor thera ; to which I ſhall never
* give my conſent : for you knew all the great fights chat have hapned in this fiege, have
© been perform'd by youy and us only, and they have never ſo much as allied oucof the
© Town, fave once only, that in ſpice of me the Rhixecroc would ſend out his people une
* der the condut of his Nephew and his Camp-Maſter, and would accept of noone of
© any other Nation, than his own, at which time you ſaw how ſoon, and how cafily chey
© were beaten back, even intothe ditch of the Ravelin of Porto Novoz ſo that if, by good
© fortune, I had nor been there, and had not made the 7talian Guard ſally our to their
© 1eſcue, not a man of them had come off alive, I will not diſparagethem, bur they arc
© much more proper for a Bartel, than a Siege. Why chen (Signiors) ſhould you becon+
(cern'd ac their departure ? I will ſay one thing more co you, that although Ihad elſe ſenc
© away the twelve Companies that 1cmain with me in this Town, I would yerundertake to
* defend your City, provided the Caprains ſtay'd behind to relieve me. You muſt make
© your Enſigns Captains of the Watch by turns, who ſhall have two nightsof incermiſſi-
© on, and ours ſhall have but one, and we muſt begin to contract our allowance of bread to
© fourteen ounces, and you of the City to ten. You muſt alſo put the uſeleſs mouths ou of
© Town, and appoint fix perſons to take aliſt of cheir names to morrow, withour further
© delay, and that withouc regard of perſons, and ſpeedily thruſt them out of your City,
© by which expedient we ſhall make our bread laſt chree monthslonger, which will be a ſuf-
© ficient time tor the King wherein to fehieve us, eſpecially now that the Spring 15 drawing
* on, Ceaſe therefore your apprehenſions, and on the contrary approve whar I have done
© in order to your ſervice. If I have done ic without pre-acquainring the Senate with my
* defign, ic was not cut of any dii-reſpe& to chem, bur ro keep this departure ſecrecy
* which wasof very great conſequence, as you your {elves may have obſerv'd; I having
© been conſtrair?d co put Monſieur de Strozzy upon the buſineſs to deliver my {clf from a
«© people ſo emcirely devored totheir bellies.

The Senate having heard my Remonſtrance, defir'd me to go to my repole, and that
they would conſider of what I had faid, rendring me very many thanks for the comforc
and good counſel I had given them. In the morning my whole Speech was divulg'd all
over the Ciry, and chere was no more chought of fear amongſt chem : Bur chey could nor
well agree amongſt themſelves abour the unproficable months, foraſmuch as every one
was willing to favour his own relations and friends ; wherefore by Ballotte they created me
their Dictator General for che ſoace of a month, during which cime neither the Ng

| 0

DOK Il. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 147

of the people, nor the Magiſtracy had any command ar all, but I had the abſolute aucho-
rity and dignity, anciently belonging co the old Dictarors of Rowe. IT thereupon created
fix Commiſlaries, to take aliſt of all the uſeleſs peosle, and afcerwards deliver'd the roll
co a Knight of Malta, accompanied with five and twenty, or thirty Souldiers, to put chem
out of the Town, which in three days after 1 had deliver'd in the Liſt, was performed. A Th* uſeleſs
thing, chat had I not very good witneſsof, both of the Sjennoz, the King's Officers, and rams ym
che Captains who were then preſent in Sjenna, I thonld not however have mention'd in ;
this place, left che world ſhould take me for a lyar : bur ir is moſt perfeRly rrue. The
Liſt of theſe uſeleſs mouths, I do aflure you amounted to Four thouſand and four hun-
dred people, or more, which of all the miſeries and deſolations that I have ever ſeen,
was the greateſt my eyes ever yet beheld, or that T believe I ſhall ever fee again ; for the
Maſter was hereby necefficaced to part with his ſervant, who had ſerv'd him long, the
Miſtreſs wich her maid, beſides an infinite number of poor people, who only liv'd by the
{weat of their brows 53 which weeping and deſolation continued for three days together :
and theſe poor wretches were to go chorow the Enctny, who till bear them back again to-
wards the City, the whole Camp continuing nighe and day in Arms to that only end;
ſo that they drove them up to the very foot of the walls, that chey might the ſooner con-
ſumethe little bread we had left, and to (ee if the Ciry out of compaſſion to thoſe miſera-
ble Creatures would revolt 5 but that prevaild nothing, though they lay eight days in
this condition, where they had nothing to ear bur herbs and graſs, and aboveche one halt
of them periſh'd, for the Enemy kill'd them, and very few cſcap'd away. There were a
great many Maids and handſome women indeed, who found means to eſcape, the Spa-
nlards by night ſtealing chem into their quarters, for their own proviſion, bur it was un-
known to the Marquis, for it had otherwiſe been death ; and ſome ftrong and vigorous
men alſo forc'd their way, andeſcap'd by nighe : Buc allcho'e did nor amount to the fourch
part, and all chereſt miſerably periſh*'d. Theſe are the eftes of War. We muſt of ne-
celfity ſometimes be crucl, to fruſtrate the defigns of an Enemy. God had need co be mer-
ciful co men of our Trade, who commit ſo miany fins, and are the cauſers of many mile*
ries and miſchiets. |
You Captainsand Governors of places, if you be nor perfeR already, learn theſe Arts
and Stratagems : Iris nor all to be valiant and wiſe, you muſt alſo be circamſpeRt and
cunning. Had I entreated the Rhivecroc to depart the Ciry, he would have been d1l-
pleas'd, and have reproach'd me, thar I ſent him co the ſlaughter, bur I proceeded more
diſcreetly, ſerving my ſelf with the authority of Monſicux de Strozzy, wherein I had no
other end, but to gain time co tire our my Enemy, and to give the King leifure to relieve
as: ButasT have ſaid before, he emplo'd his Forces there where he had the molt concern.
Nearer ts the thin than the ;kirt. Never fear to diſcharge your ſelves of uſcleſs mouths,
and bar your ears from all crysof the afflicted : Had I obey'd my own diſpoſition, I had ”
done it chree monchs ſooner, which if T had, I might peradventure have ſav'd che Town, or
at leaſt T had longer held my Enemy in play 3 and I have a hundred cimes ſince repented
me, that I did nor. |
The Marquis ſeeing that I had put the Germans out of the Town (who were the great- The German
eſt part of them defeated by the way, and thorough their own grear fault, which I ſhall defence,
not however give any further account of, for they were not defeated about Sienna, buc
elſwhere upon their march, where their own fear ſurpriz'd them, witchour any grear rea-
ſon) and ſeeing alſo char I had drivenour the uſclefs people, boch which would help to
prolong the Siege, with the contrating our allowance of bread (which hehad alſo learn'd
from thoſe thar went out) theſe things made him t» think of fome other way, to bring The Marquis
us © his bow ; fearing left ſome ſnow ſhould fall in the Spring (as it often talls our in bis deſign,
thoſe parts ac that time of che year) which ſhould ir ſo happen, he ſhould chen be conſtraind
to raiſe the Siege, and repa r to the Cities co eat, for he wasalmoſt in as great neceſſity 'as
we, and the Soldiers of his Camp werefain to cat Mallows, and other herbs, as well as The Marquis
ours, by reaſon thar oftentimes their proviſions could not be brought in due time; for ic his ufferings;
all came from about Florence, which was thirty mikes off, and upon little Aﬀles, excepring.
Ioo Mules, and thoſe were to bring ſufficient to ſerve whilſt chey could go and come;
which was five or fix days, and every recurn ſome of *their beaſts of burthen dyed. For
abour the Camp there was no more, ſo mnch as one herb; neuher hay, ſtraw, ner grain
to be found, and much leſs any one Inhabicant within ten miles of the Road. And all
tys Cavalry lay yer ten miles beyond Florence, excepting the Company of Signior (brs
the Marquis his Nephew, which confilted of no more than fifty Horſe, and was alſo cve-
ry fifteen days to be reliev'd, by fifty others that were quarter'd at Banconvent. So that
had God. been pleas'd to fend usa lutle ſnow, though but for eight days only, his Camp

Xz would

Y —x-t+ Rs 2}; ag 6

148

The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book Ilf-

The Marquis
his praQices in
Stew,

ts

would have been neceſſitated to riſe, and to ſhift for chemſelves inthe mcſt commodious
quarters abroad in the Country. All theſe things cogerher pur the Marquis upon an-attempc
to ſhorten the War wherein his deſign was one way or anotherco ſow diviſion amongſt the
quarters of the City, ſeeing us weak, and knowing very well, that although we had yet
rwelve Companies, there was nevertheleſs not ezghreen hundred men: To which effeR by
thoſeof the Siennozs who were banilh'd the City, and were with the Marquis, an inven-
tion was found ont to gain a Citizen of che Town called Meſſer Pedro, a man with one
eye, and of the order of the people (which was thac wherein we moſt confided, toge-
ther with the order of the Reformarors) and char by the means of certain lictle boys, who
went with little ſacksto gather herbs in the Meadows upon che River Trefſe. By whom
the Marguis ſo order'd the buſineſs, chat he corrupted chis man, and made him a Traytor
to his People and Countrey ; andthe form of this praQtice was, thar Mefler Pedro (honld
receive ſeveral blancks, ſign'd by the Siennozs, who werein the Marquis his Camp, which
he himſelf ſhould write over at his own diſcrecion,

The plot of this deſign was thus, that Meſſer Pedro ſhould in his Letters write theſe
words, that they wonder'd they ſhould thus ſuffer themſelves to be ſv manifeſtly abus'd by
the Seignenr de Montluc 3 and that a child might diſcern all the aſſurances he gave them of
relief 29s the King of France to be no other than gulleries and deceits : That although they
had nnwerthily been thruſt out of the City, yet did they neverthele(s, with tears in their
eyes, infinitely lament to ſee them ſo miſerably looſe themſelves, and that if they would ſend
ont a man to go ſo far as Rome, to enquire if the King was ralſing an «Army for their
ſucceur, they would then infallibly diſcover the Cheat : That they begg'd of them not to ſuffer
themſelves to be reduc'd to the laſt morſe], which if they ſhould do, they would net then come
off cheap: r, than at the price of their heads, the raine of their eſtates, their wives and chil-
dren: That they had yet means to make their peace with the Emperor , by the Mediation
of the Marquis, if they wonld I:t him into the Town, which was a thing eaſie enonyh to do,
if they would conſult and joyn with ſome of the (ity, who had already engag'd themſelves t9
them ; and that they might know who were of the intelligence, they were to go into ſuch a
ſtreet, and where they ſhould ſee a little white Croſs under the door, the Maſter of that hes(e
was one, This one ey*'d Dog perform'd his office exatly wellz and direQed his Letters
co oneof thoſe in whom werepos'd an abſolute cruſt, being very certain, that he would
forthwith carry it to the Magiſtrate, and that the Magiſtrate would alſo in the morning
ſend into the ſtreet mention 1n the Letcer, and would ſeize upon the Gentleman of the
houſe, at whoſe door the Croſs ſhould be found. - However he refolv'd ever to make his
Crofs at ſome houſe of the orders of che Nowi, and rhe Gentlemen, foraſmuch as the other
two Orders had them 1n ſuſpicion , and the Marquis thoughc ( knowing tie humor of
the Siennezs, and the hatred they bore to one another) chat immediately, fo ſoon as thac

erſon ſhould be taken, they would hurry him wichouc any ocher form of J 1ftice to
the Scaffold, by which means thoſe two Orders of the Novi, and of the Genilzmen,
would enter into ſo great an animoſity and deſpair, that co fave their lives they wou'd
be conſtrain'd to betake chemſelves ro arms, ro poſſeſs themſelves of a Canton of che
City near unto the walls, to favour the Enemy, and tohelpchem into the City.

This curſed Rogue then began co forge his firſt Lerter, and by nighr went and chruſt
it under the door of the houſe of one of the Gentlemen , who was unſuſpe&ed, and
made his lirtle Croſs in another ſtreer at che houſe of one of the richeſt Gentlemen of che
Order of the Novi ; fo that in the morning the Gencleman to whom the Letter was dire&ed,
found icin che Entry of his houſe, preſently read ir, and careird ic to the Magiſtrates,
who ſo ſoon as they had look'd npon it, immediately ſent it co me by Miſſer Hieronimo
Hiſpano, ſending me word withal, chat they had decermin'd to go apprehend the ſaid
Gentleman, and forthwith co carry him dire&ly to the Scaffold, Whereupon IT ſenc
the Signiors Cornelio and Bartolomeo Cavalcano back to them, to entreart them not ſo pre-
cipitouſly to proceed to blood, for that it might be an invention of the Marquis' to ſec
divifion amoneſt us : but that they might do well to commir him co priſon, which chey
accordingly did. Two days after there was another Lecter found in the ſame manner, in
the houſe of a Gentleman of the Order of the Novi, a man no more ſuſpected chan the
ether, and the litrle Croſs under the door of one of the Order of the Gentlemen: Ar
which the Senate was ſo incens'd, that I was fain my ſelf co go to the Pallace, where I
had much adorto obtain the favour, that chey would defer exccuton for five days only,
ro ſee if in that time God would pleaſe co give us furcher lighc inco this Fat. All che
whole Ciry was enrag'd, and ralk*d of nothing bur curting off heads. As Ged help me,
it could never fink into my head, chat ir was any other, than a device of the Marquis, for
T knew very well wich whom I had co do. I then encreated Meſſer Bartolomeo adn

chac

_—

m—_

Boox Ill. de Montluc, Mareſeha of France. 149

that he would never ceaſe day nor night, to go viſic the ſazd Gentlemen, and the Citizens of

the Orders of the Gentlemen, and the Novi, whom the misfortune concern'd, ro entreac The Sicur de |
chem not to deſpair, and to tell chem, chat I would take order no blood ſhould be ſhed, Mentluc's wiſe
and that I gave nocredit tothoſe Lecters and Croſſes. Signior Cornelio alſo affiſted me 4

yery much in thisaffair, who had a very great intereſt in the City, by reaſon of che Car-

dinal of Ferrara, with whom he had always liv'd during his abode in this City.

Now three or four days after this, thinking the fury to be over, behold another Ler-

ter, and another Croſs found in the ſame manner as before : Ar which every body loſt all

patience, and would immediately drag all chree to execution. I then ran to rhe pallace,

taking Signior Cornelis and Signjor Bartolomeo along with me. As Iwasgoing it came

into my head, that I had no way to divert this blow ; bur by a colour of devotion, and

ſo ſoon as I came there, I found the great Hall already almoſt full of men of che Reforma-

cors, and of the Order of the people $ when ſo ſoon as Tenter'd into the Hall of the Ma-

eiſtracy, they all began to cry out, that it was now no longer time to forbear, bat that they

were to proceed to a ſpeedy execution of Juſtice 3 whereupon having caken my place, I ſpoke

to them in Italian, asar other times, after this manner.

—_ ——

© Gentlemen, fince the time that I have had the honor ro Command in your City, by The Sicur de

©he appointment of che King my Maſter, you have never undercaken any thing , whe- Moztluc's Has
© ther as to matters of War, or as to the Government of your Corporation, without firſt 38-0 vp =
©communicating co me your incention, and asking my opinion and advice. Wherein, by : a "
© God's good pleaſure, I have been fo happy, thar I have hicherco never advis'd you to
©any thing which has nor ſucceeded to your advantage and honor 5 neither would 1do
<ir for the world, my own lite and ſafery not being dearer ro me, than your preſervation,
© Seeing then (Gentlemen) I have been ſo fortunate, as ever to have given you ſound
« and uſeful countels; ler me beſeech you to retain the ſame opinion of me now, and to
@pive credit to me in an affair cf {o great importance, as this that preſents ir ſelf before you,
« with which you- judgements ſeem to be very much perplex'd. I beg of you with joyn'd
< hands, and jn ihe name of God, that of all things you rake heed of embruing your
« hands in che bl-04 of your Citizens till the crack- ſhall be fully known 3 neither can ic
« poſſibly be long c-nceal'd : *cis ro much purpoſe to cover the fire, the ſmoak will how-
« ever iflue out 5 in like manner they may endeavour ro mask and diſguiſe this practice,
© bur the crach willinfallibly appear. All che world (and I beſecch you be of my opini-
© on) cannor make mebelieve, that this is any ocher chan an Artfice, and a crick of the
« Marquis, who having found that the Lyon's skin will do him no good, has therefore
© pur on that of the Foxz the berter ro bring abour his deſign. Which to do, he had no
| © better, nor more ſubcile way, than by ſowing diviſion 1n the heart of your City. And
« which way could he better do it, than by making you believe there are Traycors among
© you, and within your own walls? Knowing very well char thac would make you nor on-
<ly co impriſon ſuch ſuſpe&ed perſons, bur alſo ro put chem ro death, and by char execucion
© ro ſer difcord in your City, for true blood cannoc lye. The Parents and friends of che
© {afferers will bear the death of their kindred, though it ſhould be juſt, with greac ſorrow
© and diſcontent, and will eadeayour to revenge chem ; by which means behold you have
© cxeared ſo many domefſtick enemies, much more dangerous than choſe without, and you
< will be perplexed abour the death of your own people, arthe time when you meditate
© that of your open and declared foes. See then (Gentlemen) what joy, whac ſatisfaRion
© and delight you will adnuini{ter co your enemies when they ſhall know chat you buſic
« your ſelves about cutring off the headsof your own Citizens, and of choſe, who I dare
© ſay and ſwear arc innocent, However 1t may prove to be, che expeRation of the cruth
© can no ways be prejudicial to vou , for you have them in ſure hold : you are ſecure
© of your priſoners, you haverthem under fate cuſtody, I will alſo be vigilancon my part,
© why then thould you make ſuch haſte to pur them co death? For the honor of God be-
© Heve me, you will nor repent your patience, TI heve no intereſt but yours, ler us have
© recourſe to God in ſo great a necefſity. Command thar all your Clergy co morrow or-
© deir a general Procetſion throughout the whole City, and lec every one be enjoyn'd to be
« zfliſting ac ity and let them joyn 1n prayer, thar it may pleaſe God to do us that grace
© a5 ro diſcover rous the truth of this aftair, rhe treaſon, 1ftreaſon there be, and the in-
© nocency of the Priſoners, if there be none. 1 aſſure my ſelf chat God will hear us, and
© you will ſoon be ſatisfied of rhe truth, afrer which you may proceed to juſtice againſt
© the guilty if cauſe require : bur to do ir before, and in heat ro embrew your hands in
© the blood of your Citizens) without having marurely weighed every circumſtance, you
© would in my opinion do very 11], and bring a great miſchict upon your Cicy, Gentle»

: * men,

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book [IT,

A General
P:oceſlion,

« men, the ſole affeQtion I have to your ſervice, your ſafery, and conſervation, has made
© me ſpeak thus freely ro you wichour any other conſideration, and I once more moſt
© earneſtly beſeech you to grant me this favour , as for a few dayes ro {uperſede your ſen-
© rence, which in the mean time we will employ in prayers and (applications, thac God
© will pleaſe, by manifeſting to us the truth, to direR our jultice.

T had no ſooner ended my Speech, bur that a confuſed murmur aroſe throughout the
whole Hall, ſome ſaying I, and others no, for there will be evermore ſome oppoſcrs z bur
in the end my advice was followed, and preſently intimarion given to the Churches, and
roall the people, to prepare themſelves againſt the nexc day for a general Proceſſion, co
pray unto Almighty God ; for as for faſting we had enough of that already. I was my
ſelf aſſiſting at the Proceſſion, and all che Captains; together with all the Gentlemen and
Ladies of the City, the Kindred of the Priſoners followed weeping ; and to be ſhorr,all the
whole body of the City this day, and the day following were in humiliation and prayer,
every one beſeeching of God, that he would pleaſe co afford us that grace, as co diſcover the
truth of chis treaſon. In the mean time I flept nor, forall the nighr Signior (orxelio and

I were in conſultation, which way this pra&ice of the Marquis could be ſer on foor, 1
conſider'd with my ſelf, thar the buſineſs being gone thus far, he who carried on the de-
ſigne would not reſt chere, and that the Council of the City would nor be kept ſo lecrer,
that the Marquis would nor infallibly have intelligence of what had been concluded,
there being evermore ſome tell-rales in theſe grear Aſſemblies; and chen very well knew
thac T had committed an error, in ſo openly declaring that I was affur'd ic was a trick
of the Marquis, it being to be feared chat ir would make hum enter into ſome jcaloufie of
his Agent, Now becanſe it was likely he would by his Letters and Tickers give us ſome
new alarm, Ichought fit to cauſe certain men to walk up and down the ſtreers of che Ciry
by night, after the moſt private manner they could, co try it by that means ſomerhing
might not be brought to light, and after this manner cauſed Cencinel to be made wo

The prudence nights together. By day I cauſed the people co be taken up with Proceffions in three
of the Sicur de reſpeRtive Pariſhes, and when any of the Signiory came co tell me, char ic was ſo much

The Traytor

WO I wF- —_—__

Miſſer Pedre
confeflcs his

time loſt, and chat they muſt proceed to Juſtice, I entreaced them co have patience, aſ-
ſuring them that I began to diſcover ſome light into the buſineſs; tor ic was neceſſary
to proceed after this manner, to reſtrain the fury of che people.

Now it hapned that che chird night about midnight this Meſſe Pedro was fecn to paſs
by, and Ropping at a houſe, put his hand to a Caſement, which was low, and hapned
to be ſhut, and one of the three Letters had been found to haye becn pur into a low wine
dow as that was. He then kneel'd down, and under the door puc1n the Letcer as far
as he could thruſt his arm, which having done he went his way along the ſtreet, A
Gentleman who lay at watch went preſently after him, and caking him by che arm faid,
che fiete voi ? to whom the other replyed, 70 ſono Meſſer Piedro (1 cannot remember the
{ir-name of this Raſcal) the Gentleman chen knew him, and ſaid ro tim dove andate ?
who made anſwer me ne vo 4 la guardiay to which the Gentleman rerurn'd, adio adlo;
which having done he knockt, and made them open the door, where he found the Letter
of the ſame contents with the former. He then immediately went and carried it to the
Magiſtracy, who ſent me two of their Council, to give me'an account of the whole bu-
Gneſs, and thoſe two went and call'd uy Signior Cornelio, who came along wich them 5
where amoneſt us it was concluded, that the Gates ſhould nor be open'd in the morn-
ing, nor the Guards and Centinels reliey'd, till he was firſt caken 3 and in the morning
Signior Cornelio went witha hundred men to beſer the houſe both before and b:hind. Sig-
nior Cornelio knew the man, and ſo ſoon as he had placed his Soldiers , knocke at the
door, where he found him yet in bed, and preſently ſent me word of his being taken,
Whereupon , the time of my DiQacorſhip being expir'd, I made uſe of cntreaties, as
before , requeſting the Senate chat he might be forthwith pur upon the Rack, for he
boch denied the Letter, and alſo that he had ſeen the Gentleman of all chat nighc.
As he was upon the Rack he begs'd thar they would torment him no more, for he would
confeſs the truth, which he did from poinc to point, together wich che Marquis his
praQicesto ſer diviſion in the Ciry. Upon which confeſſion they would in the hear have
preſently hang'd him at the windows of the Palace : but I entreated them not co do
it yer, and ſo he was clapt upin a Dungeon. I then entreated che Captain of che people
ro deliver ro me the three Gentlemen, who were priſoners, for that I had a deſire to calk
wich them atmy Lodging ; which he accordingly did.

They were brought by Signior Cornelioand Bartolomeo Cavalcano, and ſo ſoon as they
were come to my Lodging I remonſtrared rothem, * chat they ought by no means to

« (tomacs

Book [1]. "" "Mb Montluc, Mareſchal of France. ou

«ſtomach (heir impriſonment, nor to bear the Senate any 1] will for feifing of their per»
& ſons, affairs being reduced to ſuch retms,, that che Farher cughr nor co cruſt his $004
& nor che Sw his Packer, fince it cancery'd no lefs chan their hives and fortunes, and thac
« chereforc 1 fiefir'd they would go ro the Mogiſtracy to give chem hearry thanks char chev
« had nor proceeded to ſpeedy execution, but had had patience till ſuch rime as God had
&« Aiſcover*d rhe trach. They recturr'd me anfacr, that I {hould pardon them, char be-
ing a thing chcy would never doz neither was ir they cmachad faved rheir lives, bur thar
it was I, and chat they would give God chanks and me; bne thar chey had no obliga-
tion to them atall, We were all three above a long hour labouring to perſwade hen,
where I remonſtrated to them, that nct ro do the thing I requeſted of chem was to ac-
complith the Marquis his Celgne, and to give i'm his hear's deſire, whicit was, char
they ſhould remain 1n divihon and morcal hatred ; and whatever elie I could concrive
co ſay; that might any way ſerve to perſwade chem to go, I repreſented ro their con(1-
deration to pacihe and appeaſe them. In the ead remembring how highly they ſtood ob-
liged to me tor the ſaving their lives, they promiſed me char they would do ir, and Sig-
nior Cornelic, and Meſſer Bartolomeo ar my requeſt went along with them, for 1 wasa-
fraid they might repent by the way ; whereſo ſoon as they came beftort che Magiſtracy; The Prifoner:
one of them ſpake for che reſt, remonſtrating cheir innocency, and the wrong that had go to ihe Se-
been done them 3 which nevertheleſs they would no more remember, conſidering the ne-' Pate.
ceſity of the time, and the Eſtate of the City, aftectionarely beſecching rhem co eſteem
chem for their good Citizens and friends, and loyal ro the Common-wealchz and chac
for the time to come neither they nor their poſterity might have any blemith upon cheir
names upon this occaſion, they defired they would pleaſe to grant them Parents ſeal'd
with the broad Seal for their ſatisfation, The Captain of the people then made chem a
very ample Remonſtrance, wherein he entrearod they would excuſe them, it che publick
ſafety beirg in queſtion, chey had been conftrain'd to ſhut their eyes to particular inte-
reſts, and by the importance of the affair had been conſtrain'd to be fo levere in their
inquifition : bur thar they did acknowledge and eſteem chem to ve good and loyal Ci-
tizens, Whereupon they all deſcended trom their fears and embraced them, and as
Meſſer Bartolomeo told me, the moſt of them with tears in cheir eyes : and ſo every. one
retired to his own houle:

Now becauſe this one-ey*d Villain was of the Order of che People z which was che
greateſt party in the Town, and wherein was moſt Soldters, I was atratd chac ſhould chey
put him to death, thoſe of his Order mighe make ſome ſtr in the Town, faying, that _
now it was well enough known of whar Order the Traitors were, which might occaſion Tk BAD 60
ſome mutiny or edition, and make them in the end bctake themſelves ro arms, which ety alle
was the reaſon that made a requelt tothe Senate to give me hus lite, and to baniſh him 1;
for ever, thac all things might be huſh up, and that the Marquis mighc not ſay chat any
of his policies had ſucceeded any more than his actempts by arms. . And thus were all
things diſcovered and hudled up, for the Senate granted my requett.

I have often {fince wondred how I came to be {o difcreer, and {o moderate 1n an affair
of this importance, conſidering how reaſonable it was, that an exemp!e ſhould be made;
but it would peradventure have done more hurt than good, We muſt not alwayes be
ſo ſevere, and the ſeeing others ſo hot upon blood I do beheve made me a litcle more tem -
perate, And you (Gentlemen) who have rhe charge of places, do not {utter your (clves
to be tranſported at the firſt appearance of things, nor upon too light information 3
conſider and weigh the circumſtances, and hinder the violence of che people over whom
you command by one prerence or another, as I did, amuling them wich Procefſions; noc
that thac was noc nevertheleſs well done, bur I would fee it time would make any dit-
covery 5 and had I ſuftered cheſe men to have been pur co death, rheir kind1ed might. per-
| haps have been prompted with ſome ſpirit of revenge. Above all chings endeavour to
preſerve union amongſt thoſe over whom you (hall happen to command, as I did n this
City, where all was accommodated and appealed. Conſider alſo with what enemy you
have to do ; for you may well imagine thac he will leave no ſtone unremov'd, nor no-ar -
tifice uncri'd, to fer diviſion in your City ; as I have formerly read in Livie, the great
Captain Hangibal did to ſow difſenſion amongſt the Remans. Your wiſdom and prus
dence (Governors of places) muſt diſcern if there be appearance in- the thingz whether or
no the parcy accuſed be a man capable of practice, or have any means whereby to bring
his purpoſe about, and whether or no he have done any thing any wayes tending co {uch
adefign, IF in apprchending him youdiſcover any confuſion in his countenance, or ya- (gu ke ee
riation in his anſwers. You ought 1n this co be very circumſpe&t and diſcreer, and to pok-nins hwy il
conſider thar there is nothing more eafie chan to calumniate a man, God be praiſed, Governor.,

"all

f

*Y, 3

Co +4 :

vt; s
ye of

—

—_—

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Boos IIf.

all here paſſed with moderation, and the Priſoners with their fricnds came to give
me thanks.
Now after the Marquis ſaw himſclf diſappointed of his expeQarion, and char all his
lots and ſtratagems came to nothing, he ſufter'd us ro reſt in peace, nor expeRing to
an us till we ſhould be reduced to the laſt morſcl of tread ; and we began to enter in-
ro the month of March, when we were in the greateſt neceſſity of all things 3 for of
winethere had not been one drop in the whole City from che maiddle of Febywary > We
had caten all the Horſes, Aſſes, Mules, Cats and Rats that were in the Town. Cats ſold
for three and four Crowns a piece, and a Rar for a Crown. And in all the whole Ciry
there wasonely remaining four old Mares , ſo lean as nothing more, which curned the
Mills, ewo that I had, the Controller Ia Moliere his, the Treaſurer P Eſpine another, Sig-
nior Cornelto a litcle Bay pad-Nag, that was blind with age, and 2fiſſer Hieronimo Hiſpans
a Turk of above twenty years old. Theſe were all the Horſes and Mares that were lefr
in the City in this extremity, which was greater than I'can repreſenr it, and I do belieye
there is not in nature ſo dreadful a thing as Famine, We had from Rowe ſome hopes
{ent us of ſuccours, and that the King was ſending away the Mareſchal de Briſſac to relieve
us, which was the reaſon that we again lefſened our bread to twelve ounces, and the Sol-
diers and Citizens of the Town to nine ; whilſt in che mean time by little and liccle we
loſt ſeveral Inhabitants and Soldiers, who fell down dead as they walked che ftreers, fo
that they died withour fickneſs. Ar laſt che Phyſicians found it our thar ic was the Mal-
lows they fed upon, that being an herb chat does relax the ſtomack, and obſtruQs digeſti-
on. Now we had no other herbs all along the walls of the City, they having been all eaten
before 3 neither could we come by theſe without ſallying out ro skirmiſh, and chen all che
women and children of the Town went out to garher them. Bur I ſaw I loſt ſo many
men in theſe skirmiſhes, that I would no more permit any one to ſally our. Now to
hear any more news of the Mareſchal de Brifſzc was henceforward impoſſible , for the

This memora- Trenches were brought up to the very Gates of the City , which Trenches the Marquis
ble ſally of the had alſo redoubled for fear we ſhould fally out upon him 1n deſpair, and give him Batcail,

Siennois was in
the year 1526.

as the Slennols in their antient wars had formerly done, as themſelves report. |
In this condition we languiſhed on till the 8ch of 4pril, that we had loſt all manner of
hopes of relief, and then it was that the Seigneury intreated me not to take it ill if they
began to think of rheir preſcryation« When ſeeing chere was no other remedy, unleſs to
eat one another? I could not deny them, curſing to the pit of hell all thoſe who engage
men of honor in places, and then leave them in the lurch. Yer did I not herein intend co
ſpeak of the King, my good Maſter, he lov*d me too well for that 5 but thoſe who gave
him ill counſels to the prejudice of his affairs, and I have ever obſerv'd more evil than

The people of g90d Counſellors about Princes. They then ſent out one of their people to the Marquisto
Sienna begin to entreat of him a ſafe conduR for two of their Senate, whom they would {end to him,

capirulare,

The extremity
of the Marquis,

which he granted , and they began to capitulate. The Marquis himſelf did very much
facilitate the Treaty, and they began to enter into great confidence of him, for he very well
ſaw, that to cauſe the City to be ſack'd and ruin'd would be no profir, neither ro the Em-
peror, nor the Duke of Florence, and would only benefit the Soldier, and on the other
fide he fear'd left if the Siennols could obtain no good conditions, we ſhould (ally our
upon him, « la deſeſperade , having already loſt above the third part of his men, who
were cither dead through the length of che Siege, or ran away, fo that he had almoſt no

ltalians, who were quarter*d at the Fort St. Mark; and the Marquis had remain'd for
above a meneth with no more than ſix Enfigns for the Guard of his own perſon, all the

reſt being in the Trenches; neither could he ever relieve them with more than cen Enſigns,
and thoſe had only one night of intermiſſion, and ſome ſuch Guards there were that were
not reliev'd in fix days, To this condition was he reduc'd withour, as well as we within ;

neither could he make any uſe of his horſe, no more than Monfieur de Strozzy could of
the Cavalry he had, by reaſon that there was no manner of thing upon the ground, ro

give the horſes to cat from CAMontalfin to Sienna, and from Sienna to Florence.

I will now give an account of my ſelf after what manner Iliv'd, I had no manner of
advantage, no more than the meaneſt Soldier, and my bread weighed no more than ewelve
ounces, and of white bread there was never above ſeven or eight made, whereof three
were brought ro-my Quarters, and the reſt were ſaved for ſome Caprain thar was fick,
Neither thoſe of che Ciry, nor we from the end of Felraary :o the 22th of April cver cac
above once aday 3 neither. did I ever hear ſo much as any one Soldier complain, and I can
affure you the Remonſtrances I often made to them ſerv*d to very good purpoley for if
they would have gone over to the Enemies Camp, the Marquis would have treated chem
very well z for the Enemy very much eſteem'd our [talian and French Soldiers, __ in =

Skirmiſhes

4. © Ee > Rd LOR Tt CE Py INE
- | eons AT = Ny $7 WF: 5d _
an I IRIS of, 33 > edt - ewe LIN Ss

Book Il, de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 133

Skirmiſhcs that had happened berwixt us had had very ſufficient tryal of cheir valour. 1
had bought thirty hens and a Cock to get me eggs, which Signior Cornelio, the Count de The Sieur de
Gayas, and I eat, for we all chree conſtantly ear togerher ; art noon in one place, .and in che Montluc's pro
evening 2t another ; but towards the end of March all theſe were eaten, the Cock and Viſon.
all. *Twas picry wehad no more : and fo I remain'd without fleſh, and wirhour eps,
and had nothing co eat but my little Toaf, with a few peaſe boyl'd with a little Bacon and
Mallows and that bur once a day only. The defire I had to acquire honor, and to pur
chis baffle upon the Emperor , ſo long to have held his Army in play, made me find
chis ſo ſweet that ir was no troubleto me to faſt : and ls pitiful ſupper with a bic of
bread was a feaſt to me, when returning from ſome skirmith, I knew the Enemy to be
well drub'd, or that I knew them to ſuffer under the ſame neceſſities we did.
Bur to recarn to the Capitulation;z the Marquis ſenc to che Duke of Florence, and Don
Juan Manricow, who was Embaſſador from che Emperor to the Pope, and reſided ar
Florence by reaſon of the Siege ; whereupon the ſaid Duke (ending a ſafe conduR, che
Sjennois alſo ſent tothe Pope (which was Pope Julio, who died two or three days afcer) Pope 7ulic,
from whom they received a very ſcurvey an(wer, he reproaching them with their obſtina-
cy, and commanding them to ſubmit to the Duke of Florence his mercy wichour any con-
dition, He wasa terrible Pope : bur the Dake proceeded afcer a more modeſt and cour-
reous manner, as a Prince ought rodo, who would gain the hearts of a people, and in-
deed he was one of the greateſt Politicians of our times Ir behooved him fo to be to e-
ſtabliſh his Principality, in the time of rwo of che greateſt and moſt ambicious Princes
thatever were, whohad both of them a great mind to get footing in /taly, Bar the Spa-
niard was more {abtle than we, and this Duke manag'd his buſineſs very well ; his name The wiſdom of
was Coſmo, and I believe he is yer living. In the mean time Commiſtioners for eight daies tbe Duke of
rogerher went, and came berwixt Florence and the Camp, and upon Monday night the Feorence.
Capiculation was brought to Sjenns , and the morning before the Marquis had ſent a
Trumpet to me, entreating I would ſend two Gentlemen onr to him in whom I might
confide, he having ſomething to ſay to them that he defired I ſhould know, and that he
was come to St, Lazare to that effe&. I thereupon ſent out to him Sjgnior Cornelio, and
Captain Gharry, who being come to him , he there acquainted them with che cerms of the
« Capitulation, which would that night be brought to the City, and that amongſt other
&« things there was one Article which expreſt, chat the Sieur de Montlac with his Italian
&« and French Companies, and all the Officers of che King , ſhould march our wich Bag
*© 2nd Baggage, Colours flying, Drums beating, with match lighted , and Bullet in mouth :
& but thar this Article would do me no good, foralmuch as we did not belong to the Sjeu-
& 29s, but to the King of France; and being we did not belong to them, they conſe-
* quently had no power to cavirulare for us ; that therefore I was my {elf ro capitulace
&« jn the name of the King my Maſter , which if I choughr fic co do, he afſur'd meI A Propoficicn
<« ſhould have what conditions ſoever I would demand, and that his ſervice to the Eme of the Marquis
< reror excepted, he would do as much for me as for the Cardinal his Brother : that he and * a. gg
« ] were rwo poor Gentlemen, who by our Arms were arrived to ſach degrees of honor, ord "xg :
« that the greateſt both of France and [taly would beglad to have our places, telling them
& withal he would there ſtay to expe my anſwer. They found me at Porto Neve walking
with Meſſer Hieronimo Eſpanos » where after I had received his Meſſage, I bad them
go back and cell him, **chac Ivery well knew he had read the Roman Hiſtory, wherein The Sicur ds
<« he might have taken norice, that 10 the times of the antiene warlike Rowans they had Mentluc's Ann
&« (ent one of their Colonies to inhabit Gaſcony, near to the Pyrhenean Mountains, of which ler,
« Province I was a Native, and that if he would not content himſelf, that the Siennois
© had comprized me in their Capitulation , I would at my coming our ler him ſee, char
« | was deſcended from thoſe warlike Romans, who would rather have loſt a thouſand
«[jyes, could they have had ſo many to loſe, chan an inch of their honor ; char Lhad ra-
& ther the Stennois (ſhould capiculate for me, than I for them, and chat tor my part che
« name of Montiac ſhould never be found ſublcrib'd to a Capiculation, They then re-
turn'd to him, to whom having repeated my anſwer, he faid rothem 1n Icalian. Che vol dir
queſto ? mi pare che vol jocar a la deſperata. Altre velte joroſe due fortereſſe con raglone, ne
per qu:fto ne ſte maj repreſs de I Imperatore, & no reſt a [# Majeſty a ſervir ſs di me. Sig»
nior Cornelio then cold him, char I was poſitive in chis determination, and would rather
put all ro the hazard of che (word, than to che hazard of a Capitulaction. Well then faid
he, recommend me to him, and telbhins I will let him ſee that I ans his friend, and that he
may march out in all aſſwrance upon the Capitulation of the Siennois, or after what manner
he pleaſes himſelf ; and ſo they rerurn?d.
Oh Camrades, you have here. a fair exemple before you , when you ſhall find your
d i elves

tad. |

* 4. LOS
Oe” I NT 25; TP
— OE

——_——
PI I"

134

| The Commentaries of Meſſne Blaize Book [If,

ſelves in ſuch an affair , never to diſcover any tear, tor nothing 1n che world ſo much
ſtartles an Enemy , as to (ce the Chief with whom he has to do to be nndaunted jn
all excremicics, and that he gives him to underſtand he will rather run the hazard of a
Fight chan a Capitulationz noching ſo much puzzels him as that, beſides the encourage-
ment it gives ro your own people, I was as much afraid as another, ſeeing my (clf ſo
deſperately engag'd, and n9 news of any relief, neither of viftuals nor men : but ask

any
one whos yet living, whether they ever ſaw me any more dejected than the firſt day I

can.e into the City, And ar the laſt of all, when we were reduc'c to the extremeſt ne-
celfiy cf all chings, I was more reſolute to fight chan before, which I believe conduced
much to the obtaining of ſo good conditions both for the Siennois and for us, as we could
have had, had we capitulated che fiſt day the Enemy ſar down before us.

Late at night came che Capitulation, and upon Tueſday morning four of the Senate
broughtir to me, wherein 1 found an Article, that every one of what mean condition ſ0-
ever ſhould go out with Bag and Baggage, their Wives and Children, who hada mind
to depart the City, except the Exiles and Rebels to the State of the Emperor, the King of
England (which was King P-i.ip) and the Duke of Florence. I then very well under-
ſtood that this Article would fall ncavy upon the poor Florentines who were with us
in the City, and who had been baniſht upon Montieur de Stroz.zy's account. There were
alſo Neapolitans, and MHillanois ; fo thar I thereclearly ſaw above a hundred men thrown
away, and cheir heads ſurrendred to the Scaffold, which made me defire the Senators ro
return, and that jnan hour I would come to them to the Palace, and ſhew them che de-
ceic that was couched in their Capiculacion , entreating them in the mean time ſpeedily
there to aſſemble all che principal members of the City, which they did, and I took a-
long with me Signior Cornelio, and Bartolomeo Cavalcano, who was ready to die for fear

when he underſtood my propoſition, for he was a Florentinez where being come I made
to them this Remonſtrance.,

The Sicur de © Gentlemen, 1 have ſcen your Capitulation, which tends rather to the cutting off of
Moniluc's , &« ycur heads, than to any indemnity for your Lives and Eſtates. You have there one
oe Fork * « Article , that every one generally thall enjoy the benefic of the Capitulacion , their
the Capirula» ** Lives and Eſtates ſaved, excepting ſuch as are Rebels co che Emperor, the King of En-
tion.  Coland, and the Duke of Florence. Now you know very well that the Emperor has
&« cauſed you all co be declared Rebels in his Imperial Chamber, as Subjects of the Empire
« for having rebelled againſt him, By which you ſee you are declared SubjeRts, and you
&« {ay you are not SubjeRs, but only ſtand in recommendation to the Empire, The diſpute
«is not yet determined, whether you are Subjets or recommended, and when the Ene-
&« my ſhall once be got within your walls, and chat you are in cheir power, what Judges
« will you have to determine of the Queſtion, excepr the Hangman, and with your heads,
« for it will certainly be by char way that they will go about to aſſert cheir title, Behold
& then you will all be pur to death, your Eſtates confiſcate, and your Wives and Children
Soldiers paſs *©2 prey to the Conqueror. As for me, and the Soldiers chey will permit us ſately ro deparr,
every where, * for Soldiers paſs in all places, and ever becter cheap than other ſorts of men. They know
&« we have nothing to loſe bur our Arms, and that we are bound to obey our Prince 3 (hould
« they offer any outrage to us, we ſhall have our revenge in turn at one time or another,
« fox men do ſooner mcet than mountains 3 Bur all the miſchief will fall upon you, con-
*« fdering the hatred the Einperor and che Duke have conceiv'd againſt you. A Prince
«© rarely pardons SubjeAs who have once rebelled againſt him ; bur if ever he can pick a
« hole1n their coats» he will be ſureto take hold of the occaſion, Since then we have ſo
« Jong liv'd together , without ever having ſo much asone unkind word paſs berwixc us,
<< 1nd that Jhave receiv'd ſo many honors at your hands, it you will cake my advice, we
« ill make che Marquis think of {omething he never chought of yer, that is we will ſally
« gut with our weapons 1n our hands to the fight, and give him batrajl, and we oughr
«ts believe, that God will be on our fide, and aſliſt us, conſidering the cruelry they would
« exerciſe upon you. For my own part, I freely offer you my life, and thole of all my
& Caprains and SolGiets to dic with you, that as we have liv'd, ſo we may die together,
&« rather than to ſee you ſo baſcly betray 'd and fold ro ſlaughter. Credete a me, a me dico
che ſon vechio, & acai ſino paſſate molte coſe inasti li occhi.

Now I knew very well, char this exception did nog point at the Sjennos, bur only at
thoſe I nam?d before, ſo that this was only a device of mine, to make the Sjenncs engage
with 15 18 the fight, for I had racher have pur allco the hazard of the (word, chan char any
one of thoſe who were within with us, and who upon my account had been obſtinace in che

defence

; Eg t _ Ty Fo) «4

A, ON Ls dE B24 —_—

- .
*(F1.'?

—

Book Ill de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 35

defence of the City thould be loſt. They cook it however tor current pay, and after I
was departed from chem, all of them reſoly'd to fighc it our to che laſt man, IT then pre- The $3ennis
{ently ſent them word what they were to dt), which was, that the Standard-bearer thould reſdlvero fight;
command all cheir Powder to be refined, their Swords, Halbercs and Pike-heads to be |
ſcowr'd and ground : that upon paiu of Death, every one who was able to bear arms,
ſhould be ready in two days, and that the Prieſt; and Religieux, who had taken arms for
the defence of the Town ar the Battery, ſhould now take chem again under the ſame
Captains they did before ; inſomuch that I do believe thac for rwoor chreedays ſo grear
a buſtle in tne City had never been ſeen, The rwo Deputies hereupon of che Dake of
Florence and the Marquis, who had f{afe condu& into the Ciry, return'd about three of
the clock in the afternoon back to the Marquis, where chey thew'd him this Article, which
had pur not only the whole Ciry, bac alſo the Soldiers, into deſpair of fair Quarter, teſ-
ling him how we were all reſoly*d and by what means hey came to underſtand che hubab,
and preparation that was making in the City to give him Bartel, which was the reaſon
thathe ſent all nighc to the Duke of Florence and Don Faan Manricin, whom I fince ſaw
with the Queen of Spain at Bayonne, giving them an account how all things ſtood, and
entreating chem withal, that ſince he was now upon the poinc co have che Town ſurrendred
:ohim, chey would not for this one Article puc him in danger of loſing all z buc conſider,
chat he had to do with a great Capraiv, and an old Souldier, commending me more chan I
deſerv'd : thar as themſelves very well knew,he had loſt near upon the one half of his Army,
and had a great m3ny fick of thoſe he had lefc, and chache had nor eweaty Horſe, chere
being nothing upon the place co ſupport them, nor any m:3ns by which to bring chem
any from orher placesz and that chey would do well co weigh and conſider of thus affair,
for as for his part, he muſt diſcharge himſelf upon chem, if any thing fell our amiſs. So

ſoon then as the Duke of Florence and Don J#.1n ſaw the Sienness reſolution, they diſparch'd

to. him le Conſroncs the Duke's chief Secrecary, wich a Blank ro put in whatever we would

demand, for he ſtood upon thorns, vll he was Maſter of the City. Ic was upon Wedneſ-

day morning that the Cou/ignou came ro the Camp, when the ſaid Marquis ſenc for che RY
ewo Deputies, who had been on Te?ſday nighcrecurn'd into the City, where they infert- The Capiculas}
ed in the Articles, tharall thoſe who had bzen banith'd, and Rebels of che Stare of che 32" og Me
Emperor, Empare and Duke of Florence, ſhould go out in al! fecuricy, as well as che :

reſt, and in this poſture we remain'd till Sunday morning the 22 of pril, char we went

our in the order following :

Before any one of us ſtirr'd ont of the Town, Ircſtor'd the Ciradel and the Fort T1, manner os
Camoglia into the hands of the Sjennois, where they vas an Enſign of the City iaco each, rhe Surrender
as I alſo made them to place an Enlign at every Gate of the City that ſtood oven, which of Sienna,
being done, I recurn'd to Porto Nove. The Marquis had planted all his Spaniſh foor all
along the ſtreet that leads ro S, Lazaro, on both fides the ſtreet, it1s Germans were drawn
up in Barralia, alicele on the righc hand in a Camp, and ac S. Lazaro vas Signior Cabry
his Nephew with fifty or threeſcore horſe, which was all chey could make (as I have ſaid
before) and three hundred Iralian Harquebuzeers, which they had drawn our of the Forrs The Surrenier
of Camolia and S. Hark, and was the Convoy the Marquis had appointed toconduR us. of Siema was
Signior Cornelio then, and the Coaur de Gayas, arm'd ar all points, with their Pikes ſhoul- VPonrhe ſecond
dred went out fide by fide, with a Company of Hatquebuzcers at their heels, after them THT
went our ewo Caprains at the head of the Pikes, amongſt whom were a great Company
of Corflets, and in the middle cf the Pikes, the Enfigns difplay*d and advanc'd, and in
the reer of them the reſt of the Harquebuzeers, with two Capains in their reer. Thadova-
night ſentco the Marquis, that he would be ſo civil to the ancient women and children,
who were to goour with us, as to lend chem forty or tifiy of his carriage Mules; which he
did, and which before I went our, I diſtributed amongſt che Sjennozs , who pac upon
them the ancient women, and ſome children in their laps. All the reſt were on foor, where
there were above an hundred Virgins following their Fathers and Mothers;and women who
carried cradles with Infants in them upon their heads, and you might have ſeen ſeveral
men leading their daughter in one hand, and their wife in the ocher, and they were num=
bred co above eight hundred men, women and children. I had ſeena fad parting ar che
turning out the uſeleſs mouchs; buc I ſaw as ſad a one at che ſeparation of thoſe who
went out with us, and who remain'd behind. In my life I never ſaw fo ſad a farwel ;
ſo char alchough our Soldiors had in cheir own perſons ſufter'd to the laſt extremes, yer
did they infiuicely regrec this wotul parting, and that they had nor che power to defend
the liberty of theſe people, and 1 more than all the reſt, who could not withour tears
behold rhis miſery and deſolation of a people, who had manifeſted themſelves ſo devour
for rhe conſervation of their liberty and honor, So ſoon as Signior Cornelis was gone oury

Y 2 all
5

FI
Gd

The cowrelie
of che Marquis
of Marignane,

C! | twixt che Mar-

I ER i > re RP

CES EE oY Leo IE non tre ood S ay) IE if
* p Us 7 SD e- I rae

I

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book TTk

all the Italians follow'd, and the Citizens in therear of che Italians. Then ac the head

156

The French of our Prench went out $» Auban and Lyſian arm'd, with pikes upen their ſhoulders, and
_— our of a Company of Harquebuzeers after them, rwo Captains at the head of the Pikes, with

another company of Harquebuzeers led by Charry and Blacon, having eich of them a
Halbert in his hand, and the Enfigns in the middle of the Pikes, afcer rhe ſame manner
the Italians had paſt before. After theſe I went one arm'd, and Mefler Hieronim Eſpanos
fide by fide wich me, for I was afraid they would have ſeiz'd upon him, he having been
a principal Ar in the revoltof the City, He was mounted upon an old Turk, and I
upon another miſerably lean and haggled our, norwichſtanding which I fer a good face on
the matrer, and made the beſt meen I could. 1letr rwo Siennozs Entigns ac the Gate, en-
treating them to clap to the Gate immediately atcer me, and nor co open ictill the Mar-
quis himſelf came. The ſaid Marquisridup and Cown, and Signior Chiapino Vitelti with
him through all the files, to take carethat no one meddled with che Sjennos, for as to our
| Baggage, it was ſo lictle, as it made no number. The Spaniſh Camp- Maſters chen came
to ſalute me, and all their Captains. The Camp- Maſters alighred nor, bur all the Cap-
tains did, and came to embrace my knee, afcer which they again mounted on horſebac;;,and
accompanied me cill we came to che Marquis aud Signior £954pine, which might be abour
300 paces from the Gate, where we embra&d, an they plac's me berwyixr them. After
this manner we paſs'd on diſcourſing all the way of tne ficge,and the porricu}aricieshad hap-
ned upon it, attributing much honor to us,the Marquisparnculaily ſaying,that h: had greap

Diſcourſe be-

Ly quis of Marge
nazo, and the

LI
WNT a HEE, A tb Le Gro as LACED ICS aheakeR"; 2's
, : »Y 4 EI,

luc.

Countelie be-
rwixt the
Souldiers,

Great famine
in Sienna.

Sicur de Mons- Obligation to me, fir that beſides he had learn'd ſeucral ſiratagems of War, | was the cuuſe

he had been cur'd of his Goat 3 telling me the fear, that Loth he and the Emycror's Gentleman
bad beenin, which did not paſs without much laught:r ; Whereupon I cold him, that
he had put me into a much greater fright the night of the Scalado, ond yet that I was not
for alt that cur'd of my feaver; adding moreover, that he had done very il to come upon
me, 45 the j:ws did to take our Lord, for be brought along with him Lanthorns and Torches,
which gav- me - great advantage + to which he reply*d bowing his head (for he was a
very conr:-:.us Gentleman) Signior, #n altrewvolte ſero pins ſaviz, 1 then cold him, that
haa he concinu:d hu Battery, he would have had no vtry good bargain of ws ; for the Gaſcons
were an dbſtinate peeple, but that they were fleſh and bone as other men were, and muſt eat.
With this, and oriier diſcourſe of the fame nature we enterrain'd ourſelves, rill we were
gor a mile beyond S. Lizero, and there the Marquis bad Signior (i pine Vitelli go co the
head of cir per ple, and ſpeak to Signior Cabry, totake care there ihould be no diſorder,
and that if any 52c offer*s] co take any thing from us, he ſhould kill all ſuch as ſhould ar-
tempt ity and char he ſhould give the ſame command to the Captain of the threehun-
dred Harquebazeers. So ſoon as Signior Chiaptno was gonefrom us, the Marquis embracing
me in his arms ſaid theſe words, in as good French asI could have ſpoke my #:1f, Adiew
Henſfieur de Montluc, 1 pray preſent my moſt kmlle ſervice to the King, and «ſure him,
that I am bus mf humble and «ffeltionate ſerw at, 7 much (m3 hincar ſafe) As any Gea-
tleman in Italy. I then return'd him thank: for the gard incunition Fo had toirards the
King, and the courtefies I had receiv'd at ky hands, which 1 won'd proclaim in ll vlaces
wherever F ſhonld come, and when it ſhould ever lie in my power to do him ſervice, won!d
requite, He offer'd me the ſame, and fo we fell to embrace again. He hari then no more
than four or five horſe with him, they being all behind 1n che ſame order he had lets chem,
and ſo he recurn'd back towards the City, and ſoon after Signior Chispino Y;teki return'd,
where we alſo embrac'd and parted,

We then went to Arbierroate, a little Village upon the Treſſe, or elſe the River it ſelf

is call'd Arbie, and there we found cighteen Aﬀles loaden with bread, which-che Marquis

had ſent thither to diſtribute amcngſt us upon the wayz of which one part I gave co the
Siennozs, another to the Ntalians, and the third co the French, To do which, as I paſs'd
through the Spaniards, I ſaw that the Soldiers had alſo purpoſely brought bread along
with them to giveto our people. 1 dare boldly ſay, and that by the ceſtimony of choſe who
were then with me, thac this bread ſav'd the lives of ewo hundred perſons, and there are
many who will affirm, that it ſav'd the livesof tour hundred, and yer could it nor goſo
far, that there was not above fifry who dy*d that very day ; for wehad been from Wedneſ-
day till Sanday withouc cating any more than fix ounces of Biſcuit a day a man and
upon the Thurſday of two horſes I had, I kill'd one, that would now be worth 9oe
Crowns, he was then indeed very lean, which I divided amongſt the 1taljan and French
Companies, cauſing all rhe oyl to be taken our of the Lamps in the Churches, which I
likewiſe divided amongſt the Souldiers, who wich Mallows and Nettles boil d this fleſh
and oyl, and ſo ſuſtein'd themſelves cill S»»day morning, when nor a marexmongft us ar
our going out, had eaten one bic of avy thing in the world? The Marquis alſo _

| our

Book Ill. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 157
— wn ———— In Wr—— ———— — —  C
four Borachio's ot wine to be brought for me, rogether wich five or fix loaves of white

bread, and ſo ſoon as we came ro Arbjerronte, we halted, and nnder ſome Sallows that

were by the River fide, ear our bread, I gave two of my Bottles of Wine to the Sjen-

now, the other two we drank our ſelves, each one a lictle, and afcerwards went on our

way direAly rowards ontal/in, when ſo loon as we came to Boncovent, Signiar Cabry

made the foor Convoy to return 2 bur cill he ſaw Monſieur de Strozzy, who came out

with a party of horſe ro meet us, would himſelf never leave us; and then he bade me far-

wel, taking mein his arms, as he did Signior (ornelio, the Conn de Gayas, and all our Signior Cabyj
Caprains, for he was a very worthy Gentleman, and a brave Soldier, as any they had in bis Charagec,
their Camp. Ss ſoon as we cameup to Montieur de Stray, weembrac'd, without be-

in? able cither of us to utter one word 3 neither am TI ablero ſay which of us had his heare

che moſt full of the remembrance of our fortunes.. In this manner then, nothing bur skin

and bone, and more like Ghoſts than men, we arriv'd art Montalſia, which was upon

Sunday, and all Monday and 7 neſday we were ſhyt up with the Treaſurers and Comp-

crollers, to examine and ſtare our accompts, and to {ee what ] had borrow*d to lend the

Souldiers, where we found that the King was four months to us in arrear, and Monſicur de

Strozzy gave me 500 Crowns of his own money to carry me into France. I dare ſware

he had not half ſo much more letr ; for Signior Cornelio and IT had been conſtrain'd to

borrow 400 Croxns to diſengage his great Order, which he had pawn'd to a Jew ar the

beginning when he came to Sienna. I would afcerwards have reſtor'd icco him, and name-

ly ac Thionville, though he would never receive it, bur laugh'd at me; and chis was the

end of the Sicge.

O Camrades, you who ſhall do me the honor co read my Book, will you not grant
me what T have ſaid before, thar God did ever as much go along with my forcune, as with
thac of any o:her Cap.ain of my time ? You have obſery'd che great adverticies I futtein'd
in chis Sjcge, and the little helps I had, nocning being $9 be expeRed from withour, his Ma=
jcſty havirig his hands io full on every fide, You have heard chat no art nor force was
ſ-:r'd t& reduce mac, you have «Io feen the greac famine I endur'd, the traverſes the Mar-
quis pcrplext me withal, and che excrem'ties to which I was at laſt reduc'd. which if V our
pleaſe maturely to conſider, you will find that I have been as much afliſt-d by Almighty The 200d for?
God, as any man chat a3 born Arms cheſe hundred years. Tcannoc lye in my Book it tune of che
I would, tiere are 700 many wirnelles alive for char. Do you not then ſee, char ] ſpoke Sicur de Mons
the truth, when 1 ſaid before, chat we are to employ all thac God has given co men, be- ***:
fore we give our ſelves for overcome ? Pray confider, wherher or no any thing was here co be
emitted, or whether I ever omtced or torgor any thing in whit condition {oever I was,
but put this poor Cicy, aud moreover the Kings honour and repuration in diſpute through-
out the whole world. I never call it ro mind, but ic makes me ſad to chink whac. a folly
I commirted in expoſing this City, rogether with his Majeſticies reputation, and all the
reſt of /us, rothe Enemies diſcretion , at che laſt morſel of bread, For the King would
by no means have had me reduc'd to that, and lerany one ask Monſieur la Chappelle, whom
his Majeſty expreſly diſpatch'd away to me, to give me advice, that I (hould nor tufter
my {elf co be reduc'd to that excremity, as tocome off ro his diſhonor. Princesare proud,
and fight more for glory than for puchaſe ; and I muſt needs ſay, that ir was not che
work of man, but of God, that we came off ſo good gheap, as we did.

Two days before we came out of Sienna, the Senate gave me my diſcharge in Pacent, The Declara?
fiened with their broad Seal, acknowledging therein , thac I would neither Capiculate tion of che ©
for the City, nor for our (elves: bur that confidering the extremicy ro which they Sieuwis in ho:
were reduc'd, I would net hinder them from doing it, calling me to witneſs of the foygl- Prof tbe
ty and fidelicy chey had manifeſted co his Majeſties ſervice, wherein they had in nothing _ Mane-
fail'd of the Oath they had made-to him, and char I went ont upon cheir Capiculation, >
and nor they upon mine. Now where will you find in any Hiſtory, chacever mars weg:
out of a place without capiculation, 1 he did nor ſteal away by night, bur nor after the
manner I went out. For every ore will confeſs that I did nor belong to the Sienzs
and thac conſequently they could nor capiculate for mez as che Marquis told Signior Cor-
nello, and Captain Charry. $o.it was, that by che good will of God, Icame outakter
this manner, and the Patent 1s co be ſeen int che King's Trealury, as, I ſhall: fy here-
after. | ey 5 OE ES are

I know very well (Gentlemen) chat many of you will cake delight in what I have to
ſay to yon, concerning the Government and Conſervation of places, and that others will
make little account ot ir, foraſmuch as there are a forc of people ſo good natur'd, ag
ro think they know all things of themſelves, and nothing value che knowledge and cx-
perzence of orher men, as if God had lent chem into the world like S. John Baptiſt,

| inſpir's

WP" "oe Lo wat ” por”.
><

RAT Li AL

Pl

an

ht. nat po. Is

| Sa < gee; oro 0 a au Ne 7 6
”

F -
<
2%

The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book Ir

The defite of
erernizing a
mans name,

Women hate
Cowards,

inſpird from their Mothers wombs. Which is che reaſon we are nor ro wonder, tha:
ſo many fall inco miſhaps ; for their own arrogancy and ſelf conceit, leads them by the
hand till they come to a Precipice, from whence they tumble headlong from the top to
che bottom, with ſo great a fall, that they are never ableto riſe again. Yer,was this no-
thing, if the fall hurt no body but themſelves bur the King and his people ſuffer alſo
by ir. Donot then diſdain to learn, and although you may have great experience of
your own, yet canit do you no great harm tohear and read the diſcourſes cf old Cap-
tains. When 1 was but five and twenty years old, I rook more pleaſure in hearing an
old Soldier talk, than ever I did to fit and chat with the fineſt woman tharc ever I was
In wh wich in my life ; therefore I beſeech you rake a little notice of what I am going
to ſay. | |

When your Prince ſhall give you a placeto keep, you areto conſider thiee things;
firſt the honor he does you inrepoſing ſo much confidence in your valour and wiſdom,
as amongſt others to make choice of you, to entruſt with a Command of chat impor-
tance, Wherein the honor he does you is no little one, foraſmuch as he'does not only
honor you in your own perſon, but moreover ers 2 mark of reputation upon your whole
race, by entruſting in your hands a Key of his Kingdom) or ſome City of very great im-
portance to him asthis was, the Siege whereof I have related ro you, This honor, I ſay,
that he dors you, draws ſo long atrain after ir, that your renown does not only ſpread
it ſelf through the whole Kingdom from whence you come, and the Countre';'s adzoyns
ing to the place you defend, but moreover throughout the whole world, Every vody is
curious to enquire who does well orill, and who is a good or bad Commander ; nay,
alchough wehave no concernin the affair, yetare weevermore inquiſitive after news, for
ſuch 1sthe nature of man: by which means thorow ail Forreign Naious your name will
be for ever known, either to honour or infamy. For v-hatever 15 done, 15 commirted to
Hiſtory, withour which the grearcſt part of men of [{:nor, would not care for acquiring
renown, it coſts ſo very dear. Never did any man evcr purchaſe ic upon harder terms
thanT ; but the laudable defire wehave to perperuate our names, makes the pain ſeem
eafjie ro him who has a generous heart, Mcthought all che rime when I read Titus
Livie, that I ſaw all the brave Scipio's, (ato's, and Ceſar's alive, and when I was at Rome,
and ſaw the Capitol, calling to mind the chings Thad heord (tor I for my own part wag
ever a bad Reader) methought I ought to find thoſe ancieicc Romans there. The Hiſto-
rjans then, who omit nothing of any kind in their writings, will mark v.ur name in
white or black, with glory or with ſhame, according to your deſerr, as you fee they
have done by ſo many Captains who have gone before us, |

The ſecond thing that you ought to ſer before your eyes, is te conſider if yon lofe the
place commurted ro you, firſt whac a loſs it will be co the King, it being part of his eſtate,
and his houſe, there being no Garriſon, that is not properly the Kings own houſe, be-
ſides thar rhe revenne js his, of which you deprive him in loſing che place, enrich his
Enemy, and augment his reputation, whilſt you diſhonor your own Maſter, who ſhall
read in the Hiſtories dedicated to Eternity, that in his Reign ſuch a Town, ſach a Caſtle,
{uch a Fortreſs was loſt. You ought then to refle& upon the miſeries you bring upon his
poor SubjeRs, how many curſes will they load you with, who ſhall be nezghboursto the
place you have loſt ; for they will certainly be deſtroy*d, and by your careleſsneſs or co-
wardiye ruin'd and undone. They will curſe che hour that ever you was born, and
eſpecially the poor Inhabicants, who through your fault, muſt either change. their King
and Maſter, or taking their children. upon their backs, be conſtrain'd to ſeek another ha +
bitation: O that the poor Engliſh who had above three hundred years been ſertled in the
Town of Calice, have reaſon to curſe the cowardize and treachery of him, io ſo in-
famouſly loſt ſo ſtrong a place ! How can you ever have the confidence to look up, ſhould
you once fall into ſuch a misfortune as this? Before you were honor'd and &ftecm'd, and
every one rejoyc'd ar your coming, praying to God to preſerve and bleſs you z bur ſhould
you once fall into a misfortune like thus, inſtead of prayers and acclamaiions, you thall
meet with affronts and injuries ; for prayers, malediRtions, and they w li curſe you to all
the Devils in Hell, Inſtead of careffingy they will curn their backs upon you, every one
will point at you, ſo thata hundred times a day , you wall curſe che hour that you were
not kill'd upon a platform , or in a breach in the defence of your Garriſon, rather than
ſo ſhamefully ro have given it up to your Enemy, | :

And not only your Maſter, the Princes and Lords will look upon you wath an eye
of contempt, but che very women and children ; nay, I wall ſay more, your own W ifes
thongh ſhe make a ſhew of love, will hate and deſpiſe you in her heart z for che nature
of all women is ſuch, chat chey hace all Poltrons, lt chem be never fo proper men » or

never

Lone ES WIE,
\ x AE Ss Le

%

Book [ll. de Montluc, Mareſehal of France: h

ac — — —  — — —— — —

s & mn
) . þ4
. s s

. ern hu ut}
never {o handſomely dreſs'd, and love the bold and couragious, let them be never ſo
flovenly or deform'd, They participate of your ſhame, and alchough being in your arms
in bed, chey may pretend to be glad of your return, they with in their hearcs you had
been ſmother*d, or carried away by a Canon ſhot : for as we conceive it to be the greateſt
diſgrace to a man to have a Whore to his Wife, the women alſo think char the greateſt
ſhame can befal chem is ro have a Coward to their husband : and thus Minfieny le Gon-
vernor, you who have loſt your place, you will be in a marvellons happy condition, when
you ſhall becurſs'd in your own bed. 7

But what ſhall we ſay of your Children? people will not only reproach chem, - that cþ1ycen 4e-
chey are the ſons of a Cowardly father; bur they will moreoever themſelves ſec his name fam'd by the

in Print, and the miſchiefs of which his Cowardize has been the cauſe. For a Town is
never loſt, ler it be never {o conſiderable, that it does not draw agreat deal of inconveni=
ence alorg with it. It brings ſo mighty an inconvenience upon your children, that to cx-

tinguiſh your ill repute, and coraile their own to ſome rollerable degree of eſteem, they |

muſt hazard cheir lives upon all occaſions, wichout either fear or wir, and few eſcape
being kild, who by this means to wipe off the ſtain from cheir family , would fig-
nalize themſelves. How many have 1 ſeen in my time, who by endeavouring to repair
ſome notorious faulc, have loſt themſclves and expol'd themſelves to death upon the firſt
occaſion has preſented it ſelf, being atham'd colive. And though your children ſhould
eſcape theſe dangers, yer will che King be afraid (what great reputation ſoever they may
have acquir'd) to traſt a Town to their cuſtody, leſt the Son ſhould take after the Father,
as ir ordinarily comes to paſs. Thus ſhall you not only ruine your ſelves, bur your
whole Family. |

To avoid and to break the neck of your ill fortune, and of a'l theſe miſhaps, there 1s
a good remedy» which Ihavelearn'd my felt, and am willing to reach it you, if you know
it not already. Firſt you ought co conlider all this chat T have told you, and ſer on che
one {ide the ſhame, and on the other rhe honor you will obcain, if you bravely defend
your place, remaining victorious ; or at the leaſt having done all thac a man of Honout
could do, to .come off Triumphant, and like a Cgpqueror, though yon be overcome,
as you ſee I did in this Siege. Imagine {bl char you ſee your Prince and Maſter be-
fore you, and what countenance you ought to hope for , if by your Cowardize you loſe
his place. And ſeeing nothing ever. had a beginning, bur. that it had likewiſe an end,
conſider from the beginning whar the. end is like to be, and remember char your Maſter
has notentruſted this place in your hands to deliver ic up, but to defend it ; rhathe has
pur you into it, nor to live there only, but to dye there alſe bravely fighting, if occafion
be. If you ask him at your going away to your Command, Sir, muſt I dye before I ſur-
render the place you have given me in truſt ? he will ccll you, chat you are co fight ro the
laſt momenc of your life ; for being you are his Subje&, your life is his, The Scignear de
Farnac one day cold the King, thac 1c wasthe greateſt crafc and Policy, that ever Kings
found our, to make their SubjeRs believe, rhar cheir lives were cheirs, and chat it was the
greateſt honor they could have ro dye for their ſervice : but that it was a great fimplicicy
In us tobelieveir, and to keep ſucha clutter with this fine bed of honor. Ic is nevcrch6-
leſs true, that our lives and eſtates are che Kings, our ſouls belong ro God, and onr ho-
nour is our own, for over my honor the King has no power atall,

Torecurn to whatI was faying before, if in accepting che charge commirted to you,
you have not this reſolution within your ſelves, you would do a grear deal berter co
make an excuſe. There are ways enow co put it off, and chere will be enow, who will
be glad to accept of what you refuſe, If you accept it with a reſolution co bring ic co
a handſome iſlue, do one thing, never think of dying. Tis for a Coxcomb to tear death,
cill he ſce ic within chree inchesof him, and yer cannorhe forbear repreſenting ir cc. his ima-
eination, though ir be a hundred Leagues off, On the contrary, medicate how ro k1ll
your Enemy; tor if you once enter into an apprehenſion and fear of death, you may aſ-
ſuredly give your place for loſt; for that is to take away your underſtanding and your
judgement, which 15 the beſt piece in your harneſs, Tis to much purpoſe to be vahanc,
if his fail you at need 3 which if you intend co preſerve, you muſt by no rfesns enter in
co thus fear of dying ; for fear isof ir ſelf, and by rhe frailcy of our own nature :09 apc
ro incrude upon us, withour our needing to affiſt ic with our own imagination. If then
it preſent ir ſelf before you, you muſt reject it, and have fudden recourſe to the incenci-
on of che King, and co what end he plac'd you chere, Think of the ſhaine and diſho-
nor you are running into. Read often, or cauſe to be read co you, Books char ſpeak of
the honor of great Captains, principally thoſe of our own times z as for example, Langey
and another , who has wric in Iralian (I cannot think of his name) who has writ fo

wil

mult never

Fathers 4

A Sayirig of the
Sieur de Far +
vac to theKirg, |

A Caprain

fear death.

> IP Sac” %
5 nk

- - mg egg” NN EE EE

The Commentaries of Meſle Slaize Book [IF,
well ſince King Charles the eight, 1 have ofcen read him, and he 1s a very good Author.
Would to God that all of us who bear arms would take up a cuſtom to write rhe things
we ſee and do; for Tam of opinion it would be better done by our own hands (I mcan as
to fears of war) than by thoſe lerter*d men, for they too much diſguiſe the truth, and this
reliſhes of the Clerk. Read then theſe Books, and medirate with your ſelves, it I do like '
Captains that Antonio de Levaat Pavie, the Sicur de Lande at Fontarabie, the Signeur de Bonillon at Peronne,
have well de- the Signior de-Sanſac at Miranda, and Montluc ar Sienna, what will they ſay of me?
i<ndcd places. whar honor ſhall T carry back ro my own houſe? and on the contrary, it I ſurrender, whac
ſhame and infamy for me and mine ? Then apply your {elves ro Almighty God, and beg
of him that he will defend you from falling into theſe misfortunes, reſigning up all things
into his hands. After this afliſt your ſelves with all char he has put into the power of men,
as you ſee I did in this Siege , and above all things be always diligent and vigilanr, ever-
more mindful of your charge , if you do this (forgetting withal death and danger) you
will find means to defend your place, though it were but a Dove-Coat 3 and though it
ſhould be loſt, you having perform'd your duty, you muſt conclude it to be by the hand
of God. We mult however always triez tor I have ſeen a place loſt that was never (uſpe-
Redo be in danger, and ſuch a one ſav*d as has been given over for gone. It you there
die in your detence, you will ncither diſhonor your ſelves nor your poſtericy, bur (hall be
laid in your grave with an immortal renown, which is all that a man of arms ought to
A man thar deſire. For a man that fears to die ought never to go to the wars, there being in the world
tears dying ſo many other employments to which he may apply himſ(clf, eſpecially in chis Kingdom of
muſt never go Fyynce, where thereare ſo many orders, what of Juſtice, and what of the Finances 3 too
OY many indeed for the good of the King and of his Kingdom, ſuch a brave and numerous
yourh living idle, who would be fit to bear arms. As IT have entred ſomerimes into the
Parliaments of Tholeuze and Berdeaux, lince my being the King's Lieutenant in Gajenne,
I have a hundred times wondred how it was poſſible ſo many young men ſhould eternally
* Or Hill, or amuſe themſclves in a * Palace, confidering that the blood ordinarily boyls in young men s
Court of Ju- ] believe it is nothing but cuſtome, and the King could nor do better, than to drive away
Rice, or Law. tefe pcople, and to enure them r@garms. Bur co return to you who have the Govern-
ment of places, and you who haye a mind to put your ſelves into a Town to defend it, if
you ſo much fear death, never go, though ir be bur a folly to fear ir, for thoſe that blow
the fire at heme in their own houſes are no more exempt chan the others, and I do nor
know what choice there 1s betwixt dying of a Stone in the kidneys,and being knocked o*|'"
head with a Musket buller, though, if God would give me my choice, I ſhould not be long
in chooſing.

Above all chings (Camrades you muſt be ſure to be evermore intent upon your Ene-
my, and have your Judgment Cenrinel to ſpy what he can do againſt you ; and play two
parts, faing to ycur ſelf, If T was the Afſailant, whar would I do ? on which fide ſhould
I make my atraque? for you ought to believe that your opinion, and that of your Ene-
my do.vcry often jump. Communicate then what you have thought of to ſuch as you
know to be of underſtanding, ſometimes in common, that you may give no diſtaſte to the
reſt; bar molt frequently in private. When you ſhall find your ſelves engaged with a
people, where you are to piſs imall, and have nor the ruling power , apply your {elves
to their humours, and bire your rongues rather than ſpeak roo much. Reduce them b
ſwcerneſs and obligation, and above all things, when you are to ſufler, your ſelves ſhew
the way, Forit you ( onfrenr le Governor) will keep open houſe, and in the mean time
cur others ſhort of their breadz you will draw upon you the hatred of all your Captains
and Soldiers, and ir is but reaſonable thar you who have the greateſt ſhare of honor, ſhould
likewiſe havethe greateſt ſhare of ſuffering.

A Governor I will put you in mindof another ching, which is, that when extraordinary want preſ-
ought fre- ſes upon you, you ſeldom remain ſhut up in your Cabinet, bur ſhew your ſelyes to che
quently ro Captains and Soldiers, and appear to the people with a chearful and aſſured countenance,
fliew himſell your fingle preſcnce will redouble their courage. I have in my time known ſeveral of
wo me PPG. . he King's Lieutenants, who have driven away the Gentlemen , by making them ſome-
times wait toolong in their Halls, wichone vonchſafing to ſpeak tro chem. A Gentleman
will be civilly uſed, eſpecially a Gaſcon, and in the mean time they prerend ro be won-
derfully bufte. 1 have known one once in my life (whom nevertheleſs, becauſe he was
Maſter of a great many very good qualities, I ſhall forbear ro name, for no-man is perfe& )
who two hours in a day would conſtantly lock himſelf np in his Cloſer, prerending to be
buſie about ſome diſparch of importance, but it was ro read Orlando Furioſo in Italian,
as hisown Secretary told us, which we tcok highly ill from him, we being in the mean
time left co meaſure his Hall, or to take a ſurvey of his Conre, Do nor uſe men of con-

dition,

160

Book Ill. de Montluc, Mareſehal of France, 161

dition ſo. Your hours of vacancy and pleaſure ought to be (penc in walking upon the Ram-
pires, and viſiting the Magazines, to ſce that nothing be wanting,

If you happen to be in a place where you thall be reduced to great ſcarcity, forget not Error of the
co ſerve your {clves with the means uſed to rid my ſelf of the Germans, and take ex- Sicur de Mont-
emple by my Error ; for I deferred ic roo long : but it was becauſe I thought the Marquis /**-
would force me by the ſword, and not byfamine ; but he was as ſubtle as I. If you ſuſ- arghces of x
peR any treaſon, and cannor diſcover the bottom of ir, cauſe ſome counterfeit information Governor,
co be given you, and without naming the perſon, ſay you are inform'd that chere is
creaſon plotted againſt you, and thar you are upon the point to diſcover it 5 pretend alſo
to have ſome intelligence in your Enemies Camp, though you have none, for this will be
a Countermine. T will ſay but this one word to you more, which is, that you ſet at once
before your eyes the favour and diſpleaſure of your Prince, for you have your choice, A
King's indignation does not cool like that of another man. They ſeldom forgive a man
chat makes chem loſe any thing, for they would alwayes win. How was that brave Mons
fieur de Zantrec received at his return from Millan, and yer God knows he was not in
fault, He was wont to ſay, it was the greateſt afliion of his whole life, Suffer then
all forts of excremitics, and omit nothing that men of honor ought to do, T know very
weil that men miſt loſe and win, and chat no place is impregnable ; bur chooſe rather a
hundred chonſand times to die, if all other means fail, than to pronounce that infamous
and harcful, I yield.

Monſieur de Strozzylent me a Galley to carry me back into France, and ſent a Kinſ-
man of his, a young man of rwenty years of age, and a Knight of alta to Civita Vechia
to make it ready, and would that the Knight ſhould himſclf conduct me to Marſeilles, The Sour
On Wedneſday morning then I took poſt, and went to Rowe, where I arriv'd about four — wa pci
of the clock in the afternoon , having ſent ihe Caprains Lnſſan, Blacon, and St; Anban to Rane.
ſtay for me at Civita Vechiaz Monkfiear de Strozzy having given them leave for four
months, the reſt remain'd with the faid Signeur; The Cardinal of « Armagnac lodg'd
me in his own Palace, and I was receiv'd with as much honor by all the Kings Miniſters,
as any Gentleman could be. They had already heard of my coming ont of Sienna, the
Marquis having ſent word of it by an expreſs Courrier to the Cardinal his Brother, I there
found Monficur le Cardinal of Gaiſe, and the Duke of Ferrara, the Father of this char
now 15, being yet there ſince the creation of Pope Zarcellinus. His Holineſs asked the
Cardinal of Gaife if T was arriv'd, as he had been told, to which the Cardinal making
anſwer, that I was, he entreated him co bring me to him, for he had a great defireto ſee
me. The Cardinal found me at che Ambaſladors Monfieur d* Avanſon, where he told
me that I muſt goto his Holineſs, who had a defire to ſee me, and Monſieur d' Avanſon
lent me his own Coach. I found che Pope newly got up, and ſet ina Chair by his Bed fide,
ſo ill thar he had much ado to ſpeak : but nevertheleſs he entertained me with very great
favour. I told him thac I would not now crouble his Holineſs with diſcourſe, buc thar
I hoped God would in two er three daies reſtore him co his health, and char then T would
come and give him an account how all things had paſled at Sienna, He then told me thar
he had already been informed of me, bur chat he ſhould be glad co hear it again from my
own mouth ; adding theſe words, That I might [ay never any man, of what Nation ſvever,
had ever had ſs much intereſt, love, and eſteem among the Siennois as 1. I then took my
leave thac I mighr not be a crouble co him, and rerurning back found the Cardinal de Gxiſe
ſtill ac the Ambaſſadors, co whom T ſaid, that they might again go enter the Conclave to
chooſe another Pope, for chac this by ro-morrow nightwould not bealive, and my words
prov'd true ; for the next day abour Veſpers he died , and the day afterI took leave of x4, yeah of
all my friends, and went to Clvita Vechia , which was on Fridayy and upon Saturday Pope Maree!
morning by break of day I wenr aboard. The pomps, pleaſures, delights and curioſities linxs.
of this Ciry could not derein me a day longer, conceiving I might elſewhere be ſerviceable
co the King my Maſter. Oneching I muſt needs ſay, though it be in my own commen-
dacionz that as I paſſed along the ſtreets, and going to the Caſtle of Sr. Angelo, every one
ran to the windows, and to their doors to ſee the man thar had ſo long detended Sienna.

Which only ſerv'd ro enflame my courage the more to acquire more honor ; and though
I had fcarce money to carry me home , I fancied my (elf as rich as the greateſt man in
France,

'Abour break of day we fer fail, with as good a wind as wecould defire, and in the
cloſe of the evening came to Capocorea, we there came to an Anchor, and two hours before
day paſſed the ſtraight berwixr Sardignia and Corſica, and about nine of the clock in che
morning came to Bonificaio, where was Monhieur de /a Hofte. I had heard ar (vita Ves
chia, that Prince Asria was gone towards Piombino with three or four thouſand Soldiers,

Z which

— ——cC ui. FEET oO

Bans "_
q © ICI
Ol

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book ll],

Monſicur de
Teymes before
Calty,

Two and fifty
Galleys of
Prince Aria,

which he had embarked in two and fifty Galleys, and rhat he went to fight Monſieur de
Termes, who was battring Calvy, This intelligence was the reaſon that T went to Bonificais,
ro give notice of it to the ſaid Sicur de 1a Mille, who immediately thereupon ſent away to
the ſaid Sicur de Termes, and ſo ſeaſonably, that he was ſcarce riſen in time to avoid bein
ſurpriz'd, and was conſtrain'd, as he himſelf told me finee, to tumble three pieces of Ca-
non into the Sea, which he afterwards went to fiſh our again, I theredid him a good
turn, and a good piece of ſervice for the King my Maſter. You who bear arms, and haye
a defire to ſerve your Princes well, have eyermore an eye to every thing that concerns
them, to give notice of every thing that you conceive conducing to their ſervice, I haye
£nown ſome ſuch good friends, ' as haverejoyced ar the miſcarriage of cheir Companions,
chinking to augment their own glory by their diſgrace : I never did ſo, nor would I doir
to the greateſt Enemy I had in the world. Of this I could produce great and notable
exemples; burT paſs them by to return to my buſineſs. The Baron dela Garde lay alfoin
a Sca-port near unto the place where Monſicur de Termes was, and had ſpeedy intelligence,
chat prince Awuria's Fleet was our at ſea, bur he knew not where, however ſnſpeRing the
worſt, he ſpeed1'y hoiſt ſail, making direaly for Marſeillers which was the cauſe of Mon-
fieur de Texmes his ſafery ; for as Prince Amria thought ro have ſurpriz'd the Baron de la
Garde in this Haven where he lay, he had intelligence that he was gone away not above
five or fix hours before, which made him to follow after, ſteering the ſame courſe (which
was upon the ſame Saturday, that I had the good gale of wind) and purſued him as far
2s the Ifles Dijeres, The Baron without ſtaying held on his courſe towards Mfar/cies, and
it was well he did fo, for had he ſtayed at rhe Iſlands he had been trufſed , foraſmuch as
he had no more chan fourceen or fifteen Gallies. 1 departed from Monſieur de 1a ole up-
on Sunday abour ten of the clock, and of all day could make no way, the wind being con-
erary : but about two hours before day the ſame wind we had upon Saturday before re=
turn'd, and we ſer forward, it being Monday morning.

About break of day I asked the Knight, it they had no bigger ſails, who told me, theſe
were the largeſt they had, enquiring of me why I asked chat queſtion, and whether I
had a mind to make more haſte, to which I made anſwer that I had, whereupon he pre-
ſently clapt a ſail upon the Miſſen, and abour break of day there fell a great miſt, which
continued t1ll the Sun grew precty high, that it began to diſperſe : the Watch then from
the Main>top began to cry our a ſail, a ſatl, and preſently after a Galley, a Galley, at which
the Knight cold me, that they could be no other than exther Prince Azria, or the Baron
de laGarde. : When the miſt ſuddenly clearing up we ſaw our ſelves in the middle of
rwo and fifry Galleys, whereof fourteen thar were ſeparated from the reſt of the Fleec
ſteered their courſe toward Sardignia, and we were berween them. Every onein the Gal-
ley then began to deſpair ; the Pilots would make for the Coaſts of Barbary to eſcape z
the Maſter was not of this opinion, but rather that we ſhould make forwards by force of
Oars and Sails : St. Auban and che ocher Captains werein the greateſt fright thac poſſibly
could be, ſaying, that being newly come our of ſo great an extremity as the Siege of Slenna,
chey were upon the point ro be reduc'd ro chat misfortune, as to ſee themſelves chain'd co
the Oar, which rather than to undergo, they had far better die with their ſwords in their
hands, What face ſoever I might ſet upon the matter, I was in no mach better hearc
than they, and would have been glad to have been planting Cabages. On a ſudden four
of the fourteen began to turn their prows to fall upon us, whilſt the ochers in the mean
time ſtroke ſayl to ſtay for them 3 and as the other had made all the ſail they could to come
upon us with all cheir Oars amain, the heads of cheir Galleys were juſt over againſt our
Cook-room. Now the Knight all chis while nor ſpeaking one word , whilſt every body
in che Galley was crying out in a miſerable confuſion, I ſaid co him, © Knight, you ſeem
to loſe your ſelf ; you have been bred with one of the braveſt men that ever went to Sea, which
was the Prior of Capua ; to which he made anſwer, Vo me perde, no me perde per Dio : mas
jo gardo la mie. The Enemies Gallies in che mean time came within a Harquebuz ſhot to
encloſe us, and then the Knight running from Poop to Prow, encouraged every one, making
them co row amain, inſomuch that when they thought ro have hemm'd us in, we were
got above fifty paces before them, and began to beſtow upon chem ſome Harquebuz ſhor.
They purſued us abour half a league ; burby reaſon of our three ſails, rogerher with our
fear that lent ns wings, it ſeem*d as if our Galley flew before rhem, ſo that they preſencly

gave us over, and tack'd about, and our Seamen plyed them with their courteous kind of

language, every one ſtriving who ſhould pay them moſt wich railing; and chus by the
great diligence of our Seamen, we in deſpite of them eſcap'd. Towards night the wind
began fo to flacken , and change upon us, that we could nor get to Marſeilles till Tucſ-
day ſupper time, where we found che Conm de Tande, the Connteſs, and the Baron de

la

Book IT. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France, | ; _.*

la G arde ar ſapper in the Garden of Monſieur Blancart, who were all aſtoniſh'd to ſee me,
having made acconnt that I was dead, and Sizmna (ack'd and burnt down to che ground ;
for they being in Corfica had heard news day by day from Romania, that I was at the laſt
extremity without any hopes of compoſition ; the Baron de la Garde had been confidenr
in this belief all the while he was with Monſieur de Termes in Corfica, and alſo after he
was come back to Mar ſeiller, and that I would play a deſperate game at my coming out,
jn caſe the Marquis would not give me ſuch conditions as I would have. Ochers ſaid
chat I had loſt my underſtanding, and that God would puniſh me for my great temerity
and folly. They were talking of me juſt as I entred into the Garden, but they would
not letme tell them any thing cill T had ſupp'd, for they had almoſt done. I had ſoon
diſpatch'd, for I was forbid ro eat much afcer I had faſted ſo long, which I think was
the death of very many after they came our ; for nature muſt by lictle and lictle be-com-
poſed, and reſtor'd to her nſual habie, I afterwards gave them an account from point
co point of all chat I had done, which they choughr very ſtrange, The Baron was very
much aſtoniſh'd when I told him, that Prince Auria had purſued him as far as the Ifles
Dieres, giving God thanks that he had not yielded ro the imporcunity of choſe he had
with him, who would have perſwaded him to caſt Anchor ar the Iſlands, and gave Mon-
feur de Termes for loſt, or at leaſt all his Artillery : bur T cold him, char npon my incel-
ligence Monſieur de Molle had diſpatch'd away to him in all diligence to give him no-
tice, The next day Idiſparch'd away the Sieur dr Lecsfſan ro che King, to give his Ma- -
jeſty norice of my arrival, forthe Count had cold me, that che King was very much diſ- The King dif-
fatisfied wich me, for ſuffering my {elf to be reduc'd ro the laſt morſel, by reaſon where- ſatisfied with
of he could expect no other than the loſs of me, and the ruine of the City, upon which © Sicur de
depended all his reputation in taly. See what hazards we run to ſerve theſePrinces ! but nie
chere is no remedy, they are born to command, and we to ſerve and obeys and God
knows if T had noc cauſe ro complain to be ſo abandon'd, and lefr a prey ; bur *cis all one
they think it yer too much honor for us to die in their Qarrels, The Baron mightily
preſſed me to {end chicher , and moreover made Lec»ſſan promiſe him to ride night and
day, which he did. I ſtayd with them until Friday morning, tha I rook poſt and came
to St, Matharin the gth or the 10th of May, where I found che ſaid Sieur de Lecxuſſan,
who ſtaid there to tell me the great joy the King was in when he heard che whole ſtory,
his Majeſty wondring at my fortune, and ſaying to every one, that he thoughc me the
moſt fortunate man upon earth, after ſuch and ſo long a Siege, and without hopes of relief,
to come ſo honorably away, eſpecially having to do nor only wich the Emperor, but alſo
with the Dake of Florence, who defir'd to be reveng'd of the Siennois, He looked alſo up-
on the eſcape I had by Sea, out of the clutches of Prince Anria, for a ſingular good for-
rune, The next morning I was at the riſing of Monſieur de Gaiſe,- who could never have
his fill of embracing me, and led me to the Kings Bedschamber, who was yer in Bed, bur
awake. Arthis entring into the Chamber he began co cry our aloud, leading me in by the
hand, Sir, here is your loſt nan, and I chen drew near to kiſs his Majeſtie's hands, who
embrac'd me wich both his arms, holding my head co his boſom ; almoſt as long as one
might be ſaying a Pater nofter, ſaying to me twice whilſt he held me in this poſture. |
O Monſieur de Montince, you are infinitely welcome, I never thought to have ſeen you more, The Sicur de
ro which 1 made anſwer, that God had preſery'd me to do his Majeſty yet once in my life Montluc wives
one good piece of ſervice, He ſaid he believ'd ir, and was afſur*d that I would nor ſpare © nr
my life to doit ; whereupon he again embrac'd me, and chen ſtarr our of his bed. I chen
retired my {lf to the appartment the Vice-Chamberlain by his Majeftie's order had ap-
pointed for me, as well ſatisfied with the gracious countenance of my Maſter, as if he had |
given methe nobleſt Preſent; for I have ever been proud, and 'cis natural for me to be The Gaſcony
ſo, being a Gaſcon. Thisalone had been ſufficient co have made me have gone chrough Proud.
impoſſibilitics. The Cardinal of Lorrain, and the Conſtable were ar this time at Ardres,
creating a Peace betwixt the Emperor and the King.

After, when his Majeſty had din'd, about one of che clock he retir'd into the Gallery,
Monſieur de Gziſe only being with him, where he was pleaſed to call for me, and ſo ſoon
as I was enter'd Monfieur de Gwiſe ſhut to the door. Afﬀrer which his Majeſty would The Sicut de
have me co give him an account ar large of all che particulariries of chis Siege, from che #ontluc makes
firſt day I eucer'd into Sienna, to the laſt, which made the ſtory concinne ſo long, that ® Narrarive to
the Captains who were come along with me, and waited withouc upon the Terrats, rold ol hen
me that chey heard the clock ſtrike five times whilſt I was in the Gallery wich the King. j, © We
He was very much delighted with the order I rook abonc the retrenchment of che bread,
and che manner after which I did ut, together with the Remonſtrances I made to the
Caprains, and co the Senate. He was alſo mighcilypleaſed with the refolucion I had raken

Z 2 _”

164. The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize |
rogive the Marquis batrail in the City, and above all chings with che order I had drawn
in reference to it, which was at that time much freſher in my memory, than it is now,
and was printed in Italy 3 and I remember the laſt ime I recurn'd our of Taſcany the
Duke of Urbin told me at Peſero, that he had ic by him, and had never in his life read
any thing that pleaſed him ſo much as that, lis Majeſty would alſo chat I ſhould make a
Narrative of it in writing, which I did and whereof he diſtributed ſeveral Copies to divers
Governors, and one I remember he cauſed to be ſent to Jariambonrg, where the Mareſs
chal de Coffee commanded, or elſe Monſieur de Fumel, He expreſſed a great ſenſe of piry
when he heard the buſineſs of turning our the nſeleſs mouths, and in concluſion was'pleaſed

A queſtion of tg ask me two queſtions. The firſt was,how I could make the four Nations, mortal enemies

a I : Fg co one another, agree ſo well rogether ; for all of them in general, ashe had been told, had

Motos: behay*d themſelves ſo exceedingly well to one another, without the leaſt diſorder, that they

could not poſſibly have done it better : A thing that every one looked npon as a miracle,
ſ{o much as rhe Emperor himſelf, wondring I could compoſe theſe people after this man-
ner (the t2/tans themſelves, who came our of 7taly reporting it to him) as an unheard

His pleaſanr of thing. To which I made anſwer, thar I had found 1t a very eafte matter, and (being
Aniner, I ſaw he had a mind to hear it, and that I ſaw he took a delight in my Narration) I told
him,thac I went one Sacurday into the Market, where in the fight of all the people T boughc
a Sack, and a little Cord to tye it with, together with a Fagor, all which having before
them all laid upon my Shoulder, when I came to my Chamber I call'd for fire co lighc
my Fagot, and after took the Sack, and there putinto it all my ambition, all my avarice,
my particular hatreds, my letchery, my glatcony, my ſloth, my partiality, my envy, my
particularitics, and all my Gaſcon humours, and to be ſhort, all thac I conceiv'd might
hinder me from conſidering every thing I was to do 1n order co his Majeſties ſervice 3 and
told him moreover, thac if all his Miniſters ro whom he entruſted the commands of
men and places would do the ſame, his Majeſties affais could not bur proſper ; for my
mind was ever free and undiſturbed with any thing that might hinder me from conſider
ing whatI had todo, and bring abour my deſign, which was never to go out of chat
place but with the laſt morſel in my mouth; and I willſay moreover, that whoever ſhall
ſtrip chemſelves of che forementioned vices, and burn them, God will ever be affiſting to
chem, who favouring our deſigns, we cannot fail roeffet whatever we have a mind to
undertake. For God ever goes along with ſuch people, and on the contrary abandons
thoſe who do not ſerve their Maſters after this manner, becauſe they forfeic the Oath they
have taken, having ſworn loyally and faithfully to ſerve him, which no man can pofſibly
do rereining theſe vices. His Majeſty laughed at my diſcourſe, commanding me to tel
him onething, and to cell him true, co which I made anſwer, chat I would no more ly

Another que- to him than I wonld ro God Almighty, He then asked me whether Monfieur de Strozz-

Kion of the could nor have reliev'd me if he:would ; for his Miniſters at Remve had ſeveral times ſen?

King's ro the hjm word, that he was in a capacity to do it, and that ir only ſtuck ac him that was nor®

wg de Moitt= .ljev*d > To which I anſwer'd, chat his Majeſty asked me a thing himſelf was better able

: to reſolvechan T., Howcan that be ſaid he, ſecing I have not been upon the place ? Sir,
ſaid I, you Kings and Princes have ſo long ears, that you hear every thing that is done,
though you be a hundred leagues off : notwithſtanding I cold him chat his Majeſty being
engaged in Scotland, at Calice, at Mariamboarg, and other neighbouring Caſtlesz at Metz,

Book, Il],

and Piedmont, and in (orfica, he ought better ro know than I, whether after having pro- -

vided all things neceſſary tor all rheſe places, wherein his honor was engaged, he had been in
The Sicur de a condition to {end money to the ſaid Sieur de Strozzy wherewith to raiſe a ſufficient Army
Montluc Jaſtis of horſe and foot to fight ſo great forces as the Marquis had before Sienna; which if his
_ mo—_ Majeſty had not becn able co do, how conld he imagine Monſieur de Strozzy ſhould re-
the King, lieve me, who had not a man to make head againſt the Spaniards and Germans ? That
of Italsans it was true, he might have had but too many : but that had been no equal
match : thar Monlicur de Strozzy was full of courage, and very affeionate to his ſervice;
bur that no one could flye without wingsz and that three ſeveral times he had run very
excat hazards for his ſervice, of which I alſo gave him a particular account. His Majeſty
then rold me, that he was ſatisfied with my anſwer, and that he believ'd Monkfieur 'de
Strozzy to be his ſervant, and roo much a man of honor to be any way infaule; making
me thereupon very many excuſes, for that having been engaged in ſo many places ac once,
it had not been polſible for him co ſend an Army into Jtaly to the ſaid Sieur de Strozzy
ſtrong enough to raiſe che Siege, and to give che Marquis bactail., Why then Sir, ſaid 1,
you are neicher to blame Monkeur de Strozzy, nor your felt, both of you having done all
chat lay in your power, , buc chis will reach you another time to look berter to your affairs.
This was a charity had been done the ſaid Monhieurde Strozzy, who was as much con-

cera'd

4 — ES

goox Ill de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fraiice. ” ”

” —

cern'd as the King, and more abourthe loſs of Sienna, for the hatred he bore to the Dake

of Florence. After we had ended our diſcourſes his Majeſty went out to look the Queen,

and Madam de Savoy that now is, to whom he repeated all that Thad ſaid co him, eſpecial-

ly that about Monſieur de Strozzy, which the Queen was very glad of, and the next day

did me the honor to give me thanks for the office of friendſhip I had done Monſieur de

Strozzy, who wasa concern of hers, I had no reaſon to do otherwiſe, for beſides thar I

had lied, Thad a particular-honor for him, and it was juſt I ſhould have ſo, foraſmuch

as helov'd and eſteem'd me more than any Gentleman that ever came our of Gaſcony. | i
This was upon Monday and upon Tweſday, Madam de Valentinos told me, that ſhe had reg de V4

never known any man return from an employment with whom the King was better ſatisfied OngT

chan he was with me, and that he did highly commend me. Which whether or no ſhe

{aid to Alatter m2, I cannot ſay : but ſhe better knew then any other, for ſhe had very

much gain'd the King's heart, and rold-me that T was very happy. As Iwas talking

with her, the King came, and pur me again upon ſome paſſages of my voyage, Now I

had there the Patent and Declaration the Senate had given me under their broad Seal ;

wherein was declar'd, that I would never conſent to the Surrender of Sienna, nor Capi-

-vlate in the name of che King : bur alſo thar they call'd me to witneſs , whether chey

would ever hear of any Capitulation, till they were reduc'd to the utmoſt extremity, and

the laſt morſel of bread. His Majeſty took the Parent, and readir ; after which heask'd

me, Why I would not Capiculace for my felf and the Souldiers, telling me thache won-

dred the Marquis did not defeat me at my coming out. To which I made anſwer, Thar The reſolutier

-- was for two Reaſons, whereof one was, that Thad madea reſolution never to ſurren- of the vicur dz

der any place 3 butrather ro dye, and that the nameof CMontlac ſhould never be found Montiuc,

co 2 Surrender or a Capitularion, having never put my (elf into a Town to deliver it up,

but to defend it to the laſt moment of my life, as I had ſent word to the Marquis by

Signior Cornelso and Captain Charry. The other Reaſon why 1 would not Capitulate

was, that in caſeeither His Majeſty, or any of his Succeſlors, ſhould hereafter reconquer

Sienna, and that the Sijennoz ſhould fortifie themſelves with his protetion, as they had

done before, he might herein be left free ro his own liberty and difcretion. Por they

could not ſay, that his Lieutenant CHontluc had conſented to their Surrender, and that

His Majeſty ought nor to quit his own intereſt ; nor that of choſe who wereto ſucceed

him to the Crown of France, The chances of War, Sir, ſaid I, are diversand variable.

Millan and Naples have been the one twice, the other three times 18 our poſſeſſion, and

Sienna may be ours again. I have done nothing to prejudice your title, His Majeſty

lik'd my Reaſon fo well, chat he remain'd very well ſatisfied, commanding me tolay up

che Parenta moneſt the Records of my Family , that it might be preſerv'd for ever.

Madam de Valentinozs then put in, and ſaid, that the Archives of a private Gentleman,

was not ſo ſecure, as the Treaſury of a King, and that if this Patent was of ſo great im-

porcance, his Majeſtic might do well to cauſe it to be laid up in his. He chen took it on

of my hand, and gave 1t to one of his Gentlemen, or elſe ro Madam de Falentinozs to

deliver it to Monſieur le Garde de Sceaux, who fince was Cardinal of Sens, command-

ing him to lay it up 1n his Treaſury, amongſt the Evidences of the Crown. This cannoc

be above ſixteen or ſeventeen yearsago 3 So that if it would pleaſe the King his Son, who

now reigns, to command Monſieur de Fizes, who was at that time Secretary to the

Cardinal, to ſearch for the Patent, I am confident it would -be found, I would T had

given 5e0 Crowns for a Duplicare of ir, char I might have {ach a Record of my elf,

and inſert it inmy Book. For that will teſtifie that I came our of Sjemna with Colonrs

flying, Arms ſhoulder'd, and Drums beating, without any Capitulation ar all. A ching

not to be found inany Hiſtory, that ever any man did the like, So that no one ought

co think it ſtrange, that I ſo much deſire a Copy of that Patent; neither ought the

King fo much to deſpiſe it, asto be out of hopes one day ro make ir uſeful ro him, and

His Maxlty ought rather co be carious than I co haye it ſought out ; for he 1s the moſt

concern'd. |
The day following being Wedneſday, Monſicur de Gaiſe in the evening told me, thac

His Majeſty was the nexc day reſolv'd to give me the Order 3 which 1n choſe times was ſo

noble aching, and ſo much ſoughc for, char the greateſt Prince in France would not have

been ſatisfied wichour it, and would rather the King ſhould never conter any honor up-

on him, chan deny him that for ic was chena mark of honor, that was not fo profay'd

as itis now adays. The next day then, being Thwrſday in the morning, the King was The Sicur ds

pleas'd to honour me wichir, and afcer dinner I begg'd leave of him, that 1 might g0 co Mentluc

Paris , to put my {elf into ſome collerable Equipage , for that 1was too torn and cace 35* Knight

rer'd for a new Knight of che Order. He was pleas'd at the firſt word to grant me leave, *# the Orgars

and

y—_

165 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox [[f,

and before I went gave me an allowance of three chouſand Francs in Penſion our of the
Exchequer, and three thouſand Livers Revenue our of his Demeaſn, wherein the County
of Guare, where part of my own eſtate lies, was compriz d, and Bregezrac made up the
reſt. T ewo years enjoy'd No County, but not Bregeyrac, foraſmuch asit was mortgag'd
before, I very much defir'd to diſengage it, becauſe Monfieur de Falence my Brother
had a Priory there, and had rather have ſettled himſelf 'in Perigort,, than any other part
of France, If I could have doneir, I ſhould very welb haye: prevented the Roguery
Recompences that has been hatch there ſince, His Majeſty alſo gave me two chouſand Crowns in ready
given by the money, bidding me moreover ask him any thing elſe that I wanted. I then asked him
King re the two Councellors places in the Parliament of Thowlenze, to help to raiſe my daughter's
Sicur de Mozt= Portion, whom I married to Monſieur de Fontenilles, Monſieur de Y alence having ſent me
_ inſtruQtions from Parts to ask thac of the King, of which I ſhould ſooner raiſe money
than of any other thing. His Majeſty was pleaſed ar the firſt word to give me this alſo,
and Witch this money I married my ſaid daughter, together with ſome liccle more that my
wife had. His Majeſty moreover promiſed me the firſt Company of Geng d' Arms thac
ſhould become vacant, I had nor the firſt, .nor the ſecond, bur I had the third ; for
Kings promiſe ſo much, that it is not poſſible for thera co keep their words with all. This
vacancy hapned after my return from Afontalſin, the ſecond time his Majeſty had ſenc
me beyond the Mountains, and was the Company of Monſieur de 1a Guiſh. Theſe were
the benefics I receiv*d from the King at that time , which were no ſmall ones., and in
bricf I had whatever T defir'd. lam ſure fince the death of this good Prince my Maſter
] havea hundred times wiſh'd my own, conſidering the craverſes have been given me,
The good nas and the croſſes 1 have had, Ir had not been in the power of mankind ro have done me
rure of King wrong if he had liv'd, for he never forgot any ſervices, let them be never ſo inconſidera-
Henyy the Ie= ble , neither was it in the power of calumny to take away his good opinion from any one
mn that did him good ſervice. And on the contrary when any one fail'd in his duty, what
good countenance ſoever he might ſhew them, our of complacency to ſuch as would dif-
poſeſs him of che ill opinion he had conceiv*d, it never came from his heart , as the Ma-
reſchal de St. Azdre has often affur'd me, who told me his humour. He was very famili- -
ar with him, and underſtood him very well. Five or fix daies after, his Majeſty came to
Paris, where I ask'd leave of him to go home to my own houſe, to ſee my family, which
he freely granted, I ſhall never conceal the benefits, and che honor my Maſters have

conferr'd upon me, that being only worthy, and becomming a mean and dircy nature,
and an unerateful heare,

The End of the Third Beok.

| - THE

__
COMMENTARIES

Mefoire Blaixe de Montlac,

MAaxrEsSCUHAL of

FRANCE.

he.
A CC

The Fourth Book.

Had ſcarce been three weeks at my own houſe,when His Majelty The King's
diſpatch'd a Courrier to me, commanding meforchwith co repair command eo
to him wherever he was, without reply, or ſtaying for any other tbe Sicur de
command : which I preſently did, having ſcarce fezn my houſe Montlue.
and my friends: But Glory z a notable ſpur. At my arrival His

Majeſty told me, that I muſt of necellity go inco Piedmont to

Monſficur de Briſſac, who had ſent to demand me to command

the Foot, ma king account that to relieve S. Fago, where Monſieur de

Bonnivet was (hut ups he muſt be forc'd ro come to a Battel: Two

days after T had my diſpatch, che King manifeſting grear tokens of Friendſhip co me,

and to be very well ſatisfied with my ſervice. I found Monſieur de Briſſac at Turin

very ill of the Goutz and the next day went to ſeek our Monſieur d' Aumale, who Monſicur d
commanded the Army art $, Valant near Viplany which confilted of five thouſand foot, Aumale com!
a thouſand men at Arms, and twelve hundred Light Horſe. The King at my going 9404s the Az
away, gave me a Courſer of his own, which wasan exceeding good one, and which 1 *?*
ordered with my Train to follow after me, for I went poſt, The ſame day thatI came

to Monſieur d' Azmale, I would go to take a view of Vipian, in order to a fhege ; for che

Dukeof Alvahad made a fool of the work, and quitred S, Fago ; and the ſaid Sicur d'

Aumale lent me alittle grey Nag, I went chen in open day co diſcover the place, wich»

in leſs then fifty paces of che wall ; for I would ler them fee, thar for having been

lately with my Wife, I had forgor-nothing of what I was wont to do. This diſcove-

ry was made in the fight of Monſieur d' Aumale, and ſeveral ochers : where ar my re-

rurn 1 gave him fo good an account, that he found I had cold him the ruth of all,

The nexc day he drew parc of the Army toward the Caſtle, where the Enemy had caſt

up a great Placform, environed with a large ditch, wich a * Tenaille chat covered the * A Tenaille
Caſtle, and betwixt che Tenaille and che Caſtle, there was fourſcore paces or more z in i* 3 kind of
which ſpace chey had moreover caſt up a Trench in the middle, co the end, thar in cafe Fin eaten
chey ſhould loſe che head of this grear Baſtion and Tenaille, betore chey could per to the © ts LY
Caſtle, chey might recire ro chis Trench, Monſheur 4 Aumale had at this time for En- Pincers,
2incers Danoand Balaſergues, who began their Trenches above five hundred paces from

the Town, where they found the earch fo full of lictle flints, that a hundred men could

not caſt up ewenty paces of Trench in a day, and che faid Monſieur d' Aumale ſpent

ewo days in this kind of work. I was very much diſcontented char they would not do The Sicge
as I would have them ; buc inthe end Monſicur d' eAwmale was reſolved himſelf ro ſee in Sep-15 95
what I would counſel him to do, fo that an hour after day-lighr, we went on that fide

by the corner of the Town on the lefc hand, and behind a liccle Chappel,, which was

within fifteen or twenty paces of the Counterſcarp, He rook no ſoul living wich him

|
J
|
|
J
il
185
i .

TD I INES non
DR On ie OA ”

bur

a —_—_—  — —_——_ —_ —_ _ ——_—J@©ſlw — ww. C-. won 2a A4A& <i>

PRSOPE
a 0” Goes a ARR =

EECR__ _ ____x_ GERT ET AAeAOAOHS FC... +. . «© 6 ——_ ww. DS.
"—- T _ OY, nn
8 NO ESI Pr WE STII” 9.

tw

The Commentaries of Mefhire Blaize Book LY.

Wn lizur ol”
Aumale goes

but me and Fegzirres,. whoas I have been told, has fince fac*d abour to the Houle &:
Guiſe, though the ſaid Seigneur ſhewed him as much favour and reſpe@, as any Ge
tleman abour hum. Monſicur 4 Armale and I went upon che Connterſcarpe, and Fe-
quieres went underneath, where we meaſured how much of che Counterſcarpe we wer:

hiaſel{ ro diſ- to cut, to plant the Artillery upon the brink of the Ditch 5 and to diſcover allo it chi

COYCT,

Enemies Harquebuzeers might not ſee into the Recoil of the Canon, and usalſo, ſhould
we lodge on the other fide of the Counterſcarp, We went upon it, and all along by

the Dirches above fixſcore paces, and whiſpering to one another, paſt by two of their
Cenrinels, without bcing queſtioned by them : lo chat had we brought two Ladders with
2s, Monficur 4 Aumale would have cempted Fortune , to have ſeen what would haye
been the iſſue (for the ofcen preſents her ſelf, when we leaſt dream of any ſuch marter)
and when we came to the third Centinel, he call'd our and wak*d the reſt, who as Þ
believe were certainly aſleep, which made the ſaid Seigneur and me retire rowards the
Ittie Chappel, mach bercer accompanied at our return, than when we went, bur it was
witn good round volleys of Harquebuze ſhot, ſo that we were conſtrained to run into the
Chappel, the backſide of which Feqaleres recover'd. Now this Chappel was open to-
wards the Town, and thar part co which che door had been hung, when it had one, was

The danger of 2 ſquare pillar of ſtone, about the chickneſs of a man that was not very groſs, and the

Monſieur d*

Harquebuze {hot put ns in ſuch haſte, that Montcur a” eAumale was ftorc'd on atudden

Aumale and tbe (© clap behind this pillar bole nprighr, and Tbehind him, for all the Chappel befictes wa:

Stcur de Mot-
tac.

Chipi Camp-
Maſter,

open. In my lifeI never heard {o grear Harquebuze thots ; I know nor whether i: was
not our fear, that maderthem icem ſo, but I am ſure there was good cauſe to be atraid

Tl ; ; : - 9
for the Bullers almoſt continually ſlapr againſt the pillar with which Monſieur d' Auma!ls
ſhelcer'd himſelf : He ſerv*d me for a ſhield, and I held myhcad and my body cz» £6
him. They kept nschere above a long half hour befieg'd, and 3c is moſt certain iliy trac!

heard us; for vvhen vyve vvere enter'd into the Chappel, vve beard Ghiem in Span

wesk © 4 4} & 4

cry out, Iuro a Dios ellos ſon en 14 Capillia, is los & eatendides, Tionlicur d' famnle hay

ofren ſince talke ro me of the frights we were zn ; for I do verily belicen that above a
hundred Harquebuzeers came to take aim at as, they ailo chrew wiſps of faming tray
into the dicch, char they might aim the better. Fe were in a fine caſe, ſaid Monſieur 4”
Armale, ſhould they ſally out upon us. Sir, ſaid I, thoſe of the houſe ef Lorrain were ne-
ver ſo unhappy as to be taken skalking : neither will the rule of War permit thews to ſally
out, without knowing what we are : We have here a good Buckley of Barcellona : All this
while the bullets clatter'd againſt the ſtones, and it was convenient for us to tweak in
our buttocks. Fequieres play'd here one very ſenſele(s trick ; for not knowing where we
were, he whiſtled to call to us, which I believe was the reaſon they ſhor {o very long.
In the mean time the Alarm run quite thorow the Town, and in the cnd they grew as
weary of ſhooting, as we wereof being ſhor at, and ſo we walk'd out and found Fe-
quieres behind the Chappel, who had made a cunninger choice of his retreat chen we,
and there Monſieur 4' Aumale concluded the night following to bring the Artillery to
the edge of the graft, and all our Enſigns. And there I got the viftory of the En-
gincers, who ſaid, that all our men would be kilFd there, and that we ſhould be forc'd
to quit the Canon; and hereupon by good fortune arriv'd Monſieur de Caillzc, In the
morning Monſieur d' Aumale in my preſence told him all we had ſcen over night, and
ſent Fequieres along with him, togo to diſcover behind the Chappel : tor the ſame njgher
the ſaid Seigneur had appointed two Enſigns, that lay a great way from the Chappel,
to go and immediately ro encamp themſelves' juſt behind it. The befieg'd commuted
there a great incongruity, for they ought not to have contented themſelves with laying
the Chappel open only, bur they ought moreover to have raz'd it to the ground. Mon-
fieur de Cailfac at his return was of our opinion z whereupon Monfieur d' Aumale per-
mitted Monſieur de {aillac and me to go and carry alone with us the Pioneers ro cur
the Counterſcarpe, ordering D#no and Balaſergrcs to bring the Canon after, and causd
a Gabionnade alſo to be made in the Meadow, ſome forty or fifty paces from the Coun-
terſcarp, wherein to lodge the powder : fo that by break of day we had cur i:2 Coun-
terſcarpe, and the Artillery was planted in Battery fo near, that the very muiicl of the
Canon hung over the Graft. Beginning to batter, Monſieur de Bonnivete went to and fro
in the very face of the Baſtion, berwixt the Barcery and the place where Monſicur 2 Awu-
male was, and the Mareſchal de Cofſe did the ſame, Two nights betore we had cat up
the Trenches at the head of the Baſtion, which cover'd the Caſtle to apvroach tg the
Ditch, che Baron de Chipi, who was Camp-Maſter, pur his Soldiers into Camitado, and
threw himſelf headlong into the Ditch pel-mel amongſt chem, and gain'd rwo Cazamacrs
that flank'd the Ditch, killing thoſe chat were within chem, for they could nct x:tire s

ang

8 -VJ
q'{ 2
> 6

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Epdnes: : 169

and at che ſame inſtant. Monſieur 4' Aumale commanded the Engineers co mine at the head
of the Baſtion, which chey d1d, and made three. Monſicur de Coſſe chen ran to the Ba-
ſtion to fee if the Mines were ready , and fo recurn'd to Monſienr d' Aumale ro the Bat-
rery we were making. Eitherto I could make ho mention of Monſieur d Angnien , the Three Princes
Prince of Ceyde his Brother, and Monſieur de Nemonrs, they being only there ſor their ar this Sicge,
pleaſure, and without any command, being come poſt from Court, upon the report of a
Battail ſpeedily to be fought ; no one believing thar the Dake of Alva would have return'd
without ſtriking a blow : However they were never abſent from the work, and at the Aſ-
fault wenc on together, and Monſieur de Bonnivit with chem. There came along wich
chem ſeveral other Lords, and amongſt ochers Monlieur de Ventadonr, de Lade, de
I' Anſun, de Malicorne, anc de 1a Chaſtaigneray. Now two of the Mines wroughc a very
orcar effet; for chey overturn d almoſt all the trop of che Baſtion into the ditch, and in
the cloud of duſt thar was raifed, the Baron de Chipy, and che Captain with him upon the
ruine came to blows with fourſcore or a hnndred Spaniards (that were entred buc four
or five dayes before, but not without the loſs of a grear many of cheir men at their entry)
and two or three hundred more, all choice men, andcull'd our of all che Spaniſh Compae
nies 3 and there died there avove fourſcore 5 and our people moreover won from them che
Trench they had caſt up in the ſpace berwixc che Baſtion and che Caſtle, for chey would
have retir'd to cheir Trench, and ours followed ſo cloſe , that they encred with them.
They then attempted full ſpeed ro recover the Caſtle, bur he who commanded within it
would not Jet down the draw-bridge, fo tha there all che reſt were diſpatch'd. This was
che ſucceſs of the Baſtion, which was bravely carried. There was there ſlain Ceſar de Na-
ples, a Nephew of the Dake of Alvs, and among the Priſoners S1gnior Sigiſmondo de Gons
2-494, and Captain Lazaro, Lieutenant of the Duke of Alva's Guards, with ſeveral o-
chers, whoſe names I have forgot. I muſt now return to the breach, which co ſpeak
che truth was reaſonable enough. Ir was afſaulted at the ſame time with the Baſtion, as
it ought to be, where though all theſe Princes and Lords behav*d themſelves with very
orear bravery, mounting the breach themſelyes to encourage the Soldiers, yer did they
within gallantly defend ir, and ſent us back again very well beaten. Here w:s ſlain the
Count de Creance, and {eyera] others bore hira company z yer knowing what had been done
on the other ſide ir comforted us a little , and gave every one hope chat we ſhould bring
about our deſign. Being mounted upon che Plarform of the Bulwark which was lefr en-
rire, I ſent Dano to tell Monſieur 4' Aumale that he muſt lodge three or four pieces of
Canon upon this Platform, to thunder the Enemy in the Town ; which accordingly was
preſently done, ſo that jn the morning they all began to play.

= Iu

Here there is wanting ſeveral particularities of this Siege

writ by Monſiewr de Moncluac , as appears by the
{ixth Book.

This fo much sſtoniſh'd thoſe within , that they began to lay their hands upon their
hearts, and co parly. In che end che Capiculacion was concluded z and alfo for the Caſtle,
againſt which (ro ſave the Governor's honor) we made fifry Canon thor. In the mean time
news was -brought that Monſieur de Termes was coming in the qualicy of the Kings Lieu-
renant, which gave great occaſion of diſcourſe, and ſeyeral reaſons were by ſeveral men
given fot this change. The n:xt day about noon came a Secretary of the Mareichal de
Briſſac call'd Yerbin, with letters to all the Princes, wherein he excus'd himſelf, afluring
them cher chis command of Monſieur de Terwes did not proceed from him : And che aid
Verlin cold me from the Mareſchal , that he earneſtly entreated me to ſpeak co all rhe
Princes, that chey might not enrertain that opinion of him 5 which I did, chough per-
haps I had nor chat credic wich chem char ſeveral ochers had : but I know not how it came
ro paſs, I have ever had more chan I could hope for. Now you ſhall hear what was madeot
one word onely that I ſaid to this Yerbin, The thing I ſaid to him was this, that Monſieur
de Gonnort, de Goxrdon, and I conceiv'd che Mareſchal might do well co write co the King,
that his Majeſty would pleaſe for a few dayes to defer the coming of Monſfieur de Termesy
being char perhaps theſe Princes would make a difficulty of obeying a Gentleman (rhe ſaid
Sieur de Termes having as yet no other ritle) which might perhaps cauſe chem to leave che
Army, a thing they could not do without drawing ſo many people along with them, as
might be prejudicial to his ſervice. This was every ticcle of whar [ ſaid co him : bur chis The Sicur ge |
honeſt man went, and told the Mareſchal, thacT had flacly cold him, that I would nor Montluc's ad-
obey Monſicur de Termes, which God knows was the furtheſt end of my thought ; for I vice imiliater+
had formery obeyed him, and was not now ſohigh in the inſtep as to play che Prince, He Pi%**4:

a was

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book IV,

COVELCEds

rendred.

hang'd,

BYE The impor-
| cance of Mox-
Ii | calv0

(fs

The Sicuc de

mY Mortluc ora»
1 duc'd to the
Af King,

was ever a very great friend boch to me and to all my Brothers, and has as grear an eſtcem
for me if not greater, than any Gentleman of Gzjenve, and we have ever liv'd together at
this rate, |

This paſt after this manner, and we marched ſtraight to Moutcalvo, expeRting the ar-
rival of Monſieur de Termes, whocame to the Siege, and behav'd himſelf with great mo-
deſty ; for he was very diſcreet, and would never take upon him to command, We laid
Sicge to the Caſtle (for the Town was carried ar the firſt, neither indeed was it ſtrong ) and
batter'd by the baſe of a Baſtion on the right hand the Gare : bur it was impoſſible ro ds
any good by making a breach chere, foraſmuch as we muſt have {torm'd it with Ladders,

Moncaluo dif» {o that our people having made an attempt were repul('d, I went then in the night to»

diſcover the Ditch, and went {o far as under the very Draw-bridge, which was cloſe under
the Wall, to ſee if there were not a Flancker that defended the Gace, and found thar
there was one below, which played all along the Dirch : the Enemy chrew down fare-
works upon mie, and there hurt me a Serjeant of the Company or Monſieur de Liewx my
Brother; and yet we were no more than chree that entre into the Ditch.

At my return I conſulted with Monſieur de Caillac to place rwo pieces of Canon upon
the Counterſcarp, juſt overagainſt the Gate, ro che end thar we miehr ſhoor direRly againſt
the beams to which the chains were faſtned, that che draw-bridge might fall down, after
which we ſhould ſoon beat down the Gate on the inſide, We told all this to Monfieur
d Aumale, who gave us leave to do as we thought fic. The night following we lodg'd
rhe Gabions, and three pieces of Canon, which was done by one of theclock at night.
All the Princes came to (ce our work, and Monſieur 4 Angalen taking me abonrt the middle
{aid ro me, You have formerly been my Soldier, I will now be yours: Sir, (aid I, you are very
welcome, neither onght a Prince diſdain to play the Pioneer in time of need ; here is work for
you. Monſieur de Crſſe came preſently after , whom I rook by the hand, and led him to
ſee all that we had done, when after theſe Princes and Lords had ſeen all, hey recir'd
themſelves to repoſe till day, and I remain'd upon the place, In the morning when che
Captain of the Caſtle ſaw himſelf cooped up after chis manner, he began to ſound a Par-

Mozcaluo ſure Jey, and ſurrendred upon free quarcer, with bag and baggage, and liberty to draw away

a lirtle piece of Artillery to ſave his honor. The Capitulation being ſigned, he preſently
march*d,and went trajght to Pont d' Aſteare,where their Camp- Maſter Don Arbro lay,who

The Governor gave him no leiſure to enter any hoaſe to give an account of his fortunes bur immediately

hang'd him up, as he deſerv'd ; for at leaſt he ought to have enduar'd an aſſault, which if he
had, upon my word he had found usenough to do,

You who pur your ſelves into places, beware never ſo ſoon to enter into fear, and chough
your enemy may have playd his game very well, and that you have reaſon to ſuſpe& your
own condition to be dangerous enough ; yet if there be never ſo little poſſibility of de-
fending your ſelves, rouſe up your ſpirits, and do the beſt you can, entrench your ſelves
within, and conſider that your enemy 1s more afraid to atraque you, than you are to de-
fend your ſelves 3 for ir muſt be a very ill place indeed, if you have not ſome means to
wichſtand an Aſſault, ſeeing you durſt hold out a Battery, Do not think to ſave your
honors by carrying away a Flag, or ſome ſmall piece of Artillery, as chis Captain did : for
all this is of very little moment, and he who lies before you will eafily grant ſuch rifles
as theſe, provided he has hisend, 2nd you the loſs and ſhame, Do bur chink what ſor-
row and repentance this poor Captain , who ſo eaſily ſurrendred himſelf, had upon the
Gallows, and if chen he would not rather have choſen to have died inthe Breach. When
you have done all that men of honor can do , there 1s then no remedy, you muſt ſub-
mir.

The taking of this place was of very great importance, for CHontcalvs bridled and kept

in awe, not onely le pont d' Aſtnre, but alſo all che places upon the River Pau, and in the

plain of the Marquiſate of Montferrant , and moreover very much afſnr*d (azas/. The
Army taid there ſeven oreight daies, during which time news was brought to the Princes,
and to Monſicur d' Aumale, that the King was ſomething diſſatisfied ar the diſobedience I

made mention of before. I alſo was pur into the fine ſtorv , ſome honeſt man having

done me that good office, as to affirm that I was the Incendiary, and the greateſt Muti-
neer ofall, which (how falſe ſocver) was ſo far believ*d, that the Conſtable ſent me a ler-
ter, wherein he writ, chat che King had commanded him to ſend me word, that I ſhould
forthwith retire to my own houſe, and that he would nor I ſhould any more intermeddle
in this expedition, This did nor much aſtoniſh me, for I knew the King would do me
the honor to hear my juſtification : but the Mareſchal de Brifſac was however ſo kind as to
ſend his Brother Monſieur de Cofſe co Court, by whom he aſlur'd his Majeſty of che con-

trary to what he had been inform'd againſt me; wich which che King was facisfied, and

acquirred

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

11

acquitred me at my arrival ; (tor this occaſtion'd me a Journey to Court where his Maje-

ty received me with as much favour as ever, particularly enforming himſelf from me of A caution for
ſuch as bave
the privilege
ae] co talk with -
che Conſtable, or Madam de Falentinois would have known ir, and ſo from hand co hand their Princes

che affairs of Pledmont,and eſpecially abour the Princes in our Army,wich whom he was not
very well ſatisfied : but 1 had acare of prating roo much, for as much as I was ſure either

ir would have been carried about, char Montlac had been the Author. aa

O thata man char lives amoneſt the great ones had need to be diſcreet, and to carry
his cup Even ! Theſe cale-carriers have never any good meaning with them : chey would
have done as much by Monficur de Strozzy at my return out of [taly, and it was well for
methar I ſpoke diſcreetly of him 3 for both the Qucen and he cook it very kindly at my
hands : 1f you know any thing of importance co your Maſters ſafefy, or his ſervice, you
are obliged in fidelity and duty to give him notice of it; bur to go and rarile to him ſay-
ing, Sir, ſuch a one does nor do well, ſuch a one goes negligently about his buſineſs, ſuch
a one does this and that, you very well deſerve to have your throac cut : for greac per-
ſons are not to be talk'd of at that rate; and he that told che King I was the occaſion of the
diſorder in the Army, was no better than a Raſcal , for there was no' ſuch ching : ba 1c
1s no wonder people thould make ſuch ſtories of me who am but a poor Gentleman, when
they dare to ſlander Princes and others the greateſt Nobility of che Nation, Theſe are ordi-
nary things at Ccurc, and 'ris there a kind of trade ; foraſmuch as the depreſſion of one
is the advancement of another 2 they play at thruſ# ont the harlot, where the weakeſt go to
the walls. There is no remedy, a man muſt run chrough this inconvenience, for a good
heart cannot ſtay at home, and he that will warm himſelf, muſt either approach the fire,
or the Sun. Our Suns the King that illuminaces and warms us with his rates whereſoever

we are; if any one ſtep in before you, you muL arm your ſelves with patience, and che The Duke
Duke of Gaiſe his Motto Chacun a ſon tenr. _ his Mot:
Aﬀcer I had ſtaid ſome time at Court I took leave of his Majeſty, and retir'd home to ©

my own houſe, where I remained five or fix monerths in repoſe, and when [I was bufie a-
bour ordering the affairs of my Family (which I never had Iciſureto look into, ) his Ma-
jeſty diſpatched away a Courrier to command me to come poſt away to him, wricing to
me co {end away my Train ſtraight to Marſeilles, withour giving me the leaſt intimation
whither he intended to ſend me. I forthwith obeyed his command, for I was never reſty,
and being come to Court, I there found rwo Gentlemen of Sienna, who were come 1n

the behalf of cheir whole Country , co beſeech his Majeſty to ſend me to command them, Fay —_

: OY . - the King for
them, or did them any injury, bur by reaſon he had loſt ſome places belonging to their Monſieur de
State, though I believe MonGeur de Soubiz? had done all that in him lay, but no one takes Montluc to

any loſs whatever in good part, and all the world judges of things by the event, At my _—

making grear complaints of Monſieur de Soabize z not that he any way tyrannized over

arrival the King cold me thac I muſt return tro Montalſin to be his Lieurenant General chere,

I conceſted a great while not ro go, not that the command was not highly honorable : but Monſieur de
L was afraid I ſhould embark without Biſcuit, and to ſpeak the truth, whoever would do Soubizade.

his buſineſs well, muſt not go ſo far from home; for a man is never remembred ar thac
diſtance, It any thing preſents ic {elf for your advancement, you are ſure never co hear of
it 2 buc for the acquiring honor and renown *c's often berter ro be further off, than near
ac hand, Your tame (hall more encreaſe, and you will be more honored and eſteemed by
Scrangersthan your own Countrey-men. On the other fide I had more mind to be em-
ployed in the Wars of France near to his Majeſties perſon : but no excuſes would be atlow-
ed, neither indeed could I heartily deny my good Maſters The Sienncis ſo foon as they
faw that I was come, were again importunate with his Majeſty to ſend me away, ſpeak-
ing much more 1n my commendation than I could any way deſerve : withouc further de=
lay then I departed, and took my way to arſeilles, where I found ſeven Enfigns of foo
the King was ſending away to Rowe under the command of Monſieur de /a Mole, in
which Regiment my eldeſt Son Mare Antoine had a Company, and Captain Charry ano-
ther. The Baron de Ia Garde embarked us, and landed us at Civita Vechia, where I im-
mediately took polt and went to Rem.

Now Cardinal Caraffa being come into France to entreat the King, that if chere ſhould
be occaſion at Rome for the Popes ſervice T might make ſome ſtay chere, his Majeſty com-
manded me ſo to do, and I found the Cardinal already come to Rome before me, where
was very welcome to che Mareſchal de Strozzy, to the ſaid Cardinal and the Duke de Palli-
ano iis Brother, by whom 1 was che nexc morning carried to kiſs the Popes feer, who made
excecding much of me, asking of me ſeveral parriculariries concerning France, The Dake

of Alva had has Camp already within ewenty miles of Rowe, and rhe ſaid Cardinal had The Duke de

:nade 2 Levy of three thouſand Swiſs, who were already come chicher. FE wagever of _—
| | c G

Aa2 opinion

I I CE eee EE NY ee nod eewarwane I

oe ene, or og er IST
op *oikecy => t > wile Ae wes OTE

-

—
gr, IR gry et
ate

4 $4 Ca nee

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book IV,

——

opinion thar we ſhould march our into the Field, ten mules from the City, and there to

encampour (clves, cill ſach timeas the Duke of Aw ſhould approach the walls of the

The ptople of
Rome nothing
watl:;k-,

The Sieur de

Montluc's Ba-
rangue to the

Romaiis,

Praiſe of the
S1ennoise

City, ever fearing thar would happen thar did fall our, chough Signior Cornelio Urſino,
who govern'd the affairs of war for the Pope, would never hearken to my advice z buc be
2an todeſign Fortifications within che City near to the wall, where I had a Pot affign'd
me. Above three weeks paſt, the Dake of Alvs never approaching nearer than five-or fix
miles, daring which time the Romans every night gave the Alarm amongſt themſelves, (o
that noching was to be ſeen, buc people running ſome cowards St. Peters, others to the Pa-
laccs of the Cardinals who were of the Spaniſh FaQtion, and in my lite I neyer ſaw (ſo great
diſorder. This People are nor yery warlike ; they are alſo compoſed of ſundry Nations,
I chink they are not df the Race of the Geſars, Cato's, Scipio's, and other brave Romans,
there are too many delights and luxuries amongſt them co produce many men of war,
Now the Cardinals of Armaguac and du Bellay, de Lanſac, and de Avanſon, were of 0-
pinion, thac if I made a ſpeech to che Captains who commanded in the icy, co acquaint
them wich the order I had obſerv'd at Sienna , they would cake 1: verrer trom me than
from any other, both they and all the City remembring the reputation I had acquir'd ar
tha Sicge, and the Mareſchal de $trozzy and Cardinal Carsffa being alſo of th ſame opt-
nion, they cauſed all chechief men of the City, their Caprains, Licutenants, and Enfigns
ro afſemble in the baſe Court of Monſicur 4' Avanſon, who was then Ambaſſador there,
and there'in the preſence of che ſaid perſons I made them che following Orarion in Tralian.
Monſieur de Lanſac is yet living, who ſo ſoon as I hat dn», rold me, that he conld
never have believ'd that a G aſcon could have made ſo geod an Italian.

*« Gentlemen, fince the time that the Duke of Alva is approached” ſomething near unto
(your City, it appearsto us French that you have conceiv'd ſome new apprehenſion, and
« without any great cauſe, infomuch that upon the leaſt Alarm you enter into an excraordi-«
© nary fear and aſtoniſhment ; ſo that ſhould the Enemy approach your walls whilſt you
*are in this confuſion, they mighc enter ar pleaſure without any great oppoſition ;
«© foralmuch as when yoa ought to keep filence in your City, eſpecially in che night, and
« chat you ought rather co run to your walls, than to ſhuffle your ſelves into the ſtrange
&© diſorder you doz you on the contrary run ſomero S. Peter, others to the Churches, and
* others to the Palaces of rhe Spaniſh Cardinals, with the greateſt confuſion in the world.
& Tis muſt of neceflity proceed from one of two cauſes, either from want of courage, or
© froma dctc& in your conduR, in that yon do nor ſtritly command ſuch order as your
« people ought to obſerve both by day and by night in a time of danger. It you do ic
« for want of courage, it is then a ſign you have not well confider'd whac people your ene-
© mics are : and whar can they be other than men as you are? do not we bear the ſame
5 2rms they do, and are they nor as good as theirs arc? are not they as vulnerable and as
& ſabject co die by our blows as we are by theirs? Is not the Pope's quarrel holy and juſt,
&« and becter than theirs? This oughc to make us hope that God 1s on our fide. And
* whar part or portion has the King of Spain in Rome » what righe or title ro any of the
« Pope's Territories, or to your habirations, that God ſhould aſſiſt him more than us?
& Whar js become of che valour of thoſe ancienr Rizzans, who have lefc you the great re-
« nown they acquir'd in their dayes? Whar other Nation does now inhabit Rope, that
© may have depriv'd you of the courage lefc you by choſe, from whom you prerend to be
© fromall antiquity lineally deſcended 2 Oh Gentlemen, how infiuitely do you wrong the
&« reputation of your famous Anceſtors 1n diſcovering your ſelves to be afraid of people
& who are no other than men as you are? And you do your enemies the greateſt kind-
« neſs imaginable, in giving them occaſion ro boaſt , rhar they are terrible ro thoſe
«who formerly made all the Nations of the world to tremble at their arms. If this fear
& proceed from the evil order you have hitherto eſtabliſhed, there is nothing ſo far amils,
&« chat in one day may nor eafily be remedied , for by entring into preſent conſultation
« from whence this default proceeds, the buſineſs is done : and ſo you ſhall manifeſt to
&« all the world, that ir is nor want of bravery, but of good diſcipline 3 and your people
« ſhall recover heart, ſeeing themſelves ſecur'd by the good orders you ſhall give. Do nor
« think it ſtrange if I declare that T am aſham'd of whac I ce in your City, when ha-
« ying been formerly in Sienna commanding a People beſieged by che Marquis of Jfarig-
& g2n0, With forces donble ro what the Duke of Alva has, I can lay to the great honor
& of the Siennois, thar in all that time I never obſerved ſo much as any one Citizen afraid.
« Happy are thoſe Sienndis who have manifeſted themſelves to be extracted from , and
« the true legitimate Sons of your ancient Fathers, who founded theſe walls and theirs
« alſo, asthey haie chemlclves aſſured me, and do alſo bear the ſame arms you do. And

« although

— —__

BooxIVo &c Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

_”

———

—u_—
—

« alchough their City be loſt, their valour and renown is not for all char buried nor ob=
« (car'd, bur fit to give every one hopes thar it may one day be recover'd by their valour
« and virtue : whereas if you bchave your ſelves no better hereafter than hicherto I have
« ſcen you do, I cannot forbear to rel] you, that I would ſooner undertake to defend S7«
« enna, wich the women of that City only ro fight under my command, than to defend
« Rome with che beſt Romans you have. Pardon me (I beſcech you) if I cell you the truch »
« for I do it not for any advantage I expe& ſhould accrue either to the King my Maſter
«or to my ſelf; bur for your own good , and to prevent the total ruine of your City,
« which if it ſhall be aſſaulted by your enemies, will be miſerably ſack'd , and worſe
« handled, then ic was in the dayes of Monſieur de Boxrbon, You may be confident,
« Gentlemen, tharcould I cake any pleaſare in your ruine, I ſhould not now make your
« chis remonſtrance in the preſence of theſe honorable perſons z bur being ſorry, as your
« ſervant (you being good triends and confederates of the King my Maſter) and deſiring
& to die with you for your conſervation, Iam conſtrain'd to be thus plain, and co ſay
« thisto you I have done ; theſe Gentlemen che Kings Miniſters having alſo sfſur'd me,
&« thac you would cake it berrer from me, than any other, for the eſteem you have of me
« fince the Siege of Sienna. 1 beſeech you therefore take my advice, and if in any thing
« T may be aſfiſting to you, upon the Jeaſt ſummons I will immediately airend you in
&« your counlel, ? Its pollivle the remembrance of the Sack of your City by th: Seigncur
&« de Boxrbon may have pur you into ſome apprehenſion ; bur you are to conſider that you
« were then ſ{urpriz'd ; bur you have now your weapons in your hands. Doubt nothing,
« fear not your enemies, bur divide your City, and appoint every one his place to repair
© gnto apon occaſion, to the end that your own confufion do not deprive us of the means
«© ro relieve you, if the enemy preſent himſelf ro che aſſaule : diſpoſieſs your Cicizens of
« their fear, if they be afraid , thar there may be no confuſion, and for che reſt trouble
& got your ſelves; tor knowing the good order you have taken» you thall ſoon ſee your
« enemies fore'd to retire. They all return'd me very many thanks, and fo departed, af-
ſaring us that chey were going to give ſuch orders, that che accidents which had hapned
before ſhould never be again, earneſtly intreating me to come the next morning to their
Coancel, and that chere they would ſhew me the order they were going to rake, to receive
thereupon my opinion and advice, Which was accordingly done, and we altogether
provided ſo well for their affairs, that there was no more mention of fear, nor ſign of
diſorder. I went to the heads of the people, and ſhewed them what they were to do,
whom I found chearful cnough in the buſineſs : yer this great multicude is compoſed of
divers humors, but a man may reduce them all ro one, when they {ee 1t 1s for their own
good and ſafety. In ſhort, all chings were very much bercer , which the Pope alſo took
exceeding well at my hands. : »

Now a few dayes after the Duke of Alva remov'd his Camp, and took his way to- The Duke of
wards Tivoly twelve miles diſtant from Rome. I know not whether becauſe he under- 4lua retires.
ſtood the Ciry ſtood better upon its Guard chan before , and char the order of things was
changed there, or that his intention was nor to approich any nearer co the City. And be-
ing that in 7 ivoly was Signior Franciſco Vr/ino with five Icalian Enfignes, and that the
Town was not ſtrong, the Mareſchal, the Cardinal Caraffa, and the Duke de Palliano
were afraid thar the Duke of Aiva was gone to take Tivoly, and cur all thoſe in Pieces
within it, which was the reaſon that they entreated me to march all night to go fetch off
the ſaid Signior Franciſco, giving me the two Troops of light horſe of the Popes Guards,
two Troops of horſeof the Dake de Paliano, commanded by the Captains, B wtolomeo and
Ambroſio, and four hundred Harquebuzcers under che command of my Son eAare Antony, Mare Antony,
and Captain Chayry. Cardinal Carff« had aflur'd me upon his honor, chac che Enemy <1deſt Son ro.
could not paſs che Tiber, and thar I mijghc make my retreat ar pleaſure, having evermore Tag de Mont-
che Tiber berwixt the Enemy and me. By Sun-riſe I was ar Tivoly with the Horſe, and the ****
Foot arriv'd two hours afcer, where I found thar Signior Franciſc) had heard no manner
of news of theenemies, and after I had told him, I was in no ſmall doubt what would be.
come of us; for I very well knew before 1 fer out from Rowe, that the Duke of Alvshad
cakegihe way of Tivoly, and now perfectly underſtood, chat he came privately to furprize
Signior Franciſco,toralmuch as he had had no intelligence of his motion. I therefore eacin
only a ſnap or rwo, cauſing the horſes to be baited, and che foot to have a lictle refreſh-
ment, ordered Signior Franciſco to cauſe the Drums ro bear, char we mighc preſently dif-
lodge, and pur our ſelves into the field, entreating him to tend me a Troop or two of his
people who were acquainted with the Countrey, for chat my {elf would go play the Scouc,
whulſt every one was making himlelt ready to depart : and it-was well for me 1 did o ;
tor Signior Franciſco having ſent out two oft his men to diſcover, they recurn'd as we fare

at

DD” —

oo

©.

14 The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize .Boox IV.

ar dinner, and had brought word that there was no news of any Enemy 1n all che Coun-

trey ; bur I would not truſt to that, and therefore wene with my two Troopers, when {ov

ſoon as I was out of Tivoly upon a ridge of a hill, I plac'd my ſelf under a Tree, for

ic began to be very hot, when preſently all along a liccle Cope, I perceived a great number

of horſe marching ſtraight down to the Tiber, and others in a valley, who came direaly

rowards me, and in che midft of a plain on this fide the litcle Copſe, I ſaw ſomething

which I could not diſcern what it thould bes I chen preſently ſent word co Signior

Franciſco, that T had diſcover'd the Camp , and that he ſhould in all diligence ger his

The Sieur de qqcn out of the Town, and march them away on the other ſide of the Tiber, The Sol-
—_— wg dicr whom Thad ſent to carry him this intelligence was ſcarce got into the Ciry, when be=
Frog #:5. hold eighteen or twenty Spaniſh Enſigns, who were laid down inthe Plainy gor up, and pur
20 fiom 11401, hemſclves upon their march. I then gallopped away my ſelf, where I found, that as yec
not fo much as one man was got our of the City, and haſted the /talian Enfigns with all

diligence ro march away, cauſing the gate of the Cicy to be ſhut , and there I played a

very cunning trick, for I carricd the keys along with me, thinking the enemy could not

of a long t:me break down the gares; for the Tiber paſſed through che middle of the
Town, whcre there is a Bridge, and very fair and good Mills in the City ic ſelf, which

I had cauſed ro be begun to be broken from my firſt arrival 35 bur that work could nor be

The Steur de finiche, I lefr Captain Charry at the Gate, and my Son are Antony at the Bridge ro
anne * O!!- ſaftain him, and I went and came running to and fro to haſten the 7talians to march,
ls when ſo ſoon as they were all out of che Gate I went to draw off Captain Charry, and we
began to break che Bridge , which was of wood, and immediately the Enemy was in the

Cicy. I placed Harquebuzcers all along in the houſes that looked into the ſtreet, the

Soldiers uhng extraordinary diligence to break the Bridge after which I marched directly

to the Gate. 1 had placed the Cavalry before the 1talians, and we were inevitably to paſs

through the ſtrezght of the Rocks, where we could only paſs one by one. Till we came

to the going out of the Gate we had the Enemy continually upon us, and itis no more than

fifry paces from the Gate to that ſtraight ; ſo chat ſeeing they could nor themſelves get to

us, bur one by one, they gave us over, and returned to rifle the Ciry: Their I:alian foor

came after the Spaniards, and thought to have entred the City to have had their ſhare of

the {poil, but the Spaniards would never let them 1n, bur held them in talk at the Gate

whilſt they were buſie ar their plunder. So foon as we came to the Pein I made my Son

and Captain Charry with the four kundred Harquebuzeers turn on the right hand along

the ridge of a Hill, about a thouſand paces diſtant from us, and the two Companies of

the Dake de Palians, telling them the myſterie , that in caſe the Enemy ſhould paſs the

Tiler, they ſhould ſtill make forwards along the ridg towards Rowe, and take no care for

me. And ingged we had as good have loſt all che Enfigns Monſieur de 1a Hole had, as

theſe four hundred Harquebuzcers, for they were the yery flower of all the Companies,

1 was not got half a mile into the Plain, when behold all che Cavalry upon the

banks of the Tiber, and their Germans, who began to paſs, and particularly ſome horſeby

the Mill, where they could onely paſs one by one. IT then gave all for loſt, for I was to

Ul retire ewelve miles before the whole Army, and made no queſtion but that the Cavalry
h would carry over a great many of Foot behind them : butaf I loſt rhe one, I would nor
{ The Retrear, loſethe other, Now Signior Franciſco marched (till at a good round rate, at about a
Harquebuz ſhot diſtance from the Tiber, and the others along the ridg over againſt us.

$ When fifty or threeſcore of the Enemies Horſe came up to us, I then took one of the Cap=
| cains of the Guard with his Cornet, whilſt the other ill march'd on in the rear of the Foot,
cauſing them to mend their pace, and faced about upon the Enemy ; who thereon made
a halr; and ſo ſoon as IT made a ſhew as if I would charge them) curn'd their backs to
z: retreat, though I cannot imagine why, and II turn'd about to purſue my way. Aﬀeer thac
| they never offcr'd ro come towards me, though more of their own people came continu-
ally up to them, but ir was only three or four at a time : fo that ſeeing me a good way

advanc'd, they turn'd back again and fell co taking Cartle rhat were grazing in the fields.

Now ycu muſt know what my deliberation was, by which you may ſee wherher I had a

mind co loſe my (elf with theſe people,or to eſcape with our own. The Duke de Palliang had

given mea grey Turk, thar flew upon che ground, and was an extraordinary fleet one ;

my deſign therefore was to engage the Enemy with this Troop, and in cafe I ſhould ſee

The Sicur de 9 poſſivility of ſaving that party, I would then retire to our own people, who were go-
Montluc's de- ing direRly to a Caſtle that held for the Pope, and in which chere was a Garriſon, where

| fign, I made account to ſecure moſt of the horſe, ic being nor above five miles ro that Caſtle.
f Aſcania de ta T0 dayes after a Trumpet told us chat the Duke of Alva would never permit Signior
Corne, Aſcanio de la Corne to pals the Tiber, foraſmuch as he had nor one Harquebuzeer, bur Ger-

mans,

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fratice. TR |

mans, all the Spaniſh and Ttalian Foot bcing ac Tivoly.' And Thus I retreated ſtraight
to Rowe, (ending to our people to come to us, and we rallyed at the Bridg neareſt to Rowe,
over which we paſſed, it being chree hours within night when we came to Rome. This is
che forcune I had in this Recrear,

When ever (Captains my Companions) you ſhall be jn any place where you are the
leaſt in doubr, never truſt to the report of others : for it is evermore the cuſtom ar your
firſt coming for every one to careſs you, and to entreat you to repoſe your ſelt 3 bur do
nor do it 5 examine the place where you are, and diſcover it very well. One of thegreaceſt _
Captains the Emperor ever had (which was Signior Peſcaro) for ruſting to the report of Pignior Pe?
others at his arrival in a City of 7taly, was taken 5, yer he had no leſs than four thous *%
ſand men with him, which was a greac diſhonor to fo great a Captain : though he laid
the fault to another, as himſelf rold me. Had I done ſo, Signior Franciſco had made me
ſuffer a great diſgrace, and perhaps to have loſt my life.

Two nights after the ſaid Signiors gave me two Companies of 7talians to conduR them
to the Duke de Somma at Baliſtra, which ſtands by the Sea-ſide, lix or ſeven miles be-
hind Marino, I marched all night, having with me the cewo Companies of the Duke of
Paliſano ; and when I came there, gave order chat our Horſe ſhould be baited, and ready
in an hourand a half torecurn, The Duke de Ssmma would by all means have com-
pelled me to ſtay that night, bur he could by no means perſwade me to it 3 for I well
imagain'd, that the Dake of Alva was not without ſpies ac Ree, conſidering there were
ſo many Spaniards, and others of the King of Spains Faftion in the City ; and therefore
having eaten a bit or two, put my ſelf upon my way, which coming and going was five or
fix and forty miles, and arrived three hours within nighc ac Rowe. Ic was well for me T
did fo ; for two hours before day there came fix hundred horſe, and five hundred Har»
quebuzeers on horſeback to Mariano, where they heard news that I was recurn'd. This
was another good fortune that befcl me, wherein there was no need that I ſhould have
Jft my underſtanding at home. And I will now tell you of another chat befel me fix
dayes afcer, though it 1s onely to make ſuch laugh as ſhall vouchſafe to read this Book, and
the ſtory of my life.

Five or fix dayes afcer this rencounter, the Duke of «Alva's Camp lying {till at Tgwoly,

The Baron de la Garde ſent word from Civita Pechia to the Mareſchal de Strozzy, thac if

he would ſend him four hundred Harquebuzeers, he would embark them in his Galleys,

and land chem at Neptm#no, a very ſtrong place upon the Margent of the Sea, which flows

into the ditches of it, and that there they might burn the Boars the Duke of Alva had

bronght thicher wherewich to make a Bridg at Of#a, to paſs over tothis ſide of rhe Tiber, Mare Anthony

as he afterwards did. The Mareſchal therefore leaving this affair wholly to my dire&ion, 29d Oaprain

T ſent thicher my Son CAHarc Anthony, and Captain Charry with the four hundred Har- _— Sag
; . ho oP a Vechia.

quebuzcers, who wenr in emulation of one another, and fo ſoon as they came to Civita

Vechia che Baron rook them aboard, and accordingly went to land chem ac the {ajd

Neptuno : bur they could not poſſibly burn the Boats, foraſmuch as they had moved chem

inco the Ditch, which was defended by the Fortreſs. Now (as che affairs of War depend

upon od accidents) it fell our that the ſame day they arrived ac Neptuns, where they ſtayd

two dayes. I went 18 the Evening to walk without the Gate thar leads towards Marino,

where ] met a man that came from thence, and ask'd him whar he was to which he

made anſwer that he was a Beadſman belonging to the Hoſpital of Z4arino, I diſcover'd

by his rongue that he was no /talian z which he alſo confeſt ro me) telling me that he

was a Frenchman, but ſo poor that he was reduc'd to the Hoſpital of AMarino, I then

asked him who was at Zarino, to which he anſwer'd, chac that very morning before he

came away, Signior Marc eAntonio de Colonna arriv'd with his Company of fifty men ar Hare Antonie |

Arms, having norhing with him more, neither Horſe nor Foot ; (tor the Companies of ae Colonna.

Gens-d' Arms of Italy have no Archers belonging to them, as ours have.) 7arino belongs to

this Marc Antonio, whom I had heard of at Reme, where he had been decipher'd to me

for a young Lord of twenty ot two and twenty years of ape, full of mectel, and rich co

the value of fourſcore thouſand Crowns yearly-revenue. Pa!jano was alſo his, which che

Pope had caken from him, and given to his Nephew , who chereupon was called che

Duke'ot Paliano, chongh he did not long enjoy that title, che other recovering 1t again

not long ater.

Bing parced from my Hoſpitaller, it entred into my fancy chacT might eafily take this A pleaſant
Riman Lord priſoner, and char if I could ſnap him I ſhould be made for ever, for ] hope of the |
ſhould have ac leaſt fourſcore thouſand Crowns for his Ranſome, which would not be Y'*v* de Mow-
chought unreaſonable, being no more than one years Revenue of his Eſtate. I walked ***
chen contrivivg with my (clt, chat Monſieur de 12 240/le ſhould go along with me wich

three

176 The Commentaries of Meſhire Blaize Book LV.

three handred Harquebuzeers only, whom I would leave in the mid-way at a Tower
where were certain Sheds for the ſhelter of Cattle (for I had caken notice of the way go-
ing and coming from Baliſfra) and that I would take Captain Ambroſio Lieutenant to
one of the Companies of the Duke de Paliano, with five and twenty of the beſt and fleeteſt

Anrelio Frego- horſe of his whole Company : that I would moreover borrow of Signior Awrelio Fregoſ

ſa. his Lieutenant, and hisCorner, with five and chirty Launces only of the beſt, and the
beſt mounted he had. That I would leave Captain Ambroſo with the five and thirty Laun-
ces abour a Harquebuz ſhct from Monfienr de 1a Molle , on that fide towards Afarino,
and with thoſe of Signior Awrelio would go place my felt in Ambuſh undcr the Vines a
little -on the left hand the great high-way near unto CAMarinoz which having done, I
I would then ſend fix Launces to give the Alarm a little bzfore day to the City ; upon
which I made account that Sjgnior Marc Antoxio being young, and full of mettle, would
not fail to ſally our, but wonld preciſcly ſally by break of day, when my fix Launccers
would draw him into our Ambuſcado, with whom we would alſo run away in his fight,
would make him purſue me a main ſceing a Colours, which he would be eager to take for
the greater honor of his victory.

Having thus contriy'd the bafincſs with my (elf, T accounted him as ſure my priſoner
as if T had already had him in my hands, and thereupon returning inco che City, ſpoke
ro Sign1tor eAzrelio, who lent me his Lieuccnanc and his Corner, with the five and churt

Captain Alexis Launces, I ſpoke to Monſieur de 1a Molle, and to Captain Ambroſio, and the Licutenane
15a Grecian, of Signijor Aurelis was called Caprain Alexis. We appointed ro meet in the beginning
of the night at the Gate of the City : bur I would diſcover nothing of my deſign cither
ro the Mareſchal, or to any of thoſe I took along wich me, till firſt we were got into the
ficlds, and then I rook afide Monſieur de la Melle, and the Captains Ambroſio and Alexis,
and acquainted them with the Enterprize, which they all three approved of, wherein we
were one as wile as another. So that we thought the time long nll we was there, they
making the buſineſs wonderful cafie, all of them affirming that they knew him, and were
confident he would not fail to ſally. Thns then we fer forwards, each Company apart,
and mine alwaies the foremoſt, till we came ro the Tower, where] lefr Monſieur de la
ole, and further behind a licle Chappel Captain Ambrogfio, Now fo ſoon as Caprain
Alexis and I were come to the edge of che Vines near e Marino, he would needs have
his Enfigne to be one of the fix that were to give the Alarm, and delivered the Colours
to another : For which uſe I lent him a Gentleman of mine, and we clapt our ſelves down
in a Mariſh. (where in Winter there was alwaics water, but in Summer none ar all) there
being no other place where we could conceal our ſelves; and fo the fix marched up di-
rely to the Gate of the City. Preſently rhe day began to appear, when hearing no-
- thing of Alarm, I began to think thar either Signior Marc Antonis would not be rempred
out of his Quarters, or elſe that he was gone back.
The Sicur de Now on the right hand of us there was agreat valley, and I was got up to alittleemi-
Montlue diſco» nence, where was the ruincs of ſome houſe or Chappel, and began io diſcern on the hill
vers the Ene- on the further fide of the valley, three or four horſemen, who one while mov'd, and
my. * another while ſtood till. T ſhew'd themto Captain Alex#s, who was lower then I, and
who thereupon ſent our ewo Launces all along by the Vines, upon the edge of the deſcent
of rhe valley. ' I had not as yet caſt my eye into the valley, foraſmuch as the day buc
juſt began to break 3 bur look'd always cowards the mountain where theſe three or four
horſe appear'd, abour fifty paces diſtant from us: but when I curn'd my eye that way,
I there faw three great parcies of horſe, in the firſt whereof there might be a hundred
or more, in the {econd two or three hundred, and in the third ſeven or eight hundred
horfe. Now you are to underſtand upon what account thefe came to be here, which was
thus. As the Baron de /a Garde Landed our people at Neptwuno, thoſe of the Town dif-
patched away rwo Horſemen poſt rs the Duke of Alva at Tivoly, who thereupon 1mme-
diacely ſent away Signior de 1 Corne wich twelve handred Horſe, and rwelve Enſigns of
Foot, who marched all nighr, and an hour before day arrived ac chis Valley, where chey
had made ahalr till Signior Antonio could make himſelf ready, ro whom he had ſent five
and twenty Launces to make him mount to horſe, who coming to the Gare of the City,
The Sieur ge they there mer with our fix Soldiers (che day then bur juſt beginning to break) where de-
Montluc's A- manding of one another who chey were for, they charged ours in ſuch manner char chey
vant Coureurs were conſtrained to return back towards us, and to fly towards the road thar leads from
pur to flight, B.1iſra co Rome, where the Enemy purſued them over the Roman Plain even to Rome ic
ſelf, and there gave the Alarm to the Mareſchal and the whole City, who thereupon con-
claded that ir was nor poſſible but that I muſt be taken, and all thoſe loſt who were with
me, Now ſo ſoon as Captain Alexis had called in his rwo Horſemen , we began our

retreat

_

Boos IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 177
reac by the ſame way we came, when behold the hundred horſe in onr Rear, che parcy
of two or three hundred after choſe, and the ſeven or eight hundred in the rear of fn The Recreat of |
who followed us at a good round tror, the Enſigns of Foor making all the haſte after chey Monheuc de
could ; in which order they purſaed us ſeven miles, till we came ro Captain Ambroſio, OI,
with their Launces continually conch'd upon 6ur horſe cruppers. I was upon the Grey
Turk the Dake of Palizno had given me, one of che fltetcſt horſes I ever came on the back
of, and the beſt leaper of a dirch : ſo that ſometimes I leapt out of the way into the fields
on the right hand , and ſomecimes on the lefc 5 and when we fled along che road, Cap-
rain Alexis and I were evemore in the Rear, and he tha carried the Corner in the Van; I
(till all che way encouraging the Soldiers, and bidding them to fear nothing, now on che
one hand, and then on che other, when che furtheſt char ever we were before the Enemy
was not above three or four Launces Iength. Now fo ſoon as we drew near to Captain Am»
Lrofio he came out from behind the Chappel, ſeeing which I cried out to our people wolſe
volte, who cherevupon 1mmediarely fac'd about, and I gave them a ſudden charge, beacing
them back to the other Body, who having ſeen ovr Ambuſcado had halted to diſcover whar
ir might be, the cwo Bodies cloſing rogether, and making a ſhew 2s it chey meanc to charge The Error of /
15. I chen ſaw thac IT had played the fool egregiouſly, in having given this charge, when the Sicur de
as God would haveit, Monhienr de 1a Molle preſented himſelf upon the road wich his Har Houlic.
quebuzeers, which mad: che Enemy co ſtep ſhort, and forbear to charge me. Caprain
Alexis then ſaid ro me, ©zelli primi checi ſequitano, ſono graci, per che lo $ inteſs 4 lorogridi.
He ne vo a vedere, ſi potero fermir li, per tratener mi con efſi /oro, which he did, demand-
ing to ſpeak with chem upon their word, whilſt I in the mean time made Monheur de
la Mokte march oft his Foot, recovering a little deſcenc 3 ſo rhac the Enemy could no more
fee what we did : when Iorder'd chem to make rowards he pillars of an Aqueduct, by
which the Romans in former times conveyed their water to Rome, commanding the Horſe
to keep ſtill in their Rear, at a good round trot, and all chemi ro march as faſt as rhey
could. I then recurn'd to Signior Alexis, having firſt coold my horſes mouth in a dicch
by the Tower, whom I found afcer as fret} as he was but new taken our of the S:able.
Now fo ſoon as the rwo Troops were clos?d up together, and had made a halt, the greac
party behind did the ſame, and the Foot likewiſe halted , Caprain A/exis ſtill calving
with them. IT could all this while from the place where I ſtood fee our people, when {o
ſoon as I ſaw chem got near ro the AqueduRs, I call'd to Caprain Alexis, faying to him
Retiriamo fi, ( apitano, retiriamo fi, avon which the Enemy asked him who it was char
commanded in chief, whereupon naming me they began co exclaim, ſaying, thar in eighe
or nine days time they had three times faild of raking me, which was ac che recreat of
Tivoly, at my return from Baliſfra, and now ; which made Captain Alex recring
laugh at themz when ſeeing him turn his horſe ro go away , ſeveral of them call'd out to
me A dio Signior di Montlaco a dio, and1T alſo cried ro them a dio 4 div, who thereupon
faced about, and went direRly to Marino, where they heard news thac che Baron de 1;
Garde had reimbark*d our people, and was gone to Civita Vechia. Signior Aſcanis ſent
me back three Launccers I had loſt by the way, but nor cheir horſes ; for as their horſes *
ſtumbled chey fell down, when leaping into the way with my Turk, ſtroke chem upon.
the buttocks wich the flar of my ſword, and made chem cloſe np co the Party. He fenc
them back by a Trumper of his, who made us laugh, when ſpeaking of his Maſter, he (aid,
chat had he known TI had been of the Party , he would have accompanied me to che
Gares of Rome to have taken me priſoner : bur never by che way asked his Priſoners who
commanded chem till afrer we weregot off. And the Trumpet moreover had told me,
thac had I been taken, Ihad nor needed to fear that any one would have offter'd me the
leaſt injury or offence ; for I ſhould have been as much made on, and uſed with as much
honor and reſpect, as in our own Camp. Neither indeed can it be ſaid, char ever any
Prifoner wear out of my hands, or any place where I had ro do,diſcontented, or diſſatisfied
with my behaviour to him, and itisagreat baſeneſs to flea men to the bones, when che
are perſons of honor, and bear arms z eſpecially in a War berwixc Prince and Prince, which
is rather our of {port than unkindneſs to one anorher.
After this manner I made my retreat to Rome, where after I had pur off my Arms,
I wentto ſeek our the Mareſchal, che Cardinal de Caraffa, and the Duke de Paliano, whom
I found in a houle of the Town altogether, being newly return'd trom the Palace of Sz.
Peters, who all of chem fell upon me, ſaying, char ic ſeem'd as if I had a mind co loſe my
felt our of wantonnels, and that had they known of my deſign, chey would have ſtopr my
journey. They would then needs know the occaſion of my Enterpriſe, which I recounced
co chem from point co point, telling them thar all che way as I wene, I accounred Mare
Antonio as fure my priſoner as I was alive, and had already ſec his ranſome ar fourſcore chou-

B b ſand

L "Yo, CoOAE :

WW VIEEIP FRA" omnes ets = 6

178 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize | Book IV+

ſand Crowns, which had not been unreaſonable, being no more than one years revenne of
his Eſtate, of which fourty thouſand I intended to give to Monſtenr de Ja CMolte, the
Caprains and Soldiers, and the other fourty thouſand I meant to keep to my ſelf, ro purchaſe
me an Eſtate in France ſomewhere near to the King y for Gaſcony was coo remote from
Court, and that I already fancied I had a houſe near Pars, of which I was ſo confi-
dently perſwaded, that ic would not out of my head of all night. Ar whichaccounc of
my proje& they all burſt our a laughing to char exceſs, that I think they never laugh*d
ſo much at onetime in their lives, to think that I had made my ſelt ſo ſure of my prize,
the ranſome, and purchaſing of Lands and Caſtles in the Ifle of France 5 whereupon the
Marcſchal, who when he had a mind to rally alwayes ſpoke Tralian , ſaid ro me with a
very good grace, S ignicy quando che vi anderemo viſitar, fareti voi a noi altri tre boyn
chiers nei caftelli que wvolete comprare a preſſo parigs ? they were merry at my ex-
ences
: They were at this time buſie about ſending a diſpatch to the King, and ſcnt Monſieur
de Porrieres of Provence to his Majeſty, who had his ſhare of laughing, and all the reſt
that were with theme And as there are a ſort of people, who are prone todo more hurc
than good, ſome honeſt man ſent news by the way of the Bank ot Lions, that I had loſt all
the Pope Cavalry in the Reman Plain, and was my felf run away no body knew whither,
nor could 8ny one hear what was become of me, I do believe theſe men are hir'd and
ſuborn'd to diſperſe ill news, only to diſcourage thoſe of our party, This was writ by
the Poſt from Lions to the Conſtable, and by him told the King, who was very much crou-
bled at the news : and Monſieur de Porrieres being to paſs through the Griſons Countrey,
could nor arrive ſo ſoon'at Courr, but that the news was got thither four dayes before him,
A falſe repore inſomuch thar whereas the Mareſchal and the reſt had laughed ac my folly , rhe King
ſpread ar was very much oftenaed with me, {aying thatir was che moſt ridiculous and ſenleleſs piece
Court of the QF folly thar ever was committed by man ; adding moreover that I had hicherto been for-
Sicur de Mot - Y , 5 ; .
tucs defeat, UnAate, buc that now I had loſt my fortune, and my reputation, which he was very ſorry
; tor; eſpecially that ſuch a diſgrace ſhonld befall me ar the Gates of Rozze, This news was
not kept {ſo ſecret at Courr, but that ir was preſently carried into Gaſcony, where I leave
you to judg how I was difleted by them char did noc love me : for one mult bea God ro
have no Enemies, nor emulators, or elſe muſt rake upon him to meddle with nothing
bur his Garden or his Orchard : Bur ſo ſoon as Monſieur de Porrieres arriv'd the King
ſent for him 1nco his Cabiner, where after he had read his letters of Credence , and his o-
ther diſparches,, finding thercin no ſyllable of this affair, and Monſieur de Porrieres ma»
king no mention of 1t neither, his Majeſty ſaid co him, And what Monſieur de Porrieres,
is Montluc heard of yet ? he has made a pretty piece of work on't, To which he made an-
ſwer, thar he had lcfc me at Rowe 3 whereupon the King proceeded and ſaid, that he
knew that I had loſt all the Popes Cavalry, and was my ſelf run away. Monſieur de
Porrieres was very much aſtonith*d at this news, and replied, that if this had hapned after
his departure, it might be ſo, and yet he had been no more than nine dayes in coming.
His Majeſty cen made chem look how long it was fince this news came, which they did,
and found 1t to be four dayes, at which the King ſaid he cthonghr ic was only alye, and
Banker's news, enquiring of Monſieur de Porrieres what piece of folly ic was I had com-
Monſieus de mitted, who thereupon made anſwer (as he has himſelf cold me fince ;) Sir [{ will tell you,
Porrieres gives ,ud 1 make 10 doubt but your Majeſty will laugh at it at much as we did . after which he
as min B *he rclared to him the whole ſtory , and what I had ſaid at my return to the Mareſchal de
Siu de Monge Stro&&), Cardinal Caraffa, and the Duke of Paliano, ar which I do affure you I have
luc's Enter- been cold his Majeſty laughed very heartily, and more chan he had been ſeen to do of a
PLizC. great while before, as alſo did the Conſtable, and all the reſt that were preſent, inſomuch
chat I was told the King above eight dayes afcer, ſecing Monhieur de Porrieres , ſaid to
him, Well Portieres, has MontJuc purchaſed thoſe places about Paris? and never call 'd the
ſtory to mind bur he laughed. And as to what I ſay in my Book, that for theſe hundred
years never any man was more fortunate in War chan I have been, I pray examine and
ſee if you will nor acknowledge me to be ſo in theſe chree occaftions, which 1n eigher or nine
dayes time befell me, one after another (beſides ſeveral ochers you will meet with in this
life of mine) to have eſcaped without loſs, three lnch dangers, which were no liccle
ONes.

A few dayes after the Duke of Alvs underſtood thar Monſieur de Gziſe was coming
into /taly to ſuccour the Pope, which made him co retire his Camp a liccle nearer to the ſea,
and afterwards he came and {ate down before Oftia. The Mareſchal then march'd our of
Rome with ſame Enſigns of Italians, two of Germans, and five or fix of French z bur the
Pope would by all means thac he ſhould leave him for his defence, my Son Marc fw

anc

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

and Captain Charry, with their Companies. The Mareſchal went chen and encamp'd
on this ſide the Tyber, over againſt Oſtia, where he entrench'd himſelf, The Duke of
Alva before his arrival had made his bridge, andereced a Fort above Oftia, on the ſame
fide where the Mareſchal was encamp'd, I then ſent to him to know if he would haye
me come to: him with five or fix /talian and French Enfigns, but he would nor permicr
me {o to do, for fear leſt the enterprize of Montalſin might not as yer be fully fitted to
the bottom. And becauſe the ſaid Mareſchal, with thoſe 1talian and French Compa-
nies he had with him, had not been able to diſcover the Enemies Fort, to ſee if there
was water inthe ditch or no, he was in the greateſt perplexiry imaginable (for the Duke
of eAlva was departed from Oftia, and retir'd towards the Kingdom of Naples, having Monſeeur
lefc only four Italian Enfigns in the Fort, and as meny in Oftia) and therefore had Strogay op oli
caus'd Artillery to come from Rozxe to batter the {aid Fort, and had ſent to intreat the
| Pope, that my Son and Captain Charry might come to him 3 which the Pope alſo grant-
ed tomy great misfortune, and the ruineof my poor Son, who fo ſoon as he and Cap-
cain Charry came before the Mareſchal, he complain'd to them, that he had not been able
ro diſcover the Fort, The next night ic being my Sons turn to mount the Guard, he de-
termin'd with himſclf to efte& that wherein others had fail'd, and communicated his de-
ſign to Captain Charry and the Baron de Begnac, who was alſo at thar time upon the ,,,,. ,,
Guard. He fail'd not accordingly to execute his reſolution, for the next day ſeeing the ye Montinc 2
Enemies ſally our, according to their cuſtom, to fetch in Bavins, he follow'd them, and covers the fort,
withour fear of the Harquebnze ſhot, purſued chem fighting to the very ditch of the Fort :
where he diſcovered as exactly, and with as much judgement as he had been an old
Caprain: but in his return,ja curſed (hot hit him in the Body, notwithſtanding which he gg; pur; perore
went upon his own feet to the ſaid Mareſchals quarters, ſaying, that before he dyed, he Oſtia,
would give an account of what he had ſeen. The ſaid Mareſchal ſo ſoon as he arriv'd
at his Tent, laid him upon his own bed, where the poor Boy almoſt expiring, told kim
what he had ſeen, aſſuring him that the ditch was dry, whatever he might have been
cold to the contrary z preſently afrer which he gave up the Ghoſt. The Mareſchal the His death;
next day ſent his body tothe Cardinal of Armagnac, and the Sieur de Lanſac to Rome,
who enterr'd him as honorably as he had been che Son of a great Prince. The Pope, His honor at |
the Cardinals, and all the people of Rowe cxpreſt great ſorrow for his deach. Had God Ame.
been pleaſed ro have preſerv?d him to me, I had made him a great Souldier ; for be-
ſides that he was very ſtouty T ever obſerv'd in him a diſcretion above his age. Nature
had done him a little wrong, for he was but little, bur ſtrong and well knir, and as to
the reſt, eloquent and defirous to learn, If che Mareſchal de Cofſe be yer living Marc _..
Anthony ſerv'd under him at Mariambarg, and he if he pleaſes can teftifie, ſhould any one FS Praiſe,
contradi& what I write, whether Ilye or no ; and rhough it does nor very well become
Fathers to commend their own children, yer being he is dead, and ſo many witneſſes of
the truch of what I deliver, I ſhall, I conceive, appear excuſeable and worthy co be
ardon'd. | |
; Now to execute the command the King had given me in T#ſcany, Iask'd leave of che
Pope to go to Mental/in, who after great importunicy, would permit me but for fifteen
days only, making me leave my grear horſes, and all my baggage behind, which Mon-
fieur de Stroz.zy was fain to ſend out after me, ſaying they were his own, and by his own
ſervants. The Cardinal of Armagnac allo ſent me out my Sumpter Mules, cover'd with
his own Sumpter-cloths, pretending to {end them to the houſe of anocher Cardinal,
where he us'd to ſtay ſometimes twelve or fifteen days together ; by which means[I gor
all my things out of Rome. During the time of my ſtay in thoſe parts, his Holineſs did
ms the honor evidently to manifeſt to all che world, chat he repogd a great confidence
in me, and had my perſon 1n particular eſteem.
Upon my coming to Montaiſin, Monſieur do Sonbize departed and went to Rome, I
found CMontal/in 1n a manner befieg'd ; for at S. Cricon there lay ſome Germans ; ar the
great Inn two Harquebuze ſhot above Aontalſin was another quarter of che Enemy,
and art a|Palace three Harquebuze ſhot on the lefr hand, likewiſe another, as alſo in an-
other rowards Greſſette, within a mile of Moutalſin another. All which were found
{eiz.'d by the enemy at the time when the Truce came fo that the King was poſleſt of
nothing on that fide, as far as the very gate of Sienna, which I chink was che principal
cauſe chat the Siennozs had Monficur de Sanbize in fo little eſteem. Ir is much ado to Th ET,
pleaſe all che world, and though a man doesall that in him lies, yer if all things do not 1 $2r-ariy |
ſucceed as people would have them, he does nothing : bur] for my part ſhall neither ac- with Monſicur
cuſe nor excuſe him at all. The Truce which had been agreed upon tor cen years berween de Soubize,
the King and the Emperor, yer continued : The affairs of theſe ewo Princes being ſo per-

Bb 2 plex'd |

ad A

180 The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book IV.

plex'd and confus'd, that it had nor been poſſible ro conclude a peace, which was the rea-
| ſon that all Treaties of accommodation ended in a Truce only : bur I had heard that
Monſieur. de Guiſe had taken his leave of the King, and was coming for 7taly , which
made me think, that although the ſuccours he brought along with him, were deſign'd
for the Pope, yer that the Truce would nevertheleſs. by that means be broken on the
King's part, and therefore laid a deſign to go give a Scalado .to the Germans at S. Cricow,
a. little Town four miles from ontalfin, intending from thence to go and ſurprize all
the other foremention'd places. I know not whether or not the Germans had any in.
relligence of my deſign or whether they were not commanded away from chence, but
ſo ſoon as I was got out of the City two hours withio nighr, a Gentleman of Sjeang,
who had his houſe in Cr icov, and whom T had fent thither, came and brought me word
that they were gone away in che beginning of the night. I ſent chen to enquire news of
thoſe at the Inn and the - Palace, and found that all were march'd away at the ſame time,
by which means we had liberty ro go out a little more art large, as far as eltefſe, a pretty
ſtrong Caſtle about chree miles from Montalſin, and near unto the road of Sienna, I went
then to Gre:fſette, where Colonel Cheramond, who was Governor there, Lorded ic over
all that Countrey, as it had been his own, not acknowledging the Siennoz ar all: Ar
which they were very much incenſt, and there we agreed that the Inhabitants ſhould
acknowledg: the Seipncury, and not him who was not to take upon him any Authority
in that Countrey, char che King would not pretend to for himſelf: And thus in a few
days all things were chang'd to the great fatisfaRion of thoſe of Sienna.

Cardinal Bur - Cardinal Bargos commanded in Sienna for the King of Spair, and had a deſign upon
goc! irenanc Hontalfn, which he thought ecafily to carry, that ought to have been pur 1n execution the
te 2: 1.1.6 of fame week char I came 4 bur hearing that I was come, deferr'd it for a few days, to ſee
= £48 19/673 if nothing was diſcover'd : when ſeeing nothing was come to light, he ſent for Captain
Montillou a Spaniard, and Governor of Pont-Hercole to execute the deſign, when Ihaving
a! the ſame time ſent out ſome horſe to forrage, they met with him, and took him, a Se-
cretaty cf Uardinal de Burgos, and four ſervants, and brought them co me. They would
very iain have excus'd themlelves, pretending to be taken contrary tothe Truce, whuch as yet
Trie Sieur 7 2d not oper ly been broken ; bur Icans'd a ſervant of his ſecretly to be put upon the Rack,
Moailuc diſco- Who confels'd, that he thonght Cardinal Bzrgos had ſent for his Maſter to put in executi-
vers Cardinal on a Gefign he had upon Xontalſin. We could not diſcover what it ſhould be, but fo
Burgos his d* ſoon asic was known at Sienna chat Captain Zſavtillon was taken, it began to diſcloſe ir
+" M08 {elt, and fo far, that a Gentleman of Sienna ſent his ſervant to me, to give me notice of
the place by which they intended to give an affault ; who came to the gate of the City,
buc would not come in, only he deſired to ſpeak with me, I then went our co him,
taking Mefſer Hieronimo Eſpanos along with me, where he told us all, and tha there
were ſome French Soldiers of the Garriſon of the plot, and that if we ſearch'd well in
the houſes neareſt thac place, we mighe peradventure find the Ladders. We gave the fel-
low ten Crowns, and ſo he rerurned. Meffer Hieronimo Eſpanos then and I went ſecrecly
co view the place, and az I remember we took Monſieur de Baſſoonpierre along with us, and
obſery'd thar part of the wall to be very low, but that there was a Turrer wherein were
continually two Centinels, who being of che Conſpiracy, the taking of the place was cafie,
and more than eaſic. Meſſer Hieronimo then, 'who was at that time of the Magiſtracy, pre=
ſently appointed two men to ſearch the houſes neareſt to the place, who ſtaid not chree
hours before he brought us above a horſe-load of Ladders of ropes, the beſt and the finelieft
made of any I had eyer ſeen. In the houſe where theſe were found, no body had liv'd of
a great while; but we knew very well, that people commonly wenr1n and out, and fur-
ther we could notdifcover. I then took order with the Serjeant Major, that he ſhould
every night ſer four Cencinels in the Turret, which alſo were continually to be choſen by
lot. I do think , that would they have made an attempt by day, they mighc have done
their buſineſs, and much beter by day, than by night, being that from the great Palace,
which was not above chree Harquebuz ſhor from the Town, they might come all along

thorough a lictle Valley, ſhaded with Cope, cloſe up to the very wall, |
Phcbus Turk. About a month after A Slennors call'd Phebrs Turk, came and addreſt himſelf to me,
dcfiring thathe might tell me ſomething 1n private, whom I ſent for into my Wardrobe.
I had nothing bur a Dagger by my fide, and when he came in, I perceiv'd himarm'd
with aCoar of Mail ; in my life I never ſaw fo fierce a countenance of a man, fo char
T was once about to call ſome body into me : When he (till celling me, that no one ſhould
hear his buſineſs but my (elf, 1 rook heartar laſt, thinking my ſelf ſtrong enough to grap-
ple with him, ſhould heatrempr any rhing againſt me. Where he told me, thac che Car-
dinal of Burgos had ofcen ſought to him to be affiſting in an Enterprize he had upon Afon-

talſin

- Oy + = ETD OC Matt TTY > £ y Fe X - 4 0-1 w__ *% *
LEG OE out a $6 US: opt te AE: oth ids CEE Bd tC Re £74 F k $476 of , . .
2525) ng EIT * a FE pt $6 IEG. & een lg = OI RES) Y 4 , " & $7,
2 0Y Bn SIRESIE 3 Ae OD RE wt Os SO RP rTies 3; 2 Ci i A 5s v ; l

Boox IV. de Montluc; Mareſchal of France. 121
Fes SE > HAR | uh
talſn, which at his importunity he had ar laſt conſented unto,. and thar he had been

himſelf cwice ro ſpeak with him in diſguiſe ; having with him three Soldiers, who were

alſo of the Plor, which he was to name to him a day before che ſaid execution, which alſohe

was to execute before Don Arbro de Cenda thould arive who was coming to Sienha ro com-

mand che Souldiery, and that if I would, he would order the buſineſs ſoy as to put them all

three into my hands. In concluſion, we agreed ir ſhould be within four days, and
thac he ſhould thar very night return to Senna to conclude the buſineſs with the Cardinal . _

de Burgos, which being concluded betwixc us, I pur him ont of the Town over the wall, Peparitien _
for the Gates were already ſhut, and in the morning diſpacch'd away a Meſſenger ro Co- _=_ > 26H
lonel (haremond at Grofſette, that he ſhould come the nexr day to Pagamegara, half way Sieur 4s Mak
berwjxt Groſſette and TMontalſin; and the ſame day thar I ſent away to the Colonel, I tuc-

call'd in the Captains who were at Chaze, Montizel, and the Hoſpitaller by Plance, whom
I ſwore upon the Crncifix to diſcover nothing of the Enterprize, and ſo {cnt them back to
make chemſelyes ready againſt I ſhould ſend for them : T then ſent away my light horſe
to 1a Rocque de Baldoc under precence of keeping Garriſon there, and the next day went
to meet the Colonel at Pagamegara, with whom I concluded that he ſhould have four
hundred Harquebnzeers in readineſs. My deſign was, that as the enemy ſhould give the
Scalado, Colonel Charemond thould come behind them, and che Garriſons of Chaze and
Montizal ſhould ſtep berwixt chem and the Palace, and my Company alſo; and fo ſoon
as they ſhould be repulſed 1 was to ſally out upon them with four hundred men from
the City, Army return from PagameguraT found the ſaid Phebar retarn'd, bur he faid
not a word to me of all nighr, which gave mea little ſuſpicion of him. In the morning
he cane to tell me, thar the Cardinal would not pur the buſineſs in execution yet a few
days, and ſo drave me oft from day to day, till in theend I was adviſed to take him pri- Phebus Turk
ſoner, and to compcl him to diſcover the truth, he being no other than a crafry Rogue, taken priſoner;
ſent purpoſely to berray me : which I accordingly did, and clapt himinto a cloſe Dun-

gcon of the Caſtle, where by misfortune he found ſome piece of wood, or iron, Now be-

cauſe he was a Siennois, I was willing to try if the Sjennois themſelves could win him by

fair means to cell the trutit, which made me deferre putting him to the queſtion ; but in

the mean time with chis p+:c7 of iron he broke through the wall, and fled away to Sienna ;

by reaſon of which accident | could do nothing conſiderable in this Enrerprize. He was

£00 cunning for me. T have nevertheleſs this obligation to him, thathe has caught me in

an affair of this importance, never to ſpare a Priſoner again, but to {queez our the ſudden

cruch :; for withouc doubt chis fellow was a Traytor, |

 Afﬀeer my arrival ac Jontalſin I procur?d Signior arionl de Santa Fiore to rettirn into Marigu! de
his Majeſties ſervice, together with the Prior his Brocher, who thorough ſome difobliga- Santa Fiere re=
tion had withdrawn themſelves from his dependance ; We had been very intimate friends 915 int? his
ever afcer the skirmiſh at Sienna, ſo that in the end I made (hitc to overcome him, and Mayeſties fers
they wenit to Court, where the King receiv'd them with great demonſtration of fayour and _

eſtcem. His Majeſty gave him a Troop of light horſe, and the Prior a Pention, who borh

of them afterwards were continually with me. Ar this time Doy Arbro de Genda con-

triv'd an Encerprize ro come and take Piance, a liccle Town near unto Afontizel, which

I had cauſed to be repair'd after the beſt manner I could, and there lodg'd a Company
| of Italians. 1 therefore gave to Sigmior Marion! my own Company, and thoſe he had

gathered together of his own, together with part of that of che Count de Petilano, and

{ent him to Piance to ferch off the Italian Company I had lefc there, and to carry chem

to Montizel, where was Captain Bartolomeo de Pezcro,

Some few dayes before Don Arbro came out of Sienna, Captain Serres, who was Licus Gaprain Serres

renant to my Company of Light-horſe, and my Kinſman, had fought Captain Carillos

Governor of Bonconvent in the {fight of £Montalſin, who had with him ten menat arms of

the Marquis of Piſcara's Company, and the Enfign of the Company had eight Launces

of a Company of light Horſe, and cighr Harquebuzeers on horſeback , who were come to

vapour before ontal/in , below 1n the Plain rowards the Inn, nor thinking there had been

any Cavalry in Montalſin,for I had taken my Company along with me to Grofſete, and had

{cnt Captain Serres with <;ghteen Launces co ſcoure the field on the letc hand towards S$i-

enna, where they mer and fougluc about Chaze, ſo that mine had the betrer. Ar his re-

turn Caprain Serres went torepoſe himſclfaday or rwo ar Montalſin, afterwards ro come

and find me our at Groſſette, and to condu&t me back to CMontalſin. Caprain Serves

then ſecing himſelf thus brav'd by the Enemy, fallied out with his eghteen Launces, two

Genilemen of Sienna arm'd with Coats of Mail, and two foor Soldiers that followed

him : When ſo ſoon as Caprain Carillon ſaw the Launceers he woald have recir'd, Captain
Serres always following in his Rear, when as Captain Garillos would paſs a narrow Rivos

ters

——

- a O

182 The Commentaries of Meſkire Blaize Book Iv:

let, Captain Serres charg'd him with might and -main, and focloſethar he cook them all,
ſaving one Captain, who had his Company in Boxronvent. Theſe Harquebuzeers on horfſe-
back belong'd to him, and he receiv'd a ſhot from one of the two Harquebuzeers that went
out with Captain Serres quite thorough the Body ; bur he got over the Rivoler, and ano.
ther with him, who conveyed him to Bonconvent, where he died at the very gate of the
Town, and sll the reſt I kept priſoners at Montal/in. ;
Don 4rbro ds Don Arbro marched direRly to Plance with three pieces of Canon, and two Culverins,
Cenda's Enter. Which made me ſuſpe& that he did not carry ſo much Artillery with him for Piance, ic
prize upon being not lo ſtrong as to require Canon 5 and ſo ſoon as Signior Marion} underſtood that
PLance, he was within three mile of Piance he went out with all the horſe to meer him, command=«
ing the Captain who was there before in che mean time to draw eur his Foot, and to make
with all ſpeed ro Montizel, which was no more but two miles from thence, In the mean
time to hold the Enemy in play, he skirmiſh'd ſo briskly, and engag'd o far that hecould
not afterwards difingage himſelf, but was charg'd by chree Troops of their horſe ac
once with ſo great fury, that twelve or fourteen light horſe of my Company were there
taken, of which Captain Gargnes who belong'd to the Mareſchal de $t#0zzy was one, and
of thoſe of the Count de Petiilano, and Signior Marion! as many , or more. After this
bruſh, getcing off thereſt, and coming to halt before Piance, he found that the Captain
had not as yet got ſo much as one man out of Town , but che Enemy (till preſs'd upon
him, and there again were ſome more Launces broken, whilſt che Caprain in the Town -
was drawing out his men, till in the end he was again charg'd with all their horſe, and con-
ſtrain'd to retire to ontize'l. Captain Serres, and the Baron de Clermay my Nephew,
who carried my Corner, eſcap'd to the little Hoſpital, The foot Caprain loſt the third
part of his Company of thoſe who had been ſlow in getting out, and he wich his Enfign
and the remainder of hismen eſcap'd, and made head at the paſs of a little River, by char
means giving Captain Bartolomeo time to come in to relieve him ; (for it was within fighe
ot ontizel) as alſo Signior Marioul who was yet retreating before the Enemies Horſe,
This a man gets by skirmiſhing at the head of an Army (as Lhave ſaid before) and by re.
treating Ey day in the face of an Enemy ſtronger than himſelf,

Don A+bro having ſtaid three dayes at Piance, he parted thence in the beginning of che
night, and with torches took his way thorough a valley that leads towards La Rocque de
Baldic. Signior Marion! was gone polt to Rome to fetch ſome Launceers that had been
promif *d him to repair his Company, but the Prior was with me the night char Don Arlro
departed. The Prior and I had been abroad on horſeback to cake the Air without che
Gates of @Montal/in, when night coming on we turn'd about to go home, diſcourfing by
the way what Don Arbro intended to do with this great Artillery : upon which dif-
courſe it preſently came into my head , that it was togo aſſault La Rocqne de Baldec , in
which place there was a Florentine Captain, Monſieur de Soubize had placed Governor
there, whom I had in ſome ſuſpicion, foraſmuch as the Gentlemen of Sienna who were
with me, had told me that they had heard he had ſent twice to Florence, So ſoon there-
fore as we came near to the Gates of /ontal/in', I commanded two light-horle of my
Company to go and ſcour all along upon the Hills betwixt Plance and 1a Reeque, and nor
roſtir from chence till break of day, unleſs chey ſhould diſcover the Enemy upon motion.

Monſieur d& Now ſome dayes before this, Monſieur de Gaiſe, who was come to Rome, and was already
Guiſe in 1tgly, march'd towards the Kingdom of Naples, had ſent to call avvay Charemon vvith his Com-
pany at the requeſt of the Siemnois, vvho could not agree vvith him, and had ſent me
Monſieur de 1a Molle Captain Charry, and three or fonr other Companies in his room, as
alſo he had ſent for ſome of mine 3 and had given the Government of Grofſ ette to Mon=
fieur de la Molle. I was ſcarce laid down in my bed, when my two light horſe return'd
telling me that Don Arbro was marching by Torch-light along the Valley I ſpoke of before
cowards 1a Rocqne : Whereupom! I immediately acquainted the Prior with the news, and
preſently got to horſe with all the Cavalry we could make, commanding Captain Andre
Cofteaux, Nephew to the Cardinal of Towrnon, to march his Company without Baggage
in all haſte after me, and that he ſhould march through the woods, to which end I gave
him two Gentlemen of Sienna to be his Guides. In the mean time, and an hcur before day
I arriv*d at la Recqne de Baldoc, and by break of day came Andre Caſteaux with his Com-
pany, who was ſcarcely entred in, when the Avenues were all ſeiz*d by the Enemy, and
che Guides raken, who had led me the way, as they were upon their return , together
with the Quartermaſter of my Company, from whom che Enemy learn'c thatT had puc
my ſelf into it, I then diſparcht away two Peſants through che woods to 1a Groſſette, by
whom I writ to Monficar de 1a Mole, that he ſhould wich all poſſible ſpeed go, and pur
himſelf into Hortalfin, and that he ſhould there command as the Kings Lieutenant; for

that

BooxIV9o de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

ce - Nr Ss II
that I was ſhut up in /a Roeqne, and reſolv'd to defend the place, Don efrbro quar=
cer'd his Camp at Avignon over againſt /a Rocque; and there ſtaid three dayes debating
with himſelf whether he ſhould artaque me, or no 3 bur in the end he reſolv'd to re-
tire, knowing with whom he had to do, and ſaying, Faro a Dios, 4 qguel Capitan tiene
alguns Diavoles en ſa poder, 0 aj alguntradudor tras nos otros &* fs Io pnedo ſaber yo tengo de
cortar li los braſſos, y los piernos - this was his care, but my mind was evermore at work,
and day and night medirating what I ſhould do if I were in my Enemies place z he has
che ſame underſtanding that you have, and ſtratagems as well as you ; ſo that medita-
ting of what he medirares, you (hall ofren jump, and by that means counterplot to whac
he his plotting againſt you ; whereas if you ſtay expeRing whar he will do, you ſhall
very often be ſurpriz*d. You ought therefore ro be in a perperual jealouſie of your Ene-
mics deſigns, and {till gueſſing art what he intends to do , whether to actaque this place,
or that part 2 it I were in his {tcad I wonld do this thing or thar, and often conſulc your
Captainsz for ir may fall out, thathe of whom perhaps you have the leaſt opinion, may
ofcen give you the beſt advice, Bur in the end Don Arbrs return'd, and went to ouarter
his Army at Alteſſe, which 1s no more than three miles from Montalſm, where ſeeing his
deſign I return'd ro my own Quarters, and ſent Monficur de Ia Aolle back to Groſſette.
Don Arbro put three Companies into Piance, two of Italians, and a third half Spaniſh,
and half 1ta!ian, for the Governor he had left there was a Spaniard, and Signior Bartolo-
meo de Leſtepha, Nephew to Signior Chiapino Vitelli, who had one of the beſt and che
ſtrongeſt Companies in all /taly, kept all the priſoners, tothe number of berwixe fifry
and threeſcore in the Palace. After a few days heretreated with his Army to Sienna, all
his Enterprizes vaniſhing into ſmoak. The Marquis of Peſcara's Enſign went roo and
fro, and cook great pains in Jabouring the deliverance of cheir people in exchange of ours ;

upon which Treaty Don Arbro ſent me a Jear, ſaying, No ſera dics, que yo rendra #n A rant of Don
Frances, que yo no tenga tres Eſpagnoles y per eſtas barbas ys harre os mins : & ellos non drbro;de Cenda,

hauran los (mos. Cardinal Burges was by no means pleaſed with this manner of proe
ceeding, and would have been glad thac all the priſoners might have been ſer ar liberty
both on the one fide and the other ; for I had the Captains ontillor and Carillon, Gover-
nors of Poxt- Hercole and Bonconvent, and above twenry others, twelve of which were na-
cural Spaniards, beſides the rewo Governors. I took the huſfing anſwers Don Arbro. lent
me invery high diſdain, and to mend the matter had almoſt every day news brought me
that he almoſt ſtarv'd his Priſoners to death,whilſt T on the contrary treated his exceedingly
well. Inthis indignacion I reſfolv'd upon an Enterprize, which was to go and give a Sca-

ladoto Piance : for I had been advertiz'd that the King of Spain had given Sienna to the The King 'of

Dake of Florence , together with che other places he held in T#ſcany, and that the ſaid
Duke was {ending three Companies of Foot, and a Troop of Horſe to Piance. 1 very
well foreſaw, that after he had once taken poſleſſion there, we could not poſſibly recover it
without breaking with the Duke of Florence, which I would by no means do, thar the
Duke of G#iſe might not be neceſſicated ro weaken his Camp to relieve me ; and more-
over I had ever been upon very good terms with' the Duke of Florence, without creating
any ching of a Quarr*l. In affairs of this tickle nature we muſt go warily and diſcreecly
ro work ; for a little thing will ſerve to break the Alliance of Princes, which once bro-
ken is nor ſoeafily piec'd again, and ſeveral raſh young people have by their indifcretion
ſer their Princes - together by the ears contrary. to their own defire.

Captain Fasſtin de Peyrouſe, who had been in Piance, had cold me that there was a
hole in the wall on chat fide coward Afontalſin, by which the filch of the Town was
evacuated, and, that 1n this place, where there were two walls, the outer wall was above
the reach of a Ladder, and thac within ſome fourteen or fifreen Raves high ; and chat fo
ſoon as one ſhould be paſt thorough che hole, which muſt be upon his .belly, and in the
dirt, he ſhould find himſelf berwixt theſe ewo walls. Upon chis information I had
caus'd a Ladder to be made of the height requir'd for] the inner wall, buc it was fo very
weak and flender, that it might paſs thorough this hole, char a man could very uneafily
ſupport himſelf upon it, In this part of che wall there wasa Baſtion ac the corner of che
Town, that Don Ariro had caus'd to be perteRed, which was of a ſufficient height, and
berwixc the hole and the Baſtion was a gate the enemy had wall'd up wich brick and cla

only, not caring ro make ic of berrex matter, foraſmuch as they had caſt up a Rampier of

earth wirhin.

I order'd char Captain Blacon with his own Company, and another of Italians char 1
had caug'd ro come from Groſſette, and the Baron de Clermont my Nephew wich my Com-
pany, and abour ewenty Launces of chat of the Count de Petillans, rogether with chircy
or forty Gentlemen of Sienne, ſhould go put themſelves berwixr Piance and fonte- Pwl-

frago

Spain gives Si-
enuna to ihe
Duke of F!g-

rene,

An Enterprjze
of the Situr de
Moatluc,

SC.

> 4 mm.
_ Fo

184.

bh IE

The death of
CaprainLr!ff an,

T hoſe of Pj-
auce have 1n-
relligence of
the Sieur de
Mantluc's de-
gn.

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book LY"

fiano to fight the Duke of Florence his people, who came to cake polletfion of the Town,
I had alſo cans'd three hundred men ro come from Chu, that che Dake of Somme hag
ſent me, who was return'd from the Dake of Giſe his Camp, upon ſome wordsthar hag
paſt berwixe Cardinal Caraffs and him, and thoſe were to ſtorm by a corner of the
Town on that ſide by which they came 5 Captain Bartolomeo de Peſero, was to fall on
by the Gate, that on his fide look'd rowards Montizel, which the Enemy kept open for
their going in and our, and ro which they were co ſer fire, if they could, and I with
the Lzdders was to aſſault the Baſtion, che dicches of which were not yee made. The
top of the Gate, that was wall'd up, flanck'd the Baſtion, and IT had with me the two
Companies of Abanſon and Andre Cafteanx, that is to ſay, the halt of each, for the reſt
I had lefr ar 2fontalfny and the halt of chat of Caprain L«fſan, who lying ar (aſtetlotie,
and by that means having the furtheſt co march, had ſo heaced himſelf with his diligence,
that he fell ſo extreamly fick by the way, as conſtrain'd him to ſtay at thelittle Hoſpical,
bur he ſent me his Son, who was his Lieutenant, and five or fix days after dyed of that
ſickneſs : he ſent me alſo the halt of Captain Charry's Company, whom to his great prief
I had lefc behind me 3n Afentalſin, I having no body alſo co leave there, Signior 2fa-
rien! tcing gone to Rome, and the Prior his Brother upon ſome buſineſs of his own to
their own houſe, To be ſhore, I might have on my ſide four hundred men in all, three
bundred that came from Chsf/, and an hu:.dred men that Captain Bartolomeo had, which
was all the Forces I had at this aſſault. We had alcogether concluded, that the Duke
of Somma's Italians ſhould be of the party, who alſo himſelf very much defir'd to be
there ; Bur I would nor ſead for him, foralmuch as Chafi, of which he was Governor,
was a place of very great importance, and ſhould I chance co be kill'd, I would not that
the Garriſons ſhould be. left withour ſome good Chiet to provide for their defence, ill
Monſieur de Gaiſe could ſend ſome ſufficient perſon co command the Countrey, We nuwſt
provide forall adventures, as well in caſe we be beacen, asif we overcome, by which means
in going to execurean Enterprize, we ſhall do nothing unadviſedly, and for which we
may reaſonably be condemn'd. We had appointed to be every one of us two hours be-
fore day at the place where he was to fall on, where thoſe of the Duke of Soma and
Captain Partolomeo were to fall on firſt, ro the end they might divert che Enemics Forces
from char ſide by which I was toarraque the place, char fide 1 was to undercake, being
by much the ſtrongeſt, by reaſon of the Baſtion, and che Flankers over che Gate, the wall
where the hole was, maxing a part of thecorner. I gave thecharge of carrying the Lad-
der to the Gentlemen of my Train, who were paid by the King, entreating them to en-
rer the hole, thoſe were Caprain Trappe , who is now with the Admiral, A»flons Ne-
phews to my late Wife, Captain Cofſeil, who now carries my Enſign, Captain Ia Zfozte,
Caſtet, Sagret, Captain Bidonnet, Captain Boxrg, who is yer living , and has a foot
Company, and two or three others, and after chem wenty 7talians thar Captain Fasſtin
de Peyronſe (the ſame who had been broken at the going ont of Piance) had brought wich
him, all choſen men, who were to mount the Ladder, afeer mine ſhould be gotten ups
The ſaid Caprain, and another of his- own Company were firſt co paſs chorongh the
hole, and draw in the Ladder, becauſe they knevy the place, vvhich none of my people
did.

I arriv'd chen vvichin a quarter of a mileof che Tovyn, vvhere I made a halt, yyhilſt
the Baron de Clermont and Blacon march'd forvvards, and vvent to planc chemfelves abour
a mile from the Tovvn, upon a road that leads rovvards Aonte-Prifano and. vyhen I
had ſtaid abour an hour, vvithout longer expeRing vvhen the 7talians ſhould begin, as I
had given order they ſhould, knovving the day began to approach : I ſenc one of my
Guides to diſcover after the moſtſecrer manner he could, and my Yalet de Cambre, who
is yet living, vvenc up vvithin tyventy paces of the Baſtion, and heard no noiſe in the
Tovvn, no morethan if there had been no body vvichin it, . ſaving that they heard alic-
tle Dog bark. They knevv of my coming over night, and ſo vvith their matches ready
cock*d, in great ſilence expe&ted my aſſault. I could not, ic ſhould ſeem, march our ſo
ſecretly, though I had caus'd the gates to be ſhut up three hoursbefore, bur chat ſome ho-
neſt man or another had gor out and carried them intelligence of my deſign, Novy, ſo
ſoon as the Guide and my Valet de Cambre vvere come back, and had cold methac they
could hear no noiſe ar all, I vvould my felf go vvith them, once again, vvhen being come
vvichin fiftcen or fixteen paces of the Baſtion, I perceiv*d a man vvichin five or fx paces
of us, who went creeping along and retir*d covyards the Baſtion, and 1 believe encred
by the ſaid Baſtion, vvhere vve now heard them ralk, and thought they ſpoke Dutch, bur
they vvere Albayozs, for Signior Bartolomeo Leſt affa had of them in his Company, and
che ſajd Signior had taken upon him the defence of the Baſtion. Secing then chat che

day

Ra
nw

—

BooxIV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

—_—_—. —— —_— —_—_—__ e-— -
'

— darn eco i So ents eu ey -_

Licutenant) wonld give me the honor to begin ; bur this Raſcal did not do jt our of re-
ſpe) Captain Bartolomeo allo expeAting when the one or the other ſhould begin the
Game, I was by theſe delays conſtrain*d my ſelf firſt to fall on, and although I knew:

both by this Cencinel Perdu, and che great lence in the Town, that che Enemy had
me in che wind, yet having taken the pains to come (o far, I was reſoly'd to try my for-
runc.

The Italian and French Gentlemen above nam'd took the Ladder, and we took the
other Ladders to ſtorm the Baſtion, which I caus'd to be carried by the Caprains, Lieu-
renants, Serjeants, Corporals and Lance-paſſades, and in this manner march*d up dire-
ly to the Baſtion, where, acour firſt approach they gave usa great Volley of Harquebuz
ſhot 3 bur we defiſted not for all char co rear our Ladders, and I had made an Order, thac
all che Commiſlaries both of War and Proviſions, Treaſurers and Comptrollers, ſhould cver-
more be provided of great horſes and arms (for theſe people have always money ) which
] always took with me under my own Cornet to Troop up and make a ({hew, to deceive
the Enemy. Monficur de Griſe had ſent Monhieur Malsſſiſe (whois now Lord of R1iſſi )
to bechiet Treaſurcr, 1 gave this man a Turkiſh horſe, if Thad now ſuch a one, I would
not take for him five hundred Crowns, a courtcfie thac he very ſcurvi'y repaid, and as ill
return'd my friendthip, for he broughc me into diſgrace wich the Duke of -Gaiſe, as he
does now wich the Qveen, as muchas in him lies, as I am inform'd from Courc ; and
T have my ſelf alſo perceiv'd it, and with God would do me the favoar, as to pur her
Majeſty in mind, how much I am her Servant, and have formerly been where occaſions
have preſented themſclves, which have perhaps been greater than ever Queen was involy'd
in, that her Majeſty might cake notice, the ought not lightly ro give credit to my Ene-
mies to my prejudice, <f{pccially ſuch as never have done, nor never will do, ſo many
and faithful ſervices as I have done. But I ſhall have patience in God, having my con-
ſcience clean, both as to thar and all other affairs concerning the ſervice of the King and
his Crowne I had atchis time diſcover*d nothing of the praQtiſesof the ſaid Sieur de 31a
laſſiſe, who prevail'd ſo far, that Monſieur de Guiſe call'd me co his own perſon, and
gave my command to Monlieur de 1a Mole, for he had an opinion that they ewo toge-
ther could manage affairs better, and more to cheir own advantage than I. I ſhall noc
here ſer down the Reaſons, foraſmuch as ic might be ſaid, I did ic in revenge of the ill
will he bears me, and conſequently char T bear bim, being a liccle impatienc of injury
as Iam, and who would willingly bear in my device, if I had not one already, what one
of the Houle of Candale gave for his Motto Qui ms aimera, ie I aimerai. Bur there ate
many worchy perlons yet living who very well know the occaſion, which if chey pleaſe to
tell ir, the (tory will not be much to his advantage. |
- But co leave this diſcourſe (not much caring whether he wiſh me well or ill; ) I lefc
him with Captain Charry, though the Captain had been very importunace co go along :
but I made account that he being in the Town, if T happened codie, would be much af-
fiſting ro che Citizens in encouraging them, whilſt in expeRacion of him the Duke of
Guiſe ſhould ſend, tos he was a man of underſtanding, and very eloquent co perſwade.
To return then to my Treaſurers and Commiſſaries, I made chem gallop round abour the
Town (chey being ficter to pur people in fear, than ro do any execution) by chis means
ro diverc the Inhabitants from one place to another. |

We gave the Scalado then almoſt all at once, and our men were chree times bexcen off,
and our Ladders all broken ſaving one or two. Now I muſt tell you ro what uſe ſery'd-
the taking of chis hole. All of chem entred into ir one after another, and ſo ſoon as they
had ſer the Ladder to the lower wall to enter the Town, my Gentlmen all mounted, and
from the top of the wall leapt down upon a Dunghil into the Town ; when ſo ſoon as
Captain Faxſtins and his twenty men ſaw ours got in, they would follow after in all haſte,
in doing which chey ſo overcharg'd the Ladder thar it broke. Theſe inconſiderate ardours
oftentimes occaſion the miſcarriage of brave Enterpizes. The hole was within four or five
paces of the gate that was walled up, and che Enemy over ic minded nothing bur thoot-
ing at our people, who were ſtorming the Baſtion, and having their backs rowards the
hole, knew nothing of our people being entred in. The /talians tried to piece the Lad-
der with girdles, but ir would not be, wherefore they were conſtrain'd to creep our at
che ſame hole by which they had entred, and Captain Faxſtinocame to tell me the mil-
fortue of my people, which pur me to my wits end, ſeeing char in atrempting to reco-
yer thoſe who were already priſoners, I had been ſo unfortunate as to loſe all the Gendle-

Off: men

An order of the
Sieur de Mont-

Top

The French
repuly'd,

185
day would preſently break upon us, and having loſt all hopes of our 1talians (who though The Sieur de -

rhey were come 25 I underſtood after 4 yer the Duke de Sora had given the com- May

. | 'luc goes cg
mand of them to ſome one, who had no mind to. dye the firſt, or elſe (as being the Kings diſcoyer Pjanc?

4

mr I
ET ans

186

The Commentaries of Meſſice Blaize Book IV

— —— _——_—

men I had, and was reſolv'd to play a deſperate Game. It was already broad day, ani
che Sun began to riſe, all our people Leing beaten off, and ſculking behind certain walls
that were there, when atche Cime time Captain Barfolomes ſent me word that they were

| all bearen off on his fide alſo. I then leapt from my horle to the ground, for T was noc

The Sicur ge
Montluc's
Speech to his
men,

A Caprain can
do much by
his example,

The Baſtion
allaulted,

The Town ta-
ken,

ycr alightcd, and call'd all che Captains together ( Avanſen Son to Monſieur d' Avanſes,
who was Ambaſſador at Rome excepred , who was hurt in the hand with a Harquebuz
ſhot) where I began to remonſtrate co them, that I was come to no other end, bur to
take the Town orto loſe my life, and that if they would follow me, I would lead them
the way : bur wichal chat I was reſolv'd to turn back upon thoſe who ſhould be reſty,
and would kill every man that did not behave himſzlf as he ought to doupon fo brave
an occaſion. Let us goon then friends, (aid I, follow your Captain, and you ſhall ſee we will
acquire honey, Which having ſaid, with my ſword in my hand, anda Page with my Hal-
bert cloſe by me, 1 went direQly up to the Gate, Thad twelve Swiſs of my Guard thar
follow*d me, and alſo did all the reſt, where I obſerv'd, as I had done at other times be-
fore, whar the example of a Leader can do when he goes on in the head of his men, and
leads them the way. I preſently put my ſelf under the Gate, where three or four men
might ſtand unſecn from che Flanks of the Baſtion, whilſt the Enemy who were over che
Gate plyed our people with a tempeſt of ſhot and ſtone, The Swiſs in the mean time
with their Halberts did their endeavour againſt chis Wall of Brick. I had my (ſword in
my lefr hand, and my dagger in my right, with which T broke and cur the bricks, when
having made a hole wide enough to pat in my arm, I gave my {word and dagger to the
Capcain of my S»i/s, and thruſt both my arms into it, The Wall was the thickneſs of
one brick only, and there was bur very little clay, for ic was in a manner a dry Wall :
when having found the inner rim of the Wall, and therchickneſs of ir, I puiVd the Wall
rowards me with ſuch force, that all the upper part fell upon me, and cover'd me all over,
inſomuch thar the Captain of my Guard was fain to draw me our from under che bricks
and che rubbiſh, which he did, and again ſet me upon my feerz after which with our
Halberts we preſently bear it totally down to the ground. The Enemy had not finiſhr
the Terrafs they had caſt up behind this Gate, of which chere wanted abour two foot to
the top of the Arch, and there I had two Swiſs kill'd, and the Captain wounded with
a Harquebuz ſhot in his thigh, and fourteen or fifteen Soldiers ſlain or wounded. I a-
gain made the Enſignes by the two Ladders renew the Afſaulr to che Baſtion, bur for all
thar they ceaſed not to ſhoot from the Flancks of the Baſtion. Now from the Baſtion
tothe Gate where I fought, ic was no more than thirty paces only : I then call'd our to
the Soldiers, to go fetch me the Ladders that had been broken againſt che Baſtion, telling
them that the ſhorteſt were the beſt ; for the height of the Terraſs was not above two
yards I think hardly fo much ; and ſo ſoon as the Ladders were brought I clape them
fide to fide, and put a Harquebuzeer upon the one Ladder, and my ſelf upon the other,
and three one in the heels of another, after the firſt Soldier, and ewo ef my Swiſs afcer
thoſe three, I then ſpoke ro him who was foremoſt, and went up firſt, that he ſhould |
preſently ger up, and diſcharge his Harquebuz amongſt them within , which he accord-
ingly did, and as he fir*d I toox him by the breeches, and puſht him in, making him
take a leap he never intended, for our two Ladders toucht ; and then I began to cry ouc
co thoſe who were upon the other Ladder, and to puſh them forwards, ſaying, leap Soldi-
ers, and I ill leapin after you; which ſaid I puſht that fellow 1n, another after him, and
the other after him 35 and when they were all tumbled in, he that could firſt riſe clape
hand to his ſword, my two Swiſs leapt in after 3 ſeeing which I leapr down on our own
fide. and again began to cry fall vn Captains, fall en, the Town's our own, our men arein ;
« hereupon they one after another threw themſelves headlong into the place. Thoſe Gentle-
men of mine who were entred by the hole had been perceiv'd ar break of day, and being
charg'd by the Enemy had recover'd a houſe, the door of which they ſtoutly defended ;
which did me a great deal of good, part of thoſe who defended the Gare being run thither,
not chinking ic poſſible T ſhould enter there 3 and ſo ſoon as the Enemies who aſſaulred
the Gentlenn heard the cry of France, France, behind them, they forſook the Gentle-
menz and would havereturn'd ro the Gate 5 when the Gentlmen ſallying our afcer them,
and hearing the fame cry of France, France, they knew our people were centred the Town,
{> that by fortune they were engag*d berwixr our two parties, and there all cut ro pieces.
Now immediately upon che killing of theſe , an Enfign of theirs who was in the place
came running direaly towards the Gate, bur my Genclemen being joyned with thoſe thar
encred laſt, the ſaid Enſign found whom to talk withal, and they handled him as they
had done the reſt. Ar the ſame time thatour. people entred, I cried out to them, thac

they thould afſaulc rhe Baſtion on the infide within the Town, which they did ; but they

chete

Book IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

there found a very great reſiſtance, by reaſon char che greateſt part of che Company ot Gens-
d'arms was there, who fought it to a miracle. |

Now (as the conrages of men encreaſe when they ſee themſelves in hopes of vitory) to
forget nothing of char they ought ro do in well and furiouſly affaultitig ; having encour-
raged my people, I lefr the Gate, and ran to the Enfigns who were upon the Ladders of
che Baſtion, crying our to them , that all our men were got in, and that therefore chey
ſhould throw themſelves headlong inco the Baſtion, which chey did, withour mzecing
che oppoſition they expeRed, foraſmuch as our men held them ſo ſhort, that chey wege
not able co anſwer us both within and wirhout z and ſo ſoon as I ſaw our Enſigns got in,
1 remounted to horſe, and with the Commiſſaries and Treaſurers rode all along by che
walls, where all choſe chac leapt over the walls to eſcape away I canſed to be ſlain.

Now to return to our fiſt Priſoners, our people followed cheir execution, till chey came
to the place where they found Signior Bartolom'o de Leſteffa, with the remainder of his
Company, who made no great defence, for already our people ran all along the ſtreets
of the Town, and even along the very Walls of ir. The Jtalians came to enter by che
Wall, that was not too high, and helped one another up ; Captain Bartolomeo de Pezero
had alſo ſer fixe to che Gate, as he had premiſed to do, bur was chere hurt with a Har-

uebuz ſhot chrough the bucrocks, and could nor poſſibly enter there, by reaſon of che
Fern fire that flam'd in che ſaid Gate, They had placed eighteen or twenty Spaniards
for the Guard of the Pwyſoners that were1n the Palace, fifty or chreeſcore in number, and
had tied them two and two together, as they told me after, who ſo ſoon as ever they

heard the Cry of France, Prance, in the great place adjoyning co the Palace, they began co The Priſoners
juſtle one another, parricularly Caprain rms hy , who was the firſt char got his arms at free themſelves

libercy, when being all freed from cheir bonds, they flew upon cheir Guard wich ſuch
fury, that what with their own weapons, and whar with ſtones, they kill'd che greateſt
part of them upon the place, and che remainder kept priſoners, and brought them out with
them. And this was the fortunate and unexpected deliverance of our Priſoners. |

It now remains to know what ſucceeded upon che command I had given to che Baron
de Cleremont, and Captain Blacon, The Duke of Florence his Companies both of horſe and
foot had ſer out of Moutepnlſiano, and were coming towards. Piance, it being no more
than three miles from the one to the other, when being in che midway} and hearing
ſuch Volleys of Harquebaz ſhot, they ſent our fix horſe before to ſce what the miatter was.
Of theſe, chree fell into our Ambuſcado, and were taken, the other three got away; and
made their people return faſter than they came : ſo that the Baron could nor poſſibly
come to fight them. In the foremention'd aQion of the caking of Piance, Signior Bar-
tolomeo Leſfepha his Lieutenant and Enſign were all taken, and the Governor who wasa
Spaniard alſo, but his Enſign was ſlain. Captain Piſtoye (fo called for being a Native of
Piſtoye) his Lieutenant and Enfign were likewiſe taken, cogerher with che Lieutenanc
and Enſign of an /talian Captain, call'd Aldetto Placits, a Siennoir, who two dayes be-
fore was gone out to ſolicit for rheir pay before they departed che Town.

This was the ſucceſs of che Scalado of Piance, which hapned upon St, Peters Eve, an
ation highly reputed chroughour all /zaly. All che Capcains and Soldiers, as well» 7:a-
liens as French, ſaid 1 had taken che Town my ſelf alone, and not they, *and chat had I
not done as Idid, and had they not ſeen meſo couragious and reſolute, chey would ne-
ver more have come near the Walls, having been three cimes ſo ſmartly repuls'd. Had ic
been Gods will that thoſe the Duke of Florence ſeat from CMontepulſiano to Plance had ſer
our but an hour ſooner, they had nat heard our Harquebuz thot by the way, and had fallen.
into the Baron de Cleremont, and Captain Blacen's Ambuſcado, who lay ſo ready and well
planted for them, char they would ecafily have been defeated and cur to pieces; for they
no ſooner heard the report of the three horſe that eſcaped, bur that they immediacely all
faced about, and in diſorder fled away towards 1ZontepulSano. I lefein Piance to com-
mand there Captain Fanſtino, vvho had been there before, and had yer fifty or chreeſcore-
of his Company left, which Caprain Bartolomeo Pezero had ever kept for him, and more-
over now lent him his Licutenant with a hundred Soldiers of his own Company :
and about noon as I vvas about to mount to horſe to return to Montal/in, and (ending
every one avvay to his ovvn Garriſon , the Captains vvih cheir Lieurenancs and Enfigns
brought me a hundred or fixſcore horſes of ſervice, vvhich had been taken in this aRion,,
beſides Pad-nags and Mules, entreating me to cake of chem vyhar I pleaſed for my ovvn
ule ; and amongſt others Caprain Trape entreared me to accept of a Courſer of Naples,
rhe moſt beauriful and the bcſt horſe in all Ttaly, rhough I accepred. none of all choſe
they offer'd me, bur that cf Caprain Trape only, vyhuch Monſieur de Giſe aftervvards
ſent to encreat of me, 2nd I gave him to him.

of |

4 To q

A ——_ —————————————————

ga_—

138

—_—_—

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boos IV,

The Sicur de
Montluc's Ie
rurn to Mog-
talſins

The Siepe of
SORRY

Llteſſe taken +

F1

I came back to Montal/in vvith no more than the three halt Companies I had taken
thence vvith me, after vvhich I order'd to march all the Captains vve had raken priſo,
ners, and ſome fevy Soldiers yvho vvere priſoners alſo, for there vvere nor many fav'd ;
Next after the Priſoners I march'd my ſelf, and all my Capcains vvichcheir Colours flying,
and behind me the Gentlmen of my Train carried the horſe Corner , and che three En-
figns vve had caken ; and in the rear cfall the foor marched the Baron de Cleremont vvith
my Troop, and the Gentleman of Sienna all on horſeback in the rear of all. I do belieye
there was, not a man nora vyoman left in the vvhole City, for they vvere all come out to
ſee me enterz excepting the Caprain of the people, the Council, and Magiſtracy, ro vvhom
I had ſent a Gentlemen before ro entreat them not to ſtir from rhe Palace, ac vvhich
I vvent and alighted, and entred in arm'd as I vvas, vvith the foreſaid Enſigns vve had
raken carried before me , where firſt in few words I gave them an account of the means
I had uſed to bring about ſo hazardous an Enterprize, and after whac manner the Town
had been taken, not without obſerving by their looks, thar they had ſo great a performance
in high admiration : Afcer which I exhorred them co continue the fidelity they had pro-
miſed to the King my Maſter, and not to abandon the hopes of recovering their liberty
and Capital Ciry, God having manifeſted to them by ſo grear and ſo happy a viRory, char
he would neither forſake them, nor any who fought in their Quarrel. And to ſhew them
thar I bore arms in order to their ſervice only, and for the recovery of their Countrey, I
preſented the horſe-Cornet, and the three Enfigns I had taken; which having received
wich the greateſt acknowledgements, and the higheſt applauſe thac could to man be at-
cributed, they upon the inſtant cauſed to be ſer up inthe great Hall of the Palace diſplay*d,
a thing that did no whic leſſon the reputation I had acquir*d eicher with chem at Rowe
or elſewhere, where the report of this Enterpriſe and execution was divulg'd and ſpread
abroad. 7

After this no occaſion preſented it ſelf worth ſpeaking of ſaving two, of which this #as
one. Don Arbro went to befiege Chazy,which Captain Moretto Calabras, who was ar Mon-
zepeſcayo, had by praRuce ſurpriz'd from the Enemy, The ſaid Don eArbro had thirty En-
ſigns of foot before ir, three pieces of Canon, and fix hundred horſe, IT departed then a
liccle afrer noon from Mentalfin with five Enfigns of foot , and about foreſcore or a hun«
dred horſe, and by break of day came to Montepeſeayo, where I cauſed little ſacks ro
be made to carry powder in, tothe number of ewenty, which all of them might contain a=
bout three hundred pound of powder. From eMontepeſcayo to Chaxy ir is fix miles, Their
Artillery was not yet arriv'd, but it came the ſame morning that I came away, and about
noon I departed from Aontepeſcayo, and went to encamp my ſelf juſt over againſt the
Enemies Camp , at the diſtance of a quarter of a mile , and abour as far from the Town,
for they were already encamped before it , and never ſo much as once ſent ro diſcover me.
The place was worth nothing, for we had not had time to fortifie it, and in the beginning
of the night I took the Lieutenant of Captain Awvanſon, call'd St. Gentes , with thirty
Pikes and thirty Harquebuzeers, which I meant to venture co try if there might be any
means co preſerve it; and being that chere was a lictle Rivoler noc above three paces broad
betwixt them and me, I ſenc the ſaid St. Genies and Captain Charry with a hundred Har-
quebnzeers to accompany him, whilſt I with the Horſe and a hundred Harquebuzcers
wenr to give them an Alarm in cheir Camp. St. Genjes got in with the powder,aud all che
Soldiers, four or five Pikes excepted, and all night long I kept them in Alarm to make them
think that I would repoſe my ſelf in the morning : when having diſcoyer'd me they would
come to fight me, confidering I had no more Forces bat five foot Enfigns only ; wherein
I deceiv'd them, for withour taking any reſt at all, and without ſorznd of Trumpet or
bear of Dram I began to retreat through the Woods,and ro take my way direRly for 1fon-
talſin, marchingewelve miles without ſtop or ſtay ; and then s 267 the banks of a ſmall Ri-
ver I made a halt, where all both horſe and foor baited upon ſome provifion I had cauſ-
ed to be brought upon Aſſes; where neyerthele(s I did not ſtay above an hour and a half,
bur went on ſtraight ro Moxtalſin. Now the ſame day that I departed from Chazy, a-
bour noon they had planted their Artillery without being able nevercheleſs ro make a
breach cill the next morning,

The ſame day thar I departed from Chazy I arriv'd in the Evening at 2fontalſn, which
was thirty miles, and after I came home made them ro work all night co make ready a
Canon, and a ercat Culverin we had, with which about nine of the clock the next morn-
ing I wenr to batter Alteſſe a ſtrong Caſtle berwixt Bonconvent and fontalſin. I batter'd
it by che Gace where ic had been the leaſt fortified, and in the Evening they ſurrenderupe
on Quarter only, chere being threeſcore men in ir. The next morning T went to take three
or four Caſtles thereabours, which were not ſtrong, bur only ſupported themſelves under

favous

Book IV. bp de Montluc;, Mareſchal of Fratice.

A ttt,
CE ee ee .—_—_ nn ee ns

favour of the Foruels of Alteſſe. Of all this day the Artillery never ſtirr'd from Alteſſe,
but however I cook the Caſtles, After this I was adviſed t> go and batrer Binconvent,
whereupon I wenr to viewit, and cauſed Gavions ſpeedily to be made before 1r, making
ſhew as if I incended a Siege 3 though ic wasonly co divers Don Arbro from mtking any
farther atcempts, fearing leſt after he had taken Chuzy (which I made no queſtion buc
he would do) he might go and fit down before Aontepeſcaillo, where Captain A4o-
retto was, and two or three other places, which only ſubfſted under the prote&ion of
Meontepeſcaillo ; and the ſame day that I made a (hew of befieging Bonconvent , 1 lent
Signior Mariozl de Santa Fiere , Captain Serres my Lieutenant, and che Baron de Clere-
wont my Enſign to ſcour the ficld as far as the walls of Sienna, where they had the fot-
rune to meet with a foot Company that was going from Senna to put themſelves into two

Caſtles hard by thoſe I had taken, which they cur all in pieces, excepting the Captain, the The Sieunsis
Lienrenant, and the Enſign, who being all mounted got away, All this was perform'd defeated.

in three dayes, reckoning from the day that I departed from before Chazy. The Alarm
of this defeat was ſo great at Sienna, that Cardinal Burgos ſent 1n all haſte to Don Arbro
to leave all and return to Sjenns, for that he greatly feared the Sienzoir would revolt and
receive me into Sienna, conſidering the violent aftetion they had for me in the City, So
chat had thoſe of Chyzy been able ro hold out a day longer he had given chem over, buc
the ſecond day having made a very great Breach , for the wall was a very weak one, and
chere being but few men within it, they were forc'd to ſurrender. The Lieutenant of
Captain Moretto Calabres was in it with part of the Company of che ſaid Moretto, and
abour fiveand fifty that entred with Sr, Gentes only, ſo that there was not above a hundred
men in all. The nexr day after Signior arial had defeated this toor Company, all che
Captains who were with me were of opinion that I ſhould go and batter. Bonconvent ; but [
{jd to themtheſe words. You know Gentlmen that ſince yeſterday two of elick in the after-
noow we have nt heard the Artillery play at Chuzy, which we heard plainly from Alceſle, by
which you may conclude, either that they are ſurrendred, or taken by force. If they be ſur-
rendred Don Arbro will not ſtay an hoar there, to try if he can ſnap us in the field, for there

7 no guſtion to be made, bat that he has receiv'd the Alarm of the foot Company you defeated
yeſterday by Sienna 5 and that thereupon Cardinal Burgos has ſent to him to come back to ſave
the reſt of the (aſt les which are neareſt to Sienna(for as 1 cook the other Caſtles I immediarely
diſmantled and pulled them down, (as I alſo did by eMltefſe.) Let us therefore conſider
things a little; if our people be ſurrendred the Gamp will not tarry above two henrs before
Chuzy 1 if they be taken by aſſault, the Town is ſo poor that the Soldiers would need but this
laſt night only to ſack it , and will be this morning two honrs before day upon their march,
which thongh it be thirty miles off, yet will the eg Artillery be here before noon : for Don Ar-
bro knows very well , that I have not 4 hundred horſe in all 1 can make, nor above ſix hn
dred men in theſe five Enſigns, wherefore the reaſon of War requires you ſhould do as I ſay.
Let me intreat you therefore that we preſently fall to drawing off our Canon , and owr foet,
and if things do not fall out as I have ſaid, let me bear the blame, Captain Meretto's Lieus
renant, and St. Genies had what conditions they deſir'd, for the haſte Don Arbrs was
intoreturn ; for they march'd ont with Bag and Baggage, and Enſign they had none.
I then fer fire ro the remainder of Alteſſe that could nor ſo ſuddenly be pulled down, and
lefe Captain. Serres with rwenty horſe upon a little eminence by Altefſe, from whence
they might diſcover as faras a Wood, which was Don Arbro's way to return ; and when I
was gt within a mile of JZontalfin Caprain Serres ſent rwo Troopers full fpeed to tell me,
that he began to diſcover rcheir Cavalry coming out of the Wood 3 whereupon I left the
foot Captains with ropes, and the ſtrength of the Soldiers to help the Oxen away with
the Arallery , and Signior £Mariczl and I with the horſe return'd back to Captain
Serres. Bur ſo ſoon as we came to Captain Serres, we from another liccle hill diſ-
cover'd the Body of their Cavalry already in the Pain , which 1 ſuppoſe had halred
ro ſtay for another Troop that was coming out of the Wood. I leſr Signior JMariewl
rhere to ſuſtein Captain Serres, and ſent to Captain Serres by no means to engage him-
ſelf in a charge , nor ſuffer the Enemy to come near him, buc begin by lictle and lictle

ro retire ; and having left the ſame order with Signior farioal, I gallopped back to a handfome
rhe Artillery, which I found within a quarter of a mile of the Aſcent, and haſtned ic Rectear.

all I could 3 when ſo ſoon as I had got it to the foor of the Hill, I ſaw Signior 1Ma-
rioul coming ar a gooc. round tror, and Caprain Serres following the ſame pace after, 1
made them {bill lug che Artillery up the hill, and could nor get it within fifty paces of che
Gare of the City, bnc that I was conſtrain'd to rake outthe Oxen, and hurry them ints
the Town, placing all onr Infantry along the Vines, and upon the Wall, and draw the
horſe (they being of no furcher ſe) into che Town , which I had no fooner done bur

the

Wo The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox LV.

the Enemy came up to the very toot of the hill. Thus 1 ſay'd all, and loſt nothing by well
computing therime they had co come from Ehnzy to be upori us, and chorough che greac
d.ligence whercwith f made my retrear. |

Take notice then Captains, and remember when you ſhall be in place where you are to

recire before an Enemy ſtronger than your ſelves, ro compute the time wherein he ma
come to fight you, and be diligenc in your retreat, whether by day or by nighr, by which
means you (hall very hardly be ſurpriz'd. Take all chings at che worſt, and imagine your
Enemy to be as diligent to ſarprize you, as youare to prevent being ſurpriz'd. Therea-
fon of war requir'd that I ſhould do as I did, and men muſt evermore be at watch when
they are near an Enemy, fo thac if he be three hours march diſtant from you double your
' ſpecd , and if it be poſſible do that in ewo hows which he may do in three : by which
means having the ſtarr, without an infamous flight, you ſhall leave him nothing bur che
empty Neſt, I but(a man may obje& and (ay) perhaps he will never come near me ac
all, andin che mesntime [retreat without ſeeing an Enemy + bur let metell you, if you
[tay for that, you will be defeated and loft, eſpecially if you have Canon to draw off
with you, which you cannot avatidon bur w:th diſhonor, = | =
I perform d another piece of diligence to relieve Monſieur de Ia Montjoye, a Kinſman of
Tallamea relics mine, whom I had putinto Tallamon. The King of Spins Galleys were departed from

ved by the Cajetta to ſurprize this place, and came to an Anchor before MMomnt Argentanz whom
Sicur de Mont-

Fe {o ſoon as Monſieur de 14 Montjoze had diſcover'd by break of day in the morning, he diſ-

; parch'd a man poſt away to me to give me notice, who made ſo good halle, thar he came
ro Montal/in by four of clock in the afternoon, though icbe no leſs than five and chirc

miles. Withour ſtaying an hour therefore after I heard the news, I departed with four

hunored Harquebozcers, and my own Troop of horſe, marching all night without ſtop ox

ſtay, until I cameo a Village within three miles of Groſſette, which was ſeven and ewenty

miles, and Icame chicher by Sun rife, where I made the Soldiers eat ſomeching, and

bait their horſes, whilſt 1 gallopped away to Groſſette, where I heard char the Enemy

were all abour Taſlamon, which made me ſuddenly to cauſe three hundred Harquebuzeers

of thoſe of the Garriſon of Greſſette to paſs a River half a mile from thence , upon Aﬀes

and Horſes ; ſo that by that time my own men whom I had left baiting were come to the

River, the three hundred men were paſs'd over, and upon their march, I then ſen

rwo Troopers to the ſaid Sieur de ontjoye, wo bid him ſtand firm, for that I was there

to relieve him, though he could ſcarce believethe news, not thinking ic poſſible I could

be there fo ſoon, but that ſome body had ſenc him ſuch word only to pur him in heart.

The Enemy had landed three or four hundred men, and rwo Gallies came and plyed
him with a great number of Canon ſhor, the thunder of which 1 no ſooner heard, buc tha I
advanc'd with my Horſe, and the three hundred Foot, that were already got over, and
Icfr Captain (harry to paſs over thoſe that I had brought from Montalſin; when, ſo ſoon
as the Enemy ſaw ſo long a Train of men, and thar I advanc'd with the three hundred
Foot and the Horſe, they all caſt themſelves into the water ; ſo eafily were they perſwa-
ded out of their fury. It was exceffively hot, and many of them were in the water to
the armpits : I had made account to have fought them, ler them be what numberche
would, for I was very ſuxe they had no Horſe : but I found char part of the Gallies were
reimbarking the Soldiers about Tallamsn, and at the old Port, ſo that before I could pet to
them chey were all aboard, and put out to ſea toward EMonnt-Argentan, Where the reſt
of the Gallies lay. I believe they thought chat Monſieur de Montjoye would ſurrender upon
the Canon ſhot chey playd from the Gallies, bur he was too brave a Gentleman tobe ſo
eaſily frighted as they imagin'd. He was ſince lain in the late troubles ar Ambeterre under
Monſieur de Canſens, no can give teſtimony of hisvalour.

Captains (my Camrades) you onght nor to think it ſtrange that I have never been defeac-
ed, nor ſurpriz'd where I have commanded in chief, as you (hall never be, if you carry your
ſelves with the ſame vigilance and diligence that throughout my whole lite I have ever
done. I perhaps have made my Soldiers do that never any one made men Co before ;
for I ever had my tongue ac command to remonſtrate to them ( when I have bccn in ou.
where diligence was requir'd ) their own honor, and the ſervice of che King; and alſo
thar by diligence only we were to ſave our own lives. *Tis that that both adds wings to
their teer, and inſpires them with reſolution when the one or the ocher is neceflary. Which
remonſtrances of mine never fail'd of their effet; and when a long march was to be
perform'd, I cans'd bread and wine to be carried along wherewich to refreſh them ; for if
you will haye your Soldiers make a long march, and take nothing wherewith to refreſh
chem, humane bodies are nor made of iron, you muſt cicher leave them by the way, or
at leaſt when you ſhall come to fight chey will be ſo weak, char chey will be able ro do

you

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

Port _"—__ FEEL

191

you very lirtle ſervice , bur raking proviſions along with you to refreth chem, together
with remonſtrances, you ſhall not only make them go, bur run alſo, if you defire them ;
ſo that 8 man muſt never think co excnſe himſelf upon the Soldier, for no man. in Chri-

ſtendom has had more experience of it than my ſelf, and I never ſaw any defe&t .on their
ſide, bur alwayes in the Officers : for a good and prudent Caprain.will make good and
diſcreer Soldiers; amongſt a great many good men ten. or a dozen. Poltrons and Cowards
will grow hardy, and become valiant ; but a cowardly, imprudent and improvident Captain

loſes and ſpoils all. This in groſs was all chat was done whilſt I ſlayd at ontalſin.

[i

Now Monſieur de Gwiſe having been enform'd that I. was like to have been ſurpriz'd at ———g de -
wiſe is angr
with the SHY

de Moxtluc.

eAiteſſe, he writ me a very angry letter, wherein he rold me, that ic ſeem'd I had a mind
co loſe my ſelf, the Country, and all, ro go our after chis manner upon every occaſion
inco the field, and chat if I ſhould chance to be defeated the whole Conntry would be loſt,
he being already ſo weak in men, that he ſhould not be able upon any diſaſter to relieve

ics thar this way of proceeding was commendable enough in a private Captain, but nor
in a Kings Lieutenant, who ought not to expoſe his own perſon but upon very grear occa- ..

fone To which I wric in anſwer, that 1 had been neceſſitaced to doas I did, or other-
wiſe Don Arbro would foor by foot deprive me of the whole Country, that on the other
fide he tnight aſſure himſelf 1 ſhould riſe ſo early, and uſe ſuch diligence, that] would
look well enough to my {elf for being at any time ſurpriz'd, and that therefore he ſhould
not take any thought concerning me; for although Don Arbro had evermore thirty En-
figns in the field, and I but five or fix to anſwer him withall, I would nevercheleſs ſo well
look to his water, thar I would well enough prevent him from bringing abour his de-
figns. Afﬀer this I re.ir'd my ſelf ro che Abby of Sr. Salvadour, fifteen or fixreen miles
from Montalſin towards Rome. About a mile diſtant from che Roman Way there is little
wall'd Town, andan Abby of Azgsſtins, which was founded by King Charles the Little
at hisrecurn from Naples ; for he made ſome abode art this place. All che Church is co-
ver'd with Flower-de-Laces, and the foundation recorded in Parchment z the Religious
of this place are very holy men. |

Being there I receiv d a letter from the Cardinal of Ferrara, (who was at this time
at Ferrara) wherein he writ me the ſad news of the Conſtables being defeated ac St.
Lentin, and thar icwas more than neceſſary I ſhould now more than ever intend his Ma-
zelties affairs, and that if God did not affiſt che King , all was gone in- France, all the
Forces his Majtſty had being loft ac this defeat. Immediately upon this Letter Ireturn'd
b:ck to Montalſin, for fear leſt the Siennois hearing the news, ſhould be torally diſmayd,
where, by remonſtrances and per{ſwafions I comforted them the beſt I could, and afcer-
waids tried co comfort my ſelf. IT had need fo to do, for I gave the Kingdom for loſt,
and it wa: only fav'd by the good pleaſure of God, and nothing elſe, God miraculouſly
blinding the King of-Spain and the Dake of Sevoy's underſtandings, ſo as noc to purſue
their victory diretly to Par - for they had men enow to have left at rhe Siege of Sr.
Onentin againſt che Admiral, and to have followed their victory too ; or aftcr chey had
taken St, Quentin they had as much time as ever, and yer knew not how co do that any
fimple Captain would have done. So that we muſt all acknowledge ic to be the bounty

He excilſes
himſclt.

News of the
loſs of the Bats
rail of Sr,

Guerin,

Diſcourſe upon

of Almighty God, who loves our King, and would not (uffer his Kingdom to be de- *bis sefrar,

ſtroyed. However I did not to the Slennois make che matter alcogerher ſo bad as ic was ,
bur rold them thatthe Lercers I had from France, aflur'd me rhe loſs was bur ſmall, and
_ the King was ſetting an Army on foot, which he would command in his own
perſon. |

Monſieur de Gniſe being at Rowe, by reaſon the King had calld him home to his ſuc-
cour, ſent for me to come to him , which I did poſt; where being come , he there de-
manded of me what it would be neceſſary for him to leave me wherewith to maintain
whar we had in T#ſcany; to which I made anſwer that I had need of that which ic was
not in his power to give me z for he had no money to leave me, nor many men, that would
not be more ſerviceable in France than in Taſcany 2 but thar nevercheleſs I would do as
God ſhould dire&t me, in whom Lrepos'd'a confidence, that he would no more forſake
me now, than hicherco he had done ; and rhar 1 humbly begg'd of him to make all
the haſte he poſſibly could into France ; for if God did not preſerve the Kingdom men
could do: very little towards it, all the Forces of the Nation being defeated and loſt. The
Mareſchal de Strozzy, who was preſent, very much approv'd of my anſwer, andas high»
ly commended me, torafinuch as others would have demanded. men and money, of both
which I had in truth very great need : buc France was of greater concern to the King than
Txſcany, where T would try ro draw money from che Conntrey, and with war make
war, Onely I bc{ought Monſieur de Gziſe humbly to entrear the King to recall me inco

The Sieur de
Moniluc's res
queſt co the
Luke of Gyiſe;

The. Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book Iv.

The Sicur de
Montluc falls
fick.

The Sieur de
Monutluc has
leave to return
into France.

France, & help to detend che Kingdom for I had nothing to loſe in Txſcany ; where.
upon he promiſed me to deal ſo effecually with the King, chat his Majeſty ſhould ſend
for me, but upon this condition, that fo ſoon as I ſhould be return'd into Fraxce, [
ſhould promiſe forchwith to repair to him, He had nor given credit to all the falſe re.
ports had been made of me, he knew me too well, and ever lov*d melo long as heliy'g,
] engag'd my word to him, chat I wovld do fo, and fo he went co embark himſelf ac
{ivita Veehia, and carried back his Forces entire into France, wherein he manifcſted
himſelf ro be a great and prudent Captain, As for me return'd back to Montalſin.

Before my licence came to recurn for France , at the requeſt of Captain Carbayrac,
char Monſieur de Guiſe had ſent Governor co Groſſette (for he had caken our Monſieur de
Ia Molle with ſeven or eight foot Companies he had, and ſent him to Ferrara, and had
ſent me Monſicur de Gizry wich thirteen Enfigns of Foot in his ſtead, wherein loft no-
thing by the change) I went in all haſte to Grofſette, to. ſee to a diſorder was faln ont there;
which was, that all the Ammunition of Corn that I had laid in there (which was ſuf.
cient for above a year) was ſo embezzel'd, that there was not above a hundred Sacks: in
all ro be found. There was a Commiſlary, whoſe name was Lowberiac, who laid theblame
of this buſineſs upon Monſieur de 1a Molle; whereupon I ſent poſt after Monſieur de 1,
Mole, to acquaint him with what this fellow had depoſed againſt him'; and Monſieur
de la he on the contrary charg*d the fault upon the ſaid Lowberiac. I lay that nigh
in a pair of damp ſheets, and ir was jn Winter , not having at that time brought my
ficld-bed along with me, becauſe I would let my Males reſt in order to my Jurney inco
France, by which means I gor a continued fever , that in ten dayes depriv'd me of all
knowledge even of my own ſervants. Without which ſickneſs E had taken an order with
Lonberiac for ever robbing the Kivgs Ammunitions again, as Idid another at Sienna who
had done the lame, ;

So ſoon as I began a litcle to recover my ſenſes, and to know people, my diſmiſſion
came, his Majeſty writing to me withal, chat I ſhould go to Ferrara there to remain
ſome time with the Duke to adviſe him in his affairs, he being at that time engag'd in a
War. The great joy of this diſmifſion pur me into ſo much heart, that four dayes after
I departed, cauſing my ſelf to be carried in a Chair by ſix mento CHontizel, where Cap»
cain Bartolomeo de Pexero was, and where I Rtayd three dayes 1n expectation of a Litcer,
which Signior 24arionl de Santa Fine was to ſend me. In which I departed thence, nor
being able for all that co travel above five or fix miles a day, and came ro Pezero, where |
found the Duke of Urbin, who ſent out five or fix Gentlmen co meer me, to conduct me
to lodge inhis Caſtle : to which recurning my very humble chanks, I ſenc che Duke an
excuſe, that T begg'd his pardon, for I was of necelſity to alight at Captain Bartolomeo de
Pezero's houſe, who had writ to his Mother to receive me, and where I was conſequently
expected. I then wenr thither, where I found his Mother ro be au extraordinary civil
perſon , and as well eſteem'd in the City as any Gentlewomsn whatever. So ſoonas
ever I alighted they immediately put meto bed, for T was ſo worn, that I was nothing
but skin and bone, and continually dying for cold, what Furrs ſoever they could put up-

' on me. The Duke did me che honor preſently to come ſee me, and ſeeing meſo ill,

He comes to
Ferrare.

He goes to
Venice,

compell'd me to ſtay four dayes there , not fuftering me co ſpend a penny, but cauſed
me every day to be {erv'd wich rwo diſhes from his own Table, after which I fancied my
ſelf ſo much better, that I ſent back the Litter, : The Duke at parting would needs make
me accept a horle ont of his Race, oneof the moſt beautiful Courſers that I almoſt ever
ſaw, and the ſtrongeſt for his height, and would have a little Friez!and horſe of mine,
frong for his ſtature, and very handſome ; and fo they ſer me upon a little pad Nagg
thac Monſicur. de Giary gave meat my departure from Afoptalſin (where he commanded
till the arrival of Don Franciſco d'Eſ#, whom the King made his Lieutenant General as
I had been) and after that manner I crawl'd on to Ferrara, where I was as welcome,
and as well receiv'd both by the Duke, Dutcheſs, and the Cardinals, as I had been cheir
own Brother, the Duke lodging me in his own Palace, and cauſing me to be ſerv'd from
his own Kitchin equal co his own perſon. |

Four or five dayes'after my arrival I had agreat defire to go ſee the Cardinal de Towr-
on, and Monſieur de Dax ar Venice , which Sieur de Dax was Embaſlador there, and
chere I ſtayed four days with them, very much troubled that I had nor health to ſee all
the City of Yenice (for I was yer ſoill, that I had much ado to go to che Arcenal) at-
ter which I return'd back to Ferrara, Now thart all the parties are dead I ſhall do no
harm to any one, in diſcovering that the Cardinal of X4antsa manifeſted himſelf co be a
great friend to the Duke of Ferrara, :for he gave him notice, chat his Brother Don Fer-
rand had a deſign to beſiege YVer/el, that he cauſed fix pieces of Ordnance to be taken our

of

—

Book IV. de Montlue, Marefchal of Fraiice.

_—

of Alexandria, with which he was march'd direaly to Cremona, with great ſtore of
Powder and Buller, aſſuring him chat this preparation was for Yeyſel, which intelligence
he diſparch'd away ro him by two ſeveral Meſſengers z one upon che heels of another, - I
was alſo advertiz'd from Cremona, that Don Ferrand was there making ready more Ca-
non, and had prcſ[t fourſcore great Merchants Boats that trafficked upon che Pax, upon
which Yerſel is ficuate, as alſo Cremony ; that part of che Spaniſh Companies, which were
coward Piedmont, began ro march direQly to Cremona, and that he was raiſing new /t4-
lias Companies about AZillan.. The Duke of Ferrara having receiv'd all theſe advertiſe-
mencs, was very much troubled, the place being as yet in no very good poſture of defence z
for there was not ſo much as any one Bulwark cover*d,: and the Courtines very low, as al-
ſo che Spurrs, being bur half rerrafſed, nor yer half fild, and all che Flancks open. The
Dake ſent the Prince his Son, who lay with his Army at Reges, word of all this, bidding
him wichall forthwich to ſend Signior Cornelia Bentivoglio to pur himſelf into it : where-
upon the Prince ſent him word back, that if Signior Cornelio was raken away from him,
he ſhould not know what to do with the Army, the ſaid Signior alwayes commanding
inhisabſence, and he having no eaſe but by him, and therefore humbly entreated he would
pleaſe ro make choice of ſome other. The Duke then immediately ſent away co Monſieur
de Ia Molle, who was with the Prince ig his Camp, entreating that he would goto defend
che place' : but Monfieur de [a Mole return'd anſwer backs that the King had given him
no order to ſhut himſclfup in any place, bur only co perform his office in the field ; and
cherefore defir'd ro be excus'd. The Duke was exceedingly troubled, ( as alſo was the
Cardinal his Brother thac now is) that they had not a man in ſo great an exigency, whom
they could entruſt with the defence of chis place.

I now began to gather a little ſtrength, and theſe diſpatches to and again were carried
{o privately » that I knew nothing of all this, till in the end a Gentleman of the Dakes,
(whom he had commanded to be continually abour me, to ſee that I wanted nothing)

The Siepe of.
Verfetdelignd.!

diſcover'd it all to me one night very late, and told me moreover, that the Duke had al- The anzicry of
moſt given over the place for loſt, foraſmuch as he who was Governor in it was no Soldier, the Duke of

nor had ever born arms in any aQtion of conſequence : but thac he was nevertheleſs a very
honeſt man z ſo that che Duke did not n the leaſt ſuſpeR his fidelicy, bur only his wanc
of experience, and which was wort of all, there was no one in a timeof ſo great need,
who would make an offer of his perſon, to put himſelf into the place. Having heard chis
ſtory, 1 all night conſulted with my health abour this affair 5 for as for inclination I had
bur too much, and inthe moraing finding my ſelf indifferentcly Iuſty, I chereupon went
zmmediacely co wait upon the Duke, whom I found abed, forhe alwayes role very lace.
He had given order to his people, that at what tzme ſoever I came to his Chamber door,
alchongh he was in bed, they ſhould let me in z wherefore I no {ooner knockr, but tha
one of the Gentlemen of his Chamber preſenty open'd the door, where I found the Dake
in Bed, and two Secretaries writing upon a little Table by his Bed-ſfide, So ſoon as Ihad
given him the good morrow, I gave him an account of what had been told me over nighc,
bur withal naming che Gentleman. Whereupon he repeated ro me the ſame things I had
heard before, togerher with the great trouble hi was in, but would not mention the Car-
dinal of Jantza to me, from whom he had che moſt certain intelligence untill my return,
when ſo ſoon as he had made an end, I ſpoke to him after this manner, Sir, dare you
confide in me for the defence of your place, to which he made anſwer, in you Monfieny de
Montluc? yes certainly, and ſooner than any man in Italy ; then Sir, (aid I, get up, ayd
write preſently to the Prince your Son, to give me a French Company that 1 ſhall chuſe, and
ſome horſe to convoy me to the Town, and write to Signior Pietro Genrilis, that be keep a
good correſpondence with we for the defence of the City, and that you have not ſent me to de-
prive him of his Government, but becauſe 1 bave more experienet is thoſe «ff airs than be has,
and that he ſhall preſently execnte whatever I ſhall direft. Upon this the Duke chruſt our
his arms, and claſping me faſt about che neck, held my face cloſe to his boſom, bidding
one of his Gentlmen run forthe Cardinal his Brother, who lay in his own Palace, a greac
diſtance from the Caſtle. The Gentleman made all the haſte hecould, celling the Car-
dinal whar he had heard, who immediately came co us, and ſo ſoon as he came into the
room, taking me 1n his arms, ſaid ro me theſe words. O Afonfrexr de Montluc bow infi-
nitely i (ur whole Family oblig'd ts your generoſity for this nible offer. After which they im-
mediately fell co diſparching cheir leccers, whilſt I went to make my {elf ready to be gone,
for che buſineſs requir'd haſte , Ferſel being ſo ſituated ; that an Army being ever ſer
down before it, it 15 impoſſible co ger 1n, provided rhey. have two or three boars only upon
the River, I went thac night to lic ar Final, the next day I din'd at Modena, and arriv'd

Ferrara.

The $jeur de
Montluc offers
himſelf ro the
Duke of Ferra+
1a,

He goes to the

in the evening ac Reges, where ihe Prince with his Army lay, who gave me the Baron t«lisf of Verſel.

Dd d'iAvrade,

, , m is = CIS a an ay TOI IO Igr Dnoieee—no nt
i CI —__—_— b

hate <de-. hs 49”

« 2/1 hatin Bina! nc Eros hi

194

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book IV.

i

a* Aurade, ( the ſame who was after {lain ar Monſicur de Nemonrs his Chamber window
at Vienna) wich his Company and a Troop of Horſe for my Convoy. In this equipage

- at one of the clock in the afternoon we arriv'd at Yerſel, where there was one Company

of Swiſzr, five of Italians, and now thar of the Baron d' Awrade , who was glad to go a-
long with me, and made the ſeventh. The Duke of Parma from the time of his bein
reconcil'd to the King of Spain, had call'd back his two Companies of Lighr-horſe, which
had been with ns at Rome, commande( by che Captain Bartolomeo, and Ambroſio, and
ſeven or eight dayes before this Captain Ambroſio had been caken, and brought priſoner
into the Caſtle of /eyſel, where I found him juſt going away, the Prince having exchang'd
him for another, He was #maz'd to ſee me there, and I told him, 2hat not long age we
had worn the white (roſs together, but that I now ſaw him nith a redone; to which he
made anſwer, que beſognava far le eommandamentse del ſno padrone, and ask d me what buſie
neſs I bad there i In anſwer to which I merrily told him, th.+ / was come thither to ſerve
them in the qua'ity of Mareſchal de Camp, where I would pr: +4, (+1 O uarters to lodge
their Army in at their eaſe : But Captain Pietro Gentitic ©) 91 211114 him, char [
was come to defend the place, who therenpon ſaid, O qz«/ti non ſono baye dongue « /+ f:de
che, is portero cative nove al mic padrone, and ſo bad me farewell, :

Now the Dake of Parma at this ſame time held another place of the Dake of Ferr4-

The defects of 74's beſieg'd belonging co Reges. For five or fix miles round about Yerſel 1 found nei-
Verſel.

ther Hay nor Straw, nor any other thing for the horſes co eat, neither was there any
meat ar all, and within few utenſils to work withal, nor wine, bar a lirtle they had for
the Swiſs, and very little cirher meal, or corn to make meal of : A defeR thar I believe
more tempted Don Ferrand co beſiege it, than any other thing. Methought I was once
more got inte S$ienns, where | was 1n the greateſt neceſſity of all chings z and in the morn-
ing the Troop of Horſe would needs be gone, their horſes not having any one bir of an

ching of all that night co ear. Now there were three great Bourgs upon the Road co-
wards Parma (which as I remember they told me appertain'd to the Sicur de St. Swrin,
whom I have ſcen jn a round Bonnet at Court ) half a mile diſtant che one from the o-
ther, and ewo miles from Yerſe], where there lay ſome 1talian Soldiers in Garriſon, to
hinder thoſe of Yerſel from drawing any relief from thence, I therefore ſallied out with
the Swiſs Compeny , thar of the Baron 4 Anrade, and chree hundied 7:alian Harquebus
zeers, ordering Signior Pietro Gentilis to command all the men, women, and children to
follow after me, together with all the.horſe in the Town, and a great number of Ropes
and Sacks, and ſo marched direRly to the firſt Village, The Enemy who were quarter'd
there, npon my coming preſently abandon'd the Bourg , and retir'd to the next, and I
till follow®d after, till at laſt they forſook chem all, and retir'd in all haſte towards Par-

Verſel viftual- 994» I had given order that upon pain of death no one ſhonld ronch any rhing bac pro-
led by «be
Inbabirants
themſelves.

viſions, and left the Baron d' Aurade with the Troop of Horſe at the furchermoſt Village
rowards Parma, the /talian Harquebuzeers at the ſecond, and the Swiſs ar the third near-
eſt ro Yerſel, giving them all in charge co ſuffer nothing to paſs, but viual only, whilſt
I rid up and down from Bonrg to Bourg to haſten them in their work; for I never ex«
peed to go off withour fighting, The Bourgs were none of chem all encloſed, and there
was great plenty of proviſions, inſomuch that ſome made five or fix journeys to carry
victual into Verſel, ſothar in the end there was not one who did not come to ſeek for pro-
viſion, and che wines we embark'd upon Boats, and convey'd them by a little River there
was (I think an Arm of the Po) landing then abour half a mile from Yerſel, che River
coming no nearer tothe Town, This work continued from Sun-riſe to Sun-ſer, ſo that I

| Gare be bold co ſay there was bur a very little proviſion, of all ſorcs pur together, left in

all che Villages, the men and women whereof were very much aſtonithe ac chis proceed-
ing, buc I promiſed them farisfaftion 5 and ſo the day paſt, wherein ſo much proviſion
both for men and horſes was conveyed into the Town, that for three months we could nor
poſſibly want, and then the Caprain of the horſe was content to ſtay with me a few days
longer. The nexr day Signior Pietro Gentilis ſallied out with all the men, women, and
children of eight years old and upwards, and went to fall upon a Cope abou half a mile

The diligence from Ferſel, to cauſe Bavinsro be made and brought before che Town. The Inhabi-
of the lnhabi- rants were by no means unwilling to go, and he alſo rook the Swiſs, and almolt all the
rants of Yerſel. [;aljan foor along with him, whilſt T wich che Baron 4d A#rade, and the Troop of horſe

went along to graard him, where they plyed their work as well at che Copſe, aschey had
done at the Villages the day before, and came rochrow down their Bavins within a Har
quebuz ſhor of the Town z neither rill the nighe cook us up did we ever ceaſe, and for
ewo dayes after did the ſame, inſomuch that I am confident there were above threeſcore
chouſand Bavins made in three dayes, which afterwards we went with Colours flying to

#-* | ferch

7
hd
\-T
"gi
»$B
k.
«0?
-:
=
bs
WY
3M)
Ap
bY
$.*#
$4.
o,
F
*
3)
”
wy
A
n;
Ky
Ah
$f
©
7
-
'Y
#1
gs
4%
«K
+

___ de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

195

—

——

ferch home, and beſtowed them in the Town , filling the Church,

and ſeveral vacant The $jeur de -

places in che Walls, and then fell co fortifying, none being excepted from the work, Sig- Mentluc carries
nior Pietro and I carrying Baskets ro give example to the reſt, T can ſay nothing but very a Basket ar the

well of chac Gencleman , for I perceived in him no want eicher of. courage or induſtry,
but only of a little experience, which is not to be acquir'd withour being employed, which
he had neverbeen > and how can one judge of a man until he be tried ? *Tis poſſible if he
had been artaqu*d he would have acquitted himſelf very well : though men who have
never ſeen a Siege are apt tobe aſtonithe when they hear ſuch a rattle abour their ears,
and if a Governor be once daunted, all is loſt, So ſoon as we had got our Bavins into
the Town I reſolv'd upon another Enterpriſe, wich was to go and ſweep away the pro-
viſions of two Villages. near Graffalda, which belongs to Don Ferrand, in which there
were two Companies of Germans, and one of /talians. To this end I ſent the Captain
of che Horſe, and all che Gentlemen who were with me, to ride up to Graſtalda , and
with them all along by a Hedge the Baron d' Amzrade to ſecond chem, whilſt T with the
Swiſs, and four hundred /talians was buſie loading away the vicuals. They ſent then
twelve horſe up to the very Gatesof Graffalda, and the reſt were plac'd in Ambuth in
a lictle Wood hard by. Whereupon the German Captains, and a great many people witht
them fallied our, and purſued our Avant Conreurs. Our Ambuſcado diſcover'd it
{elf too ſoon, otherwiſe all che Captains had been taken ; but we purſued them-up to
che very gates, where fourty or threeſcore Germans were ſlain (for the Baron 4' Aurade
was got in amongſt them (the Ambuſcado's both of foor and horſe being planted cloſe by
one another) and a German Enſign with twenry or four and rwenty Germans taken ,pri-
ſoners; and fo we return'd home with the proviſions we had loaded, and the next day
I diſmiſſed the Horſe to return back to the Prince, who I was afraid would be diſpleaſ-
ed thar they ſtaid ſo long, though the men themſelves were very willing to have ſaid
longer with me, which if chey had I ſhould often have engag'd them with the Enemy ;
for I have ever taken care that my Soldiers, whether horſe or foot, ſhould not grow reſty
for want of employment, and ſtronger or weaker, have ever ſet them together by the ears
with the Enemy, to ſee what they could do. *Tis true a man ought to go diſcreetly co
work not to loſe them, but on the other fide, he that ſtands over much upon caution
ſaying I will northrow away my men, or I will not do this or that to endanger the loſs
of my Company, ſhall in the end find, that he has perform'd no great matters. A man
muſt both give and take. |

The Duke of Parma lay (till before the foremention'd place, which he batrer'd, and
in the mean time I did my bufineſs ; Captain Balferniere and another French Company

were init, who behaved themſelves ſo well, that they for ren or twelve dayes held che

Fortifications.

Enemy in play. . Don Ferrand who was at (yemona having intelligence of the vitual Don Ferrand

and Bavins we had pur into Yeyſel, and of the great diligence we uſed in all our affairs, in \uſpcnce
began to cool in his deſign + for (as Thave ſaid before) I had made head againſt him ar 92* © 90:

Caſſal, and he knew very well what order and diligenceI had obſerv'd in my Fortifica-
rions there 2: he alſo remembred how I had ſerv*d him at Benne, aud at St, Damian, all
which together made him imagine he ould not eaſily carry chis place, and cherefore he

withdrew his Atnmunitions and Artillery, which were upon the banks of Po ready co be

ſhipt aboard, and diſmift che Boats he had preſt whereon to embark the Canon, and che

Foot 5 for the Duke of Parma's Camp was to have joyned with him before Yerſel, And

although ic be in my own commendation, yer ſhall 1 not forvear to tell you, thar the
Dake cf Ferrara {aid in publick, and gave me that glory, thar my preſence had diverted
che Enemies deſigns, who would not atrempr the Enterpriſe, knowing ( as I faid be-
fore) what I could dofor the defence of a place, *Tis a grear deal to acquire ſuch a re-
putation, as to make a man's ſelf fear'd and eſteem'd by his Enemy. The ſaid Don
Ferrand was an old wary Soldier, and would not attempr a place where I had broken
eround ; and alſo if he had, having wherewithal to car I ſhould have baffled him,

Abouc this time che Dake of Florence: procur*d the Dyke of Ferrara's peace with the The Duke of
King of Spain, but it was with the knowledge and conſent of the King , otherwiſe the Ferrara a good
ſaid Duke would not have done it to have ſav'd his Dukedom, he was ſo good a French. Frenchman,

man ; and when the peace came, which was five and twenty dayes after I encred into
Ferſel, 1 cook my. leave of the Prince, and recurn'd to Ferr«ra, where it 1s nor co be asked
if 1 was welcome to the Duke, the Dutcheſs, and the Cardinal ; for I do not think they
ever carcfſed any man of what condicion ſoever he was, or could be, more than chey dig
me and when he died I might well ſay, as I now do, I loſt one of the beſt friends I
had in the world : and when I departed from Ferrara ro go to Verſel, the Dake exa-

min'd 2 Secrecray of wine what {tore of money Thad, and he ceiling hina I had nor as

Dd 2 boyg

-

195 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book LV.
The Duke of bove rwo hundred Crowns, he ſent five hundred Crowns to my faid Secretary, who had
4 eraſe B- NC ordering of my expence ; and when three dayes after my return I took my leave of
preg os gg him, the Dutcheſs and the Cardinal, the {aid Dake (eein;, me have a great many Gentle»
men of Quality in my Train, and knowing 1 could not have money enough to defray
my Journey, he ſent me five hundred more. And thus I return'd rich from my Com-
mand in T*ſcany. This money carried me to Lyons, whereI found wo thouſand and four
hundred Francks, which the King had cauſed co be paid ſor two years Salary of my place
of Gentleman of the Chamber, and that Martineau had there depolited for me 1n the
The Sieur ds hands of Cathelin Jean the Poſt-maſter, which brought me to Paris, Immediately upon
Mont!uc ar- my coming to Paris I went to kiſs his Majeſties hand, he being then ac Creſſy, where T
tives at Court, wag as well receiv'd by his Majeſty as at my retura from Sienna, and he was very well
ſatisfied with what I had done for the Duke of Ferrara, Monficur de Gaiſe, who had
not ſeen me before, embrac*r me three or four times 1n the preſence of che King himſelf,
and his Majeſty commanded the ſaid Monſieur de Griſe to cauſe a thouſand Crowns to
be given me, wherewith to return and co fojourn ſome time ac Pars, which he preſently
did. And thus was my return out of /taly into France the laſt cime thar T was 1n thoſe
part*, andthe ſervices I did thuc, wherein I cannoc hez there being ſo many yer living

who can bear te{timony of whar I have deliver'd.

By this (Captains) you may ſee, and rake notice whac a thing reputation is, which alſo
having once acquir'd, you ought rather co die than to Joſe ; neither muſt you do like men
of the world, who ſo ſoon as they have gor a little repute are content with ic, and think
that what ever they ſhall do afterwards, the world will {till repurce them valiant, Do
nor fancy any ſuch thing z for by performing from time to time ſtill more and braver
things, young men riſe to greatneſs, have fire in their pates, and fight like Devils z who
when they ſhall ſce you do nothing worth raking notice of, will be apt to fay that che
world has beſtowed the title of valiant upon you without deſert, will fer leſs value upon
you, uſe you wrh leſs reſpet, and behind your back calk of you ar their pleaſure, and
with good reaſon 4 for if you will not {till continue to do well , and ſtill atrempe new
and greater things, it were mnch ſafer for your honor to retire home to your own houſe,
with the reputation you have already got, than by ſhll following arms to loſe it again,
and to be ſcouting at diſtance when others are laying abouc them. Tf you defire to
mount to the higheſt ſtep of the ſtairs of honor, do not ſtop in the mid-vvay, but ſtep by
ſtep ſtrive to get up to the top vyithout imagining that your renovyn vvill continue the
{ame as vvhen it vyas obtein'd at firſt. You deceive your ſelves, ſome nevy commer vvill
carry avvay the prize, if you do not look vyell about you, and ſtiive co doſtill berter and
beter.

The ſame day that I vvent from Creffy back to Pars, Monſieur de Guiſe departed alſo

The Duke of to go to Metz to execute the Enterprize of Thionville. The King from the time of his
Guiſe created return our of [taly had made choice of him for his Lieurenanc General chroughout his
ea vvhole Kingdom, {ſo that before my coming I found that he had taken the Tovvn of
Sg: ig * Calice, and ſent back the Engliſh to che other fideof che Sea, together vvuh Gaines, and
that he vvas novy upon the Siege of Thlowville, Tvvo dayes had not paſt before the King

{cnt for me to come to him to Creſſy, vvithour giving me notice vvhat it vvas abour, and

I heard that the next morning afcer I departed from chence the King had cauſed Mon-

ficur d'eAndelit to be arreſted about ſome anſvver he had made him concerning Religi-

Andelot ar- on. So ſoon as I vvas come the King ſent for me into his Chamber, vvhere he had vvich
reſted, him the Cardinal of Lorain, and tyvo or three orhers (vvhom I have forgor, bur Ichink
the King of Navarre, and Monſieur de Aontpenſrer vvere there) and there the King told

me thac I muſt go to Herz to the Duke of Gaiſe, there ro command the Foot, of which

Monſieur 4 Andelet vvas Colonel, 1 moſt humbly beſoughc his Majeſty not ro make me to

intermeddle vvith another mans Command, vvhich rather than I vyould do, I vvould go

ſerve his Majeſty under the Dake of Gwiſe in the quality of a private Soldier , or le

vvould command his Pioneers, rather than rake upon me this employment, The King

then told me, that Monſicur de Gziſe ſo ſoon as he had heard of Andelots impriſonment,

had himſelf ſent to demand me to exerciſe the ſaid command. Secing then I could ger no-

thing by excuſes, I rold his Majeſty that I was not yer cur'd of a Dyſlencery my diſeaſe

had lcft me, and that this was a command which requir'd health and diſpolition of body

What :n opi- to perform itz which were neither of them in me 3 whereupon his Majcſty cold me, chac
nion King he ihould think this Command better diſcharg'd by me in a Litter, than by another jn
Henry had of rerfect health, and chat he did not give it me to exerciſe for another, but char he intended
= riogs ar I thould have it for cver ; to which I made anſwer, that I gave his Majcſty moſt humble
TN” thanks tor che honor he defign'd me herein, and made it my moſt humble requeſt, chac

he

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mzreſchal of France. 197 }

he would nor be dilplealed, 1t I contd not accept it. Whereupon his Majeſty ſaid ro me

theſe words, Let me entreat Jun to accept ut for my ſake, and with thac the Cardinal re-

prov'd me, ſaying, Ton diſþate it too long with his CHMajeſty, 't!s too much contefted wich

your Maſter, to wich I replyed, that I did nor diſpuce it out of any diſaftetion to

his Majeſties ſervice, nor that I was unwilling to ſerve nnder the Duke of Gzi/e, I having 1

upon my fiſt coming to Pare laid out money to buy me ſome Tents, anc] orher Equipage, -

in order to my attendance upon him, having engag*d my ſe!f before at Rome ſo to do ; ;

but only upon the account of my incapacity in that poſture of health wherein I then was.

His Majeſty then told me, that there was no more to be ſaid, and that I muſt go z after

which I had no more to ſay. And I fancy the King of Navarre, and Monſfiear de e Mont-

penſſer both fcll upon me to perſwade me to accepr of this Command, foraſmuch as I re-

member che King ſaid to me, there is no more excuſe, for you ſee all the world is againſt

you, and thereupon commanded the Cardinal to order me another choufand Crowns to-

wards my Equipage, which he preſently did. I then recurn'd to Paris, where I ſtayd

bur two dayes to provide my ſelf of ſuch things as I wanted, and fo went away to the

Duke of Guiſe ro Metz. I fonnd him juſt mounting to horſe to go to diſcover Thion- The Sicur de

ville, bur he would not ſuffer me togo along with him, by reaſon of my long Journey, vor grogiteg

and to ſpeak the truth I was nor very well ; and the ſame night he return'd, and rold Rh ag

me, that if God would permit us to rake thar place, there was honor to be got. He was

alwaies wone when diſpos'd to be merry to call me, his hearc, and ſmiling, then ſaid to

me, Corrage my heart, I hope we ſhall carry it. And inthe morning we departed, for he had

all his rackle ready. I muſt needs ſay one thing with truch, and wichour flattery, char

he was one of the moſt di]igent Generals thar I had ſerv'd of eighteen, under whom I had

che honor to bear arms tor his Majeſties ſervice z and yer he had one faule, which was, that

he would write almoſt every thing with his own hand, and would not truſt to any Se-

cretary he had. I will nor ſay this was Il done, bur it rendred him a litcle flow, and

affairs of war require fo prompt a diligence, that a quarter of an hours delay ſometimes

endangers the ſucceſs of che greateſt Enterprize. One day I came from che Trenches to

demand of him four German Enfigns to reinforce our Guards, for we began to approach

very nearto the Town; and becauſe rhe Artillery from che walls had forced him from his

firſt Quarter, he was lodg'd ina lictle low houſe, which had one lictle Chamber only,

che window whereof was juſt over the door : I there mer with Monhieur de Borrdillon,

who was ſince Mareſchal of France, whom I asked where the Duke was ; he told me he

was writing 3 the Devil, (aid 1, take all theſe writings for me, it ſeems he has a mind to

ſave his Secretaries a labour, *tis pitty he wasnot a Clerk of the Parliament of Paris, for he

would have got more money than du Tillot, and all-the reſt of thems put together, Monſieur

Borrdiflon was ready to die with laughing, becauſe he knew (which I dream'c nor on ) thar

the Dake heard every word I ſaid, and therefore cgg'd me on {till ro deſcant more upon

this Clerk : when preſencly Monſieur de Gziſe came our laughing, and ſaid, How now

my heart, what do you think I ſhould have made a good Clerk? butin my life T was never ſo

out of countenance, and was furiouſly angry with Monſieur de Borrdillon, for having

made me talk ar that rate, though che Duke laughc at ic only, and gave me Count Roc- |

quendolf wich tour Enfigns. + Bur to return to what I was ſaying of his diligence, there The laudable

was not any one who did not acknowledge him for one of the molt vigilant and diligent qualities of che

Generals of our times, and withal a man of ſo great jadgment in deliberations thac he PvF< ot Guiſe.

having deliver'd his opinion and advice, a better was noc co be expeted. As tothe reſt,

a Prince ſo diſcreer, attable, and tamiliar, chat there was not a man in his Army, who

would not cheerfully run all hazards for the leaſt word of his mouth ; ſo great a dexce-"

riry he had in gaining hearts. Onely his diſpatches cook up a litcle roo much of his time,

I chink becauſe he durſt not truſt his Secretaries, a fort of men thac do us a great deal

of miſchief, and 1s very rare to find out one that 15 faithful, |
He bchieg'd the Town then on chat fide beyond che River, che River being berween, |

which he caul'd to be founded, to try 14 it was not very deep, by five or fix Soldiers The 3

that I brought wich me : we were not above five or fix with him, of which number were Thionz

Monficur de Boxrdiflon, and Monſieur de Cirez and we found that ſome of the Soldiers

had warer up to the Codpiece, and ochers to che Girdle, 1 chen cold hum, that in caſe

this was the weakeſt fide, he ought nor to deferre making his Bactery ; for I doubred nor

ro make the Soldiers paſs over co the aſlaulr, and har 1 my {elf would lead them che

way. The night tollowing we planted Gabions upon the bank of the River; and in the

moraing by break of day the Arullery began to thunder againſt che Tower, which was

open*d on the lett hand cowards a Ravelin chat flanckc the (aid Tower, as alſo was a

liccle Turrec berwixr che great Tower and the Ravclin., This was all tha conld be dons

ac

iep2 of
ilies

__ ET = Dn on

y COTS
OI” ;

198

The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book IV,

A Counter
Bartcty,

A farious coune
cr battery ,

The Trenches,

Thioville dif-
cover d, ,

The Duke de
Guiſe nor {a-
risficd with rhe
ailcovery made
by the Sicur de
MoRiluc.

P

at that place. The Enemy planted ten or twelve greac pieces of Canon, juſt over againſ}
our Artillery , and abour cleven of the clock 1n the morning began to make a Counter.
bactery, with which before rwo a clock in the afternoon chey had beaten all our Gabions
to pieces, excepting one, and the half of another, behind whichren or a dozen of us thar
were there were ſquat with our bellies cloſe to theground z for all the Soldiers and Pio.
neers were conſtrain'd co quit the poſt, and to go throw themſelves behind another Trench
above fixſcore paces behind us 3 ſo that durſt che Enemy have ventur*d over che water, they
might hare taken our Artillery, and ar great eaſc have thrown them inco the River : for
che Soldiers that were retired to the other Trench could nor have come up to relieve us,
but at the mercy of their Canon, and {maller thor, foraſmuch as the River was nor aboye
threeſcore and ten paces over, and ran within four foot of the Wall. Monſienr le Mar-
quisd'Elbernf, with fourtcen or fifteen Gentlemen of the Dukes Train, never forſook me_
of all the while, and ſo we lay cill dark night, that we planted new Gabions, and doable
the number, but it was all to no purpoſe, for we conld do no good with our Battery a-
gainſt the Wall, fora ſmuch as they had caſt up great Terrafles wichin, ſo broad that ewo
or three Coaches might have gone upon them abreaſt both in thar place, and elſewherequite
round the Town ; 1n my lite I never ſawa Fortreſs better fortified than that was, Mon-
fieur de Gaiſe thencall'd a Council, where every one was of opinion that he ſhould draw
off his Artillery from that place, and lodge all our Infancry and Germans on the other
fide the River, and chere to begin his Trenches as near as he could ro the Wall. This be-
ing reſoly'd upon, the ſaid Dake cauſed a Bridg in excreme diligence co be preſently made,
and we paſſed the River over it, though the plancks were not as yer nail'd, and encampr
ina Village about five or fix hundred paces diſtant from che City, ficuate upon a Plain,
nd ſo open, that a bird could nor ſtir withour being ſeen, and there they plyed us with
cheir Canon till they had nor left a houſe {tanding in the whole Village, inſomuch thac
we were conſtrain'd to ſecure our ſelves in che Cellars under ground. I had pitch'd m
Pavillions very cunningly betwixt ewo Walls, but they bear down both Walls and Pavil-
lions ; in my life I never ſaw a more farious Counter-battery, The night following the
Mareſchal de $trozzy paſt the River with Monſicur de Gife, and we began to caſt up our
Trenches along this Plain , where we lay ſeven or eight dayes before we could approach
within two hundred paces of the City,by reaſon the nights were ſhort,and by day they did
{o thunder the Trenches, that there was no working but by night, The Mareſchal never
{lirr'd from us, unleſs he went ſometimes to his Tents, (which yet remain'd on the other
ſide of the water) to ſhift his clothes, and that not above once in three dayes. He gave
me leave ro make the Trenches according ro my own fancy, for we had at firſt begun them
a little two narrow through the wiſdom of an Engineer. Ar every twenty paces I made
a back corner, or return, winding ſometimes to the lefc hand, and ſometimes to the right,
which I made ſo large that, there was room for twelve or fifreen Soldiers with their Har-
quebuzes and Halberts; and this I did co the end, char thould the Enemy gain the head of
the Trench, and ſhould leap into it, thoſe in the back corner might fight chem, they being
much more Maſters of the Trench than they who were in che ſtraight line, an invention
that both the Mareſchal and the Dake did very well approve of.

Mogſicur de Gziſe then told me, that I muſt ſend co diſcover what efteR our Artillery
had wrought againſt the Tower, and that I muſt do it by valiant perſons. In order
whereunto I took with me Captain Sarlaboxs, the younger Millac, St, Eſtephe, Cipiere,
and Captain Montinc my Son, and went. So ſoon as we came near unto the Tower we
were to paſs over certain little Bridges che Enemy had made, by which to paſs over the
Mariſh to the Tower ; and being come to the Tower we found a Palliſado of poſts as
thick as a mah's thigh, that from che Tower went ſeven or eight paces into the River, and
we were to go all along by the Palliſado in water to the end of it, and afterwards on the
other fide of the Palliſado to return to the Tower. We had made ewo Soldiers bring
two Pikes along withus 3: I for my part did not go into the water, bur all the reſt paſt che
Palliſado after this manner, and one after another view?d the breach chat had been made
inthe Tow:r, and they pur a Soldier into it by a Pike, and found that within che Tower
there was watcr up to the arm-pits, and being the River madea grear noiſe at this place
by reaſon of the Palliſado, their Centinels never heard us, though the Tower was no more
thau four paces diſtant from the Wall of che Town. This being done we return'd, and
went co give Monſieur de Gwiſe an account of what we had ſeen, who would nor give cre-
dic co our diſcovery, bur rold me he was certain there was no Pallifado, and chac people
who came lately from thence had afſur'd him ro the contrary ; and chac cherefore che
night following we muſt diſcover it better, 1 was vexc to the blood at this anſwer : bur
ſaid no moreto lum but only this, that 1 conceiv'd the teſtimony of thoſe Captains was

” [#»fjicient,

7 \ ” ol " —_— - by RY” WOE: Bn Jo i i \ Sh nd et. ras 4
_ «57 __ 9 SO IOE IL AL Tb4 "Ln g des yy no hs Ss LS $epn'd _ N 6. er WE en Ce $%, 1 REP "< far We.
Bee LATINOS rt EOS 1a x 2h a ar Fer 8 . 5 . y . FT.
HE de OT ON Re ALES OE OREN 2 21” FS I tw 177 _ oC ” 1 TG

nl 4-5 ET FILES TS S: Lo ISS bt < BSE; 14 $-t > a 3h. Ne a - J . - - o ww a

}
|

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. -

ſuſſicient , but ſeeing he was not [ſatisfied with it, let ſome body in the name of God diſcover it
better, © which he made anſwer, chat he did not mean I ſhould go my ſelf, neither ſaid
1, del intend it, The Mareſchal knew very well that I was angry, and faid to the Sieur
Adrian Baillon, and to Count Theophile, I know Montluc is angry by his anſwer to che
Dake of Guiſe, and you ſhall ſee it he do not go this night co diſcover after a terrible
manner, for I know the complexion of che man, Ry | 5 CIO
This night Monſieur de Guife derein'd the Mareſchal with him in his Qaarters, and

{o ſoon as it was nighe I rook four hundred Pikes, Carflers all, and four hundred Har-
aebuzeers, and went to lay the Corſlets upon their bellies upon the ground wichin a huan-
Td aces of the Gate of the City, and I with the four hundred Harquebuzeers marched

direQly to the Pallifades The Captains chemſclves who had diſcover'd before, vycre as An

S9_

other diſco

angry ac theanſwer Monſieur de Gwiſe had given them, asT, and themſelves firſt paſſed may an the
the Pallifado. Now I believe the Enemy had in the morning perceiv'd that people had PR:

paſt by the end of the Palliſado, for we there found a Court of Guard of twenty or five
and ewenty men, of which the moſt part were kill'd, and thereſt eſcap'd into the Ram-
pire, where our people purſued and entred after them ; but the door of the Ravelin chac
went into the Town was ſo narrow, that one man only could paſs at a time, which was
che reaſon that our men ſtopr ſhorc, for the Enemy defended the door. Nevertheleſs they
made ſhift to diſmount, and tumble a Baſtard from the Ravelin on our fide down to.the
ground, and being that by the Tower our Artillery from the other fide of che water had
beaten down parc of the Wall, ſochat ic was pretty low 5 we with ſome Pikes that came
along with us, came co diſpute it with them, where the fight continued for above along
hour. Monſieur de Geiſe, who ſaw all from che other ſide of the River, was ſtark mad

' at what he ſaw, but che Marcſ:hal who was wich him laught with Sieur Adrian, and

che Count de Theophile ſaying, did I not tell you he world make one ? Thad made the Sol-
diers to carry five or fix hatchers along with them, wich which during the time of the fight,
I cauſed all the Pallifado tobe cut, and pulled up, ſo that we needed no more to wade

the water at our return» Captain St. Eftephe was there ſlain with the Enſign of Cipierre, St» Eſtephe

none) together with tep or ewelve Soldiers kill'd, and wounded. Captain Sarlabows is
yet living, and. ſeveral others who can witneſs, that had wetaken with us five or fix Lad-
ders ſeven oreight foot high only, we had entred the place, for they kepr very ill guard
on that ſide, andin that place, relying upon the Guard they had lefr wichour, ſo that ic
was a long time before they came to the defence of this Poſt, whilſt in che mean time five
or fix of our Soldiers helping one another mounted upon the Wall ; ſo that had we had
Ladders to reach from the top of the breach inthe Wall up to the Terraſs, I chink fortune
would have {mil'd upon us, for they (ay ſhe favours the bold.

In the morning I ſent Captain Sarlabors to give the Duke an account of what we had
ſeen, for I wonld not go my (elf, being certain he was very angry. The Mareſchal was ſtill
with him, who laughing ſaid, wwazld you bave a Breach better diſcover d than by giving an
aſſanlt ? T his was aGaſcon trick you was net aware of. Thething thac moſt croubled che
Duke of G#iſe was, that word would be ſent to the King, that we had given an Aflaulc,
and were repul{*d, otherwiſe he had nor cared ſo much. His incredulicy and my deſpite
were the loſs of a great many good men. When we had brought up our Trench within
fifty paces of che Tower, one morning by break of day the Mareſchal would retire to his
Tenc to ſhifc himſelf, and I alſo would do the ſame. Now as our approaches came nearer
co the Town, I ſtill made my back recurnsa little longer, to che end that rwo of them

mighr receive a whole Company. I had evemore an opinion that the Enemy would make -

a Sally upon us, but ic would never fink into the Mareſchal's head, for he would always
ſay, ould you have them ſuch mad men as to make a Sally to loſe their Soldiers, never any
men of ſenſe did ſuch a ridicalous thing 3 to which I made anſwer , why ſhould they not
ally? for in the firſt place they are able from the walls to ſecure their mens retreat, ou the
other (ide they are in the Town twelve Enſigns of Foot, four hundred Spaniards choice men
Picks ont of all the Spaniſh Companies, and a good Chief to head them, which is Joanne Gaye-
ano, 4 7240 they efteems above all the Captains they have, and a bundred Horſe beſides, and
the Town would be ſufficiently defended with half the forces they are nithin. 1 could not
for all chis make hum underſtand.ir. I*know not why, for the reaſon of war I am ſure
was on my fide, ;
This very morning I had plac*d Captain Lagorhe elder, and his Company in two of che
long back returns on che right hand, whom I caus'd to enter befote day, thar the Enem
might nor perceive chem, ſo that it was, as a man may fay, a kind of Ambuſcado. The
Caprains who mounted che Guard, had in charge, that in caſe the Enemy ſhould make a

ſally,

and another Enfign ( but they had not their Colours with them, for I had broughr ſlain,

| 200 The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaizte Boox IV,

—

ſaley, and arraque the head of che Trenches, tlicy thould, pur themſelves into che Field

and run tocharge them in the Plank; and choſe at the head of the Trench had likewiſe

ordety that iti caſe they ſhould artaque the returns, they ſhould likewiſe leap out of che

Trench to affaulrt them in their flank alſo. Wehad every night four German Enfigny

quarter'd there where we begah our Trench; to affiſt usin time of need, bur whar Regi.

ment it was that was that nighe upon the Guard, I cannot remember , and before the

Mareſchal and 1 were got to the end of the Trenches, it began to be fair broad day. The

Mareſchal trifled the timea lictle ralking with a Getmah Captain, 8nd alſo to ſtay for a

horſe, which had ſent fot to lend him to paſs over the bridge co his Tents, being ac a

ſtone Croſscloſe by the village, the horſe I had lent him came, when, as my footnian way

A Sally of che alighring, on a ſudden we heard a mighty noiſe, and ſaw che Enemy fighting wich our

bclirgee, men at the head of the Trench, and leaping headlong into the Trenches, and had it nor

been for thoſe back returns, had donbtleſs gain'd them from us. With them thereſallied

our alſo fifry or threeſcore horſe. Captain Lago did there approve himfelf co be a valiant

and a pradent man, for he cried to his Lieutenant in che return behind himy to run

with his Pikes charg'd full drive upon the horſe, whilſt he himſelf ran upon the Enemies

Flanck, who were diſputing the head of the Trenches. Seeing this, I mounted upon the

horic, whilſt che Mareſchal remain*d.at the Croſs, ſpeRator of the wholeaRion, nor ever

Raid cill I came up to our own men who were at it pell-mell with che Enemy; who fo

They are re= ſoon as Lago came up to them would have reti*d, when our. people leapr our of the

Phllcd, Trenches, and flew upon them, and ſo we purſued them wounding and killing up to the

very Tower on the right hand. I then preſently ſent back the horſe to che Mareſchal,

who found Monſieur de Gaiſe, and all the Gentlemen chat were quartered near him on

horſeback coming to relieve us : bur he told them there was no need, for that he had ſeen

all che fighc, and the viRtory was ours As weretir'd from the purſuit, all the remain-

der of their Harquebuzeers were npon the Walls, and fir'd ſo roundupan our rerrear, that

ic ſcem'd as if ic had been only a Volley in complement to us. I was alone on horſeback

in the middle of our men, and therefore let any one judge whether God did not by mi-

racle preſerve me 1n ſuch a ſhowre of Harquebuz ſhot, conſidering whac a fair mark they

had of me, The Caprainscried our to me co gallop off, though I would never leave them,

bur came along with chem to the edge of the Trenches, where I alighted, and preſently de-

liverd the horſe to my Lacquey to carry him to the Mareſchal as I ſaid before, and with

the reſt chrew my {elf inco che Trenches, where I found a Caprain and a Lieutenant of

ours lefc dead upon the place : Ido not remember their names (for they were French,

| and I was but lately come to command in the Army) with twelve or fourteen, whar of

| theirs and ours dead in the Trenches. And yet notwithſtanding the brave Volley they

gaveus from the Walls, we had not above ten men hurt ; and chustheir ſally did not fo
| much endammage us by a great deal, as it did themſelves.

You may here Captainstake a good example concerning Trenches, and the order Itook

for the ſally the Enemy might make, ,with the advantage we had by 1t. For never diſ-

puteit, the Defendants have need of men, and therefore will be oath to atrempe to force

your Trenches : *cis true if you fleep in them you will be {urpriz'd. Take norice alſo

1 when you make your Trenches, to make them high and ſloping, and that they have back

| cerurns, or corners capable of lodging men ; for they are as Forts to repel an Enemy. There

was now no more talk of Monſieur de Giſe his being angry with me, the Mareſchal and

} he holding no other diſcourſe all dinner time, bur of che fighr, and principally of che pro-

1 vidence and circumſpeRtion wherewith I had proceeded, ſaying, that ic would be a hard

thing ever to ſurprizeme. And alſo intruch I walk'd whilſt ochers ſlepr, withourt fearing

— ————— ig al Re fir th, bribe oe
__, :

either hear or cold. I +as inur'd ro hardſhip, which all young Gentlemen who will ag-
vance themſelves by arms , ought to ſtudy becimes, and learn to ſuffer, thac when they
2 ſhall wax old, it may not be altogether intollerable z bur old age being once wholly come;

Goodnight Godſon. | ok
| Within ewo or three nights after we brought up our Trench to the foot of che grear
| Tower, whereupon Monſieur de Guiſe brought his Miners co cry if the Tower was to be
mind, and therefore fell co piercing the Wall within cwo or three foot of the ground)
when ſo ſoon as the Enemy heard what we were about, they began to make Caſemars
within the Tower, ſo chat cheir Caſemats anſwer'd to our Hole. We were three nights
about piercing the Wall ; and at the ſame time chac our Miners were picking wichouc the
Enemy were picking within art their loop-holes. Every night Monſieur de Galfe (ene us
four Gentlemen to help us to watch, and Iremember chat one might Monſieur de Mont-
pezat, and Monſieur de Randan came to lie there. So ſoon as the hole was almoſt thorough,
Monficur de Guife cauſed a Canon to be brought me co help co pierce the Wall , for hs

knew

— ——

oox lV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. $6

LC

Pr
——— —
_—__—_————_ I —_— —_— —— Rt
—_— —  — — "OO —_—

knew very well char the picking we heard was about Caſcmats, and thar ſo ſoon as cyer
che wall ſhould be pierc'd through, they would ſhoot ar us trom them. The day bc-
fore the Canon was brought, che Mareſchal de Srrozzy was gone to his Tents on the other
code che warer to refieſh himſelf, and co ſhifc boh his thirt and his clothes, for we were all
rt. |
, Monſieur de Gniſe from rhe time that che Miners began to work at the Wall, caus'd a
great many Picneers to come, and to begin a Traverſe of Earth and Bavinscloſe adjoyn=
ing to the Tower, making them to leave a little path, ar which they wrought ſo hard,
rhac as the hole was pierced, the Traverſe was alſo brought to perfeion. The Enemy had
laid a great number of planks upon che Tower in manner of a Trench, and the night be-
fore wegave the aſlaulr, going up by the lictle pach of the Traverſe, and wich thehelp of
ſome Ladder, we took away the planks of their Trench from the cop of the Tower, which
did us more harm than good $ for when the planks were taken away, the great Platform
which was cloſe by the Tower, there being only five or fix paces berwixr them, ſo ſoon as
any of us popt up a head, difcover*d us.

Now as I have already ſaid the Mareſchal was only /gone to ſhife himſelf, but Mon- ts
fieur de Gaiſe made him ſtay ſupper with him, and with greac importunity kepc him all Guiſe poPrnntf9
char night, to his great misfortune: for Monſieur de Gaiſe derain'd him che next morn* naccly derains”
ing, to ſce where they ſhould plant four Culverines on thar kde where they were to play the Marſhal
inco che Enemies defences, when we ſhould the next day give the afaule. The Mareſchal de Stroxzy alk
ſeveral times begg'd of him to give him leave to return, telling him, char ſhould any bu- > rentlen =

; = ? Quarters,
fineſs befal me that night, he ſhould be extreamly troubled if he ſhould nor be there, Ar To
laſt the ſaid Mareſchal, to his grear grief, was conſtrained to ſtay, and fo much contrary
to his mind, that ſo ſoon as he was retir'd into his Tent, he ask'd the Sicur Adrian Bailon
and Counr- T heophile, if they had the word co paſs chorough the Germans : for as for our.
people he did nor care, and could paſs well enough without. They rold him they had
none, whereupon he ſaid to them theſe words, Jt rims in my head, that CMonſrenr de
Montluc will this night have ſcmething to do, and that the Enemy will come to attaque hirs
over the Counterſcarp of the Ditch of the Town, which ſhould it ſo fall ont, it would tronble
me the longeſt day I have to live, that I was not there,

To which they made anſwer, that he oughr nor to fancy any ſuch thing, for that T had
plac'd a Courr of Guard of four hundred men wichin twenty paces of che Gate of the
City, which they muſt of neceflity fight withal, before they could come ro me, To
which hereply*d, know wot what it #, but I am ſtrangely puſſeſs'd with an opinion, that
ſome misfirtune will happen thi night. They endeavoui?d all chey could to pur this con-
ceit our of his head ; tor the Sieur Adrian had no mind to repaſs the River, and goto
lic all night ac the Tower, he having been lately very ſick, and nor yer perfettly recover'd ;
for had they told him, as thev afterwards told me, that he might have paſt thorough che
German Guards well enough without the word, being as well known to all the German
Officers, as tothoſe of our own Nation, he would have gone, what promiſe ſoever he had
made to the Duke of Gaiſe to che contrary 5 bur when the honr is come, I think God
will have ir ſo, thar death hall follow, and *as to no purpoſe for a man to fly, or to
hide himſclf. He moreover ſaid to them theſe words, CIHonfieur de Montluc zs not yet
well known to the King and Queen, although the King loves him vrry well ; but if I eſcape
from thu ſiege, 1 will make both the King and the Oacen nnderſtand his worth, and che
next day when he was dead, the Sieur Adrian and Count 7 heophile rold me, char I had
loſt the beſt Friend I had in che world, which I cafily believ?d, and do ſtill believe it,
and might well ſay, that having loſt the Dake of Ferrara and him, I had loſt the two
beſt friends I had 1n Jtaly and in France, He was kill'd the ncxc day, as he was looking Th
and conſulting with Monkeur deGmiſe where co place the four Culverines. Before din- Anon:
ner he had been looking long, bur Monſieur de Gziſe would needs recurn again in the af- lun.
rernoon to conſider of it better, having Monſicur de Salcede with them, He was lain by :

a Maſquer ſhor from a little Bulwark, that was at a Corner of che Town) pointing along
by the Rivertowards Metz. Thus when a mans hour is once come, he cannot avoid
it, This poor Lord had paſt thorough above fix thouſand Canon, and above fifty chou-
ſand Harquebuz ſhor, which could nor all kill him, and yer chis accurſed Muſquer ſhor
could do it, at the diſtance of above five hundred paces, Monkienr de Goiſe being cloſe by
him, The King there loſt a good ſervant, and as valiant a man dyed, as any was in
France. Two hours after, Monſicur de Gaiſe came to the Tower, bur gave expreſs charge
thac noone ſhould ſpeak a word of his death, when ſeeing the Sieur Adrian and Count
T heophile, 1 ask*d them where he was, ro which they made anſwer, thar the laſt night
he had not bcen very weil, bur that to night he would come to me ; buc perceiving

Ee Monſenr

Monlicur de Gaiſe to be ſad, and all thoſe who were with him very grave, my hearc mil.
gave me, that ſomething was amiſs , when Monſieur de Gaiſe being return'd, and having
left Monſieur de Bourdillon with me in the Mareſchal's ſtead, I carneſtly entreaced him
to tell me what was become of Mc,nſicur de Strozzy ; who made anſwer, Why, I will
zell you, and alſo if you knowit not today, you will knoy it to morrow, and thereupon gave
me the relation of his death, and how Monſicur de Gziſe had forbid them to cell me, tear=
ing my grief wonld hinder me the next day from pertorming my duty in the ftghe, To
which I reply*d, That it was true, no man under Heaven was more «fflifled for his death
than 1 was, yet that I would endeavour to forget him for that night, and the day following;
but it ſhowld be to lament him ever after whilſt I had an hsar to breath : Count T heophile and
the Sieur Adrian ſtay*d wich me all this night, during which we paſtrogether our lamenca-
tions, and by break of day began to play onr Canon at the Hole. Monſieur de Gaiſe
had cans'd an Engineof planks above a foot thick to be made, tov pur before the Canon (o
ſoon as it had fir*d, to the end that the Enemy from their Loop-holes might not kill our
Engin of Canoncer'. Ar the foot of this Engine there were ewo little wheels for 1t to Move upon,
planks to de- and it was drawn with alittle cord, which ſo cover?d the muſſel of the Canon, thar
fend the Ca- no Harquebuz ſhot could pierce ir. Aﬀrer this manner we made twenty thot at this
LIE Hole, which we broke thorough, and madeſo wide, that a man might eahly paſs chorough ;
bur the Canon could do no hurt to their Caſemats, foraſmuch as they were a lutle on
the right hand, and no man could approach the Hole, wichoar being killd or wounded.
Monſieur de Gaiſe then ſent me order, that T ſhould try to lodge three or tour hundred
men betwixt the Tower and the Ravelin, and that he would to that purpole fend me Ga.
bions and Pionecrs, He had caus'd Mantelets to be made; to place from the great Tower
to the River, which might be ſome ſeven or eight paces, and from thence our Harque-
buzeers ſhot at thoſe who appear*d npon the Courtine 3 our Enfigns planting chemſelyes
all along by the wall, from the Tower to the Rayeline, Thoſe upon the Platform ſaw all
along by the Courtine, and ours who were by this Raveline on that ſide by the Hole,
f1*d atthem, whilſt TI made chem ſhoot from behind che Mantelets, Monſieur de Nevers
che Father of theſe three daughters now living, was come thither, and ſtood by our Tra.
verle that was at the foot of che Great Tower, and Monſieur de Gaiſe was on the other
fide of the River, by the Artillery. Poton Sene'ſchal of Agensss commanded one of the
four Culverines, who made very brave ſhots, and did us great ſervice, for he play*d con=
tinually upon the top of the Courtine and the Platform, at thoſe who ſhew?*d rhemlelves to
ſhoot at our people below, and this continued fonr or five hours ar leaſt. Monſieur de
Gaiſe then ſent to me by Monſieur de Ciplerre to try if we could by any means place che
Gabions he had ſent me, berwixt the wall and the Hole, but all thoſe who preſenced
chemſelyves to plant the Gabions, were either kilPd or hurt. Trhen bechoughr my ſelf co
put a hundred or fix{core Pioneers into the water, under the bank of the River, cocaſt
| up a Trench all along by the water fide towards the Rawvaline. Monſieur de Cipierre ſaw
the great difficulty and impoſſibility there was in executing the Dakes command , and
found Captain Bordezjere dead, and his Enſign wounded who dyed afrer. You could
have ſeen nothing bur wounded men carrying off to be dreſt, and che Manrelets ſhat-
| ter*d allto pieces with ſtones, {o that we lay all open ſhooting at one anorher as one
| ſhoots at a mark, T had order*d our affairs pertty well ; for 1 had plac*d moſt of che
Harquebuzcers by hundreds, fo thactas one hundred had ſpent all their powder, another
hundred came co ſupply their rooms, and (till all the danger and miſchief fell where
] was ; for as well the Culverines that plaid from che-other fide of the River, as thoſe
men of ours chat ſhot openly, and wichour ſhelcer, kept the Enemy 1n ſuch aw, that not
one duiſt pop up his head to ſhoot ac our people who were under the wall below, bur
j plaid continually upon us, who were almoſt in a level right over againſt chem, Mon-
fieur de Bourdillon then at the bidding of Monſieur de Nevers, came and caught me by
the arms behind, and hal*'d me above fix paces backwards, ſaying, What will you do man,
in the name of God, wha? doou Intend to do, do you net (ee, that if you bs kill'd, all this
laboar's loſt, and that the Senldiers will be diſcoaraged ? to which, diſengaging my ſelf
The oof from him, I reply*d, and do yow wob alſs ſee, that if I be not with the Souldiers, they
” OOF IIA will abandon this poſt, and the Enemy will kill al! thoſe that are under the wall ? for thenthey
Montluc, will ſtand up at their eaſe, and ſhoot plum down upon them. Monſieur de Newvers then
calld to mealſo from the other ſide of the hole, ro make meretire, which nevertheleſs I
would not do, but ſaid to-Monfieur de Bowrdillon theſe words, What God will do with
we this day ts already determin'd, I cannit avoid it, and if this place be appointed for my
grave, it # in vain to ſhun my deſtiny, and ſo, withour ſaying any morero him, return*d
back co the place from whence he had drawn me, when on a tudden I bechoughe wy
| c

202 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book IV.

”w ” ay "_ 6h, ”q " div AR rant a wes, Anal FE RAR. adker Ss : Lad HY 4 4 Ca
EA FS er Ts fas n 4 5 : - < : , SF B ” Q 1
> Vo 5 is <LI hd : . "4 ? h
os EUGENE ORIEL boo Ft Ok; 3 be” ob \ p y oor as 4

»

- 7

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. ;

{clf of an Encerprize, bidding Captain Volumat to take fix Harquebuzcers, and two Hal-
berts, and go place himſelf behind a Canton of the Wall, chac remain*d of the Tower
when ic was beaten down, and there trie if ſuddenly leaping out from behind chis Wall,
he could not throw himſelf headlong upon the Caſemats, a deſign grounded upon my
belief thar they could not be cover'd with any thing bur plancks, for they made them afcer.
the ſame manner that we made the Hole, or elſe chat chey were totally open, Bur be ic
how it would, I intreared him without diſpute to throw himſelf upon chem , aſſuring
him that I would go make another Captain fall on by the path of the Traverſe, which
lcad up to the top of the Tower, and rhat both of them at the ſame time ſhould throw
themſelves headlong upon the Caſemates. I then calP'd to me a French Captain (I do
not remember his name) and faid ro him in the preſence of Monſieur de Nevers and Mon-
eur de Bowrdillon, the ſame things I had ſaid to Caprain Yolumat, and thac fo ſoon as ever
he ſhould be up , without pawſing upon the matter, he ſhould throw himſelf upon che
Caſemars, defiring Monſieur de Newers, and Monfiear de Bourdillon to encourage che Sol-
diers to follow this Captain, whilſt I went to Captain Yolumat ro do the ſame, Bur {o
ſoon as ever this poor Captain thruſt up his head, he was kill'd by thoſe ofthe grear Plac-
torm, and another after him, ſo that they fell dead berwixt the legs of Monſieur de Ne-
vers, and Monſieur de Bowrdillon. I then cried out to Captain Volumat, being ſome fif-
reen paces from one another, that the Captain who fell on by che Traverſe was already
upon the top of the Tower (to beger in him an emulation, which ordinarily ſharpens
the nobleſt courages) whereupon the ſaid Captain Yslamat ſtart up, for before ke was
kneel'd down behind the Canton, and ran up to the brink of che Wall. Now there was
another Wall berwixt the Caſemats and the Corner of che Tower ; ſo that alchough he
ſhould leap into the firſt only , he was never the nearer ; yet ſo ic was, that this very ching
was cauſe of the winning ofthe place,for the Caſ:mat was all open and very low 5 ſo that ſo
ſoon as ever they ſaw Captain Yolumat upon the top, making ſhew as if he would leap in
berwixt the two Walls, they acquitced the Caſemats, and fled away along by the Curtain
of the Wall and che Terraſs, berwixt which and the Wall five or {ix men might march a-
breaſt, and then a Soldicr of Captain Yolumats at two leaps was wich me, telling me in

great haſte chat the Enemy had abandon'd the Caſemat:, Whereupon I immediately ran The Enemy |
up to the fide of the hole, and raking the Soldier by the arm cried to him, /eap in, Sol- of the Caſc+

dier, leap in, and I will give chee ewenty Crowns : bur he cold me flatly he would nor do
it, for that he ſhould certainly be kill'd , and chereupon ſtruggled with all che force he
had to get away from me. My Son Captain entiuc, and thoſe Captains I nam'd be-
fore, who alwayes uf' d to bear me company, were behind me, art Whom I began to ſwear
and curſe, that they did not help me to truſs chis Gallant, when immediately we chruſt
him in with his head forwards, and made him bold in ſpite of his teeth, and ſeeing they
ſhor no more from the Caſemars we pur in two Harquebuzeers more, partly with their
conſent, and partly by force, firſt raking from them their Flasks and their Matches, for
there was water within up to.che armpits, and immediately afrer Caprain 2fontlac leapt
in, then the Captains Coſi], 1a Motte, Caſtet, Segrat, and the dafil5ons, having all Tar-

gets, took the leap to ſave my Son, and three or tour Harquebuzeers afcer them, when ſo Gaſcon Cap«
ſoon as I ſaw they were nine or ren, I cried outto them, C owrage Camrades, now ſh'w your 108,

ſelves true Gaſcon Soldiers, and fall upon the (aſemats, which they did, whilſt che Ene-
my upon the Terraſs threw ſtones ar cheir own people, to make chem return to che Caſe-
mats, and as Captain ontlue came to the door of the ſaid Caſemars he met with che
Enemy, who would have re-entred into 1c, but a Harquebuzeer of ours kill'd the Chief
of chem, who was arm'd with a Mail cover'd over with green velvet, a gilt Morion upon
his head, and a damaskt Halbert in his hand. Two others were alſo kill'd by hand,
and then our people leapt into the Caſemat, and calld out to me rhorough che hole, Suc-
conrs, ſucconrs, we are in the Caſemat : Monſieur de Nevers then and Monſieur de Boxr=
dillon help'd me in all haſte to put more Soldiers in : we took their flasks and rhear fire,

and ſo ſoon as they were in the water, chey took chem again in their hands, and paſt over Honor done by

throwing themſelves into the Caſemats, and ever after chart time Monſieur de Newer call'd oper o
| evers to tne

Sieur de Mont

me his Captain ſo long as he liv'd, ſaying he had there ſerv'd under me in the qualicy of a
private Soldier.
| We had there two Captains of the Garriſon of etz called le Baron d' Anplure, and
Flon-Ville, who at my requeſt had obtein'd leave of Monfieur de Guiſe to be ar the Aſ-
ſaulr, with five and twenty Harquebuzeers each, whom I had all chis while kept under
the Traverſe, ſo that as yer they had nor ſpent one ſhot. Tcalld chem, and che
were wich me at a leap, and threw themſelves into the hole, and their Soldiers followed
after, when as faſt as chey entred I made _ run to the door of the Caſemat, and co
6 23 enrcr

Ss

/

204

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book IV,

Diviſion a-
mongſt the
Defendants,

Severity of the
Spaniards,

The prear
T ower taken,

enter intoit, The door was lictle and very low, and the Enemy durſt not dehiver ther
ſhot plum down, becauſe our men who were all along by the Wall would fce them as
ſoon as they pur up their heads, as alſo would thoſe who were there where I had been :
but they tumbled down a great quantity of ſtones, for all which our people deliſted no:
from going in and our of the Caſemart as occafion requir'd 5 and as the Soldjers of the
Baron d' Anginre and Valon-Ville encred the Caſemar, I made thoſe come out who had =
gain'd it betore, the place not being capable to contain above forty or fity perſons, Now
as God would have it, and to our great good fortune, the Detendants could nor agree
among(t themſelves about the defence of rhe Caſemats; for the Spaniards who were in
the Town would keep chem, but the Flemings would not ſufter ir, and che Governoy
would that ſome of his own Company ſhould defend them; for which he lay a long crime
in priſon, and the King of Spain would have pur him to death, the Spaniards acculing
him that he had put in corrupted people purpoſely to loſe che place. The Governor de-
fended himſelf, ſaying, tharhe had ſeen Foanne Gaetano and his Spaniards behave them.
{elves ſo ill, that he durſt not truſt ther with the defence of the Cafemar, and ſo they
accuſed one another ; all which we knew from the Conſtable, and the Mareſchal de St.
Andre at their return out of priſon, who left this Governor {till a priſoner. I have in m y
time obſerv'd the Spaniards to be ſevere puniſhers of thoſe vvho by covvardiſe or crea.
chery have loſt or ſarrendred places, and it vvere vvell and prudently done, if all Prince:
vvould puniſh ſuch as commir ſo important offences , at leaſt by degradation from arms,
vyhich is vvorſe than death :; bur then they ought to be cenſur'd vvithour prejudice or
paſſion; forT have knovvn a man accuſed by another vvho cou'd not himſelf have dowe
Þetiers

Bur to return to our Siege, Monſicur de Giſe being vvith the Culverins, and making
them continually to ſhoot at the Enemies dztences, perceiv'd that the Soldicrs of the
Trenches run ſtraight up to the Tower (which were che two Captains, Anglureand Yalon-
Ville that Thad call'd up tome) and Lancbourg (Colonel of a Regiment of Germans, who
was at the fartheſt end of the Trench, co whom I had ſent to ſead me a hundred of his
Harquebuzeers in all haſte, for ours had ſpent all their powder) came alſo running him
ſelf with the hundred Harquebuzeers, and a hundred Pikes co me co the Tower 3 whom
Monſieur de Gaiſe ſecing to run after this manner, and ſecing the others that were by the
Tower run to the hole, he cried out (as they told me afterwards) O good God the Tower is
taken, do you not ſee how every one runs to the place ? which having taid he immediately
mounted a bay Curcal he had ready by him, and ran full ſpeed to pals che Bridg, gallop-
ing all che way till he came to the Trenches. So foon as I ſaw that Angliare and Y alen-
Ville were in the Tower, I ſpoke to a Gentleman that ſtood by, and ſaid run to Mon-
freur de Guile, and carry him news that the Tower is taken, and that mow 1 think he will
take Thionville, which till now 1 did never believe. The Gentleman ran as faſt as he could,
and met him juſt as he was entring the Trenches, where he ſaid ro him, Sir, Monſieur
de Montluc ſends you word that the Tower is taken , who {bl galloping on made anſwer, 7
have [een all my friend, 1 have ſeen all, and ſome fifty or threelcore paces from the Tower
alighted , and leaving his horſe came running to us on foot ; when {o ſoon as he came,
I began to ſmile upon him, and ſaid, O Sir { now think, yon will tage Thionville, Mas bows
hazts trop bon marcat de noſtre pet, & de boſk monſeigne ; whereapon he threw his arms
about my neck, and faid, 1 now ſte , my heart, that the old Proverb is true, That a good
horſe will never tire. Now Lunebourg was already got in, and fifteen or ſixteen Germans,
and the reſt were entring in file, when Monheur de G#iſe alſo put himſelf into jt, and by
the little door cntred the Caſemat, and ſo ſoon as he was in call'd ro me through a looy-
hole, that I ſhould pur him ſome Pioncers into the Tower to bear down the Caſcmars,
and that I ſhould ſee that no more Soldiers entred, they being already ſo many, that they
began to be crowded, I then pur Pioneers into the Tower, who preſently fell ro breaking
the Wall of the Caſemat, when che Germans ſecing the raſcals lazy ar their work, them-
{elves took the picks, and fell ro cutting the Wall, Monſieur de Gaiſe then ſent our Lune-
boarg to look that no more entred into the Tower, telling him , that he would ſee that
they ſhould ply their work in the Caſemats, as they alſo did, and ſo well, char in leſschan
half an hour all the Caſemars was overturned into the water that was in the Tower, the
raines whereof drank it all up, and then we had room enough, and every one entred thac
would, and then Monſieur de Gaiſe came out, as he allo made the Germans to do, and
to return to their Poſt ; and then I drew off Captain Sarlabuwwand all his Companions,
who was along by the Courtin , and under the Ravelin, and puc chem into the Tren-
chess

Now {ſo ſoon as the Enemy ſaw the Tower loſt, they ſhot nu more ſo ſmartly as before,

and

— O—_—

45 $0 on

Book IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

AAA FA AA et OO So, pa
— ——
_—_— E—_—

«nd we very well peiceiv'd them to be down in the mouth, The &ngliſh Miners the Duke
+f Gaiſe hady had never ſtirr'd from me of all this while , and Monſieur de Guiſe be-
{1c he came our of the Tower had conſulted with them whereabouts to begin the Mines,
and found chat it was under the grear Platform, marking the places where they were to
made, and fo went back with Monlienr de Gwiſe, who ſaid ro me, My heart, I will

«/lop home to my Qnarters to ſend the King word of the taking of the Tower , and aſſure

our ſelf Morſi-ur de Montluc, 1 will not conceal from him the brave ſervice you have per-

iirm'd at this Siege 5 I will ſend the Miners back, to you at night , and 1 pray appoint ſome

(Gentlemen to be continually with them, that by them they may ſend you word what they want 3

::3d ſo he went away to diſpaich a Courrier to the King z for theſe grear ones think the

me long if news do nor fly. His Majeſty had rhe day before made them read the Prophe- The Prophe-_
cs of Noſtredsmus, and found for the next day Good news for the King ;, people may ſay cies of Noſtre-

Har theſe are fopperies, and idle things, but I have teen many of his predictions come dams,

» paſs. The Tower was raken berwixt four and five a clock in the afternoon, and we
nad diiputed wt from ten of the clock in the morning, fo that we made account the Fighr
!ifted berwixr fix and ſeven honrs, This fight, and chat of the Fort ( amoglia ar Sjenna
were the longcſt, and che moſt dangerous wherein Batrail or no Battail I have ever been ; for
npon my word zt was very hot, and many were Jefr dead npon the place, In the begin-
1:ng of rhe nightche Miners came, and I my ſelf went with them to fee them begin ; of
all night long I never ſlept, becauſe ſeeing them ply their work fo well, I vvould not that
ny thing ſhould be vvanting, bur immediately be broughc chem, that chey might nor loſe a
quarter of an hour for vvant of materials; ſo thac by break of day they had perfeRed tvvo
Mines, and charg'd chem vvith poyvder ready to ve ſprung, and the third they made
account vvould be perfeRed by ren of the cleck ; vvherein my preſence ſerv*d nor a little
to the advancement of the vvork , neither indeed had I any more mind to ſleep than to
dance, Monſieur de N:.vers, and Monſieur de Boxrdiflon vvere gone back over night vvith
Monſicur de Guiſe, and returr*d the nexr day by Sun-riſe, and at eight of the clock the
{aid Sicur de Nevers cauſed his dinncr to be broughtz vvhen as vve vvere eating upon three
Drum-heads, upon vvhich his people had laid the Cloth, ficting upon three others, vve
had fcarce drank each of usa draught of vvine vvhen the Centinels came tc tell me, thar
a Trumper trom a Canton of che Tovvn founded a Parley ; vvhereupon I tare np, and

delivering the Dram | face upon to his Maſter, bad him go anſvver che Parley, The Drum The Defen-
preſently rerurn'd, znd brought me vvord, chat che Trumpet entreated me, knovyving I dants ak to

}

commanacd wmhec ro fend vvord to Monkear de Gniſe, car they deſir'd to parley, Parley,

vvhich fo foon as Moniieur de Newers and Monſieur de Bonrdillon heard, they gave over
cating, 2nd mounting to horſe galloped away to the Dukes Quarters, co carry him the
news. The Duke then lent away a Trumpet of his own, by whom they ſent word, char
it Monhcur de Gzife would pleaſe to {end four Gentlemen to parley,: they would deliver
11m four ocheis in hoſtage. Whereupon the Duke ſenc thicher Monſieur de Ja Bree,
Monficur de Bowrdillon, or elle Monheur de Tavannes, Eſclabille, and another, bur whom

L have forgot, They capitulared ro march out with what money they could carry abour The Surrender
them, and not to hie, I remember nothing of the other Articles as indeed I never uſed of Thionville;

much to trouble my iclt with eheſe ſcrible- ſcrawls, having enough to do to provide thac
no body might be untealonably (lain during the rime.of the Treaty, as it ofc falls our, Bur
the next day they marched our, and I dare boldly ſay, thar 6f four parts three were wound=
ed, and almoſt all in che head, which was done when they ſtood up co thoocr ar us there,
where I had planted my Harquebuzeers ; for they could not ſhoot ar choſe who were under
the Wall, bur thcy muſt diſcover themſelves from the girdle upwards, and all their harm
came from thoſe of ours who were under the Ravelin, and thoſe that I commanded
where we {hot point-blank, The ſame nighc thac che Capiculation was fign'd, Monſieur
de Gaiſe diipatched away Monſieur de 1a Freſne, who before he went came to take his leave
of me on horlebacky asking me if I would command him any ſervice co the King , to
which I made anlwer, that he himſelf had ſeen how all things had paſt, and that I had (>

mrch confidetice in Monfieur de Guile, that be would not conceal my ſervice from the King, "7 HIENEYE? SHA"

who thereupon told me, th.t he had expreſs charge tv give his Majeſty a particular re= to the Sicur de
lation ef the fight, and that among ft other things, the Dake had commanded him to tell the Moniluc by che
King, that three men had been the cauſe of the tuking of Thionville, of which I was one, and Duke of Gusſe,

that his Mujeſty ought to acknowledg my ſervice. And I perceiv'd atcerwards chac he had
done me right to the King , for he brought me back letters from his Majeſty full of very
obliging expreſhons , of which one among the relt was, that he would never forget the
ſervice 1 had done him. 1 hall noc 1 hope deprive other men of cheir due honor, rela.

ting what I did my {elf, 1 believe che Hiſtorians who wrire of none bur Princes and

great

FIGS

The Duke of
Guiſe envy'd,

The honor of
this Victory
due to the

Duke of Guiſe.

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book ING

great perſons will ſpeak enough, and paſs over in {ilence thoſe of a more moderate (ta-
rure.

Behold then the City of Thionvile taken. Notwithſtanding that, ſome who had ng
very great kindneſs for the Dukeof Gwiſe, had paſted a Libell at the Gates of the Palace,
and upon the Corners of the ſtreets of Pars, that he ſhould not find chat ar Thionvilte
he had done at Calice, where there were none. bur raſcally people ro oppoſe him, ic went
in Rhyme, though I remember nothing of it ; bur ic mult be contriv'd by the envy ſome
vnworchy people bare to this brave and valiant Prince, for the honorable command the
King had conferr'd upon him, which I have nothing to do to treat of, neicher do I in-
cend to trouble my ſelf with ſuch trumpery. Envy has ever reign*d upon the earth, be-
fore we were borny and will do after we are dead and gone, unleſs God would pleaſe to
mold us anew. There were ſome who were ready to burſt for ſpite that Monſieur de G iſe
had ſo good ſucceſs ; for there are ſome, and roo many of ſuch a vertuous diſpoſition,
that they had rather ſee theruine of their King and Countrey, than behold the Triumph
not only of their Enemy, bur of their Friend and Companion, andit any diſgrace betal
him (for men are not Gods) they laugh , rejoyce, and make an Elephant of a Gnar,
Ler us leave ſuch to ſwell with their own poyſonous envy till they burſt. In che mean
time Thionville was ours with a great deal of honor. The night before the Enemy
march*d away, Monſieur de Gziſe put Monſieur de ijelle- Ville into the City , who re-
fusd to enter, unleſs I went along with him, becauſe he ſhould not, he ſaid, be maſter
of the Souldiers, but they would enter by force over the walls: I cherefore took two or
three hundred Souldiers, and chree:Captains, and went in with him, he having his own
Company of Gens d' armes , where we were fain to play the Centinels all night, to watch
that the Souldiers did not climb over the walls, and never {lept one wink. I wonder at
what we read in the Roman Hiſtories, of thoſe who before the day of a pircht Battel,
{lept as profoundly, as it had been the day of their wedding. I have neyer, I confeſs
been ſo indifferent and inapprehenſive: but on the contrary , have paſt three days and
nights without ſleeping, or ſo much as having any great inclination to it. The next day
I advis'd Monficur de Guiſe to remove his Camp from thence, for otherwiſe it had been
impoſſible to govern the Souldiers, and to ſpeak thetruth, they very well deſerv'd to have
had the ſack of the Town given them) for it is to dilcourage Souldiers, not to give them
ſome reward, and: the leaſt ching they gain from the Enemy gives them beter concenc
rhan four pays. But Monſieur de Gniſe would by no means permic it, ſaying, that the
Town muſt be preſerv'd for his Majeſties Service, being that chorough che Vicinity of this
Cty to Germany, he might atall times draw whar forces he pleag'd from thence z and that
moreover, John William Duke of Saxony, being to paſs thac way, the proviſions muſt be
preſerv'd, and ſo ſent away the Army to encamp abour halt a mile trom thence, and
Monkieur de Yeille-Ville, with three or four Enſigns of Foot, and his own Company of
Gens d armes was left Governor there.

Here (Captains my Companions) you have an example, if you pleaſe to take notice of
it, by which you may ſee of what uſe prompritude is; this place being won by the great
haſte I made, immediately upon Captain Volnmat's Souldiers relling me, that the Enemy
had quitred the Caſematsz I had nor patience to pnt1n above nine or ten men, but imme-
diately I pur in my Sonthe firſt, and after him the Gentlemen char had follow*d me at
che ficge of Sienna, and at CMontalſin, and it ſtood me upon to mae haſte, and ro make
chem go ſpeedily to the fight; for had Iftay*d ill therehad been as many in the Tower,
as in appearance were neceſſary for ſuch a ſervice, the Enemy had re-entred ;into ir, and
been ſuddenly re-inforc'd, ſo chat it had been impofiible ever to have raken it. I have
been at many Sieges, but never without ſome hopes of raking the place, excepting at this z
for having diſcover'd and conſider'd all that was to be done for the taking of it, I found
my ſelf asfar off, as Heaven is from Earth, and in plain cruth the glory of it is due
to Monſieur de G#iſe alone, who was ſo obſtinately bent upon it, that che fight laſted fix
or ſeven hours, and I do verily believe, that without the continual ſolicication I had al-
molt every moment from him, we had all retir'd, knowing that we might co as much pure
poſe have invaded Heavenz and we ought to believe, that through his good fortune, and
the aſſiſtance of God who would have it ſo, this fiege was brought to a good iſſue, and
not by the power of men ; being certain, that there was more Canon ſhot fir'd from with-
in, than we ſpent from withour. |

When (Camrades) then you ſee an opportunity, haſten the execucion, and never give
your Enemy leiſure co recolle& himſelf, rake thac advice from me, I have three qualicies
that are not common to all, one whereof is, ro be good at numbring of men, wherein I
never met with any Serjeant Major or other that ſurpaſs'd me, and provided the Enemy

was

-” 6 RR. —C TINT TH IRE Ine

pe cootdes _

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

OE om_ ———_—_—__

—___

was not divided part ſloping, and part in plain, ler the Body be never fo greac, I could
number them to fifry men, at the diſtance of almoſt half a mile. The ſecond 1s, ro know
by an Enemies behavzour, whether or no they be in fear, eicher by their morion, cheir
order, or their manner of firing, a thing from which you may derive very great advan=
caves : So ſoon as ever I perceiv'd my Enemy never fo little in doubt, I concluded him
preſently for loſt. And che third, a readine(sI always had co fight them 1m their ap-
prchenfion, whether ſtronger or weaker for if you know nor how to make an advan-
cage of your cnemRts fear, you can neyer hope to derive any from your own, and1I have
cyer had eAlexanders device in my head, though I never woreit any where elſe, which
is Defer not till to morrow what thou canſt do to day z and am of opinion, that next to the
Divine alliſtance, all the ſucceſles I have had, have proceeded from theſe three things.
If you have notthe judgement, ſceing your opportunity, to preſs and ſolicite your men,
and wichout further deliberation, to fall roundly ro your work, you will never perform
any thing of moment, either for your ſelves, or for him you ſerve: Fear not in a peril-
lous lcap to hazard thelife of a Souldier. (There is no remedy, ſome mnt be ſacrifc'd
tro the Pablick, the world would otherwite be over peopled) provided it bein a place
from whence he cannot retire, -as I did to the Souldiers I thruſt into the Caſemars, for
then they take courage, ſeeing themſelyes loſt, and make a virtue of neceſſity. Had Ire-
cir'd then when Monſieur de Bowrdillon pull?d me back by the arms, I think our enterprize
had been deferr*d till another time, TI have ſeen ſuch as are glad when they are com-
pellF'd atcer that manner to retire, eſpecially in a place of danger, and yer will keep a great
clucter ar other times. I know thoſe men by cheir looks, Camrades, Friends, afcer
having ſaid your in manu, never think of any thing more, but of doing well; it your
hour be come, *tis ro much purpoſe to hide your heads, fince you muſt once dye, *cisbeſt
to dye like men of honor, and to leavea good name behind you, |
I loſt, by the relation of the Captains, above five hundred Souldiers, kill®d and hurt,
and caus'd allche woanded men to be carried ro Metz, to which place Monſieur de Vielle-
Ville (who at this time is Mareſchal of France) ſent to recommend them, tor he was the
Kings Licutenanc there, cauſing money to be diſtributed amongſt them out of the Re-
venue of the Hoſpical the Admiral founded there, which has been the preſervation of a
great many wounded Souldiers, and alſo an encouragement to others to venture more
boldly in fight, hoping that in caſe they ſhould be hurr, they are (ure co have a relief of

Monſeur de
Vielle-Ville

Mareſchal of
France, |

money out of the Hoſpital for their cure. And truly Sir, both you and theother great agyice ro the
Princes of the world, ought to make it one of your chiefeſt concerns to eſtabliſh a Re- King. |

venue for your poor maim*d and wounded Souldiers, as well for cheir preſent cure, as
their furure ſnpport , and that ſome penſions may be ſer apart for them. Can you
do leſs for them, who expoſe and ofter up rheir lives for you ; this hope makes them
more willing to hazard cheir perſons. And doubtleſs your own ſouls will one day an-
iwer for all, for they will be no more piviledg*d than ours; nay, you will have a greac
deal more to anſwer for than we, for you make us do all rhe ills we commit, to farisfie
and execute your paſſions, and if God be not merciful both to you, and to us, we
are in a ſad condition. For the honor of God chen, Sir, providefor your poor Souldiers,
that loſe their arms and legs in your ſervice 4 it 1s not you that gave them their limbs, bur
God, and can youthen do leſs than maintain them, when they are lam'd in your ſer-
vice, Do you think that God will not hear the MalediRtions they curſe us withal, who
have made chem miſerable all their lives? I have heard the Grand Signior has a very
good order, as to that particular, and accordingly he isthe beſt ſerv'd of any Prince in
the world. | | #

Three days after the taking of Thionville, the Army march'd direatly to Arlon, a lit-
tle Town, bur a very ncat one for its circuit. Tis a great fault in a General to lie (til
afrer the taking of a place, as I have known them ofcen des This both encourages your
Enemy» and gives your own men opportunity to ſteal away z whereas their honor will
oblige chem co ſtay, when they ſee themſelves employ dz I mean, if che Army be nor
rotally broken or ruin'd, for then neceſſity compels you ſoto do 2 but otherwiſe to repoſe
afcer a Conqueſt, and to loſe never ſo little rime, is very prejudicial co his Majeſties ſer=
vice, I with our foot quartcr'd round abont the Town, Monficur de Gaiſe lay a quarter
of a League behind, and told me he was almoſt moap'd for want of ſleep ; for char ſince
che beginning of the fiege of T hionville till now, he had not had ſo much ſleep in all, as
he was wont to have in one nightat other times (and I had had leſs than he) entreatiog me
ro make the approaches that night, that he would ſend me the Commiſſaries of the
Artillery with four pieces of Canon, to conſule where they ſhould be planced , and
that he would give the ſack of this Town to the Souldiers, in recompence of chat of

Thionvidle

——J.ud.. ed

208 © The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Bo ox. I

— —

%

7 hionville : Which having ſaid, he recu'd himſelf into a litcle chacch'd huuſe, where he
was to lie.
The Forces in There was 1n the Town a hundred and fifty Germans, and four hundred Walloons,
Arlon. the Germans kept one Gate, and the Walloons another ; when (fo ſoon as I had placed the
Centinels , and the Courts of Gaard very near to one another (becauſe it was faid thar
ſome {uccours would enter in that night) they within fer a very good face on the matrer,
which mace us chink that they Jookr tor ſome relief ) I began ro make the Eſplanade by
| the Gardens of the Town,to bring up the Arrillery,reſolving to make my Bactery a lictle on
| the left hand che Gare, to aſhſt my ſclf ac che aſſaule wich the Ladders of a little Breach
i they had made themſelves, thorough which co carry up earch co the Terraſs they were
making 1n thar place; which to do they had madeſteps 1n the very earth ic ſelf, both at
the deſcent into the Grafte, and likewiſe in theaſcent on the other fide up to the Terra.
I came up cloſe co the Ditch of the Town, and to another litcle Dicch chere was near un-
to the way, which I cauſed to be diſcover'd by a Soldier; and I had three or tour Cap-
rains with me 1n this liccle Ditch. The Soldier found the fteps, by which he went down,
and afcerwards mounted three or four of thoſe char went up to the Terraſs, and there
ftayd withour being perceiv'd ; when having ſtayed a while he return'd to me, and rold
me, that there was no Centincl upon the Terrafs; fo that he thoughr if we ſhould chrow
our {clves deſperarcly upon the Terraſs we ſhould carry the Town. Hearing chis, I cauſed
a Courc of Guard (that was much ſtronger than the reſt, ic being defign'd to guard the
Arcllery ) to come up to me, making the Soldiers to creep on their hands and knees, and
to put themſelves into the Dicch, Ichen made the Soldier recurn to the Dicch, with three
| or four Harquebuzeers, and two Captains with Targets, of which Monfiear de Goas was
'f one. The night was fo very dark, that a man could not ſee a ſtep from him , and this
| Soldier was a Fleming. He goes down into the Ditch, the Captains af:er him, and the
ll three or four Harquebuzeers after them ; and ſo ſoon as they were in the Dicch chey plant -
| ed themſelves on that fide of it towards the Town, and as near as they could to the ſteps.
l The Enemy hearing the noiſe vegan to cry who goes there? and the Soldicr anſwer'd chem
l in their own language, 4 friend, & friend; they then demanded of him what he was, to
i which he made anſwer, that he was a Ficying, and that being their Countryman, he very
wuch lamented cheir ruine, for thar all che Artllery Monficur de Gaiſe had would be
[. planced 1n battery by morning, and that they were not to truſt to the Germans who were
[ | with chem inthe Town, for they were aflur'd to have no harm, nor the leaſt offence fron
|

| Ai lm diſco-
| 3

our people,they having already made chem that promiſe by a German Soldier, who ſtole our
18 the cloſe of che evening to ſpeak with us 3 ſo chat all the {laughter would tall upon chem
if they did nor ſurrender, which alſo would be too late after che Canon had once playd.
if Upon this they ſent immediately to the Gerzwans Quarters, and found that a Soldier of
ll ours who ſpake Dutch was ralking to them z ſo that ſo ſoon as their Mefſenger recurn'd,
| this Souldier hcard chem all in a hurly-burly within, and began to ask them, if the

| would make him drink, to which they anſwered they would, and bad him come np boldly
upon their word and faith. 1 hea: 4 every word, for I was not above fix paces from the brink
| of the Graffe, and made che other two Captains go one after another into it, and three or
| four Serjeants with Halberts after them. The Soldier then mounted che Reps till he came

i ro the edge of the Terraſs, where he again ſpoke to them, ſaying char Monficur de Guiſe
l had made fair War with thoſe of Thionville, and would do the fame by them, (till amu-
1 fing them with fair ſpeeches, and chey ferchr him ſome drink. Monſieur de Goas was
| juſt behind che Soldier, and three Harquebuzcers one after another (for they conJd mount

bur one by one) in heels of him whom this firſt Soldier ſo thaded with his body, char
| chey could nor ſee down the ſteps. The other Caprain followed in the rear of che chree
'Þ Harquebuzcers , and the SerJeants after him , inſomuch thart all che ſteps were full from
the cop to the bottom ; which when Monſieur de Goas ſaw, he puthr the Soldier chat was
before him upon the Terraſs, and the other Caprain the orher three Harquebuzeers , and
and then the Soldier began to cry goot Krich, which 1s to ſay, good Q#arter, good Quarter,

A:lon furpri- the Harquebuzeers gave fire , and the Captains threw themſelves upon the Counterſcarp,
nk | and every body after them , and theſe poor people fled ro their Quarters, the Soldiers

chaſing them thorough the ſtreets. 1 chen leapt inco the Dirch wich che reſt of my men,
mouncing the Souldiers as faſt as I could one afrer another. The Germans who ſaw them-
ſclves ſurpriz'd behind, at the requeſt of rhe Soldier that ſpoke Durch very courteouſly
open'd a Poſtern, and gave themſelves up ro the diſcretion of the Soldiers, wherein our
men did an a& worthy the higheſt commendation, and by which chey ſhewed chem-
ſelves to be old Soldiers, for there was nor four men kill'd in the whole Town : but on the

contrary they chemſclves led our people to the houſes where the beſt booty was co be had 3
4 | And thus the Town was taken, Mon-

__—_— SD SR |
oo WD2v a7 > a+

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

© Monſienr de Guiſe who had given order that no one ſhould diſturb him, buclec him
thac nighr ſleep his fill, knew noching of all chis cill break of day, char asking if che Ar-
ciflery had begun co play, they told him the Town was already caken, from abou- mid-
night, and the Arnillery return'd back co ics place, which made him make che $ gn of
che Croſs, ſaying this is quick work , when preſently making himſelf ready, and myuntirg
- to horſe he came up ro us. Now by misf-»rtune the fire hid taken in two or thice houſes
by reaſon of ſome powder thar was tound in them, which in 1emoving thence accidencally
cook fire, and burner four cr five Sold«crs, ſo rhiac che Town being aln; ft Fall of flax ready
drcſt for ſpinning, and the wind being very high, no ſo good means could be u(*d, bur
chat above half the Town wasreduc' to athcs, by reaſon whereof the Soldiers did nor
ger ſo much as otherwiſe they had done. | | ; |
The nex: day Monlienr d: Gaiſe marched away with all his Army, and never ſtaid cill
he came to Pierre pt, where hunſelf and all the Gentlemen of his Train lodg'd in the
Town, which wos very large, whilſt we enc1mor wichour on bo.h fides the River ; and

Arlon burne;

chere it was that the Swiſs came ro 15, and Jihn Willizm Dake of Saxony, whio broght a The Duke of
greac 2nd very brave Troop of Rejters along with him, and, it I miſtake nor, a Regimient Saxony.

of Germans ally, The King himſclt Iikewiſe came, and lay :t Marches, a houſe belong-
ing to the Cardinal of L»rain, which al ogecher made up che preaceſt and the braveſt
Army that I think ever King of Frarce had 5 for when che King would fee them all
drawn into Battalia, they rook up abovea leagic and ahalfinlengch, and when the Van
bezan ro march to go back co the Rear, and co re:urn back co che Front rook up three
hovrs :ume, | mae
T«xo hons bifore day Mefſcurs de Bourdillon and d: 7 a vann's, Mareſchaux de Camp,
came to the place afſian'd for che Rendezvour , where as we came they (bl drew us up,
and betore «| che Army was in Barcalia it was above eight hours, and was excelhvely hor ;
Monſieur de Gaife came himſclf by break of day, and helped co pat the Army into Bat-
calia, I with my French Foot was placed berwixc the $ »iſ5 and a Battalion of Germans,
where as Monſieur de Geiſe paſt by the head of our Baccalion, he ſaid, Wou!d to God
w? had ſome god fellow here with a bottle of wine, and a cruſt of bread, that | might drink
a glaſs w two, for 1 ſrail not have time to go dine at Pierre-pont, and be back againbefore

the King comes, whereupon I ſaid to him, Sir will you pleaſe to dine with me at my Tents? The Sieur de
(which was not above a Harquebuz thor off ) 7 will give you very good French and Gaſcon Montlac in-
wine, ayd a whole Covy of Partridges , y:s my heart, ſaid he, bat they will be Garlick and vices Monſieut
Onions; to which I made anſwer, that they ſhould neither be the one, mi the other, but 4 Guiſe to

that I would giv: him as good a dinner as if he was in his own Oa-rters, and wine as cool as he
could deſire, and moreover Gaſcon wine, and admirable good water. Are you in earneſt my
heart, ſaid he ? yes upon my faith am I, ſaid 1, why then, ſaid he, 1 would willingly come,
ut I cannot leave the Duke of Saxony ; why Sir, ſaid I, in the name of God bring the Dake
of Saxony » and-who you pleaſe : I Int , ſaid he, the Dake will not come without his
Captains ; why, ſaid I, Lring his Coptains too, 1 have lell)-timber for you all, Now I
had over-uight promiſed Mctlieurs de Beurdillon and de T abannes to treat them ar dinner,
after they had drawn the Army up in Baccalia 5 bur they could not come, by reaſon thac
part of che Cavalry, who were quarter'd a great wy off, were not yet come up; andon
the other ſide, 1 had one of the beſt Providores in the Army. Monſieur de Gaiſe then
went to find out the Nuke of Sax2ny and his Caprains, and I ſefic in all haſte ro my Stew-
ard to gerall chings ready. My p:ople had made a Cellar in the earth, where che wine
ar.d the water was as cool as ice ; and by good fortune I had gor a great many Parcridges,
Quirles, Turkies, Leverers, and all chat could be defir'd, wherewith to make a noble
Feaſt, with bak'd- mears and Tarts : for I knew that Mefſieurs de Bowrdillon and de Ta-
vannes would not come aJone, and I had a mind to entertain them very well, chey being
both of them very good friends of mine. They were (o well created chat Monſieur de
Guiſe asking the Duke of Saxony by his Interpreter, what he chought of the French Colo-
nel, and whether or ao he had not treated them well; and giyen them good wine? che
Duke made anſwer, tht if the Ring himſelf had treated them, he could not have dent it
better, nor have given them better, ner co ler wine, The Duke of Saxony's Caprains ſpared
it not, but drank freely ro onr French Captains, thar ] had broyght along wi.h me, nei-
ther though Meſſicurs de Bowrdilon and de T avannes had alſo come had I been ſurpriz'd,
for ncxc to the Duke of Gaiſe his own Table, there was nor one in the whole Army longer,
or becter furniſhc than mine. A way thac I have alwayes uſed in what command ſoever
I had been, being willing thereby ro honor the Employments ] have had from my Maſters,
ro encreale my expence ; and have alwaves obſerv'd ſuch as bave liv'd after this manner co
be in greater reputation, and berter followed than orhers ; for ſuch a Gencleman may be,
an

CLI ne aA ergy WY SE A
whey _ w—__

no”. hon

br entutarn Suie——c I En > vo re
Pens nmr = TRIP WC SE>— EI Era

ITN Inn
Oded

——— —
Mon ——_ _
_ > EOS. = 2 no re Loo
= EEE I —
o ” - . - 4

n F re no > x5
4 aus Haan rs y

—TR_—_

i = ww: tg _— .

——

+

| |
+

l

+

_
.

12

216 5 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book IVe

and ofa good family, that ſometimes knows not where to dine, and knowing wherea good
Table is kept, will be glad to be there, who if he follow you ar your Table, will follow
you any where elſe, if he have nzver ſo liccle good blood or breeding in him. Burt to re.
rurn to my Gueſts, ſo ſoon as they roſe from Table Monſieur de Gaiſe asked me, what
Laundreſs I had that kept my Table-linnen fo white, to.which Imade anſwer, that the
were two men I had that did it; believe me, ſaid he, you are ſerv d like a Prince ; and
thereupon enter:ain'd the Duke of Saxony upon that ſubjeR, ſpeaking berter things of
methan I deſerv'd ; whereupon I took occaſion to tell. him, that he would do well to per-
{wade the King to give me money to buy ſilver Veſſel, that another time, when he and the
Dake of Saxony would do me the honor to come eat in my Pavillions, I might ſerve them ac-
cording to their quality. Monſicur de Guiſe told the Duke of Saxony what I ſaid, who
made anſwer, that he would tell the King ; when being abour to mount to horſe to
return to the Camp, word was brought that the King was upon his way from Marches,
and coming to the Camp ; whereupon they two went out to meet him, and we return'd
every one to his place, all of us I aſſure you very well drunk, and our pates iull. Abouc
a quarter of a league from the Battalions they mer the King , where his Majeſty asked
them, if they had din'd, to which Monſieur de Gaiſe made anſwer, that they had, and as
well asthey had done of a year before : why, ſaid his Majeſty (ſeeing them come fromwards
the Battalions) you did net dine at Pierre-pont, » Sir, ſaid Monſieur de Gaiſe, neither can
your Majeſty gurſs where we din'd, nor by whom ſo well entertain'd; T pray by whom (aid the
Kings Marry Sir, replyed Monſieur de Gniſe, by Montluc ; I believe then, ſaid the King,
he feaſted you with his own Countrey diet, Garlich and Onions, and Wine as warm as milk «
whereupon Monſieur de Gaiſe up and :old him how I had entertain'd them, when the
King 3sking the Duke of Saxony by his Interpreter ifit were true, the Duke made anſwer,
The Duke of that if bis Majeſty himſelf had treated them, they could not have had better meat, nor cooler
5 pn OE wine ; and that fince I was ſognd afellow, his Majeſty might do well to give me money to
RG 8 .” buy Plate, nithing having been wanting but that , and that Monpenr de Guiſe and he had
the Sicur de both promiſed me to mak: that requeſt to his Majeſty in my behalf 3 which the King pro-
Montluce miſed them to do, ans that Hince I was ſo honorable in my expence , he would give me
means to do it, more than hitherto he had ever done.

Though this paſſage be nor much to the purpoſe, yet T rhought fic to inſert it here, to
the end every one may know , that Ayarice had never ſo great a dominion over me,
as ro hinder me from honoring the Employments I have had from my Kings and Maſters
and I would adviſe you, fellow Captains, who command over a great many men, to do
the ſame, and never to ſuffer avarice to be predominant over you ; thelittle you ſpend will
procure you ſeveral and conſiderable advantages, A Captains handſome Table invites
worthy men, eſpecially rhat of a Lieurenant of the King, to which the Nobility and

Every. one Gentry repair, either tor want of commodious Quarter, or ſometimes perhaps upon the

avoids an ava* account of other inconveniences, where if the {aid Lieutenant be miſerable and narrow

ricious Caps ſoul'd, they will look upon him as a man unworthy to be tollow'd. I never did ſo, but on

rain, the contrary alwayes ſpent more than I had,and have found chat it has done me more good
than harm : yer was not this my only way of ſpending, bur I had a trick of giving Hor-
{es and Arms alſo, and oftentimes ro men thar were berter able than my ſelf. If che
King or the Prince you ſerve under know you to be of this humour, he ought alſo co be
open-handed to you, knowing you to be of a liberal nature, and chat you reſerve nothing
ro your (elf,

Now, as I was ſtanding at the head of our Battalion, and every one of our Captains
in his place, the Prince of Joinville, who is now Duke of G#iſe, came up to me; together
wich the Son of Monſieur d' Aumale, both little boyes » and delicately handſome, having
their Governors and three or four Gentlemen attending on them. _They were mounted
upon two little Pad Nags, to whom I ſaid, Goto, little Princes, alight from your horſes ;,

The Sicur de for 7 have been bred up in the family from whence you are deſcended, which is the houſe of
Me = Lorrain, where 1 was a Page, and I will be the firſ® who ſhall lay a Pike upon your ſhoulders.
:nco the hands Upon which their Governors preſently alighting, cauſed chem alſo to alight : they had
of the Prince little Taffata Ribbons over their ſhoulders, which I took off, laying each of chem a Pike
of Pl ns, upon his neck, and ſaying to them, 7 hope God will give you the grace to reſemble your
and mc oono

che Duke of : eAnceſters, and that 1 ſhall bring you good fortane, for being the firſt that has laid arms np=

ts on your ſhoulders. They have hitherto been favonrable to me, and God make you as vali-
His ſpeech to 478 44 Jou are handſame, and the Sons of brave and generous Fathers : And ſol made them
them, march fide by fidear the head of, and before the Bartalions, and return againco the ſame

place, Their Governors and all the Captains were ſo raviſht to ſee theſe pretty Chil-
dren march (ſo gracefully as they did, that there was not onewho did not look upon thac

action

.
%

Book IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

ation as a happy preſage : Bur I fail'd in one, which was that of Monfieur 4” Aumale, for
he dy'd preſently afcer ; and yer as I have been told, this lictle Prince was as ſound within
as any child could poſſibly be 3 bur I think Phyſicians kill Princes, with keeping too
much clutter about them in their ſickneſs ; they are men as we are, and yer they will have
chem co have ſomething particular from others, Monſieur de Gwife is yer living, and I hope
will accompliſh che good fortune we that day wiſh'd him. The beginning is good and
hopeful, I hope the end will crown itz that ſo fince God has been pleas'd to take one
he may remain ſole Heir to that happineſs, that at that time we joyntly wiſh'd ro his
Couſin and to him, I have ever conceiv*d great hopes, from the little knowledge I have
had of this young Prince, neither was there ever Poltron of that brave Race, whichis rarely
{cen in a numerous Family. In brief, our Army was a very brave one, and the King was
very much pleas'd with the fight of it, | |

A few days after, his Majeſty was advertis'd, that the King of Spajn had taken the
Field, and was marching his Army in all diligence towards the borders, which made
his Majeſty doubr, that he was going to ſurprize either Corble or Doarlans, or elſc Amieng,
never a one of which having above rwo Foot Companiesin Gariſon, The night chat this
news was brougne, they did nothing bur diſpute upon the means to relieve theſe places,
bur concluded it impoſſible in the end, confidering that the King of Spain was ſo far ad-
vanc'd. Monſieur de Guiſe upon this occaſion, ſtaid thar night at 2Larcher, and ſent back
Meſſienrs de Bourdillon and de Tavannes to Pierre-pont. It was my conſtant cuſtom to go
every day to give Monſieur de Guiſe the good morrow, and thence to return back to my
Tent, nor ſtirring of all day after from my command, neither did I uſe to ſpend much
time in Courtſhip, That has never been my Trade, for which both the King, the Duke
of Guiſe, and all the Princesof the Army, ld me the berter , and were plea&d to ſay,
chat no diſorder could happen on onr fide. The next morning I went to give the good
morrow to Monſieur de Guiſe, believing that he had rerurn'd overnight to Pierre-pont,
buc at my entring into the Town, I met Meſſieurs de Boxrdillon, and de Tavannes, and
d' Eſtree on horſeback going our, and ask'd them whither they were going 3 ro which they
made anſwer, that they were returning to the Councilat Afarches, being that over nigh
they had not been able to reſolve upon the means to relieve {obie, for che King of Spain
was marching inall diligence that way, and that Monſieur de Gziſe had ſtaid all nighe
at Marches, I then ask'd him how far ic might be from thence to Corbie, and I chink
they told me thirty Leagues or more : Whereupon I ſaid ro them, 7 pray gallop away full
ſpeed, and tell the King, that it %s not now a time to infift upon Councils and Conſultations,
and that perhaps whilſt he is in debate what to do, the Enemy # upon his march + but that
he muſt ſuddenly reſolve, aud that if he pleaſe, 1 will take ſeven Enſigns, and march

night and day to put my ſelf into it : and tell him that no graſs (hall grow under noy

feet, Lut that 1 will make ſuch haſte, that T will be there before the King ef Spain, or any
part of his Army. And tell Monſienr de Guiſe, that I will only ack bins five and twenty
Jules laden with bread, for I will carry along four Wagons of wine of the Merchants Va*

Inrt:ers of our Regiments, to make our Souldiers eat and drink upon their march, without en-

tring into either Town or Village, and that therefore he give preſent order to Monſienr de
Serres, ſpeedily to ſend me the Xnles loaden with bread. In the mean time I will run to
the Regiment, to choſe ont the ſeven Enſigns, ſo that at your retarn you ſhall fiud me ready
to depart 3 but you muſt make very great hafte, and the King mnſ# ſuddenly reſolve, for if
they do net immediately conclude, without farther delay, I will nos #ndertake it. Monſieur
de Bowrdillow then began to ſay that the King would think ir a matter of great difficulry,
that the relief could be there ſo ſoon as the King of Spain 5 at which 1 flew out into
a rage, and ſaid ſwearing, I ſee very well, that when you come there, you will ſpend all
the day in diſputes : Fnut in deſpite of diſputes and conſnltations, let the King bat leave itto
21 and I willrelieveit, or break my heart for haſte, Monſieur d* Eſtree then ſaid, Let
% go, let ua go, the King cannot but like of it , and ſo they ſpur'd away direQly co
Marches, and I ſtreighrro my own Regiment, So ſoon as I came thicher, I ſuddenly
made choice of my ſeven Enfigns, bidding them preſently to take ſome repaſt, and tel=
ling them, that without baggage they muſt immediately depart to perform a good piece
of Service. I gave them not half an hour to eat in, but drew them our preſently into
the Field, one partof the Harquebuzeers before, and another in the rear of che Pikes. I
then took four Wagons loaden with wine, of choſe that had the beſt Horſes, which I
plac*d in the head of che Captains, commanding the Waggonersro take two or three ſacks
tf Oats, and to throw them upon the Punchions, and alianle hay : Which being done,
I ran tomy own Tents, which were behind the Regiment, and fcll to ear, raking ths
Caprains of the ſeven Enſigns to dinner with me.

FE 2 | Neſſicurs

7 * antacid 6 hos Ke"

212 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book IV.

Meſlieurs de T avannes, de Bourdillow and d' Eſtree made ſo goud haſte, chart they found
the King but newly riſen outof his Bed, where they preſemily propos'd the buſineſs to
him : Whereupon the King would have calld all the Council, at which Monſieur 4'Eftree
began to curſe and ſwear, as he told me afterwards (and he is as good ac ic as) ſaying,
Sir, Montluc told ws true, when he ſaid you would ftill delay time in debates and con (alt ;-
tions, whether it be to be done or no, whereas if your Majeſty had reſolv'd loft night, the re.
lief had by thus time been ten Leagaes upon their way ;, and he ſys mireover, that if he have
not what he demands immediately (ent him, he will not ſtand to bus word, for the Spaniards
ſhall not triumph over him. Monſieur de Gaiſe chen proſecuted the affair wich grear ve-
hemency and vigour, and Meſheurs de Bonrdillon and deTavannes did the ſame, when
upon the inſtant, without further deliberation, ic wasconcluded, and Monfienr de Gniſe
ſent co Monſieur de Serres immediately to ſend the five and twenty Males loaden wich
bread, The King then ſent me word by Monhfieur de Byoilly (a Gentleman belonging
ro the Duke of Guiſe) that he had approv'd of my opinion, ſaving that he could nit conſent
1 ſhenld go, becauſe he had no ether per ſon to command the Regiments, in caſe he ſhould le
put to the neceſſity of a Battel (for no body knew whether or no the King of Spain was
not coming with a reſolution to preſent ir, he making a (hew of attempting grear mat=
ters) but that be was going to make choice of one to lead the ſuccours, and that I ſhonld make
all things ready in the meantime. The aid Broilly return'd in all haſte co the King, to
tell his Majeſty that he had (een the ſeven Enfigns drawn out into the Field ready to

Gs call march, and that I ſtaid for nothing but che Bread ; and ar the ſame time char Broilly was
Kate the fc. Feturn'd towardsthe King, the Mules arriv'd, and by the way he met with Captain Braeil
cours co Corbie, Governor of Rae, and Brother in Law to Salcede, who told him that che King had made
choice of him to condu& the relief to Corbie. Captain Bymeil ſtaid to eat four or five bits

only, whilſt waiting for two ſervants he had ſent for; who preſently came, and fo the
began to march, I accompanied them above a long League on their way, ſtill calking to
him and thereſt of che Captains, repreſenting to chem, that God had given them a fair
opportunity, which alſo they ought to have purchas'd at the price of half their eſtates,
wherein to manifeſt co the King the affection they bore to his ſervice, and alſo to give a
ceſtimony of their own valour, inthe ſight, as it were, of the King himſelf, who would
be ready to relieve them, and to fight a Barcel rather than ſuffer them co be loſt. Tfound
by their anſwers that they went with great chearfulneſs, which made me leave them, to
go through the files of the Souldiers, and to remonſtrare to chem, that ic was their own
faults, if they did not fignalize themſelves for ever, that the King ſo long as he liv'd
would acknowledge their ſervice, and that T had done them a great honor in chooſing
out them from the reſt of the Regiment, entreating them not deceive the good opinion
I hadof them, and that I wonld deliver co the King the names of thoſe who ſhould beſt
acquit chemſelyes of their duty, in obeying what ſhould be impos*d upon them, after
which 1 made them all lifcup their hands and ſwear, that they would march day and
Night : which being done, I return*d to the van to embrace Captain Brxeil, and thereſt
of the Captains and Lientenants, promiſing them immediately rogo to the King, and to
acquaint his Majeſty with the eleQtion I had made of their perſons above all others of the
Regiment, for this ſervice, and ſo left both Officers and Souldierschearful, and very well
reſoly'd upon this long march, ſaying ro them ar parting, Remember Fellow Souldiers, the
dilggencts you have formerly ſeen me make in both Piedmont, and in Italy (for many of chem
had ſerv'd under me in thoſe expeditions) and believe that upon your diligence now depend
beth your lives and honors. Now being I am not of that Countrey , nor was ever there,
but ar this time, I am nor able to make any judgement of their diligence : but che King
and all choſe who were acquainted with the Conntrey, ſaid, that never Foot before per-
form'd ſuch a prodigious march neither did they ever enter into ceicher Town or Vil-
lage, but when by day they met with a little River, chey made a halt, and refreſh'd chem=
ſelves ewo hours at moſt, taking a little nap and away again, but march'd continually all
night. They were out but two nights, and arrivd by Sun-riſe within a quarcer of a
Leagueof Corbie, where they met a Gentleman who was riding poſt co che King, togive
him notice that the King of Spain's Camp was juſt coming before the Town ; ang who
moreover cold them; rhey muſt run full ſpeed if they intended to ger in, for char che
Cavalry already began to arrive» They then began co mend cheir pace , the Gentleman
returning back with 'cthem almoſt to rhe Town , that he might be able co give che
King an account that they were entred 5 when fo ſoon as they came within rwoor three
hundred paces of rhe walls, the Enemies Cavalry began to appear, and our men run full
carreer to throw themſelves before the gate, and upon the edges of the Graft where chey
made head, The Enemy kill*d (even or cight Souldiers in the rear, who were nor able
eo

PEP II_ i. A ——— C—

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

to keep pace with the reſt, and fo all our people got fate into the City, wichone loling any
of their Mules or Waggons, tor they had madean end of all thar bread and wine four
Leagues from thence, and had ſent them back. Thad alſo given them one of my fix
Cheſts, chat I had contiiv'd to carry powder in, which was drawn by three horſes, and
chat arriv'd at the Gates as ſoon as the Souldicrs. There are yer living ſeveral Princes and
Lords, who were then of the Kings Council, that can bear wirneſs whether I ſpeak the
cruch or no, eſpecially Meſticurs de Tavannes and d' Eftree, who carried my deliberation
ro the King, |

When ever (Camrades) the King or his Lientenant ſhall put you upon a defign, that
requires extraordinary diligence for-che rclieving of a place, you ought nor to loſe fo much
as a quarter of an hour, and you had much berrer work your body and your lces to the
ucmoſt of what you areable to perform, and enter inco the place with ſafety, than walk-
ing at your caſc tobe kill'd, and nor co enter intoit 5; wherein your ſelves wall be the cauſe
of your own death, and the lofs of the place ; and where you might by your d:hgence gain
a brave reputation, you will bv Ioytering ac your eaſe, finiſh your lite and your reno 4n
rogerher 3 and never excuſe your ſelves upon the Souldiers, nor make the Enterprize ſeem
difficult unto them, bur always eafie 3 and above all chings be ſie co carry provition along
with you, eſpccially bread and wine, wherewith to refreſh chem by the way {for as L
have ſaid b<tore, humane bodies are not made of iron) always ſpeaking cheartul'y rochem
by che way, and encouraging them to go on, repreſenting to them che great honor they
will ecquireto themſelves, and che fignal ſervice they thall perform for the King, and
doubr not, but (proceeding atter that manner ) men will go as far and farther chan horſes.
I adviſe you to nothing that I have not often done my ſelt, and caug'd to be done, as you
will fad in thereading my Book; for afcer horſes are once td, you ſhall not make chem
badge a {tep with all the ſpurs you have 5 but men are ſupported by their courage, and re-
quire not ſo much rime for refreſhing, they ear as they go, and chear one another upcn
cheir march. Ir will therefore (Fellow Captains) {tick only ar you $5 do then as Thave
ofren done; forſake your horſes, and fairly on foorar the head of your men, ſhew them
that you will undergo the ſame labour they do, by which means you will make them do
any thing you will, and your cxample will enflame che courages, aud redouble the Forces
of che moſt rir'd and overſpent of all the Company.

Two or three days afterthe King mov'd with all his Army direaly towards eAmlens,
and in his firſt or ſecond days march, arriv*d the Gentleman from the Governor of Corbie,
who found his Majeſty marching his Army in the field, where he brought him news, that
Captain Braeil was entred ſafe into Corble, which was a great ſatisfaQion both to thus ſaid
Majeſty, and the whole Army, to know that this place was ſecured 5 whereupon his Ma-

0 — C———

Ou IooTD_—_ —_—_

Foot will make
2 longer match
than horſe,

News brqugh:
to the King of

jzelty merrily ſaid co Monſieur de Guiſe, Whe ſhall be the firſt to tell Montluc this news? (he reliet of
for 1 for my part will not be he Nor 1 neither, ſaid JAonfieur de Guiſe, for (0 ſoon as he Corbie,

ſhall hear it, he will ſo crow, there will be nodealing with him : which they taid, becanſe
chey had all of chem been of opinion, that it was 1mpoflible for foot ro pertorm ſo long a
a journey. The next day his Majeſty was advertiſed, that the King of Spain had made
a hal: a liccle League from (orble, and made no ſhew of having any incention to befiege
that place 3 which made the King think, that by reaſon of che {uccours1t had. receiv'd,
he would make no attempt againſt ir, and thereupon it preſencly came into his head, chat
he would march direRly ro Amienr, which having no more than one or ewo foor Com-

panics in Garriſon, he immediately ſent away the Marquis de YVillzrs, whois yer living, The! Marquir

with three hundred menac arms, to go in extreme diligence, and put himlelt into tt,
commanding me to ſend away other ſeven Enfigns to follow after him, with all the»
haſte they poſſibly conld make ; which I accordingly did, and gave the charge ot con-
duRing them to Caprain Forces, who 1s yes living , and being the Caprains and Souldiers
had all heard what commendarions both the King and all the Army had given Caprain
Bracil for the haſte he had made in going ro relieve Corbie, they would do che ſame,
and arriv'd as ſoon asthe ſaid Marquis at Amiens ; for nothing fo much excites men of
our Trade, as glory, and the defire ro do as well, or betcer, than another. Two or
three days before this his Majeſty had ſent three Companies alſo into Dowrlans, and (o
wach all great caſe provided for.che ſafery of rheſe chree important places.

So ſoon as the King was come to Amiens, the King of Spain's Army alſo arriv'd and
encamp?d within a League, the River berwixt them, and there the Treaty of peace was
ſer on foot, of which the Conſtable and the Mareſchal de S. Andre had made che firſt
overtures, during the time of their zmpriſonment in Spain 3 in order to whick I think
there' was a truce from the beginning, becauſe nothing of aGtion paſt on either ſide, ar
leaft char I remember : for I tell very fick of a double Terran Ague, which I gor nor by

de Villars.

Treaty of peacc

berwixe France

and Spain Con-
cluded.

excels

"©
I.
L
C
|
4

i V
&
5
[1

:
, 1
a dh. 4

FY "
a O—_—_—

214

A—

_—

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book IV.

The miſchiefs
that enſu'd up-
on this peace,

The praiſes of
King Henry the
[ccond,

Monſieur de
Montluc nor
much beloy'd
by the Houſe
of Montmarein=

&).

exceſs of revelling and dancing, bur by paſſing the nights without ſleep, ſometimes in the
cold, ſometimes in the heat, always in ation, and never at reſt. Ir was well for me
thac God gave me an avle body, and a ſtrong conſtitution ; for I have pur this carcaſs of
mine as much to the proof as any Souldier whatſoever of my time. After all the going to
and again, thatlaſted for above ewo months, the peace was in the end concluded, to the
great misfortune principally of the King, and generally of the whole Kingdom. This
peace being cauſe of the ſurrender of all the Countreys conquer'd , and the Conqueſts
made both by King Francs and Henry, which were not ſo inconfiderable, bur that they
were computed co be as much asa third part of the Kingdom of France ; and I have read
in a Book writ in Spaniſh, that upon this accomodation, the King deliver'd up an hun-
dred fourſcore and eighteen Fortreſſes wherein he kept Gariſfon, by' which 1 leave an
one to judge how many more were in dependance, and under the obedience of theſe. All
we who bear Arms may affirm with truth, that God had given us the beſt King for Soul-
diers that ever Reign'd in this Kingdom ; and as for his people, they were ſo affeRionate
to him, that not one of chem ever repin'd co lay out his ſubſtance to aſſiſt him in the
carrying on of ſo many Wars, as he had continually upon his hands. I ſhall not con-
demn thoſe who were the Authors of this peace, for every one muſt needs believe chey
did it to good intent, and that had they foreſeen the miſchiefs thar enſu'd uponit, they
would never have put a hand to the work : for they were ſo good ſervants of the Kings,
and loy'd him ſo well, asthey had good and juſt realon to do, that they would rather
have dy'd in Caprivicy chan have done it ; which T ſay, becauſe the Conſtable and the
Mareſchal de S. Andre were the firſt movers and promoters of ic, who themſelves have
{cen the death of the King, and themſelves (har d in the miſhaps thar have fince befallen
this miſerable Kingdom, wherein they borh dyed with cheir ſwords in their hands, who
ocherwile might yer perhaps have been alive, by which any one may conclude, char che
did not make this peace, foreſceing the miſchiefs it has ſince produc'd, which rightly co
comprehend, let us conſider the happineſs wherewich God was pleas'd to bleſs this King -
dom, in giving it ſo brave and magnanimous a King, his Kingdom rich, and his people ſo
affectionately obedicnc, char they would deny him noching ro aſſiſt him in his Conqueſts,
together with ſo many grear and brave Captains, moſt of which had been yet alive, had
they not devour'd one another 1n theſe lace civil Wars. Oh had this good King bur liv'd
or this unlucky peace never been made, he would have ſent the Lutherans packing into
Germany witha vengeance, As to the reſt, our good Maſter had four Sons, all Princes
of prear hopeand fingular expectation, and ſuch, as from whom his Majeſty in his de-
clining years, might expe& che repoſe, and comfort of his old Age, and confider chem ag
proper inſtruments for che execution of his high and generous deſigns. The ocher Kings
his neighbours could nor boaſt of this, for the King of Spain had one Son only, of which
never any one conceiv'd any great hopes, and he proy'd accordingly ; che Kingdom of
England was in the Government of a Woman, the Kingdom of Scotland neighbour toir,
ſtood forus, and was ours, France having a Dolphin King 3 by all which any one may
judee, that had not this unlucky peace been concluded , che Father or his Sons had
ſway'd all Europe. Piedmont, the Nurſery of brave men had been ours, by which we
had a door into /taly, and perhaps a good (tep incor, and we had ſeen all chings cturn'd
topſie turvy : Then thoſe who have ſo brav'd and harafſed this Kingdom, durſt not have
ſhew*d their heads, have (tirr*d, nor ſo much as projeRed or chought of what they have
executed fince. But *cis done and paſt, wichour any poſſible remedy, and noching remains
to us but ſorrow and affliion, for the loſs of ſo good, and ſo valiant a King, and to mt of
ſo gracious and liberal a Maſter, with che miſhaps that have ſince befallen this miſerable
Kingdom, well may we call it ſo, in compariſon of whatit was before, when we ſtid ic
the moſt great and opulent Kingdom in Arms, good Caprains, the obedience of the people,
and in riches, that was in the whole world.

After this unhappy and unfortunate peace the King retir'd himſelf to Beauvais, bur
Monfieur de Giſe (till remain'd in the Camp co diſmiſs the Army. Before his Majeſtics
departure, I ſurrendred up the Commiſſion he had made me to accept by force: Neither
ought ir to appear ſtrange, that Idiſpured ir ſo long, before I would take char employ-
ment upenm?; forT doubted well that would befal me, which afcerwards did, which
was to jncur the perpetual diſgrace of che Houle of CMontmorency more than that of Cha-
filton, which was more nearly concern'd in the affair than the other. But there is no
remedy, a man cannot live in this world, without contrating ſome Enemies, unleſs he
were 2 God. I accompanied Monſieur de Guiſe as far as Beanvate, and from thence re-
tir'd to Pars, he having firſt promis'd to obrain me leave to go into Gaſcony, and more-
over to cauſe money to be given me ts defray my journey thither; for he knew yery well

Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 215

—— ITT *%.

I had not one peny. Both which I am confident he would have perform'd + buc fo ſoon
as he came to Beauvars, he found a new face of affairs, others having ſtepr in berwixt The Duke of
him and home, and undermined him in his credit with the King. Thus goes che world, Guiſe decli-
but it was a very ſudden change, and much wondred at by thoſe who had follow'd him ning in the
in the Conqueſts he had made, he having repair'd all the diſaſters of others, and mani- Kings favour,
feſted co the King of Spain, that neicher the loſs of the Battel of S; Qaintine, nor that of

Graveline, had reduc the King to ſuch a condition, but that he had yet one or two

Armies ſtrong er than thoſe, having asto the reſt, taken almoſt impregnable places. Bat

letchem deal it our, Theſe are things whar very often fall out in the Courts of Princes,

and I wonder nor chat I have had my ſhare, fince far greater than I, have run the ſame

fortane, and will do for the time to come.

Now the King of Navarre had been driving on ſome enterprize or another in Biſcay, The King of
which in the end prov*d double, and entreated the King to give me leave to goalong with Navarre car-
him) for that he was reſoly*d to exccure it in his own perſon, having an opinion thar *i< the Sicur
Monſieur de Bury had fail] through his own default; and ſo I went along with him 4 wy

| 11 into Gyienae,
without any ocher advantages from Court, than bare promiſes only, and che good will of
che King my Maſter : bur he was diverted from his liberalicies both co me and to others, who
deſerv'd it as well, and perhaps better than I. Woe went then to Bayonne , where we
found that he who was entruſted to carry on this affair, and whoſe name was Gamnre,
plaid double, and intended to have cauſed che King of Nawarre himſelf to be raken ; where-
upon he ſenc back Monſieur de Dara with the Lepionnaries, and alſo the Bearnors he
had caus'd co advance hither in order to his deſign. I had bronght with me threeſcore
and five Gentlemen all arm'd, and bravely mounted, who were come thither for the love
they bore co me, and being return'd home to my own houſe, within a very few daysafter
came the gift che King had been pleav'd ro give me of the Company of Gens d' armes, be-
come vacant by the death of Monficur de Is Gaiche, wherein his Majeſty had nolitcle to
do, to be as good as his word, and co diſengage himſelf from the ſeveral Traverſes and
obſtacles my Enemies ſtrew d in his way, to hinder me from having that command ; ne-
vertheleſs the King carricd it againſt them all, more by anger than otherwiſe, he being in
the end conſtrained to tell chem, that he had made me a promiſe of the firſt vacancy, and
world be as good as hu word 5 and that therefore no man was to ſpeak a word mure to the con-
trary. I made my firſt muſter at Beaumont de Lonmaigne, one 1a Peyrie being Muſter-

Maſters

Ac this time thoſe unhappy * Marriages were ſolemniz'd, and thoſe unfortunate Tri- * Of the 5iRtes
umphs and Tiltings held ac Court. The joy whereof was very ſhort, and laſted but a and Daughrer
very little ſpace, che death of the King enſuing upon it, running againſt that accuirſed of Henry che
Montgomery, who I would to God had never been born, for his wholelife was nothing cond.
bur miſchief, and he made as miſerable an end. Being oneday at Nerac, the King of
Navarre (hew'd me a Letter that Monſieur de Gaife had writ him, wherein he gave
him notice of the days of Tilting, in which the King himſelf was to be in perſon, his
Majeſty wich the Dakes de Guiſe, de Ferrara, and de Nemours, being Challengers, I
ſhall ncyer forget a word I {aid ro the King of Navarre, which alſo I had often heard
ſpoken before, That when a man thinks himſelf to be out of his aff airs, and dreams of no-
thing, bat how to paſs his time well , "tis then that the greateſt misfortunes befal him, and
that I fear'd the iſſue of this Tilting. It was now bur juſt three days, reckoning by the
date of rhe Letter to the Tilting, and the next day I return'd home ro my own houſe, and
the very night before the day of the Tilcing, as I wasin my firſt fleep, I dream*d, *© char The Sieur &
© Ifaw the King fitting in achair, with his face cover*d all over with dropsof blood, and Montluc's =
« mechought ic was juſt as they paine Jeſus Chriſt, when che Jews pur the Crown of Teams,

* Thorns upon his head, and that he held his hands joyn'd together, I look'd mechoughr
& earneſtly upon him, and could diſcover no hurt he had, bur only drops of blood crick-
**ling down his face. I heard methought ſome fay, he is dead, and orhers, he is nor
« dead yet, and ſaw the Phyſicians and Chirurgeons go in and out of the Chamber ; and L
&© do believe my dream continued a great while, for when I awak*d, I found a thing I
& could have never beliey'd, which is, char a man can cry in hisſleep 3 for I found my face
& all blubber'd with tears, and my eyes ſtill ſpringing new, and was fain to ler them take
«their courſe, for I could not give over weeping of along time after. My wife, who
was then living, ſaid all fhe could to comfort me, bur all in vain, for I could never per-
{wade my ſelf any. ocher but that he was dead. Many who are yer living are able to ce-
Rifie, that this is no fain'd ſtory, for Itold ir them fo ſoon as ever Lawak'd., Four days af-
ter a Courrier came to Nerac, who brought Lecters to the King of Navarre from the
Conſtable, wherein he writ him word of the King'sbeing wounded, and of the little hopes

chers

 —

a

CIC WY —_—____—

_216 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox IV:

there was of his life, whereupon the King of Navarre ſenc a ſervant of histo me, to ac-

quaint me with the diſaſter, and to defire me to come preſently away to him. The Mef-

{enger came away in the cloſe of the evening, and was preſently with me, it being no more

chan four leagues from N rac to my houſe, where he found me juſt going to Bed, I im-

mediatcly rook horſe, and went totake a Neighbour of mine in my way, call* Monſieur

de Berand along wich me, and {o we went together at a good round rate to Nerac. The

Gentleman 35s yerliving, andcan witneſs that I rold, and forerold him all che miſeries, or

very near, that we have ſince ſeen happen in France, and ſaid as much to the King of Na-

Nevyy the ſe- warre, with whom I ſtaid but two hours at Nerac, and return'd co entertain my ſorrows

cond kill'd by my own houſe, Eight days had not paſt before the King of Navarre ſent me word of

MontgomerY the Kings dcath 3 by which I got nothing, having never ſince met with any ching bac

croſſes and mistorrunes, as I had becn the caufer of it, aud chat God would puniſh me for

the offence; Iam ſue I had !ittle reaton co be fo, for fince his death, I have a hnndred

The Gt times with'd my 0:vn, and it evermore 1an in my head, thac I ſhould never after meet with

Montluc un. 20 thing but misfortune, as indeed 1 have never had any thing elſe. For I have fince been

forrunare af- [uſpected to have intelligence with the King of Navarre, and che Prince of Conde, whereas

ter thedeath God Almighty knows, I was never of their Council, nor privy co any of their defigns, as

of King Hewry, I have ſuff.1ently manifeſted in the pinch of affairs. 'Tis very true, that I have ofcen heard

| theſe two Princes complain of the Il uſage chey receiv'd, bur when everthey fell upon thar

The King of q{{courſe, I ever way*d itall I conld. God by his good grace has aſſiſted me to demon -

NO 20d rate co all the world, that I never had intell:;gence but with the King and the Queen, and
1$ DLOtNcr | | F

diſcontented, With thoſe who have fauhfully and loyally ſerv'd them, and have found that choſe who

had rece1v*4 che deepeſt impreflions of this 11] opinion of me, have been, and ac this day

arey the beſt Patrons 8nd Friend's I evcr had, or yet have, Therc are, who know very well

what I ſaid to the Prince of Conde, at the fine Conference held ar Pojſſy, when he acrempred

Jealeufies of © draw meover to his party. After the firſt cronbles the Queen of Navarre went to

the Sieur de Roxſillon, where ſhe carried to their Majeſties a whole ſack full of informations againſt me,

Montluc, thar ſpoke of nothing bur Treaſons, and Intelligences that I had with the King of Spain,

co deliver up Gaienne into his hands, Rapesof Wivesand Virgins, Depredations, Impofi-

tions, and Thefcs from the Kings Treaſure : Nevyerchelefs, their Majeſtics being came co

Tholowſe, and into Gvienne, they found neither man nor woman of one Religion or the

other, that ever open'd their mouths againſt me, and found Gzienne ſo abounding in all

ſorts of proviſions, that the whole Court wonder? at it, conſidering that ar the ſame time

in Languedoc, the whole Countrey was ready to dye of famine; and the Chancellor him-

{elf ſaid, that baving for three days ſojourned in that Province, in all choſe chree days ime

his Clerk of his Kirchin could furniſh him wich no more than one Puller only, which he

ſpoke openly ar Table, ar an entertainment he made for ſome Preſidents and Councellors ;

upon which the fiſt Preſident took occafion to ſay, that notwithſtanding he would figd

Gaienne to abound with all ſorts of proviſions. Yes anſwer? d che Chancellor, but how comes

#t tobe 0, for ſonse have poſſeſt the King aud Oneen, that they would fond nothing to eat in

Guienne, and that Monſieur de Montluc had rnin*d the whole Conntrey : whereupon all

thoſe who were at the Table atteſted the contrary, and that he ſhould find the Countrey

very well govern'd, as he did, by his own confeſſion ; the Q een alſo who fear?d ſhe ſhould

want proviſion at Bayonne, ſaw there with her own eyes, that they were fain tothrow the

FRO: flcth into the ſtreets, and yer before cheir coming, 1a Graviere Seneſchal of Qarrey, re-

1 _ earning from Court, call'd ar my houſe at Stillac, where he made him{elf ſo drunk wich

po pe Sicur the good wine I gave him, that he dream?*d in the night I had cold him, thar I would de-

de Montinc, liver up Gujenne to the King of Spain, that che Cardinal of Armagn:c, Meſſicurs de Terride,

de Negrepelice and (cycral others were of the ploc,and thar if he would be one, I would make

him x. greateſt man of his Race, and ſo went with his night-cap to tell this fine ſtory

to Monſieur de Marchaftel, who immediately diſparch*d away Rappin to Court, to carry

this newsto the King, where it was beliey*d for ſome days for the Queen ſent d# Pleſſis

co me poſt, ro bid me fear norhing, for that nothing was believ'd : but I had had notice of ir

before, though I made no great matter of it, having ſo great a confidence inthe Queen,

that ſhe would nor lightly be induc'd to believe any ſuch thing. Ds Pleſſis (who was of

the Bed-Chamber to che King) found me at Agen dancing (tor we mult make merry ſome-

times) inthe Company of fitceen or twenty Gentlewomen, who were come to {ce Madam

Slanderers in fe { anpenne my Daughter in Law, who had never been jn this Countrey before, : And

the Courts of thus my Treaſon was found to be true, We demanded farisfaction of their Majeſtics,

Princes, but could never obtain any, and thar's it , that nouriſhes ſo many Tale-Carriers and

Slanderers in the Kingdom, for they are never puniſh'd, no more than falſe witneſſes in

the Courts of Parliament, But I hope God will one day make them all known to che

King,

'Boox IV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. = 7

——

a ti

King, and make him cuc off ſo many heads, char he will cleanſe the Kingdom of this
Vermin@e, |

Though all chings chat have been forg'd againſt me have been prov'd utterly falſe, and
without any colour of truth, my aRions as well of the paſt as preſent time, having clear-
ly manifeſted che contrary, yet could T not nevertheleſs fo purge my ſelf, but that the

acen believ d ſomething, or act leaſt rerain'd ſome jealoufie of me, and I have ſufficient-
ly felr it, though I believe however it was only co hinder the King from giving me any re-
compence for the ſervices I have perform'd for his Majeſty and his Crown, which what
they have been ſhe very well knows; and knows very well alſo, that I am no Spaniard,
nor have any praCtices either out of the Kingdom, or within it, bur what point at his
Majeſties ſervice, She had no ſuch opinion of me, when fitting upon a cheſt berwixt che
Cardinals of Bexrbon and of Gmiſe, ſhe entertain'd me at Tholonſe with tears in her eyes.
Her Majeſty may call ir co mind jf ſhe pleaſe, for though ſhe have a great many mat-
rers to trouble her head withal, ſhe hasa very good memory. It was ſhe her ſelf who
rold me, that having received news of the loſs of the Bartail of Dreanx (for ſome brave
Cavalier had run away ar the beginning, and carried this lying report) ſhe entred into con-
ſulration with her ſelf, what ſhe was beſt ro do, and in the end took a reſolution, if cer-
rain news ſhould be bronghe of this defear, ro ſteal away with a ſmall Trainy with the King
and the Monſieur, and try to recover Gajenne by the way of Auvergne, both out of the
confidence ſherepos'd me (and indeed Gaienne was clear and entire) asalſo becauſe the
King and the might chere at great caſe, have calPd in ſuccours from other places. God be
prais'd there Majeſties came not thicher, bar this will appear better hereafrer, In the mean
time, her Majeſty may pleaſeto take notice, that hitherto T have not much importur.*d her
with demin 1s, neither bave they much troubled themſelves with finding out ſomething
to give me, having refus'd me the County of Gaare (which is not worth above rwelve hun-
dred Livers a year) afcer che firſtcroubles. Every one knows what ſervices I did the King,
and particularly in the conſervation of Gajenne, not chat I complain of his Majeſty, for both
his Father and he have confert*d raore honor and advantages upon me than I deſerve,
neither did I ever hope for any recompence for the ſervices I had done, or could do, after
I was anſwer*d by a perſon who is yer living, when ſome friends ſpoke in my behalf, that
1 was already too great in Guienne, Which I do confeſs I was, nor in Riches , but inthe
friend{hip of oll che three Eſtates of the Province, both for the loyalcy and fidelity chey
knew Thad ever born to the ſervice of the King and his Crown, as alſo forhaving ever-
more endeavom*d to eaſe the Country of Gariſons, and all other Subſides, when I had
the power to doit. And Thopeat the return of che Commiſſioners who are now come 1n-
to cheſe parts, the truth will appear. T have not corrup:ed them, for I would nor ſo much
as ſeerhem, ler them do their worſts andas to my eſtate, ir is now fifty years that I have
ſerv'd in command, having been three times the Kings Lieurenant, thrice Camp-Maſter,
Governor of places, and Captain both of Horſe and Foot, and yer with all theſe employ-
ments, I could never do more than purchaſe three Farms, and redeema Mill chat ancienc- Wm
ly delong'd co my houſe, all which amount to no more chan berwixt fourteen and fifteen uk Rib -
thouſand Francks, which is all che wealth and purchaſes that T have ever made ; and all che y,1pq ia Gy
Eſtate that I now poſleſs could not be farm'd out to above four rhouſand, five hundred ene. |
Francksa year. I thould have been glad that any one could have reproach'd me, that I
was to great, for the great richesthe King had given mez and nor for having had noching,
bur remaining poor as TI am. God be praiſed tor all, in that he has made me an honeſt
man, and ever maintain'd me in an integrity fic ro walk with my face ere&t amongſt men.
I fear no man upon earth, I have done nothing unworchy a man of honor, and aloyal
Subject ; neither have I cver ſerv d my Prince in a Vizor, or with diſmulation, for my
words and my aCtions have evermore gone hand in hand ; neither had I ever any incelli-
gence or friendſhip with che Enemies of my King and Maſter, and whoever is mangy, ler
him ſcratch a Gods name, for 1 neither itch within nor without, having always kepr my
nails ſo ſhort, that I had never any uſe of them : for which I praiſe God, and moſt hum-
bly chank him, who has hitherto guided my lite fo as co preſerve ic from any Manner of
reproach, and hope he will do me che grace, that as hicherco he has gone along with my
forcune 1n arms, he will alſoaccompany my renown to my grave, fo that after my death,
my Relations and Friends ſhall nor be atham?d to have been my Kinſinen or my Compa-
nions, and 1 doubcnor bur with this fair Robe of Fidelicy and Loyalty to fignalize my
ſelf, in deſpite of thoſe who have ever been envious of my ſuccels, and emulous of my honor,
So ic 15, that had King Henry my good Maſter liv*d, theſe misfortunes had never befaln me,
nor which is worſe, the Kingdom: Bur I ſhall leave this diſcourſe, growing perhaps 1nto roo
much paſſion for the deach and lofs of che beſt King that Frarce ever had, or ſhalteyer have,

Gg \

hs. Eat arid

MC

\

218

Pen EET ———_—__—

| The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox IV,

Why rhe Sieur
de Montluc has
Written.

I ſhall nor meddle wich the Fa&Rions and Rebellions that have diſcovered themſelyes
ſince the death of Francis the ſecond, though I could ſay ſomething of them, as having
liv'd in that timegand been an eye witneſs of many things: for I pretend not to be an Hiſto=
rian, nor to write in the mechod of a Hiſtory, but only to give the world an account, that
T did not bear arms for nothing 5, as alſo that my Companions and Friends may take ex-
ample by my aQions, of which there are many that may be uſeful to chem, when they
(hall be engaged upon the like occaſions; and moreover, that by reaſon of my writing, my
memory may not ſo ſoon periſh : Which is all char men who live in the world, bearing arms
likemen of Honor, andwithour reproach, ought to defire ; for all che reſt is nothing. I
do believe, that ſo long as the world ſhall endure, men will talk of choſe brave and va-
liant Captains, Meſſieurs de Lautrec, de Bayard, de Folx, de Briſsac, de Strozzy, de Guile,
and ſeveral others, who have flouriſh'd fince King Francis the fuſt came co che Crown,
amongſt whoſe better names that of Montluc may perhaps have ſome place : And fince God
has depriv'd me of my Sons, who all dyed in the ſervice of the Kings my Maſters, the young
Mentlac's who are deſcended from them, ſhall endeavour to exceed their Grandfire, I will

| therefore write nothing cf the Reign of Francis the ſecond, nor of che Fa&tions at Court z

neither were they other than Sedicions and Rebellions, of which I know ſeveral parcicullars,
as having teen very intimate with the Kingof Navarre and the Prince of Conde : but as I
have already ſaid, I leave thoſe affairs to the Hiſtorians, to finiſh the reſt of my own life ;
wherein I ſhall proceed to give an account of the fights in which Lhave been engag*d du-
ring theſe Civil Wars, and wherein Ihave been conſtrained, concrary to my own nacure,
co uſe not only ſeverity, but even (omerimes to be cruel.

The End of the Fourth Book.

TD HE

Boox V.

THE ;

COMMENTARIES

eMeſovire Blaixe de £Montlac,

MAarEsSCHAL of

FRANCE.

The Fifth Book.

A Ing Francis being deal at Orleans, where I then was, I went to The death of
SS wait upon the Queen Mother, who alchough ſhe was very ill, ne- Francis the ſe-
yercheleſs did me the honor co command, that they ſhould per- ©99% .

mir me to enter into her Chamber. I had taken norice of the

practices were fer on foot, which did by no means pleaſe me, and

eſpecially thoſe of the Eſtaces chen firring,by which I ſaw we ſhould

not long continue in peace, and that was it, which made me reſolve

ro retire from Court, that TI might not be hook'din, either by

one FaQtion or another z eſpecially conſidering char 1 had been

made guilty that way before (contrary to all truth, as God be my help) which was the

reaſon, that taking leave of her Majeſty, and not chinking it fit to trouble her with much

diſcourſe in her indiſpoſition, I (aid toher theſe words, Madam, I am going into Gaſcony, The Sicur de
with a d:termination to do you moſt hamble and faithful ſervice all the days of my life, which Monluc's

I moſt humbly beſeech your Majeſty tobelieve, and if any thing fall out conſiderable enowgh oghobatog
to engage you to call ycur ſervants about you, 1 promiſe you, and give you my faith, 1 will never qe. |
tabe other fide than that of your CMajeſties, and my Lords your ( hildren; but for that will
be on hor(eback (6 ſoon as ever your Majeſty ſhall pleaſe to command me, The very nigh
of the ſame day on which King Frances dy*d, I had given her the ſame aflurance, for
which ſhe now did me the honor co return me thanks, when Madam de Curſol, who ſtood
ar her beds head, ſaid ro her, adam, you ought not to let him go, your Majeſty having
no ſervants more faithfal than thoſe of the Family of Montluc. To which IT mide an-
iwer, Madam , you (hall never be without Montluc's, for you have three yet remaining,
which are my two Brothers and my Son, who with my ſelf will dye at your feet, for yonr
Majeſties ſervice. For which her Majeſty recurn'd me many thanks. She who had a
grear deal of underſtanding, and who has given very ampleteſtimony of it to che world,
ſaw very well, that having ſo many affairs upon her hands, during che minority of her
children, ſhe ſhould have uſe for all the ſervancs the had, and may her ſelf remember whar
{he ſaid ro me, wherein if I have fail*d to execute her commands, ic was becauſe I did nor
underſtand rhem. And ſo Icook my leave of her Majeſty ; Madam de Carſol follow*d
me to the middle of the room, where ſhe took her leave of me, and Madam de Comrton
did the ſame, and thus Irecurn'd ro my own houſe.

Some monihs after my return home, I had news brought me from all fides, of the ſtrange Audacious
language, and moſt audacious ſpeeches the Miniſters of che new faich impudently utrer'd, ſpecches of the
even againſt the Royal Authority. I was moreover cold, that they impos'd taxes apon the Hugonor Mi-
people, made Captains» and liſted Souldiers, keeping their Aflemblies in the Houſe; of ſe- RO
veral Lords of the Country, who were of chis new Religion 5 which was the firſt begin-

»ivg and cauſe of all thoſe Miſchicts and Maſfacres they have fince exercigd upon one ans

Gg 23 othex.

-__—.

210 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize

Book V:
other. I ſaw the evil daily toencreaſe, bur ſaw no one who appear'd on the King's be.
half to oppoſe it. I heard alſo that the greateſt parc of the Officers of che Treaſury were
of this Religion (the nature of man being greedy of Novelty) and the worſt of all, and
from whence proceeded all the miſchief, was, that thoſe of the long Robe, che men of
Jaſtice in the Parliaments and Senechalſeys, and other Judges, abandoned the ancient Re-
The miſerable Jjgion, and that cf the King, to embraceche new one. I met alſo with ſtrange names of
cſtare of Gib- 544 ycillans, Deacons, Confiſtories, Sinods and Colloquies, having never before breaxfaſted
$48 of ſach viands. I heard that the Surveillans had Bulls pizzles by them called Johanots, with
which they miſus'd, and very cruelly beat the poor Peaſants, if they went not co their
Conventicles z the yeople being ſo totally abandoned by Juſtice, thar if any one went to
complain, they receiv*d nothing bur injury inſtead of redreſs, and not a Serjeantthar duiſt
attempt ro execute any thing in the behalf of lie Catholicks, bur for the Hugonors only
(for ſo they were call*, though I know not why) thereſt of the Jadges and Officers who
were Catholicks being ſo over-aw*d, that they durſt not have commanded ſo much as an In-
formation to be made for fear of cheir lives. All theſe things rogether were preſages to me
of what I Eav? ſince {een come to pals, and returning from another houſe of mine co. that
of Stillac, T found the Town of La Plume befieg'd by three or four handred men. I had
my Son Captain Montlac with me, whom I ſent with all ſorts of fair language (for I had
no more than ten or twelve horſe in my company) to try to perſwade them co deliſt.
Wherein he prevail*d ſo far, that he overcame the Brimonts, the principal heads of this
Enterprize (which was, undertaken to reſcue two priſoners of their Religion, that che
Magiſtrares of La Plume had for ſome diſorders committed. ) My Son having prowiſed
them, that if they would retire, I would cauſe them to be deliver'd 5 they took his word,
and drew off from before the Town. The nexc day accordingly I went :© {peak with the
Officers of the ſaid City, to whom having remonſtrated, that for thele :wo Priſoners chey
ought not to ſuffer a {edition to be (cr on foot, they brought them our to me , and ler
them 90s 7 |
The Sieut de Monſieur de Burie, who at thiscime jnche abſence of the King of N.cvarre commanded
Burie be Kings in Guienne, vas at Boardeaux, where he had 3s much work cliteing our for him, aS1n any
Licurenanc is, ocher part of ene Province 3 but I did nor hear char he made any great ftir, and T believe
TO? ke was very much aſtoniſht 2 for my partT had command of nothing bur my own Com-
pany, nevertheleſs I would once take upon me ro meddle ar the requeſt of che Court Pre-
{idialy and che Conſuls of 4gen, abour the concern of a Miniſter the Magiſtrates had com»
mitted to priſon, which ct che whole Cy in commotion one againſt anorher 3 wherenp-
on the Conſuls came to entreat me to come to-d4pgen, for that otherwiſe the Inhabicanrs
would cur one anothers throats Which I accordinfyggld, whiere, upon my coming, the
The Hugonors Hugonors were of themſelves poſleſt with ſo grear a terroBg,chac ſome of them hid them-
dread the ((yes in Cellars, and others leapt over the walls 5 nor that I gave them any occafion ſo to
POS of do, forlhad asyerdone them no harm z nicher did 1 do any more now, bur only take
On che Miniſter out of a Houſe to deliver him inco the hands of Juſtice 3 bur theſe people
have ever fear'd my name in Grienne, as they have that of Monſieur de Gaiſe in France.
Bar how little ſoever che thing I did was, the King of Navarre took it ſo highly ill ac my
hands, that he mortally ha'ed me for ir, and writ to the King that I had diſpoſleſt him
of his Lieurenancy , entreating to know if his Majeſty had given me authority ſo to do,
whilſt in the mean time he meditared his revenge at whar price ſoever. This hapned in
the time when King Francis was yet living : for in thoſe times theſe new people began
their innovarions. Monficur de Guiſe ſent me word by my Son Captain Zfontlacs that I
ſhould uſe all the means I could to reſtore my ſelf to his favour, for although the King was
ſatisfied with whar I had done, he could not nevertheleſs make any ſhew of it, it bein
requiſite for him to proceed after this manner. This lecter might very well have been the
cauſe of my raine, for without this private advice from Monſieur de Gaiſe, Thad never
reconciled my {elf ro the King of Navarre, as having much rather have choſen co have ſtood
upon my Guard, and in my own defence, than to have any tampering with the King of
Navarre in any thing bur what ſhould be by his Majeſties command ; bur I conceiv'd I
: could not erre in following the advice of Monſieur de Gaiſe ; for he abſolutely govern'd all
things at Court.
Bur to recurn co my firſt ſubjeQ, having heard and ſeen all cheſe affairs and novelcies
which Rill much more diſcloſed themſelves after my recurn , and after the death of che
King (for they now explain*d themſelves in down-righe Terms) than before ; I delibera-
ted to recurn ro Court, no more to ſtir from che Queen and her Children, bur ro die ac
their feer in oppoſition to all ſuch 2s ſhould preſenc themſelves againſt chem, according co
che promiſe Thad made to the Queen, and pur my {elf upon my way in order to this re-

ſolucion.

Book V. "Mi Montluc, Mareſchal of France. - 221

reſolution. The Court was then ar St. German en Aye. I Raid but ewo dayes ar Parz,
and ar my coming to St, Germain, found not one perſon of the Houſe of Gniſe, nor any
other, bur the Queen, che King of Navarre, the Prince of (onde, and the Cardinal of
Ferrara, where 1 was very well receiv'd by her Maieſty, and by chem all. The Queen
and the King of Navarre drawing me apa! t, enquir'd of me how affairs ſtood in Gmienze ;
ro which I made anſwer, that they were not yer very ill, but thac I fear'd they would
every day grow worſe and worſe, celling cherh withall the reaſons why I conceiv'd that ic |
would not be long before they would break into open arms. I aid there but five dayes, The Huponots
in which crime news came that the. Hugonots were riſen at Marmanda, and had kilPd all riſe in Guieane,
the Religious of the Order of St, Francts, and burnc cheir Monaſtery : immediately came

other news of the Maſſacre the Catholics had made of the Hugonots at Cahorr, with that of

Grenade near unto Tholoxze. Afﬀecer that came news of the death of Monſieur de Famel, op de
barbarouſly maſſacred by his own Tenants. who were Hugonots; which croubled che irs by v8
Queen more than all the reſt, and then it was that her Majeſty ſaw, that whar I had pro- ,, Tegan,
phecied to her, that they would not long abſtain from arms, was very true. They were

ſix dayes before they could reſolve at which end to begin to extinguiſh this fire. The

King of Navarre would that the Queen ſhould write to Monſieur de Berle to take order

inthoſe affairs; but the Queen: ſaid, that if none bur he pur their hands to the work,

there would be no great matters done, by which ſhe implied ſome jealoufic of him ; and I

know what he ſaid to me, A /ittle thing will ſerve to render us ſuſpefted. I perceiv'd alſo

char the King of Navarre was not fo kind to me as formerly ; which 1 believe proceeded

from my own behaviour, I being not ſo obſervant co him as at other times, and never ſtir-

ring from the Queen. Inthe end they reſolved ro ſend me into Gulenne with a Commilſ1- The Sicur de
on to raiſe Horleand Foot, and to fall upon all ſach as ſhould appear in arms. Idetended Mentlucs large
my ſelf the beſt I could from this Employment, knowing very well that ic was not a work Commiſlion,
done, bura work that was only about to begin, and ſuch as requir'd a great Maſter ro exe -

cuce it as it onght to be 3 and therefore remain'd at this bour conſtant nor co taxe it upon me.

The next morning the Queen and the King of Navarre ſent for me, and che Queen had in

the interval commanded Monſieur de Valence my brother to perſwade me to accepr of this
Commillion ; 1o chat when I came before chem, af: er {evers! Remonitrances chey made

me, I wasconſtrain'd to accepr of it, provided thar honfgoar de Barie right be joyn'd

in che Commiſſion, for I would have him have iis pace of the Cak:, Bur the Queen

would by no means hear of it, alledo:%, bur too any reaſons (Pmces may ſay what
they pleaſe) 21] in theend I was ford? inncll hep Majeſty plainly, that in caſe he was
nor comprehenced n the Commult;o::, 1:8b 10g-he Kings [.:-utenant as he Was, would

underhand fſtrew fo many Traverſes,and vJihculaes hn my way, that] ſhould never effect
any thing to purpole z which at laſt wey 4liow'd cobea ſufficient reaſon, and let ic paſs
according ro my own deſire, The ſame Commiſſion they gave me for Gmaienne, they alſo Monſicur de
gave Monſieur de Carol for the Province of Languedoc, giving us both in charge, that which Curſul in Lan;
of us ſoever fthould firſt have diſparch'd our own buſineſs, ſhould go help his fellow, if he £edoc.
ſhould ſtand in need. Monhieur de Curſol was no more of this new Religion than I, and
without all doubr afterward turn'd to it more our of ſome diſcontent, than for any de-
votion, for he was no great Divine, no more than I was: but T have known many carn
to this Religion our of ſpite, who have afrerwards very much repeated, Weboth of us
rogerher took our leaves of the Queen and the Ring of Navarre, and went to Pars, and
Monſieur de Falence withus, IT demanded rwo Connſellors of that part of France to fir
upon life and deach (fearing that thoſe of the Country would do no good, being thar
ſome of them would encline to the Catholics, and others to the Hugonots) and had given
me two of the damned(t Rogues in the whoie Kingdom, one whereof was Compaina Coun-
ſeilor of che greac Conncal, and the other Gerard Lientenantto the Prevoſt d' Hoſtel, who
have ſince gain'd no better a reputation, than they had before, Irepented me chat I had
demanded them ; bur I chought I did well in it, and fo I came into Gaſcony in all di-
ligence.

" found Monficur de Brrie at Bourdeaux, where I deliver'd him the Patent, and where
all che City was divided againſt one another, and the Parliamenr alſo, becauſe the Hugo-
no;s would that they might preach openly in the City , alledging that by the Confe-
rence at Pojſey it was permicred chem ſo todo ; and che Cachelicks affirm'd che contrary ;
ſo that Monſieur de Burie and I had for a whole day together enough to do to keep them
from falling rogecher by theears ; and thereupon agreed to raiſe ſome men, and that ſo
ſoon as our Commiſſioners ſhould be come, we would march direaly to Famel, our Pa-
rent expreſſing that we ſhonld begin there. Now the power of raiſing Forces, and of
commanding them was in me, wheretore we concluded together to raiſe two hundred

Harquebuzcers,

£
n)
A
$
FI

& $52,

RT en does

Yo 9207 UP PARRY or wee NP otro pe OS PEBRAIPT EO ORs 7m ng na" #

yS Tow nu om on a II $a
g_—

222 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book V
* Light-horſe, Harquebuzeers, and a hundred * Argoulets, the command of which Igave to the younge
Tilladet, the ſame who 1s now Lord of Sainforens,
Bavrelle a Mis LI bad ſcarce been four or five days in my houſe Efilac, when a Miniſter call'd 1a Bay-
niſter attempts rele came to me in the behalf of cheir Churches, telling me, that the Churches were exceed-
ro corrupt the . ing glad of my coming, and the Authority the Queen had given me, being now aſſur'd tg
Sicur de #ont- obtain Juſtice againſt thoſe that had Maſſacred their Brethren, To which I madeanſwer,
bes chat he might be confident all ſuch as ſhould appear in faulr, ſhould be certainly puniſh'd.
He then told me, thathehad in Commiſſion from the Churchesto make me a handſome
preſent, and ſuch aone as therewich I (ſhould have reaſon to be well ſatisfied. I old him,
that there was no need of any preſents to me, foraſmuch as my integrity would oblige me
to do my duty, and thar for all the preſents in the world, I was never to be made to dy
any thing contrary to it. Hethen told me; that the Catholicks had dcclar'd, they would
never endureto have Juſtice executed upon them, and thar rherefore he had in Commi(-
fion from all che Churches, to preſent me with four thouſand foot in good equipage, and
paid, This word began to put me into fury, and made me angerly demand of lym, what
men, and of what Nation mult thoſe Four thouſand Foot be? to which he made anſwer,
The offers of of this very Country, and of the Churches; whereupon I ask*d him, 1t he had power to
the Churches. preſent the Kings SubjeRs, and to put men into the Ficld, withour the command of che
King, or the Qucen, who was at this rime Regent of the Kingdom, and ſo declar'd by
the Eſtates held ar Orleans, O you confounded Rognes, ſaid I, 1 ſee very well what you aims
at, it is to ſet diviſions in the Kingdoms and tu you Miniſters that are the aAnthors of this
godly work., under colour of the Goſpel 3 and thereupon tell to (wearing, and ſeizing him
by the collar, ſaid theſe words, 1 know xot Raſcal, what ſhinld hinder me, that I do not my
ſelf hang thee at thu window, for 1 have with my own hands, ſtrangled twenty honeſter men
than thiu. Who then trembling, ſaid tro me, Sir I beſeech you let me go to Monflenr de
Burie, for 1 have order from the (hurches to go ſpeak with him, and be not offended with
me, who only come to deliver a meſſage, neither do we do it for any other end, but only to
defend our elves. Whercupon I bade him go and be hang'd to all the Devils in Hell, both
he, and all the reſt iff his fellow Minifters, and ſo he deparred from me, as ſufficiently
frighced as ever he was in his life. This ation got mea very i]| repute amongſt the M1i-
niſters, for ir was no leſs than high Treaſon to touch one of them,
Nevertheleſs a few days after came another Miniſter callPd Boenormant, alias 1a Pierye,
ſent in the bchalf of their Churches (as he ſaid) ro entreat me to accept the preſent and
| offer that Barelle had made me, ſaying, that it was not tor the intention Iimagin'd, and
* A farthing that withour coſting the King fo much as a * Liard, I might render equal Juſtice both
ranges on co the one party and the ocher, Ar this I was almoſt ready to loſe all manner of patience,
a peny,a Liard and with great vehemency reproach'd him with the levying of money, and theliſting of
containing men, bur he deny?d it all. Whereupon I faid ro him, But what if [ prove to you, that
chree Deniers, yg Jonger ſince than yeſterday, y0u liſted men at 1a Plume, what will you ſay ? To which he
» hereof rwelve 111ge anſwer, That if it was ſo, it was more than hehnew. Now he had a Souldier with
go 2 P7” him, chat had formerly been in my Company in Piedmont, call'd Antraguery, which made
me turn to him, ſaying, Wi!l you Captain Antragues deny, that you yeſterday liſted men at
la Plame > To which, ſecing himſclt caught, he made anſwer, That indeed the Church
The Churches f Nerac had made him their Captain. Whereupon I began to ſay , What the Devil Churches
mzke Caprains, 47e thoſe that make Gaptain; ? and fell roreproach him with the good uſage and reſpe& I
ad ſhew?d him when he was in my Company ; forbidding them ever again to come to
me with che like Errand, which if they did, 1 ſhould not have che patience to forbear
laying hands upon them ; and ſo they departed.
The Sedician They afterwards began to riſe at eApen, and to make themſelves Maſters of the Town,
of Agea, in which were the Seigneurs de emi and ( aftet- Segrat, and the Seneſchal of eAgenss ;
Poton'was alſo there, who did all tharin him lay to pacific affairs, and came to me, enireating
me to go to Agen, and thar all obedience ſhould be pail me there ; chere came a Miniſter
alſo along with him, who would engage his honor to me 1n the buſineſs, bur I did nor
take that for good Security. The Seneſchal proceeded with integrity, and I believe ir
would have coſt him his life as well as me mine, had I eone thither, tor he would have
defended me the beſt he could z and it came fo near ity that ar their importunity, I pro-
mis'd to be there the next morning. Bur che Steurs dels Lande and de Nort in the mean
Apicemon the time diſpacch'd away a Meſſenger in private tome, to give me warning mot to come, if 1 had
Sicur de Monte 41) Care of my life, for if 1 did, 1 was a dead man 5 which made me ſend chem word,
luCs life. chat I would nor paſs over the River, bur it they would come ro a Houſe ar che Ferry, 1
was Content to give chem the meeting there, When chey ſaw they could nor inveigle me into
their power, they conſented to come to the place appointed, whither I accordingly wene to

meec

.———_—_—__

' Boox V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 223

—————————. —_— ——_O_—_—

meerthem with five and ewenty Souldiers, whom I order'd notto ſtir fromthe water ſide,

and chere we din'd Ys rn After dinner we fell to debate what was beſt to be done z

where I cold chem , * chat in che firſt place, and before we proceeded toany further parti-

« cylars, they were to content themſelyes with the Church, chat Monficur de Burie had al-

« low'd them for their meetings, which was a Pariſh Church, and char chey muſt quic che

« Tacobins, and permir the Religious to re-enter, to perform their offices there ; that they

« muſt lay down their arms, and receive the one half of the King of Naverres Company

« jnco their City for a Gariſon, and the other half ſhould remain at Condom. I could ne-

ver perſ[waderchem to condeſcend to this wherefore taking the Seneſchal of Agen aſide,

1 ſaid ro him, Do yo not evidently ſee, that they aim at a ſubverſion, and to make them

ſelves Maſters of Cities ? I would net adviſe you to ſtay with theſe people; for you will be
neceſſitated, either to let them do what they will, or reſolve to have your throat cut, we have

a fair example in Monſieur de Fumel : conſider with your ſelf what ts beſt for ts you dog and

ſo farewel : and ſo without any more words, I abruptly letr chem, and rerurn*d co Stil-

lac, where at my coming home I found a Farmer of mine of Puch de Goxtant call'd Labat,

who cameto tell me in the behalf of cheir Churches,thay 7 was too Cholerick, and had nit pa-

tience rightly to wnderſtand what the Miniſters Barrelle and Boenormont had to ſay to me,

and to preſent me withal, which was, that the Churches made me a tender of T hirty thou-

ſand Crowns, provided I wons!d not take arms againſt them, but let them alone, without d:- ;
firing nevertheleſs that I ſhanld alter my Religion, and that within fifteen days at the fur- Aran ry
theſf, they would bring me the money to my own houſe. In anſwer to which Icold him, That 5; = ” ; Mos:
were it not for the love I bore him, andalſo that he was my Tenant, 1 would handle him after j,.
another manner, than T had done Barrelle and Boenormont, and clap a dagger in his boſom,

that he knew very well I had the knack on't, and therefore henceforward let neither he , nor

any other be ſo impudent as to make any ſuch Propoſals to me, for I wonld infallibly be the

death of themif they did, Whereupoin very ſufhciently frighted, he immediately lefe me

co return to Nerac, to carry back my anſwer to his Church,

Eight days had not paſt after chis, before Captain Sendat came again to cempt me with Captain Sen:
much greater offersthan before 3 for hemade me an offer of forty thouſand Crowns, he Jt treats with
himſelf having made them a promiſe co be of their parry, provided I did not take arms the Sieuc de
againſt them ; for which they alſo gave him Two thouſand Crowns, We talk*d a pretry Hon'luc,
while of the buſineſs, and when he ſaw he could no other way prevail with me co cake their
money» he preſt and advis'd me, to takeir, and lend che money to the King, wherewich
ro make war againſt them. To which I made anſwer, That I very well perceiv'd he did
not underſtand what it was to bring the reputation of an honeſt man in diſpute : For in the
firſt place, ſaid I, they will not give me this money, without firſt making me take an Oath not
to bear arms againſt them, which engagement they will have in writing to ſuew to their Churches,
to make them part with their money ; and beſides, it is impoſſible but that this muſt come tg Conſiderations
light, for fire can never be ſo cover'd and conceal'd, but that ſome ſmoak will iſſne out. The of «be Sicur de
Oxeen will wonder that I fit ſtill 3n my own houſe and do nothing, ſhe will ſolicite me to take D_ 4.x
arms, which if I then refuſe todo, will you not, that both ſhe and all the world believe I of Capteln g
have taken money, and am abrib d corrupted fellow z On the other ſide, ſhould 1 give this Sendat.
money to the King, his Conncil maſt needs take notice, that I have taken an Oath nit tobear
«rms, and yet they know, that upon my receiving the Order, I have ſworn to ds jt, and to
defend his Perſon and hu Crown againſt all the world. How then can you imagine, that
either the Queen now, or the King when he grows up, can look upon we as an honeſt. man,
when 1 have taken two Oaths expreſly contrary to one another ? Some will ſay, that [ took
the money at firſt upon the account of infidelity ; but that afterwards repenting, 1 would pal-
liate my Knavery, by giving it to the King. Others will ſay, that the Oneen ought no more
to r<poſe any traſt in me, having taken two Oaths poſitively contrary to one another, and that
finee 1 mnade no con(cience of cheating the Hugonots with an Oath, I would make as little to de-
cejve the King. Thu ſhall my honor be brought in queſtion, and, I with juſt reaſon, ſen-
tenc d for ever incapable of any place among ſt honeſt men, and ſuch as are goed and loyal Snb-

Jefts to their Prince. What will then become of me,and what a Monſter of men ſhall I be, when þ

have leſt the honor 1 have fonght for all my life,and parted with my blood tookgain ? I will net

only ſay, that the Gentlemen of France will avoid my converſation, but even the baſeſt »

the people alſo will be aſham'd of my company. See then Captain Sendat what a fine condition The Stcur de
1 ſhould be in, ſh11'd 1 fellow your advice : In retarn of which, 1 will give you better z I Montlus with«

pray frequent theſe people ny more, you have ever been brought up and born army with ow Capjaic

Sendat from che
the MoncluCs, let me entreat you to take them up now for the ſervice of the King, and Hagonors,
do nog go over to that ridiculous Religion. Our Forefathers were honeſter mes than they,

and I cannot believe that the Holy Ghoſt is amongſt a people who riſe in rebellion againſt

their

2'4 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox V:

their King : Here is a hopeful beginning. He promis d to follow my counſel, and (9
departed. |
By my behaviour in this affair, I ſufficiently manifeſted to all che world, thar Avarice
could never make me abandon my honor, nor my conſcience to falfifie the Oath 1 have
in the preſence of God made to the King loyally, and faithfully ro ſerve him, and to de-
fend his Perſon and his Crown, and yer ſome have not been aſham?d to accuſe me of polling
trom the Kings Treaſury, and of impoſing taxes upon the Country to enrich my (ſelf,
God and the cruth are on my ſide, _and the teſtimony of the Eſtates of Guienne, who will
make ic known to allchoſe, who have madeall cheſe talſe reports of mero their Majeſtics,
that T have never done any (ſuch thing, Bur letting this alone, T will recurn to the Juſtice
Monſieur de Bxrie and ] did with our vercuous Commiſſioners C ompain and Gerard, who
remain'd a long time without appearing in any place, or it being ſo much as known where
they were. Which made me ſolicite Monſieur de Burie to lecus ſpeedily fall to our buſi -
neſs, and that fince our Commitſioners did not come, we would make uſeof the Counſel-
lors of Agen. Yet ſtill we linger'd away the time in delays, whilſt Thad intelligence daily
brought mc, that the Hugonors continued their damnable Con( PIraciess There was ar this
timea Lieurenant of che Tribunal of (Condom, cal'd ds Franc, a very honeſt man,and a goo
ſervant of the Kings, who was once half in mind to have gone overto this new Religion
{ for he was not the Son of a good Mother, thac was nor one of them) this man was one
day call'd to a Council, in which there were ſome perſons of very great quality, and wherc
he heard an accurſed and execrable Propoſition , which being once propos'd, he durſt nor
when it came to his curn todeliver his opinion, ſay otherwiſe than the reſt had done, fear-
ing ſhould he contradi& ir, chey would pur him to death, leſt he ſhould diſcover their
Council, and was cherefore conſtrain'd to go thorough with it as the reſt had done. I hal}
not fy where this Council was kept, muchlels name the perſons who were preſenc ar it, for
the Council and the Propokition tignifie nothing now, and there were ſome in the Com.
pany, who are lince become very honeſt men. Heſcenr to me to entreat chat he might have
ſome private confetence with me, betwixt Sampoy and Condom, and appointed an hour, ]
took no more company with me, but one Foorman only, and he another, for {o we had
agreed, and we met 1n a meadow that Iay under the Houſe of Monſieur de Sainforens,
where he told me all thar had been ſaid in the Council, and whar had there been concluded,
which wasſucha Conſpiracy, as (ſo God ſhall help me) made my hair ſtand an end, to
hear ir. After he had ended his ſtory, he made me'the Remonſtrance of an honeſt man,
D Foe dif. llingme that now an occafion preſented it ſelf, wherein Tmight acquire honor to my ſelf,
pee Ley H.. 2nd thoſe who ſhould deſcend from me for ever, which was with acouragious and mag-
gonors Conſpi- Nanimous heart to take arms, and to expoſe my life ro all dangers, for the ſafeguard of
racy. * thoſe poor children who were the ſons of ſo good a King, and as yet in no better an age
to defend themſelves, chan if they were in their cradles, and that God would aſſiſt me,
{ecing me take arms ro protect the innocent, and thoſe who were no way able to defend
chemſclves. To his, this good man added fo many,and fo powerful Remonſtrances, that
(as I ſhall be fav'd) rhe cears came into my eyes, entreating me withal, nor to diſcover him,
A deſign of the for if 1 ſhould, hewasa dead man, He told me further, that as to what concern'd my
Hugonors ro felf, chey had conſulred abour me, and determin'd to ſurprize me in one place or another,
kill Monſieur and that if chey could ger me into their hands, they would deal worſe by me, than they
fe Home. had done by Monſieur de Fumel, Nothing of all their Conſpiracies was conceal'd from
che ſaid Lieutenanr, becauſe they choughe him ſure of their ſide, ſo dexterouſly did he be-
have himſelf amongſt chem ; bur he afterwards ſhew'd them the contrary, ſeveral times ex-
poſing his life in the City of Condom, with his Sword in his hand, in defence of the Kings
Authority : But however it came to paſs, he was afterward either by poyſon, or ſome other
violent means, diſpatch'd our of the world for this very buſineſs. I thought he had never
difcover'd himſelf but co me only, bne I found thar he had told the ſame thing co Monſieur
de Gondrin, who was @ very intimate friend of his, and ro Monſieur de Maillac, Receiver
of Guiexne, for they were both as it were Brothers. For my part, I never open'*d my lips
concerning it to any one living, but to the Queen at Tholoyze, by the chimney of her Cham-
ber, at which her Majeſty was very much aſtoniſh'd, as ſhe had very good reaſon to be,
for more horrid and Diabolical deſigns were never heard of, and yer very greac perſons were
of the Conſpiracy. |
The Sieur de Having heard all cheſe abominable deſigns, I retir'd ro my own houſe ar Saxpry ; where
Moutlws d&- 1 concluded with my {elf co lay afide all manner of fear, reſolving co {ell my skin as dear
Fen, as I could, as knowing very well, char f I once fell into their hands, and wasJefr to their
mercy, the greateſt piece of my body would be no bigger chan my little finger. More-
oyer, derermining to execace al! che cruelty I could, and eſpecially againſt choſe who ſpoke

22ainſt

Book. V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 2'5
againſt che Royal Majeſty ; for I faw very well, that gentle ways would never reclaim
choſe canker'd and invererate Raſcals, Monficur de Burle departed from Bowrdeaux, ſend-
ing me word cf the day he intended to be at Clairac, that we might there rogether re-
ſolve where we ought to begin our Circuit. He ſent me alſo Lerters che Commiſſioners
had writ to him, wherein chey appointed us to come to Cahors, there ro begin againſt the
Catholicksz in anſwer to which I writ co him back ag2in, that he ſhould well conſider
the Parent, and chat there he weuld find che Queen had commanded us to go and begin
art Famel. The Lecters of theſe two honorable Gentlemen, were of ſo audacious and im-
pudent a ſtile, as rhat by them they gave us to underſtand, that chey were the principal
Commiſſioners, and that we had no authority, ſaving to juſtifie their proceedings, and co
be affiſting in the execution of their Deerees.

Now there was a Village two Leagnes from Effillac, call'd S. Mezrd, the greateſt
part whereof belong d ro the Sieur de Roxillac a Gentleman of eight or ten thouſand Livers
a year. Four or hve days before I came thicher, che Hagonors his Tenants wereriſen up
againſt him, becauſe he offer'd to hinder them from breaking open che Church, and taking
away the Chalices, and kept him four and ewenty hours befieg'd in his own houſe ; ſo tha
hadit nor been for a Brother of hiscall'd Monſieur de $, Ajgnan, and ſome other Gentle-
men his neighbours, who came in to his relief, they had certainly cut his throat, as alſo
thoſe of Offfort would have done to the Sicurs + Cu9, and de la Zfontjoye, ſo that already
chere began to de open War againſt che Gentry, 1 privately got ewo Hangmen ( which The 'Sieur de
chey have ſince call'd my Laequais, becauſe they were very often at my heels) and ſentro Montlu;'s Lacs
Monſieur de Fontenilles, my Son in Law (who carried my Corner, and was at Beaumont Ys:
de Lomange, where he lay in Garifon) that he ſhould come away upon Thurſday in the
beginning of che night, and by break of day be ar the ſaid S. Mrzard, there to ſeize of
thoſe perſons whoſe names I had ſenr him in writing, and whereof the principal was Ne-
phew to the Advocate of the King and Queen of Navarre at Leffoure, call'd Verdery.

Now the ſaid Advocat2 was he that fomented all the Sedition, and I had private word

ſent me, that he would come thar very Thurſday to S. Mezard, for he had ſome eſtate
there. I was reſolv'd to begin with this felows head, foraſmuch as h:ving advertiz'd the
King of Navarre at Court, chacrhe ſaid Yerdery, and other of his Officers at Leffoare,
were theprincipal Incendiaries of Rebellion, and having writ as much ro the Queen, of

the Kings Officers, {he had writ back that I thould begin with thoſe people firſt, and the
King of Navarre had writ in his Letter, chat if I hanp'd the Kings Officers on the lower
branches of a Tree, I ſhould hang hison the uppermoſt of all. Bur Yerdery came nor;
which was well tor him, for if he had I had branch'd him. Monficur 4e Fontenilles per=
form'd a very long march, and came by break of day to S. 2fazard, where ar his firſt
coming he took the Nephew of Yerdery, and two others, and a Deacon, thereſt elcap'd
away, there being not any one who knew the Houſes, for there was nor ſo much as any one

man at arms, or Archer who had any knowledge of the place. A Gentleman, call*d
Monficur de Cordey who liv'd at the faid place, had ſentme word, that when in the pre-
ſence of the Conſuls he had remonſtrated to them that they did ill, and chat che King would
be highly diſpleas d with cheir doings, they made anſwer, What King ? We are the Kings, Inſolence of
he that you (peak of ts alittle turdy Roylet, wel whip his breech, and ſet bim to a trade, to the Hugonocs:
teach bim to get his living as others do. Neither wasit only there thatthey talk'd at this
precious rate, but jt was common diſcourſe in every place. I was ready to burſt with in-
dignation att, and ſaw very well, chat allthis Language tended co what had been cold

me by Lieutenant d# Franc, which in ſum, was to make another King. I had agreed
with Monſieur de Sinftorens, that he ſhould alſo take me five or (ix of 4ſftefort, and ef pe-

cially one Captain orallet the chief Ringleader of them all, and thac if he could rake him,
andchofe I nam d to him, he ſhould with good words bring them to metro S. HMazard,

che ſame day chat I perform'd the execucion, which was upon a Friday, which neverrhe-

leſs that day he could nor do, bur he ſnap*d them che Sunda) following, and broughc
them Priſoners to Filleneufe, So ſoon as Icame to S. Mazard, Monſieur de Fontenilles
preſented the three Priſoners and the Deacon, all beund, in the Church-yard, in which
there was yet remaining the foot of a Croſs of ſtone they had broken, that might be abouc
ſome too foot high. I preſently call'd Monficur de Corde and che Confuls, bidding them
upon pain of death to deliver cruly, what words they heard theſe fellows (peak againſt the
King. The Conſuls were atraid, and durſt fay nothing ; whereupon cold the ſaid Sieur de
Corde, that it belong'd to him to ſpeak firſt, and cherefore bid him ſpeak ; upon which

he maintain'd ro their faces, that chey had ſpoke the forementioned words, and then the
Conſuls cold che ruch, and juſtified the ſame the Sieur de Corde had done. I had my two
Hangmen behind me very well equip'd with their ackle, and eſpecially with a very ſharp

Ax,

F

\ ,

3

$

”

4

&

*%

&

i *.

: 4

MY

7
'F]
:

7

£

' b

li: |

>

.

f

j vr

p?

i 4

6: |

|

Ly

-

|
i
;:

| |

|

_— * RY 144 THAO re: A. gr

226

En —_—

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book V

A ſuddain exe-
cution of Mon-
fieur de Moat-
luc's.

Juſtice corrup-
red.

Ax, when flying in orca: tury upon this Verdere, Trook him by che collar, ſaying co him,
O thou confounded Rogne ! durſt thou defile thy wicked tongue. againſt the CHMijeſty of thy
King and Swveraign? To which he reply*d, Ah Sir, have mercy upon a poor ſinner. Ax
which more enrag'd than before, T ſaid ro him, Thou ungracicuw Raſcal , wowldſt thin
have me to have mercy upon thee, who hadft no reverence nor reſpett for thy K wg, and with
that puſh'd him rudely to the ground, ſo that hisneck fell exacily upon the piece bf the
Croſs, crying to the Hangman, Strike Villain, which he did, and fo nimbly, that my
word and the blow were the one as ſoon as the other, which ferch'd off his head, and moxe-
over above another half foor of the Croſs. Theother two I cauy'd co be hang?d upon an
Elm that was cloſe by, and being the Deacon was bur eighteen years old, I would nor pur
him to death, as alſo that he might carry the news to his Brechren g but caus'd him ne-
vertheleſs to be ſo well whip'd by the Hangman, thar, as I was told, he dyed within ren
or twelve days after, This was the firſt execution I did ar my coming from my own
houſe without ſentence or writing ; for in ſuch matters, I have heard, men muſt begin
with execution, and 1f every one that had the charge of Provinces had fone the ſame, they
had put our the fire, thar has ſince conſum?d all. However, this ſer\*d to ſtopthe mouths
of ſeveral ſcdirious perſons, who duſt no more ſpeak of the King, burwith reſpe&, bur
in great privacy , and wich greater circumſpeRtion carried on their praftices and des
ſigns.

The next day I parted from Eftillac, and went to find out Monſieur de Burie at (lairac,
and there wefell to debate of the place where we ſhould begin our buſineſs, whether ar
Fumel, oratCahirs; I found him won to go to the Commiſſioners to Cahors, who were
come thither, and had begun to try the Catholicks, without vouchſafing to lend an ear to
any thing whatever to the contrary, T then call'd for the Patenr, where I thew'd him,
that ir was the Queens intention we ſhould begin at Fumel, which he knew not how to
contradi&, ſhewing him moreover, that by virtue of that Parent,we were the crue Commiſ-
ſjoners,and that Gerard and Campain were oblig'd to come to us, and not we to go to them z
celling him, thar on the other fide, 1 had been advertiz*d fince my departure from Court,
that they were two of the greateſt Hugonots in all the Kingdom of France, and that we
ought to have an eye to them, and to our own reputations, thac the world might not caſt
a blur upon us, declaring us Hugonotsz for as for my own part, I would not be branded
with that mark : And to ſpeak thetruth , when I came to Bowrdeanx, I thought I dif-
coyer'd both by his carriage, and alſo by other advertiſements had been given me, thar
Monkeur de Barie enclin'd a little to that Religion.

Upon Monday we went to YVilleneufue, where Monſieur de Santtorens with his Troop
of Light Horſe, and rwo hundred Harquebuzeers came to meet us, bringing me along
with him Captain CMora'let, and other four, with two others that ſome Gentleman had
craken at S. Ligrade, all which upon Txeſday, without holding them longer in ſuſpence,
I caugd to be hang'd, which ſtrook a great fear into the whole party, ſaying, hat ! he
puts us to death withont tryal ! Now their opinion was, that in caſe they ſhould be appre-
hended, they muſt be proceeded againſt by witneſſes , and thar chen there would nor be
one who duſt give evidence againſt them, for fear of cheir throats, and alſo that there wag
no Judicature great nor ſmall, but would have ſome of cheir own Religion amongſt them,
who would ſet nothing down in writing, but what ſhould be to their advantage, and in
order to their juſtification, Thus was Juſtice ſlubber'd over , without any puniſhmenc
inflited upon them; and when they had murther'd any one, or broke Churches, theſe
wicked Officers (for ſo they may juſtly be called) would immediately preſent themſelyes
co take cognizance of the fat, when the Informations being perteRed, the Catholicks were .
evermore found to be the beginners of the brawl (the beaten muſt bear the blame) and that
chey themſelves had broken the Churches by night, chat ir might be ſaid che Hugonors had
doneir, I donotchink ir is to be found in Hiſtory, that ever ſuch Roguerics, Cheats
and Machinations were invented or praQticed in any Kingdom of the world ; and had the
Queen delay'd ſending me with rhis Commiſſion bur three months only, all the people
had been conſtrain'd co turn to this Religion, or have loſt their lives, for every one was ſo
rerrified with the ſevericy that by the Judges was exercis'd upon the Catholicks, that there
was no other way left chem, bur either co abandon their habirarions, to loſe cheir lives, or
0 turn to thar party, The Miniſters publickly preach'd, char if chey would come over to
cheir Religion, they ſhould neither pay duty co the Gentry, nor taxes to che King, bur
what ſhould be appointed by them 3 others preach'd, that Kings could have no power,
but what ſtood with the liking and conſent of the people; and others, thar the Gentry
were no better men than they, and in effe&, when the Gentlemens Bailiffs went to demand
renc of the Tenants, they made anſwer, that they muſt ſhew chem in the Bible, _

| » cher

Book Vo de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 215

ther they oughr to pay or no, and thar if cheir Predeceſſors had been Slaves and Cox-
combs they would be none, |

This inſolence grew ſo high, that ſome of the Gentry begari ſo far to give way to its
fary, as to enter into Compoſition with their Tenants, entreating chern to ler chem live
in ſafery in their houſes, and to enjoy their own Demeaſns, and as to Rents and Chiefs
chey would nor ask thetn for any. No one was ſo bold as to dare to go outa hunting,
for they came and kill'd their Hounds and Greyhounds in the field before their faces,
and noone durſt ſay wrong they did, for fear of their livesz but if any one meddled wich
any of chem, all their Churches were preſently made acquainted with it, and wi.hin four
or five hours, you had been diſparch*d outof the world, or enforc'd to hide your ſelf in
ſome of the Confederates houſes, or in Tholouz?, there being no ſafety in any other place ;
and chis was the miſcrable condition to which Gajenne was reduc'd, The particulaticies The miſcravte
whereof I am necefſuaced to inſiſt upon, to ler you ſee, whether or no the King had nor Eſtate of Gyy«
xcaſon to honorme wich that Glorious Title of Conſervator of Guienne, and whether it ©e.,
was not neceſſary to fall to work in good earneſt z for had I proceeded with Mildneſs and
Moderation, as Monſieur de Barie did, we had been loſt. He promis'd them great mar-
ters, but I perform'd nothing, knowing very well, that it was only to deceive us, and by
degrees to get places into cheir hands : To be ſhort, theſe Upſtarc Chriſtians would give
as the Law, and there was not a lictle Miniſter amongſt them, who did not Lord ic asif
he had been a Biſhop; and theſe were the hopeful beginnings of this fine Religion, and
che manner afrer which ſhe inſtructed men to live.

Ar our departure from the ſaid Villenenfve, we went to Fumel, where we found that
Madam de Fumel, with Monſieur de Cangon her Brother, and ſome orher Gentlemen of
che Family,had pur themlelves into the field, upon the news of our being come thicher,and
had taken five and twenty or thirty of thoſe who had maſſacred the Sieur de Furl. Mon-
Geur de Brrie then {ent corthe Commiſſioners to come, and to fall in hand with their Com-
miſſion, who ſent him word flatly they would noty but that we muſt come to them ; and
I had intelligence ſent me by a friend, that they had ſaid, that fince I proceeded to
execution without Form or IndiAment , they would make bold co bring me my (c1f
ro my tryal, after they had done with the reſt, by which I ſaw that I was to cry wich
them a better ora worſe; for otherwiſe we ſhould fall into the greateſt misforrane that
we could poſſibly fall into, and if we did not uphold our Authoricy, and keep the people
in aw of us, withour ſuftering them to be in fear of theſe Commiſſioners, all would goon
the [ide' of the new Religion, Neither did I fail co repreſent this danger to Monſieur de
Brie; but I found by his anſwers, that he was either in fear of doing amiſs or (as I ſaid
before) thar he a liccle enclin*d to that fidez buthis end has clear'd that point co us. See=
ing therefore that we could not have our own Commiſſioners, we ſent for Counſellors from
the Tribunal of Agen , who preſently fell ro trying theſe people , whom they fonnd (o
ouilty, that chey confeſt themſelyes co have been ARors in che Maſſacreof their Lord ; T'* Aﬀaſli-
for they were all his own Tenants, who had begun the baſineſs, and ſent to call in heir ya Fa ar]

| Mhrcs ! . ts : unmet.
neighbouring Churches to aſtiſt chem in the performance of this Religious exploit, butcher- execucd.
ing this poor Gentleman with an infinite number of wonnds, and being bn half dead,
laid him againſt a cuſhion upon his bed, and ſhot at Bucs againſt his hearc, pillaging and
ſacking his houſe , and all that he had; theſe good people crying our when they had
done, Ler che Goſpel live 3 For which to be ſhorr, in one day, what apon Gibber, and
what upon the wheel, chirty or forty of them were ſenc our of this world, I cannortell
whither. |

From thence we went to Cahors, where we found theſe venerable Lords, who had be-
gun, and werc already a good way advanc't 1n their proceſs againſt the Catholicks, and
kept in priſon Monſieur de Fiole Canon and Arch+deacon of Cahors, and Chancellor of
the Univerſity, a Gentleman of a Family of ſeven or eight chouſand Livres a year belong-
ing to Meſſicurs de Terride, de Negrepelice, and other Gentlemen of che Country. The pyiole Canon of
Sieur de Canmont des Mirandes had married his Siſter into this Family, and was there ſo- Cabors priſon«
liciting for the ſaid de Fiole, his Brother-in-law with his Children, and Nephews of the ©
faid de Viele, and Madam de Bagsa, Siſter ro the ſaid de Violee. Monſieur d' Auſſun was
come thicher alſo, as being Kinſman co his. Wife, and che whole Ciry was full of Gentry to
ſolicic in the behalf of the faid Sieur de Yiole. Our reverend Commiſfioners had order'd
cheir buſineſs ſo well, that they had call'd in to cheir aſſiſtance nine Judges, fix whereof
were Hugonors, and the ocher three they had ſo terrified with their power and authority,
chat they pretended to have it in their Commiſſion, that none of chem was to dare to con-
tradi whar the others ſajd,, and eſpecially Judge Mage, being a timerous perſon durſt
not pronounce a ſyllable but whar the reſt would have him ſay. They there condemn'd

Hh2 fourreen

F4
——

—

248 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox YV

fourteen or fifceen men, of which nor above three had any hand in the Maſlacre 3 bur in

Juſtice done ar revenge of the execution we had done at Famel, they would pur rodeach as many as they

Caboys. could juſtly or unjuſtly, and cauſ*d them to be cxecured in the Marker-place of the City ;
ar which both che Magiſtrates and the Clergy encred into {o violent an apprehenſion, thae
they gave themſelves all for loſt, ſeeing them to put Monſieur de Viole, and ſeveral others
upon their Tryal, who were none of them preſent at the Maſſacre. All the Ladies were con-
tinually following afrer me, ſeeing they conld obrain no ſatisfactory anſwer from Monſieur
de Barie, and Monſieur de Caumont that now is, came to {peak ro Monſicur de Barie, I think
rather totakean occaſion to quarrel me than for any thing elſe, becauſe T had ſaid that he
ſuffer'd a Miniſter in the open Pulpit to {peak againſt rhe perſon of the King and his Roy-
al authority ar Clairac, of which he was Abbor , and he queſtion?*.] me abour it in the 0-
pen Hall before Monkeur de Burie ; whereupon I told him, that 1 had ſaid ſo, and that he

A diſpute be= ſtood ſo mnch obliged to the King for the benefits he h:d receiv'd, that he ought not to have

: wixt the Sieur endured jt,to which he replied, that the ſaid Miniſter had not preach'd before him, and that

Ge Moatluc and 11; þoyoh bs bad, it was nit to me to whom he was to give an acecunt ; at which I had though

the Sicur dc © þ . ;

Cn ro have flown upon him wich my daggerin my hand, and he clapt hand co his ſword,
when in an inſtance fifteen or ewenty Gentlemen of mine leapt upon him, and there was
enough to do to ſave him from being kilPd. Monſieur de Burie cook my part in a very
high manner, and ractled him to ſome parpoſe, inſomuch char ſeme friends of his chu u(t
him our of the Hall to ſave him, for every one had his {word drawn, and he had nor a party
ſufficient to make it an equal match againſt che friends I had preſent there ; and this was
the occaſion of the hacrred they ſay he bears me, for before we were very good friends z buc
c15 the leaſt of my care,

Buc to return co our Juſtice, the Counteſs of Arein who was at Aſſer , ſent me a
Letter by one of her Gentlemen call'd 1a Brzn, wherein ſhe entreared me to fee Juſtice
duly perform?*dz to which I writ her anſwer back, that I would by no means obſtruct
it» where I ſaw there wss reaſonable and juſt cauſe , and that Monſieur de Brie,

An offer made and I were there for no other end, The next day he return'd co me again, and in pri-

ro the Sicur yate entreated me, that I would further the execution of the Commiſlioners Sen-

de Mon'lic, tence, and that inreturnof ſo good an office, I ſhould not fail of Ten thouſand Francs,
He made me this offer jn the preſence of a Merchant that ſold piſtolets, which he
himſelf choſe our for me , telling me, that he was privy to the affair, and would im-
mediately disburſe the ſum. I rold him, He did me a very great pleaſure, but that 1
world leave them in his hands, being to go to Monſieur de Burie to ſupper, whoſe ledging
was hard by, Bythe way as went, I began to confider with my ſelt trom whence chele
Ten chouſand Francs ſhould come ; bur could nor poſſibly imagine, though I was farisft-
<d chere muſt be malice and knavery in the caſe. After ſupper, when it grew late, I re-
tir d tomy Lodging at the Archdeacon Redozls houſe, where by the way I mer Madam de
Longua, and Madam de Viole hard by che houſe, who paſſionately weeping, ſaid ro me
theſe words, O Sir, Aonſrenr de Viole 24 going to be put to death, if you do not ſtand his
friend, for ſentence # paſt apon him, and tha night there is order given to ſtrangle him in
priſon, and in the morning to preſent him dead upon the Scaffold, All the forementioned
Lords and Gentlemen had lent away poſt to the King abour chis buſineſs, bur rhe Meflen-
ger had return'd too late, if Ihad not been. I diſmiſt chem with the beſt comfort I
could, telling chem thac I would take care to prevent execution to which end I appoint-
ed certain Gens-d'armes of my own Company to ride the Patrouille before the priſon,
and before the Commiſſioners Lodgings, and never put off my cloths my ſelf of all thac

Monſeur ds Might It was very late before the Archdeacon Redow! came home, vvhen ſo ſoon as I

Viale and hcard he vvascome into his chamber, I ſent for him) co calk vvicth him abour the buſineſs.

others con» He had been privately enquiring afcer the aftairs of Monſieur de Viole, and the other Pri-

demn'dto 6ye. ſoners, who vvere all people of good quality, and brought this account, that they vvere
all condemn'd to dye, and that for fear of ſcandal, and that no comets might ariſe,
they were to be diſparch'd ſecretly in priſon by torch-lighe, and that by their Proceſs and
Judgement, they had divided the City into three diſtin Corporations, to wir, the
Church into one, the Magiſtracy into another, and che third Eſtate inco the laſt 3 all which
three diſtin bodies, were ſentenc'd to a fine of Sixſcore thouſand Francks : whereupon
ir preſently came into my head, chat the Ten thouſand Francs of which 1a Brun had made
me a tender,was certainly to come from hence ; and the ſaid Archdeacon wept, ſaying, thac
the City of Cahors was rain'd for ever, and thac though all che goods of the City move-
able and immoveable ſhould be ſold, they could nor make up that ſum : Whereupon I
adviſed him not to afflict himſelf, bur leave ir ro me, for that out of the love I boreco
Monſieur de Viole and the reſt, I would keep fo good watch, that I would trap Np
efore

————
AAS > >a ooo OA GLAD © DA Ale * ot oO OP IIY a_—
,

Book V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

———_—

before they could"do cheir execution, and as to the fines you ſpeak of, ſaid I, ic is nor
che Kings intencion that your City ſhould be deſtroy'd, for it 1s his, and afſure your ſelf
he will remic them. Alas Sir, faid he, zf the fines went into the Kings purſe, we ſhould

have ſum? hipe that his Majeſty would not ſee us deſtroy'd ; but he is not to have one peny of

: bem. Why »ho then, ſaid I? '7z the Count Rhincgrave, ſaid he, who lent the King Fifty
thouſand Francs upon the County, and we have had a tryal with the ſaid Cornt aboat the
fines of Tholouze, where he has coſt ws, it being prov/d, that he had as good title to the fines
ind amerciaments, 4s to any other part of the Revenue, and that us the reaſon why we have
no other remedy, but to abandon the City, to golive in ſome other place, and leave him all we
have. Hearing which, I was ready corun mad, to think thac theſe two Rogues ſhould
ine one of the Kings Cities, for one particular man. I paſt over the whole nighc in
orear anger and impacience, and inthe.morning Monſieur de Burie ſem for meto hear che
judgement of the Procels 3 bur by the way, I thought to prevent them from pronouncing
ſentence, which bcing once pronounc'd, there was no poſſible way to ſave the City, bur
char the Count Rhinegrave would have had the Fines, who though he was a ſtranger, yer
he was one the King had very often occaſion to uſe. In this heat I came to Monſieur de
Burie's chamber, where. I found them all already fer, and the bags upon the Table. They
perceiv*d very well by my countenance, what Ihad in my ſtomach, bar I ſaid nothing,
buc rook a liccle ſtool, and plac'd my ſelf ar the end of the Table, for they had taken up
all cheroom round avour it, and there the ſaid Campsin in a Learned Oration, began to
lay open the offence chat had beeen committed in this City, enlarging himſelf upon the
hainouſneſs of che Fact, and remonſtraring to us, how many women and children had loſt
cheir husbands and cheir fathers in this bloody Maſſacre, and that che King and Queen
had ſenc us chicher to do this Jaſtice, which was equitable and right (his Harangue laſted
for half an hour ar leaſt) and char choſe offenders they had already put to death, would
fignifie nothing, 1f they did nor alſo execute the principal Authors of this Sedicion, which
would ſcrve for an exampleto the whole Kingdom of France, concluding that therefore
they would read the ſentence before us, to have ic afterwards executed in priſon, entreating
us to lend our afiſtance in the ſeeing 1t accordingly perform'd, and thereupon began to
draw the Sentence out of the Bag. Llook'd upon Monſieur de Burie, to ſeeif he would
ſpeak, for it was for him to ſpeak before me, bur ſeeing he ſuffered him co proceed with=
our interruption, and che ocher beginning ro open the Sentence to read ir, Ifaid to him,
Hold 2fonſjeur de Campain, proceed no further, till you have firſt anſwer'd what 1 have
to demand of you. To which he made anſwer, That after he had read the Sentence, he
would anſwer my queſtions, but that he would firſt read that, before he did any thing elſe.
Wherenpon I ſaid co Monſieur de Bury (rapping out a great Oath) Sir, at the firſt word
that comes ont of his mouth, I will kil him, if he do not firſt [atiefie me in ſuch things as 1
ſhall in your preſence demand of bim. At which Monſieur de Barie (aid co him, AMonfeeur
de Campain, you muſt hear what he has to ſay to you, for perhaps be may have heard ſome-
thing, that I know not of, and chen T perceiv'd my Gentleman co turn pale, and upon my
word he had good reaſon. I hen ask'd him, yhoſe z; the City of Cahors? To which
he anſwered, /t i the Kings. And whoſe u the Tudicatare ? ſaid I. The Kings, ſaid he.
And whoſe is the (harch? (aid I. To which he made anſwer, That he conld not tell.
Whzreapcn I ſaid to him, Do you deny that the (harch is not the Kings as well as the reſt 2
To which he made an{wer, That he did not concern himſelf abont it. I chen ſaid to him,
Have you divided the City into three Corporations, that is to ſay, the Church, the Judica-
tare, and the (ity ſeparate by it (elif, aud impos'd fines ſeverally upon them all? To
which he made anſwer, That I (honld give ear to the Sentence, and that would inform
me, whether he bad or no. Whereupon I began to thou him, ſaying, Thow ſhalt here de-
clare before Monſteur de Bury and me, what 1 demand of thee, or I will bang thee with my
own hands, for 1 have bang'd twenty honeſter men than thy ſelf, or thoſe who have aſſiſt=
ed at thy Sentence ; and thereupon ſtart up from my ſtool, ar which Monſieur de Bwrie
laid, Speak Monſieur de Campain, and [ay if ,zow have done it or no, Yes Sir, anſwered
he, 1 have: Whereupon I ſaid, O tho damned confounded Villain, Traytor to thy King,
then wilt ruine a City Lelonging to the King, for the profi of one particalar man ; were it not
for the reſpe&# 1 bear to Monſienr de Buric, who is here the Kings Liemtenant, 1 would

hang both thee and thy Companions at the windows of this chamber ; ſaying to Monſieur de -

Brie, Sir, for Gods ſake let me kill theſe accurſed Rognes, that are Traytors to their K ing
for anothers prifit and their own; and chereupon drew my {word half way, and had chey
let me alone, 1 had order'd them for ever making more Sentences or Arreſts; but Mons
lieur de Bury leap'd ro me, and caughc hold of my arm , catreating me not to do- ic,
whilt inthe mean cime they recovered the door, and fled away in ſo great a fright, char

the /

230

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book V;

The deliver-
ance of ihe

Sicur de Vole.

they leap'd the ſtairs, wthour ſtaying to count ihe ſteps, I would fain have followed af.
ter to have kilPd them, but Monſficur de Burie, and Monſieur de Comrre his Nephew held
me {ſo faſt, that I could not break from them, the rage wherein I was nor permitting me
to be maſter of my {elf z. It oaght nor then to appear ſtrange, if I call them ſo often Rogues
in my Relation. This being done, Monlicur de Barie, Monſieur de Conrre and I went
into a, Garden, where the ſaid Sieur de Bury told me, That befides that I had preſerv'q
this (i'y from total raine, 1 had ſav'd his honor alſo, for the King and the Oneen, and
all the world, would infallibly have concluded, that he had taken money, whereas he proteſted
that he knew -not one [)llable of all this, and then it was thac I cold him which way I
came ta diſcover it, and do real'y believe there was no intelligence on Monſieur de Burie's
fide. I din*d with him, and do think he did not car four bits, and all chat day ob-
ſerv'd him to be melancholy and diſpleas'd, ſending word to all the Commiſſioners nor
ro proceed any further in any thing whatſoever, till the King ſhoald firſt be enform'd of
all chat had paſt. I alſo ſent ro Jadge Mage and the reſt co forbid them, char they
ſhould not be affiſting in any thing (ſhould be done by Campain and Gerard upon for-
feiture of their lives. They. came in the evening one afcer another, I mean the Judges
Afliſtants, to excuſe themſelves ro Monfieur de Rurie; conteſſing to him, that they had nor
foreſeen rhe ruine this Sentence would have inevitably have brought upon the City, which
would alſo have been the undoing both of them and their poſtericy : bur they durſt never
ſpeak a word to me, nor ſo muchas come where T was. Monſieur de Berie cold me all,
buc whatſoever the matter was, nor one of them durſt come in my fight ; which it they had,
upon my conſcience I think I ſhould have ſtrangled one or another of themes Abour five
or ſix days afcer came the Courrier that the Relations and Friends of Monſieur de Vjole

had ſentto the King, who brought an Injan&ion ro the Commiſſioners, not to proceed.

any further in any manner whacſoever againſt the (aid Sieur de Yiole, nor concerning this
Sedition, commanding them to ſet the {aid Sieur de Fjole, and the other Priſoners ar liber=
ty, upon Bail to appear when and ſo often asthey ſhould be ſummoned fo ro do. Ir is
not to be wondred ar if the City of Cahers havea kindneſs for me, as indeed they have, to
ſuch a degree, that by the reſpe& they pay me, and the entertainments they careſs me
withal, it ſeems, as if the King himſelf, or ſome of his Brothers were come into their
City. :

This was the ſecond time that they attempted to corrupt me with money, but ic ſhall
never be found in Hiſtory, that Lever had a hand in any ſuch dirty pratices; neither do
I fear any perſon living, not only in Guienne, bur in /taly, where I have had great and
honorable cmployments, and where I might have got Two hundred thouſand Francs
at leaſt, would I have done as others did, who had no fault found with them for it,
and have had more thanks for rheir labour than I have, Bur. I can ſay, and ſay cruly,
that I never return'd from avy of my Employments, that I was not neceffitated ro bor-
row money to carry me to my own houſe, and have ever been willing to beggar my ſelf,
and co ſuffer all ſorts of inconvenience, only to ſpare the Kings purſe, and nor co enrich
my ſelf : Neither was I alone the ſufferer, bar moreover all thoſe who were under m
Command ; as for example, the Treaſurer Brancher, the Comptroller 1a Aolliers , and
others, who return'd as very Rogues as I, Andaif at any time any City has preſented me
during theſe troubles, ir wasonly ro maintain the great expence I muſt of neceſſity be ac
co entertain the Gentlemen and people of the Countrey, and was done openly, and not in
private, This was the end of che ſtrange proceedings at (hors.

Now Monſieur de Brarie having himſelf ſeen,that theſe rwo brave Commiſſioners did not
go franckly ro work, and that their only drift was to execute Juſtice upon the Catholic s
only, and not npon the Fugonors alſo , he ſent in all haſte ro Bowrdeanx, for Meſſicur
d' Aleſm the elder, and Ferron, Counſellors in the Court of Parliament, and men that
very well underſtood their buſineſs, that he might joyn them to theſe Commiſſioners of
ours for a Counter-poiſe to ballance their wicked inclinations, and ſo we went ſtreight ro
Fille- Franche de Rowergue, when hearing by the way, that the Hugonors from all parts,
drew together in great numbers. Monſieur de Brie ſent for the Companiesof the Ma-
reſchal de Termes, of Meficurs de Randan, de Ia V auguyon, and de Farnac, for before we
had no more chan our ownewo Companicsz and found ar F'ille- Franche; Monſieur the

.the Cardinal of Armagnac, who ſtaid there expeRiing our coming, to complain of the

Churches had been violated and defac'd in his Jariſdi&ion , and particularly at Yille-
Franche, a member of his Biſhoprick of Rhodes ; when ſo ſoon as he ſaw us draw near ,
che Conſuls ſeiz'd of four or five of the principal of the Sedicious, whom we found Pri-
ſoners, The next day after our arrival came che above named Sieurs d' Aleſwe, and de
Ferron, of whom our Commiſſioners would by no means allow, ſaying, they had nor che

Kings

OE ESTES OEM WET ae mY Se FS > >Fiw

at RG 1 prongs,

zok V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

=

—_— FI row 2 OS OO DIE I Aer CS IO I Gr A OA EF A Eo 1 OI II Oe TS

Kings Parents, though in che end we over-ru'd them whether chey would or no, Mon-
feur de Burie had intreated me to dothem no ham at our departure from Cahors, for they
JcGir'd nothing more than to be gone z and at laſt they began to. try theſe four or five thar
che Cardinal of eArmgnic had cauſed to betaken : bur it was impoſſible to perſwade
Campain and Gerard to conſent to their execution, notwithſtanding that an infinite num-
ber of Rapines and Violacions, beſides thoſe of Churches, was by the teſtimony of the
moſt eminent perſonsof the City, evidently prov'd againſt them, They continued eight
or ten days in this diſpure, eyermore concluding that they ought co be releaſt, and alchough
Monſieur de Ferron's Wite and Family were of that Religion, he nevercheleſs affirm'd with
Monſieur 4 eAleſme, char they ought rodye. The Cardinal of eArmagnac and all the
Officers were in deſpair, to ſee that Juſtice was not executed, expeRing nothing bur all
ſorts of violence ſo ſoon as our backs ſhould be curn'd, if ſome example were nor made. In
the end Meſlicurs d' Aleſme and de Ferron came to my Lodging, to tell me, that ic was not
o behop'd, that theſe people would ever execute Jaſtice upon thoſe of their own Re-
ligion, and that thcrefore {ceing no good was to be done with ſuch men, they were reſoly'd
| to return home, T then entreated them nor toleave us; to which Monſieur d' Aleſme
made anſwer, Will you thin do an «ft wirthy your integrity and courage, and cauſe them to be
hang'd 4 the windows of the T own houſe where they are Priſoners, by which means you will
put the baſineſs out of diſpute, and without that there is no hope that Juſtice ſhall be done<
Are you both of you of this opinjon,laid I. They anſwered me they were, Enough was faid, E
call'd ro me Monſicur de Sainfforens's Serjeant, ſaying to him in their preſence, Go fetch
me the Goaler hither 3 which he did, to whom 1 ſaid, Deliver thy Priſqners to this man :
and you Serjeant, take my two Hangmen, and 99 hang them preſently at the windows of the
Town-batt. Whereupon he immediately departed, and in leſs than a quarter of an hour,
we ſaw them hang?d at the windows. The Commiſſioners were furiouſly enrag?d ac this
ation, and endeayour'd to make Monfieur de Burie diſapprove of it, which the nexc day
] reproach'd themwith, relling them in che preſence of che ſaid Sieur de Burie, that Mon-

Geur de Barie and I ſhould agree well enough, in deſpite of all their endeavours ro divide

us And 1 doubt not, ſaid I, bat to make you hang your ſelves, before the geme be done, and
that we go out of this Commiſſion. There # a rumour that the Prince of Conde has tak-n
arms and poſeſt himſelf of the City of Orleans, which if it prove true, hope for no other,
but that I mille as good as my word, It was not two hours before Rance, the King of
Navarres Secretary arriv*d, and brought news to Monſieur de Burje, thar the Princeof
{onde was in arms, and had ſeiz'd of Orleans, telling wonders of the prodigious Forces
the ſaid Prince had with him, in companiſon of thoſe of the King, and that the King of
of Navarre, the Conſtable, Monſieur de Gaiſe, and the Mareſchal deS. Andre were toge-
ther, who could not all raiſe ſo much as one man, with a thouſand other flim-flam ſtories.
Whereupon the ſaid Sjeur de Burie expreſly forbad him to ſpeak a word to any oncelle,
relling him it would be as mach as hislife was worch, ſhould T come to hear the leaſt whiſper
of it : He ſent alſo privately co the Commiſſioners to get away before the news ſhould
be publi(?d, for otherwiſe it would not be jn his power to fave them from being put to
death ; and he was in the right, for I would infallibly have done their buſineſs. They
needed not to be bid twice, bur immediately ſneak'd away in great ſecrecy, ſo that I
know nothing of their deparcure till che next day, and ſearch*d very diligently for Mon-
fieur Rance, who had he fallen into my hands, I think I ſhould have taughc him to carry
news.

Upon this untoward news, we were of opinion to go direAly ro Montauban, and put
our {elyes into- the Town, before it revolted, for we underſtood that the City of Agen
was reyolted, and had ſeiz?d upon their Catholick Officers, Conſuls and Canons, and ac-
cordingly chat night went co S. Anthony, thinking the next day to enter into Montanban,
bur before we were got halt way, we heard chat the Town was revolted, which made
us turn direaly towards Fille Neufue d' Agenors, and found that all was revolted, We
then came to a Village call'd Gallapian, near unto Port S. Mmie, and found that Port
S. Marie was alſo revolted, for thoſe people had laid their deſign long before hand,
and had carried their bufineſs very cloſe. And there we concluded, that Monſieur de
Bzrie with the four Companies of Gens d armes, ſhould go pur himſelf into Bourdeanx,
and char I with thar of che King of Navarre, which was at Condow,, that of the Mareſchal
de Termes, and my own, ſhould paſs over the Garonne towards Gaſcony, and keep my
ſelt in the open Champain towards Tholouze and Beaumont de Lomange , which being
reſolv'd upon berwixeus, and weſt ready to depart, there arriv'd Captain St. Geme,
who brought me Letters from the King, the concents whereof were theſe,

Monfiear

Agen and Mon-
ianbar reyolr,

- + SS 1 YO OOO YR Soto 9 tos

232 The- Commentaries of Meſlre Blaize Baox Vs

Monſieur de Montluc,

The King's | Fog yow, if ever you deſire to do me 4 ſignal piece of ſervice, that immediately, and

Letter ro the A in all diligence you come away to me with the Mareſchal de Termes his Company , and

Sicur de Moxt- your own , and fix Companies of Fort, for which 1 ſend you Commiſſions, with blanks for the

ol Captains names, for you better know who deſerve to be preferr'd to theſe Commonds then 1,
therefore leaving all things, I entreat you to comt away, for we muſt (ave the body of the
Tree, which being preſerv'd, thc branches will every day recover, 8c.

Theſe were the contents of my Letter, and that of Mcnſeur de Burie, made mention
of what his Majeſty had written to me, telling him withal, thathe « :5co rake the beſt
order he could in Guienne ; for his Majeſty £new nothing as yer of ics revolt, Mon«
fieur de Barie then took his way dircSily to 7 heneing, where hefount Meſſicurs de Gan-

The Sicur de wont and de Daras (which {aid S:cur de Caumont had been 1mportun®d by their Churches
Caumont retu- to be their Head, but he would never be perſwaded to 15, no more would Monf:ur de
ſes co be head Nuys, though in the end he was conſtrain*d ro take it uwvon him, 'at the perſwalion of
- Ye Tg. 2, pexfon of greater Quaticy than him(clt) borh which Gentlemen behav*'d chemſclves with
og great civility and reſpect, and denundco noching of him, for they Rill try'd co winhim
by obligation ; burhe was an honeit 350. *ie went then ſtraight ro Boxrdeaux, and rhe
miſchief on. © was, that he ſevt away ali his #5 Companies rowards Xasntonge, io thathe
remain®d next; 2ad alone jn Beurdeanx, ſaving tor five 3nd twenty Harquebuzeers of
his Guard : And the ſame day that we parted, I came to Quarter at the houſe of Mon-
feur de Reanmont rear unto Agen, and in the neighbouring Villages, where T diſpos?d of
the ſx Commifſ:ons the King had ſent me, namely, to Captain Charry two, to Captain Ba-=
zordan other two, one ro wy Nephew the Baron of Clermont, and che ocher ro Captain
Arne. ;
The Catholick The Sicurs de Canron de CMontferran, and all the Catholick Gentry of Agenozs were
Geatry 6ccein come in tome, and began to murmure amongſt one another in the Hall, chac if T lefr
tne Sicur de them, they were all loſt, and their wives , children and houſes ruin'd and deſtroy'd.
Ts For Lefture, another ſtrong place, was alſo revoltcd , by which means the Gencry of
Gaſcony had no place to retire unto for ſafety but were enforc'd to fly to me ; fo that
they concluded among chemlelves, thar in caſe I ſhould reſolve ro go away to the ®:ns.,
as his Majeſty had commanded, and offer to leave them without a Head, t%:r tney
muſt be tain to derain me in the natureof a Priſoner, and not ſuffer me to depart. In
the Evening Iafſembled all theſe Grntlemen together , where I remonſtrared to them,
chat ir would be neceſſary I ſhould ſend away in all diligence to the King, ro acquaint
his Majeſty with the revolt of all Gzienne, Tholouze, and Benrdeanx excepred , which
alſoif they were not ſuddenly reliev'd, would be in great danger to be loſt, as well as the
reſt. Which they all approving, I immediately diſpatch'd away Captain Cofſeil, to give
the King 2nd Queen an account of all charhad paſt 3 which I had no ſooner done, but
that Monkeur ds Meaſles (who dyed lately at Limoges, and at that time carried the Ma-
reſcal de Termes his Cornet) told me before all the Company, that T had done very well
to take chis reſolution, for otherwiſe they had determin'd amongſt themſelyes to detain
me by force, Inthe morning we paſt the River at two or three Ferries, with danger enongh,
for Leyrac was revolted, as alſo was the whole Country of Bazadois, la Revlle excepted,
and all as far as the very Gates of Tholouze, excepting Avillar and Condom, where Cap-
tain Arne lay with the King of Navarres Company, which alſo before hiscoming thither
had twice revolted 3 but the Lieutenaut General d# Franc, whom I have ſpoke of before,
had raken Arms to defend the Kings Authority, and got the npperhand, nevereheleſs in
the end he would not have been able to have kept ir, without the ſaid Company that 1
ſencintoic. I quarter d my own Company at la Sauvetat de Gawre, and Monſieur
de Terride had his round about his houſe, in his own Territories , for Beaumont was
alſo revolted. Monſieur de Gondrin and I confert*d together at my houſe at Sampoy en
Gamre, to which place I had affign d him tocome, where we concluded to reconcile all
the Catholick Gentlemen, that we might be united together, and being che Seigneurs
de Fermarcin and de Terride, though both of one Family, had an averſion for one an-
oth*t, we agreed to make them friends; to which end we affig'ad them to come ro Fax-
The Union of ,?,,,; where there wasa great company of Gentlemen, and where at laſt we made chem pet-
ene Carholicks £.2 550d friends. Captain Charyy departed in all haſte co go put himſelf into Paymiro!,

becauſe

—
—_—_——

BooxV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

becauſe I had intelligence, that the Enemy had quicted it, and taken away the Artillery
chat. was there ro carry co Agen, The ſaid Captain Charry went to paſs the River at la
eMugiſtere, and by break of day was in the City, for the good people immediately open'd
him che Gates, and there was but ten Souldiers in the Caſtle, who preſently yielded, and
every one of the other Captains went forthwith about cheir buſineſs to raiſe their Com-
panies, when ſo ſoon as we had din d, there arriv*d a Horſeman who was come poſt from
Cahors (having rid all night, and hir d a freſh horſe at /a Hagiſftere, where he was told
that ] was at Faudonuas) bringing me a Letter from Monſieur de la Rocque des Ars near
unto Cabers, a Kinſman of mine 5 which Letter is to be found enroll*d in the Regiſter
of the Parliament of Thelouzr, and whereof theſe are the Contents,

SI 5

O day abont noon at this place, and by great journeys, ts arriv'd a Gentleman frons
Fra, who having enquir'd at the Inn, if there was any one that knew you, the Hoſt
fold him that I was in the Town, and was related to you whereupon he ſent the ſaid Hoſt im«
mediately for me, and ſo ſoon as I came to the houſe, be bad the Hoſt goin, I then offer'd to
exubrace him, but he made me a ſign not to touch him z, when he and I being left alone, he told
me that he was of the County of Foix, and belonging to the King of Navarre, and that at
Orleans a Phyſician had dyed in bed by him of the Plague, with which he was yet infefed, bid-
ing me immediztely go fetch pen, Ink and paper ; which 1 having accordingly done, he made me
in the ſtreet to write this encloſed Letter, entreating me to ſend it poſt away to you,

The ſatd encloſed Letter was thus,

Ray from Court, I paſt by Orleans, where I left the Prince of Conde, who #5

gathering great Forces together, and has already rais'd a great number of men. There

is a * Capitonl of Tholouze , who # coming by long journeys after me, and 1 think thi * Capitouls of
night will paſs by this place ; who has engag d to the ſaid Prince by the eighteenth of this pgs Free
month (which was May) to pat the City of Tholouze into his hands. The ſaid Capitou! ky 2G
diſcover d himſelf to me, of which I thinght fit to give you ſpeedy notice, that if poſſible, OY -
you may prevent his deſign, For the Kiakins that Monſieur dela Rocque will write you fiſt is to be «

 wordof,, 1 world not ſubſcribe this Letter, but have cans'd it to be fign'd by bim. Gentleman of
that Province,
the reſt Laws

; yers, or rich
Theſe were the contents of che two Letcers, which having read, Icook aſide the fore- Merchancs.

mentioned Gentleman , tro whom having communicated the ſaid Letrers, I immediately The $icur de
ſent them by an expreſs Meſſenger poſt to the firſt Prefidear danſencal, and wric upon Montluc re-
che inſtanr three Giſparches to the three Captains Bazordan, the Baron de Clermont, and ceives incelli=
Arne, wherein I ſent chem word to labour day and night to get the foor Companies I had 8*2<* v we
given them Commiſſions for to gather z and approach as near as they could ro Tholouze, 40.958 :
Monhieur de Terride recurn'd in all diligence ro make ready his Gens d'armes, and the w
Sieurs de Gondrin, and de Fimarcon retarn'd in all haſte to gather together the Gentlemen

of the Country. Now the Meſſenger could not get to Tholonze till it was three hours with-

in night, ſo that the Preſident was gone to bed, by which means he could not deliver his

Letters till the nexc morning, which was the rwelfch of May. And there the Preſident The error of
commutred an Error , foraſmuch as in the morning he aſſembled all the Chambers, and the Preſideng
chere in the preſence of them all cauſ'd the Letters to be publickly read : and I commitred Tholoure,
another, having been ſo wiſe, as not to give him caution to communicate them bur to few :

which was the cauſe thar thoſe of cheir Society who were of the new Religion, and alſo of

the plot, at their return from the Palace, gave notice to all che reſt of the Conſpirators,

char they muſt make haſte ro ſeize the Town: houſe, and the Arcillery, and not to deferre

ircill the eighteenth day of che ſaid Month : For I had alſo wricin my Letter, that I was

ſending away in all diligence to Caprain Bazordan, and the Baron de Clermont, that in

raiſing their Companies, they ſhould approach concinually nearer and nearer towards the

ſaid City of Tholowzr, which eight days before was encer?d into great luſpicion, choſe of

the Town ſceing every day ſtrangers that no body knew, enter into the City ; and the

ſaid Letcers unluckily came juſt in the nick of this jealoufie. I had (nor as yer knowing

any thing of all this) fent away my own Company to Montjoye, near unto /a Plemr, and
1 che

234

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox'V:

the very next day, which was che eighteenth, being recurn'd ro Sampoy, -I receiv d two
Letters together, one from Monheur de Terride, with two others of Advertiſements en-
clos d, in one of which was, Sir, Four Enfigns of fost are arriv'd at Montauban, who come
fromwards the Sevennes, and entred about break of day, having march d all night; and in
the other was, That a black Enſign had paſt over the Bridge de Buzar, 6n the other ſide of
Tholonze, wearing a white Scarf, and held the way towards Montauban. Monſicur de
Terride {ending me word, that I might rake both theſe Advertiſements for certain. Ar the
ſameinſtanc I received another Letter from che Vicar of Amxch, and the Conſals of the ſaid
City, wherein they entreated me to come in all diligence ro Auch, or that otherwiſe the
wou'd cut one another to pieces. TI wric in the open ſtreet for haſte four lines ro Monſieur
de Terride, entreating him to make his Company ready, and toget together the moſt men
he poſſibly could, which having done, I mounted to horſe, having Monfieur de Fontenilles
with me, and went in all haſte direaly co Anch, though I was neither the Kings Lieu-
tenant, nor had any power to command, bur all I did was our of the particular afteRion,
and good will I bore ro his Majcſtics ſervice, being afſur*d that doing well, all wou!l4 be
well interpreted by thoſe of the Kings party, and as for the reſt I did not much care, having
evermore rather have them for enemies than friends.

Coming to Sezan a league from Sampoy, there came a man to me from T holonz?, ſent
by Monficur le Preſident Manſencalto tell me, that he had received my Letters, cntreac-

Tholoige ſeiz'd 1ng me to come and fnuccour the ſaid City, for the Hugonots had poſlcſt themiclves of the

norte,

The Sieur de

Montluc's di=

ligence to re-

lieve Tholoyx24

Commendarti
on of Czprai
Chart).

by the Hugo- Magazine, and the Artillerie that was init. I alighted at the Towns end under an Elm,

and there writ back to the Preſident, that he ſhould with all ſpeed give noti-e ro the fore=
mentiozed Caprains, that they might put themſelves.into Tholouze, and that would go
ſend away the Mareſchal de Termes his Company which was at Peſſan near unto Anch,
that they might be at Tholouze by break of day in che morning, bidding them take cou-
rage, for I would ſoon be with them, and dcliver'd ar the ſame time four or five Blancks
to my Secretary fign'd with my own hand, to ſend letters to Monſieur de Gondrin, and
others to bid them march away immediately ro Tholouze, which being done, and having
ſent to my own Company to return in all diligence to 1a Sauvetaty I gallopr away full
ſpeed ro Anch, where being arriv'd faſting at one of the clock in the afternoon, I diſpatcher
rwo Letters as I ſat at dinner, one to Monſieur de Bellegarde, it being no morethan two
leagues from thence to his houſe, and the other to Captain Maſles, who was within half a
league, ſending to Monſieur de Bellegarde immediately to rake poſt, and go pur himſelf in-
iO Tholouze, to command the Soldiery there, cauſing his great horſes and arms day and
night to follow after. Monſieur de Maſſes, ſo ſoon as he had ſpoke with me immediately
departed, and never ſtopr nor ſtaid till ke was in Tholoaze the next morning by break of
day, and Monſieur de Bellegarde got thither two hours after midnight. The Baron de
Clermont entred the ſame morning, and at the ſame inſtant that the Soldiers entred, they
fell ro fighting, which was from the place St. George even to the two Gates of the Ciry thar
lookt towards Montawban, which two Gates were poſſeſt by the Enemy. Captain 4rne

entred about two of the clock in the afternoon, as alſo did Captain Bazordan at the ſame

time, and fo ſoon as Thad pacified chem at Ach, I unberhoughe my (elf of che Lerters
Monſieur de Terride had ſent me, and concluded that thoſe Enfigns which were come to
Mantauban , were come thither for no other end, bur only to to relieve their people who
were engaged at Tholouze, Whereupon I immediately diſpatch'c away a Soldier upon a
good Horſe, commanding him to ride direRly ro Lawdecoſte, and thar he ſhould paſs the
River at la Peres, by whom I writ a Letter ro Captain Charry, that immediately upon
the receipt thereof he ſhould march day and night direQtly to 7 holowze, and ſhould make
a halc at Fronton, In like manner I diſpatcht away another to Monkieur de Terride to pals
over his Company at Borret, ſending him word alſo to halt ar Fronton, and keep continu-
ally on horſeback day and night, and whilſt he waited for Captain Charry, to take care
that ſuch as ſhould come from Montanban might not recover Tholowze, An hovr atter I
had made theſe rwo diſpatches, it came into my head, thar in caſe the Soldier could not
paſs the River ar la Perez or that he ſhould chance to be taken, Captain Charry could nor
be advertjz'd what to dos and the City by that means might be in danger to be loſt, which
made me immediately diſpatch away another, whom I order'd to go by the way of 1s
Magiſtere, and it was the next day ar noon before he could ger to him, for the firſt had
been purſu'd for above three leagues together, Captain Charry upon che Meſſengers ar-
rival mmediately marcht away, caufing bread and wine to be carried along with him, as

; Thad writ to him to do, and as he had learnt under me, thar the Soldiers might nor en-

 terintoany houſe by the way. He underſtood as well as any man in France, how ſuch di-

ligences were to be perform'd , and two hours after midnight wich ewo or three hundred
,
men,

Boox Vo de Montluc, Mareſcbal of France.

—_—_— —_—
_ "'.

men, arriv'd at Fronton, where he mer with Monſieur de Terrides Company, and ſo, that

before they knew one another, they were like to have gone together by the ears. Now

as Captain Charry was got within a league of Fronten, two or three Hugonot horſe belong-

ing to the Vicount de Bearniquel fell accidentally and undiſcover'd amongſt them in the

night, when underſtanding them to be our people, they took their way ſtraight.to Mon-

tauban, and met the five Enfigns already advanc't the midway betwixt 4fontauban and

Fronton, and not being able to number our men by reaſon of the obſcurity of the night,

cold chem, thar ours were three times as many as they were, and that ir was Captain Chay-

ry whocommanded them ; which wasthe reaſon that they recurn?d back again to Montag-

ban ; and I marcht away with my Company. Monkiner de Gondrin came to me to Faudonas,

and the nexe morning we advanc'd within two leagues of Thalonze,to a village called Danx,

where we ſtayd for che Gentlemen who were coming poſt after us, and where the Sienr

de Terride came not up to us till night, by reaſon he could no ſooner ger to us: with his
Company. TI ſent word to the firſt Prefident and Monſieur de Beliegarde of our arrival,

and that in the morning by Sun-riſe we would be wich chem, bur that in the mean time

they ſhould be ſure to keep the Gare Se. Sabran free, and ler them take care for nothing

elſe, bur only that I might ger in. The haſte wherein I was, made me forget to write

chem word, char I had ſent ro Frenton upon the road from Montauban to fight any relief

char might come from char ſidez and they having heard as well as we of the arrival of the

five Enfigns that were at Aontauban, fearing they would that nighc enter by the two

Gates the Enemy were poſſefled of, were once in mind to enter into compoſition, and were
advanced (o far towards it, that in order thereunto Rapin was deputed for the Enemy,

and Monſieur de Maſſes for the City 3 during the Treaty the skirmiſhes ceaſed for three

or four hours, and in the incerim of cheſe tranſations came the Letters char I had ſent to

che Preſident, and Monſieur de Belleg arde from Auch. But by fortune the Preſident ſent

his Letter co Monſieur ds aſſes, co the end that he might ſhew ir them, to encline

them the more to an accommodation, fo char unknown ro Monſieur de Bellegarde, the ſaid

Sieur de aſſes, who was already parted from Rapin, having ſeen my letter, turn'd back

rohim co ſhew him whatT had writ, who upon the reading of ir grew ſodainly very me-
lancholy, ſaying to Captain aſſes that they gavethem(elyes tor loſt ſeeing I was fo ticar

(for they had heard char their ſaccours were return'd back to CMontan'an, though

our people knew nothing of it.) In the end they concluded to talk farther of ir rhe

next morning, bart he never intended 1t, for at the ſame inſtant he went to prepare his

party, without giving any notice to thoſe of the Town, in all haſte to be gone, fo that in

the cloſe of the Evening they began to quit the Barricadoes they had made ar the corners

of the ſtreets, and ro fleal away, which our Captains perceiving began to charge them from

Kreer to ſkreer, bur rhey were hindred by rhe night from ſeeing their iſſue our of the Gates,

ſo. that in rout and confuſion they recover'd the Vines, and got away ; bur loſt five of their

Enſigns. Now we had concluded to fight after this manner, to wit, thac Meſſjeurs de

Terride, and de Gondrin ſhould march on wichourt ſtaying in the Town, taking my Com- Rout of the
pany and the Gentlemen Volunteers along with them , and plant themſelves before the Hvgono.
Gates the Enemy were poſleſled of withour the City, and that I ſhould alighr, and with
Monfieur de Termes his Company, whom I wonld alſo cauſe to alighr, our own foot and

thoſe of the Town to fighc on foor, reiolving to enter and fight by day. In the mornins |
as we began to march an hour before day, there came tousa Capitoul of T. holouſe, called The order ge-
Maiſtre Dowrdes, who brought me a letrer from the Prefident, and Monſiear de Bellegarde, - 24 TOE OR
wherein they ſent me word of the departure and flight of the Enemy ; for which I was i
very ſorry, for had they ſtaid my coming, not a Raſcal of chem all ſhould have eſcapt :

3nd God knows whether I had not a mind to have made clean work, and if I would have

{pared ever a mothers ſon. Thoſe who were come from Fojx return®d towards their ſaid

Country of Fol in route and diſorder, for the very Peaſants killd a great many of them,

and the reſt fled every one to the place from whence they came, Thus was the City reliev'd,

where che fight conrinned for three days and three nights cogether, during which above

fifry houſes were burnt one afcer another, and many pcople on both fides ſlain ; and a-

mongſt orhers two Brothers of Monſieur de Sa#ignac de Comenge. Art our arrival we went

and alighted betore the Palace all arm'd as we were, my Enfign and Guidon diſplayd;

and indeed for a hundred and fifry or rwo hundred Gentlemen there might be of us rope-

ther with my Company, it was a handſome appearance, and a very fine fight. We found

all che Court aſſembled, and any one may judge, whether or no we were welcome, I there The Sieur dy
in a ſhort ſpeech told them, ** Thar alchough I was nor che Kings Lieutenanc, nevercheleſs 4197tluc's =
** che ſervice I had ofold devored to their City, and particularly ro that honourable AA {ycech to the

ca

; . on? Has -N” Parliarfient

* bly, was the cagle that atier the nas had received of the danger chey were Tholoure, x
12 Gin.

; 7

4

WG

" The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize | Boox V+

The execution
at Tholouxze.

The deſign of
che Hugonots
concerning
TholouRe.

*in, I had gathered together all the friends I could for the conſervation of their City,
& the ſecond of France, and had my (elf immediately come away in p:rſon to their reſcue;
&« but Gentlemen, ſaid I, in the long time that I have born arms, I have learnt tharin
« aftairsof this nature, *ris better ro keep withour, and ſend in continual {uccours, know-
© ing thar-ſuch a rabble were not likely ſo ſoon to force your City, who had they ſtaid my
* coming, ſhould have been as well handled, as ever raſcals were. Ir now remains, thar
&© fince God has been pleaſed to deliver you, you do your parts, and make your Cantons
«(tink with the Carcafles of theſe accurſed Traytors to God, their King, and their Coun-
try. So ſoon as I had done ſpeaking, the Preſident Manſencal made me a very honora-
ble Remonſtrance, concluding with great thanks both to me, and to all che Gentlemen,
The Capitouls then accommodated us with very handſome Lodgings, and ar the very
ſame inſtant began to fall in hand with thoſe of the Murineers who remain*d in the Town,
and who had been taken at their going out, and the next day proceeded to execution, where
I ſaw more heads fly than ever in one day before. T in the mean time was elſewhere ſufh-
ciently employd, for it fail'd bur 1i:tle, chat the Ciry was not ſackt by our own people,
foraſmuclr as ſo ſoon as ever che neighbonring Inhabicants heard that the City was reliev'd,
they all came ranning both Peaſants and others to the {poil ; neither would rhey be ſatts-
fied with plundering the houſes of the Hugonots only, but began to fall on upon thoſe of
the Catholicks alſo, inſomuch that the very houſe of Prefident Palo himſelf had like to
have been ſackr, through a rumour that within it there was a Scudent a Kinſman of his
who was a Hugonot, though nevertheleſs there was no ſuch perſon found ;z ſo that I was
forc'tto run thither, and to remedy the diſorder to cauſe Monficur de Termes his Company,
and my own to mount to horſe, the half of which continually from fix hours co ſixhours
marcht arm*d, and mounted by fix and fix together up and down the ſtreers of the City.

The third day I had word brought me, that Monſieur de St, Panl of the County of
Foix was upon arrival , being come from the ſaid Foix with three or fonr thouſand
men, and Monficar de Lamezan of Comenge with ſeven or eight hundred more, who
had they centred , it had been impoſſible both for me and all the reſt of us who were
within to have ſaved che City from being ſackt ; to prevent which I ſent in all haſte co the
Capirouls to (huc cheir Gates, and all night long we kept continually on horſe-back 1n the
ſtreets, and had the foor Companies upon Guard ar the Gates, togerher with the whole
Ciry in arms, afcer the ſame manner as before, when they had been in continual fight.
All rhis while Captain Charry and Monſieur de Terrides Company never ſtirred from the
two Villages berwaxt Fronton and Tholowze, Monſieur de St. Paul quarter'd himſclt and
his people 1n the Suburbs, and Monſieur de Lamezan alſo, very much diſpleaſed rharchey
might nor be permitted to enter the City, threatning that anorher time chey would not
come to relieve them , though their relief now did more harm then good, conſidering
that they came nor when they onght to have come. The next day I ſent our Monheur
de Bellegarde to tell them, that they did bur loſe time in ſtaying there, for they ſhould
not enter, whereupon Monſieur de St. Payl return'd with his people, and Monkeur de
Lamezan ſent away his, entring himſelf and his ſervants only. Afrer this the Capitouls
and I concluded together to drive our all thoſe who were come in from the neighbouring
places, and accordingly wich the Trumpets of the City, and our Drums, Proclamation
was made for all ſtrangers to depart, ſo that in the end we were abſolure Maſters of the
Ciry. Nevertheleſs ic was not poſſible ſo to govern our own people , bur char chere was
ſtill ſome diforder, which made me ſend all the horſe and foot our of the City, ſurren-
dring the whole power into the handsof the Magiſtrates. I gave a Company to Captain
Maſſes the younger to remain in the Town, and to Monfieur de Grepz+ Son to Prefi-
dent CHanſencal another, who already had it almoſt full, and fo I cleans'd the City, lea-
ving no body in it but the Inhabitants, and two Companies of foot.

Captains my Companions, conſider I beſeech you how narrowly this great and opulent
City, the ſecond in France, eſcap*d being rain'd and deſtroy*d for ever. There lives a
Gentleman at the Gates of ontanban, called Monſieur de ls Serre, whoſe houſe was
burnt by che Hugonots, who told me that he had been preſent at a Synod, where it was
determin'd, that could they bring about their Encerprize upon Tholouze, they would ro-
tally raze ittothe ground, and take ſuch of the ruins as were of any uſe ro CMontanban
co enlarge their own City greater than it was , intending to comprehend their Suburbs
within the Walls, and to draw a River thorough it thac turn'd a Mill belonging co the
ſaid Sieur de 1a Serre, that there might be no more memory. of Theloxze for ever. Beſides
the teſtimony of this Gentleman, a hundred others have confirm'd the ſame, which muſt
be the diſcourſe of their lictle Miniſters only, for the great ones who had the Government
of affairs, would have been beter advis'd than ro have dcſtroyed ſuch 'a City, which

would

Boox Vo de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 237 =

CI

would have been fo great a loſs both ro che King and the whole Kingdom, You may
then rake notice of che grear and extraordinary diligence IT uſed, beginning from the ad-
yertiſement I had of che Capirouls promiſe to the Prince of Conde to pur the City into his
hands, and next che haſte I made the Caprains co makein compleacing their Companies,
which were not half tull, co pur themſelves inco the City : then che diligence of Mon- |
fieur de Bell:-garde, and Caprain Maſſes with his Company 2 and on the other fide the.
diligence wherewith I caus'd notice to be given to Captain (harry, and my foreſight in
ſending another Mcſſenger afcer the former, to bid Monſieur de Terrides Company croſs
che River at Borret, beſides my diligence wherewich I advertiz'd Monſieur de Gondrin
and others, all which was done in chree dayes and three nights, Wherefore if you will
cake notice of chis exemple, and recein it, it will ſerve you to ſo good uſe, that you will
never loſe an hours time ; and alchough I have writ in the beginning of my Book (and
as ſome may think wich vanity enough) that my diligences and ready foreſights have
procur*d me the reputation God has given me in point of a Soldier, as great as other men z
yet it isevidently true in this as well as upon other occaſions : for had I fail'd buta mi-
gute the City had been abſolutely loſt. You ought not then diſdain to learn of me, who
am at this day the oldeſt Cap.ain in France, and whom God has bleſt with as many ſuc-
ceſſes as any man whatever of my time 3 but you ought ro avoid learning of thoſe who
have been continually vdeaten, and have eternally run away where ever they have
been engag*d 3 for if you go to ſchool to ſuch Maſters you will hardly ever come to
be any grear DoRors in Arms, If T had ſtood long conſidering, and conſum'd the
time 1n conſultations, to be ſatisfied whether before I intermeddled wich theſe affairs, I
ſhould not firſt ſend ro Monſieur de Burie, who was the Kings Lieutenant, I leave your
ro judge whether or no the Hugonors had not had ſufficient leiſure wherein to do their
work. Burt whenever they heard of me, they preſently fancied che Hangman ar their
Breech ; as alſo chey ordinarily call'd me the Tyrant, When ever you (hall be in place
to do a notable piece of ſervice, never ſtay for a command if the occaſion be preſſing ; for
in the mean time you loſe your opportunity, therefore fall back fall edge try your for-
rune, it willafcerwards be well interpreted, I know there are ſome who think ir ſtrange
that the City of Tholonze had ſo great a reſpe&t and kindneſs for me ; but ſhould they
have other, they would degenerate from all good nature ; for they will confeſs chac IL
ſav'd the City rogecher with their lives and eſtates, and the honor of their wives, which
without my reſolace and ſpeedy ſucconr had all been loſt, Upon which account I hope
chey will never be ungrateful co me, for the good office I did chem upon this occaſion :
and if any one will ſay, that wharc I did was all for the ſervice of the King, I (hall anſwer
to that, that ar thattime I had no Employment from his Majeſty, excepting the command
of my own Company of Gens darmes; for Monſieur de Burie was the Kings Lieutenant
in Gaienne, andthe Conſtable in Languedoc. Yet ſhall Lnor deny, bur that I was prompt-
edro it onr.of an honeſt defire I have ever had ro do my King ſervice, and char nor only
our of reſpe& co the obligation Thave to my Countreys preſervation, bur alſo our of a na-
rural affe&ion I have ever had for his Majeſties ſervice z and moreover, out of the love and
friend(hip I have ever born, and do ſtill bear to this famous City. Forche diſpair I was
in to ſceit in danger to be ruin'd, made me take the pains I did: Ir is not then to be
wondred at, if this City have an animoſity againſt chole of this new Religion, for there Tholouxe no.
1s not a City in France, who has run fo great a hazard as this Ciry has done, nor that hag friend co che
ever manifeſted it {elf more affeRionate to the King and his ſervice, or ſtood ſharper brunts Hvgo00::
to maintain chemſelves in his Majeſties obedience. Rowen ſuffer'd it (elf to be taken wich-
our ſtriking a blow, Lyons, Boarges and Poitiers did the ſame. Paris was never reduc'd
co that extremity, being alſo another kind of thing than che reſt, Bourdeayx made no
defence ar all, chat being no other than a ſurprize they would make upon Chaſtean Trom-
pette, which they alſo made chemſelves ſure of, foraſmuch as Monſieur de Duras was at
che ſamertime ar the Gates of Bogrdeayx, We may all therefore contefs with cruth, that
no City whatever has fought ſo well, and run ſo great ahazard asthis; having bravely re-
puls'd the Hugonots after they had ſeiz'd of the Magazine, and were pofleſt of che gares, by
which they might introduce ſuccours from Afontawuban. |

I was then advis'd to go before Montarban, bur it was more to draw the Souldjers from Enterprize of
abour Tholoxz2, and out of the Ciry, and tolive upon the Enemies Country, than ouc Moutauben,
of any hopes I had to takeit; for I knew very well there were a grear many men within ir,
char were there aflembled for the encerprize of Tholoaze. I then march'd hither, having
no more than fix Enſigns of Foot, which were thoſe of Monſieur de Sainftorens, de Bazor-
' dan, the Baron of Clermont, Arne and Charry; to which thoſe of Tholouze gave me rwo
pieces of Cangng and one Culverine, beſtowwng moreover a civility upon the Sonldiers;

they

bs
Fe
2
&
2
-
4
L
£
'
L «
Ss
J
|
j
L
J
|
7
%
5

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book V!'

rhey gave them one pay, So ſoon as I was come before Montaub.n, I tound that there was in
the Town two and twenty hundred Souldiers ſtrangers, and a thouſand or twelve hun.
dred Townſmen, all very well arm*d. I might have about eight or nine hundred in all,
the moſt of which had never been in arms before for all the good old Souldiers were gone
over to the Hugonots, after the unfortunate peace, and that upon meer neceſſity, for they
had no Trades, the Wars having continued long, and they having been all chat while em-
ploy'd in /taly, and other of theKings conqueſts, The gocly Miniſters promis'd them
not otily riches, but as I have been told, even Paradice it ſelf, as if they had kept the
Keys ; and another inconvenience this peace brought after ic was, that we had lain long
idle, without having any employment wherein to make good Souldiers. So thar when I
came before Montauban, I was conſtrain?d to quarter all my Foor together in the Bourg ge
P Eveſche, for to have ſeparated them had been madnel[s, the Enemy making lo grear ſal.
lies upon me, that they continually beat up my Foot to my body of Gens d' armes, without
which they had been ſtronger than I, and would have cut me to pieces : for for one thar
T had they came out ten, ſo chat the ſecond day I was conſtrained to leave the Eveſche, tg
go relieve Monſieur de Terride, whom I had lefrin the Suburbs on that fide the Town to-
wards Moiſſac, to whom Thad given Monficur de Bazordans Company, where I fonnd
thac the Enemy had beaten him out of the Bourg to a Brick-kill hard by, which made me
ſpeak to the Souldicrs to run full drive to recover the Bourg, and to charge them bravely,
ſo that being come running in ſo great haſte, and going on immediarely to the charge, I had
no body with me but Captain Cabarret, who is yet living, Monſieur de Clermont, who is
of the Houſe of Faudonas, Monficur de Beancaire, who is fince dead, and three or four
of Monficur de Terrides men only, with which we gevethem ſo brisk a charge, thar we
beat them back, laying on in their rear, to the very wicket of the Gate of the Ciry, moſt
of them not being able to per in, bur were forc*d ro take on the left hand direQly co the
Bridege, and the others on the right, ſo that had the great Gare been open, we might have
encer'd the Town ; for Monfieur de Beaxcaire's Horſe was kill'd before rhe Gate, hard by
the wicker, and mine was ſhot cloſe by him, and fo weretir'd, for all the wall was ſer
thick with Harquebuzcers, and two horſes were ſhot in our coming off, of thoſe of Mon.
ficur de Terride's Company, who had follow?d after us. Thethird day Irook a reſolution
co retire, for the Gens d' arms were no longer able to guard the Foot z and on the other fide,
though I had made a Bactery, Ihad not dat'd to giverheaſlaultto ſo many as they were
within, with ſo few as I had withour. Wherefore I ſent back the Artillery to Tholouze,
and the Captains to the places ro which they defir'd to go to make an end of filling up their
Companies compleat. Monſieur de Terride went to Beaumont de L:imaigne, and the
places adjacenteo his houſe, for the Enemy had quitted Beaumont ſo ſoon as they perceiv*d
us to approach. Lrepaſt che River at Moiſſac with the Mareſchal de Termes his Company,
my own andthatof Monſicur de Sainftorens of Harquebuzeers both on horſeback, and on
Foot, which I always kepr about me for my Guard. I ſent Captain Charry to Puymirol,
ro compleat his two Companies, and ro make War upon thoſe who kept Agen; and fo
ſoon as I had paſt the River onthe fide of Gaſcony, I ſent back che Mareſchal de Termes his
Company towards Ach, to keep that Quarter in aw, and Monſieur de Gendrin into Armag-
ner, with the Gentry he had brought along with him, to ſee that nothing revolted there.
Nov I had left Captain Arne at Condom, to hold that Countrey in ſubjeftion, who
might have about fourſcore Launces in his Company, and I had intelligence that Mefſieurs
de Diras and de Caumnnt held a conſultation at Agen, and chart Monhear de C-um0nt would
come at night to licat a Paſſage : Which having heard, I ſent a man to Captain Arne
that he (houid not fail ewo hours after midnight to be at Aſffort, and char he ſhould nor
enter the Town, bur ſtay for me in Barralia till I came, which he accordingly did. And
as I was going away inthe evening, Monſieur de S. Parl, to whoſe houſe IT was retir'd
near unto Donac, asking me whecher I was going, I cold him 1n his ear, thar I was going
co carry aclean ſhirt ro Monſicur de Canmont at Ia Paſſage 3 whereupon he told and aſſur*d
me, that he was gone the day before, after they had concluded of cheir affairs, and given
Commiſhons ro Caprains to raiſe more Men ; which was thereaſon thacl Raid togive our
horſes, and Monſieur de Sainforens his Company a little repoſe. Bur as this encerprize
taild, anorher preſented it {cIf ; for the ſame morning that I would have given a Camiſado
to Monſieur de Caumnnt, Six hundred men were corae our of Nerac, to go give another
Camiſado ro Caprain 2folis, who had pur himlelf inco Franciſcas with threeſcore or
fourſcore men, and the people of the Town, and thoſe of Ner-c, had taken four. hundred
Corflets our of the King of Navarres Magazine, and at break of day gave three affaulcs,
one immediately after another, but were always repulſt, By m1sortune I ſtaid there vill
night, for had 1 gone away in the evening) as I had donc bur for whar Monſieur de

S. Pas!

Book V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. : 229

S. Pexl told me concerning Monheur de ( anmont, Thad come time enough to have fought
the fix hundred men of Nerac. And there my diligence once fail'd me,

By break of day Caprain Arne and I met, and march'd together ſtreight to Afoyracs,
becauſe he told me he had intelligence thar this very morning thoſe of Nerac would
come out, and had taken all the arms in the Caſtle, but he knew not whither they
were © go ; ſo that yet we had mer them, had ir not been that Monſieur de Sainftorens
would needs ſtay co skirmiſh thoſe of Layrac, who were come out a great way towards
che Vines, ſo that jt coſt me an hours time before T could get him away, becauſe he had a
mind to havecharg'd them up to the very gates of the Ciry, could he have cempted them
out of the Vinesz and when we came to Mojracs, we heard that the enemy was before
Franciſcas, which made us put on to a good round trot, to haſten thither, ſending fix lighr
horſe before to diſcover where they were, who ſent me word that above an hour before,
chey were retreared to Nerac, by reaſon they had had notice of Captain Arnes departure by
night from Condom; for they had heard nothing of me, I ſent to the Avant-Courcurs
{ll ro go on, and that I would follow after; which they did, and ar laſt diſcover'd them
half a quarter of a League from Nerac, we ſtill ata long trot following after, but in vain,
tor they got ſafe into the Town. I had a great mind to have been fingering thoſe arms, to
arm our new rais d and naked men. x

This was the nauphty beginning of our War in Gajenne, wherein the Hugonots too

us at unawares, and unprovided ; fo thatit is a miraculous thing how this Country could
fave it ſelf, conſidering the ſecret intelligences the Rebels had in all the Cities of the Pros
vince : but they ſhew*d themſelves Novices, and indeed they were guided by their Mini-
(ters only : if before they had made ſo many Surprizes, they had atrempted Bonrdeaux and
Tholonze, they had not fail'd of carrying the one or che other, and poſſibly both ; bucwe
were already upon our Guards, and God preſerv*d thoſe rwo Forts, the Bulwarks of
Gmienne, to ſave all the reſt, I very much broke their deſigns, by ſending people every
where, and never reſting long in a place, for by ſo doing, a Kings Lieutenant ſhall hold
all the world inſuſpence, becanſe they cannot gueſs at his deſign, every one imagining that
he is coming upon him ; whereas ſhould he always lie ſti]l in one Quarter, he cannot pro=
vide againſt all accidents, nor come 1n time, - where there is immediate and preſiing need ;
and alſo your being ſertled in one place; gives a great advantage to your Enemy, who by
that means has his arms at liberty to do what he will ; but T was not only my ſelf in con-
tinual motion, bur alſo with Letters and Meſſages was perpetually ſoliciting and cmploy-
ing all the Friends we had, Believe' me, you who have the honor to be Governors of
Provinces, it 'is a very good thing, and of great utilicy to your Prince, to keep a corre-
ſpondence by Letters with thoſe you know have never ſo little intereſt in the Country, and
lam certain, that had I not done {oy the greateſt pare would have fided with theſe new
people, who have made all this fine work in the Kingdom.

Soon afcer Caprain Coſſeil return'd with Letters from the King and Queen, wherein
they commanded me to {tay in Gw#ienne, there to do them the beſt ſervice could, for the
conſervation of the Country, recommending to me the care of their affairs, in more ho-
norable expreſſions than I could any way deſerve : By which I diſcern'd their Majeſties were
in great anxiety, eſpecially che Queen, who writ me a very pitiful Lerter, The great ones
ſometimes, when it pleaſes God, have need of the ſmall, chey muſt now and then be pur
in mind, that they are men and women as the reſt of the world are ; for it all ſhould go -
as they would have it, they would not ſo much regard thoſe that do them ſervice, as
when they ſee themſelves diſtreſt, bur conſume the time in Plays, Maſquerades and Tri-
umphs, which are the cauſe of their ruine: asit hapned ro my good Maſter, who running
art Tilt for his pleaſure, was untorrunately lain, which he could not have been 1n war,
he would have been too well guarded for thats Tis an old ſaying, that men [cratch al-
ways where they itch, and I alſo am ſenſeable when I rub upon the old ſore, which is the
lols of my good King, whom I lament, and ſhall do the longeſt day I have to live.

Nor lenz after Monſieur de Daras took his way all along by the River Garonne, and ren- The Sieur de
dezvouz'd his Army at Clairac, Toneins and CMarmanda, which conſiſted of thirteen En- Puras for the
figns of Footy and ſeven Corners of Horſe, and fo ſoon as the Pardaillans, Savignac (Cap- Fvgonots.
tain of the Guard to Monſieur de Burie) Salignac and other Chicts, were ready to execute
their Enterprize upon Chaſtean Trompette ; Monhieur de Daras march'd towards Mont-
ſeger, and the places adjacent ro Cadillac, with a great number of Boats, wherein he had
ſhip'd che beſt of his Soulhers, to preſent cthemſelvesin the beginning of the night before
ChaſteanTrompette, wherethe forenam'd Caprains had thought to have been gor in, and The Enter-
by ic to have given them entrance into the Ciry. Bur cheir enterprize ſucceeded ill; for Chace. |
Monſieur de YVaillac the Fother was circumſpe&t, and would not ler le Puch de Pardaillan Trompette fails,
his

|

—

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Boox Y'

his Brocher in Law re-encer, who pretended ro bein great tear, ſaying that thoſe of the
City had a deſign to take him : and Captain de Ia Sale who belong*d co Monſicur de
V iillac did alſo very good ſervice upon that occafions Now chishapned ar one of the clock

in the night, and all the City was inan alarm. Monheur de Burie was at the Maieric,

All things de»

pend upon the
Gentry.

the Inhabitants becook themſelves ro arms, and fell upon che Hugonots (bur the ſaid Sicur
kept himſelf in the Maicrie with ſome Gentlemen of his Guard, and thoſe: bur very few,
for moſt of them were of the Conſpiracy) whereof ſome eſcap*d over the walls, and un.
der a Palliſado that goes down towards the River. They were above two or three hun-
dred Conſpirators, ſome of which were raken, and as Monheur de Daras his people, why

were inthe Boats, were under Cadillac, they met with the Count de Candalle, Son to Mon.

fien; de Candalle, as he wascoming from Bordeaux to the faid Cadillac, whom they took
Priſoner, and ſent him to che Queen of Navarre, who was at Duras, but newly come
from Court : and who made him promiſe her to take arms for their Religion , upon
which promiſe ſhe lec him go to his own houſe, where he ſtaid for a few dayes making
ſhew as if he meant to go joyn wich Monficur de Daras ; but it was only to expe when 1
ſhould draw near, that he might come in to me, as he did 3 ſaying, It was a promiſe extoy-
ted from him by force which he was no wayes obliged to keep, being no priſoner of Warre, Ever
fance which time this Count has been a mortal Enemy to the Honſe of Darar,

At this time Monſieur de Buyie diſpatch d away to me Raxze his Secretary, poſt, en-
treating me to come to his relief, or that otherwiſe the City wonld be loft, for hehad no
Forces with him $ and beſides chere was not one grain of corn in the City, inſomuch that
he was reduc'd ina manner to Famine, by reaſon that the Enemy vvere poſleſt of all the
River of Garonne, and that of Dordogne, vvhich are the tvvo Teats that nouriſh the Cit
of Bourdeanx, I immediately ſent back the ſaid Razeto aſſure Monſieur d: Burle, that
I vvould ſoon be vvith him, and in order thereunto preſently diſparch'd ayvay co Captain
Maſſes to come to me vvith che Mareſchal de Termeshis Company, and to Captain 4rpy,
ro ſend me foriy Launces of the Company belonging to che King of Navarre, command-
ing him vvithal not to ſtir from Condozs, but ſtay ro keep the Country in avy, and to take
care the Tovvn did not revolr. I ſent likevviſe co Captain Bazordan, that he ſhould not

ſtir vvich his rvvo Companies from Beanmont de Limaigne, and the places adjacent to Mon-

fieur de Terride, to vvhom TI vvrit alſo co put himſclf into Grenade vvith his Company,
and that I had left Captain Bazordan to be near him. I ſent in like manner to Monſieur
de Gondrin, that he ſhould gather to him his Relations and Neighbours, and ſome Soul-
diers, to put himſelf into Exfe, and that I vyas going to relieve Monſieur de Burje at
Bourdeanx. 1 vvas not the Kings Lieutenant, and yer every one obey'd me as chearfully
as they could have done any man in .the vvorld 3. by vvuhich you may ſee vvhar it is for a
man to get the love of the Gentry as Idid, and vvho does not ſo, ſhall never perform any
thing vvorth ſpeaking of 3 for upon them, almoſt all chings depend, eſpecially conſider-
ing hovy Gaſcony and Armaignac abound in Gentry,

The fift day after Raze's departure, there cameo me Monſieur de (onrre, Nephevy to
Monſieur de Burie, and Lieutenant of his Company, vvho came again co ſolicite my haſte,
by vvhom che ſaid Sieur de Burie ſent me vvord, that if in fix days he vvas not relievd,
the City vvould be loſt. The Sieur de Conrre cold me alſo, thar although he had only
travell'd by night, he had nevertheleſs mer vvich the Enemy almoſt at every ſtep, and char
all che Conntry vvas up in arms againſt us,either voluncarily or by force, I ſent back the ſaid
Sieur de Conrre by les Landes, he having vvich him five and cvventy Launces compleatly
arm'd, recommending him to houſes of Gentlemen of my relations, and the next day al(-
ſembling all my men both Horſe and Foor, I began to ſer forvvards direQly to Bourdeanx.
The firſt days march vvas to Bruch, vvhich belongs co Monficur de Gondrin, and another
Village a quarterof a League from thence, call d Forgarolles appertaining to the 5. 99 of
Navarre, vwhere I lodg*d the Companies of Monſicurde Termes, and that of Monſieur de
Saint Salvy, Brother to Monſieur de Terride, vvhich v vas nevyly rais'd, and ſo ſoon as
ever their Quarters vvere made, there came three Enfigns of Nerac, led by one Capcain
Dewazan, vwhich might be in all bervvixc five and fix hundred men. Lhad not eaten fix
birs, vvhen they came to tell me, that ar a Caſtle hard by, call'd Caſtel-Fieille there
were ſome people who defended the place z whereupon I preſently went thither, com-
manding Captain Bardachin, that with a hundred of his Musketeers, he ſhould go and
ſer fire to the gates, and give an aſfaule, which he did, and wecarried the place, when as
we wereentring, there came an Alarm from Forgarolles, that the Enemy were fighting wich
che Companies of Meſſicurs de Terms, and de Saint Salvy ; whereupon I left the Caſtle,
and ran to Foxggrolles, ſending to Captain Charry, who was quarter'd with his men cloſe
by me, (I never ſuffer'd him cobe very far off, for if it came to ſtriking, he would always

give

Book V: de Monthuc, Mareſchal of Frarice. | 4

——

%

give the firſt blow) chat he ſhould advance with his men to come to the fight. I had
ſome Gentlemen with me, and but a few, forasmuch as they durſt not as yet declare,
ſeeing the Enemy to have the upper hand, and amongſt others the Governor de la Muthe-
Rowge Captain Poy, and fifreen or twenty others. I gave Captain Bardachin order to
make che Soldicrs give over the ſack, and follow after me as faſt as he could, bur he lefc
the charge thereof to his Licatenant, and went along with me, with five or fix horſe more
of hiv |

Now from Caſtel Vieiile to Fougarolles it is no more than a quarter of a League, when
ſo ſoon as I came thicher, I found Monfeur de Termes his Company in Batcalia by the
Bourg, and rhac of Monheur de Saint Salvy alſo cloſe by one another. The Enemy were
at the ocher end of the Bourg, who ſaw us coming, and began to face abour and retire.
Whereupon I bid Captain Maſſes take ten of his Launces, and thar the reſt ſhould quarter
chemlelves with the Company of Monſieur de Saint Salvy, for we had madea long march
on*®c, and would be going an hour before day, by reaſon of the exceſſive heat. Caprain
Charry allo came up to me with five or fixhorfe, and thereſt were coming after as faſt as
they could, for I put-my ſelf in the Rear of the Enemy,

Cloſe by the Village on that fide rowards MNerac there 1s an aſcent, and when we were
at the foor of the Hill, they were in the middle, and upon the rop, and there they fac'd
about : 1 had nogreat mind to fight, becauſe my defign was to relieve Buwrdeanx, and
cherefore was unwilling toengage, fearing ſome diſaſter might happen, and char then I
could nor relieve the City. Nevertheleſs ſeeing them upon the top of the Hill I followed
after, and when I came co the top, ſaw them in che grear High-way berwixt ewo Copſes
marching ſoftly on, and in very good order, this Captain Dorazan, with four or tive horle,
and ten or twelve Harquebuzeers, bringing up the Rear. We might be in all with che ren
Launces ſome five and fifry horſe good and bad : I madethe Harquebuzeers alight, and to
put themſelves in their Rear , whereupon I perceiv'd them to make a little more haſte
than before, which made mecry to the Governor 1a CMothe Rouge, Monſieur de Sainfto-
rens, Captain Charry, and the reſt of che Gentlemen, follow them cloſe, for upon my life
theſe people are afraid, I ſee it by their march, they have a long retreat to make, and 1 will
ſecond you with Captain Maſſes, Captain Bardachin then ſent to his Muſqueteers, thar
chey ſhould run as faſt as ever they could, and we had nor march'd after this manner a-
bove two hundred paces, but thar I ſaw our Avant-Coureurs were fallen in pell-mell a-
moneſt them, and our Harquebuzeers began to make a lictle more haſte, when ſeeing their
horſe paſs thorough the files of the foot, to recover the Van (which was becauſe Dowa-
z.ans horſe was (hor) I rid up tothe head of our men, and ſhew'd chem that the Enemies
horſe gain'd the Front of their own people, either with intention to make them face a-
bour and fight, or elle they ran away for fear 3 But I rathey think , (aid 1, it is for fear,
for their foot alſo begin to mend their pace, let us charge them, but firſt let (aptain Maſles
come ap to us, who might be abour ſome rwo hundred paces behind, to whom I ſent char
he ſhould gallop away : bur as ſoon as ever they ſaw our people coming upon the gallop,
they began to ply their march, and gave over ſhooting, and then cried, let as fall on, Th: Hugono:s
let ws fall on, for they are afraid, which we did, and without reſiſtance charg*d them d:fcarcd,
through and through over the very bellies of chem. Their horſe fled full { pced towards
Nerac, and the foot like cowardly raſcals crept into the Copſes, and fquar in the ditches,
where our Musketceers ſought them in the Woods, and thor at them as they ſhoot at
Birds. Part of thoſe who eſcap'd threw themſelves into the River Baiſe where ſome were
drown*d, the reſt paſt chrough the Woods, and recover'd the Vines. We were ſo few
that we were not enow to kill them all : forin thoſe times there was no talk of Priſoners,
and had the King paid his Companies, I ſhould nor have ſuftered Ranſoms to have been The Ranſoms
in uſein thisquarrel, which have only ferv'd ro maintain the War, Buc neither Gens- of Priſoners
d'arms nor Soldier were paid, and therefore it could not poſſibly be avoided , chough 7avrain the
indeed there were not many. Ic is notin this caſe as jn a forreign War, where men fight WIE
for love and honor ; bucin a Civil War, we muſt either be maſter or man, being welive
as ir were all under a roof ;z and char's che reaſon why we muſt proceed with rigour and
cruelcy, otherwiſe the tempration of gain 15 ſuch, chat men would rather defire the con-
tinuation » than the end of a War. Bur to return co our Runaways, the Alarm ran
quite thorough our Camp, {o that all of chem came powdring in both Horſe and Foot,
bur at their arrival found char all was done; fo chac would we have purſued che Victory
as far as Nerac, they had all run away, and we might with great eaſe have taken the
Town : bur my deſign was only to relieve Bourdeanx. Inthis Engagement rhere die
ofthe Enemy above chree hundred men, whom the Judge of Yiane cauſed to be inter*

xd, as I have fince been cold, withour omprating thoſe that were ſlain in the Vines,
K and

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book V,

The Queen of
Navarie's Let-
ter to the Sijeur
de AMyontlue

Couſulcation
upon the
Queen of Na-
varr's Letter,

L.a Reolle be-
fieg'd by the
Hugonors.

and choſe who were drown'd, who might in all amounc to becwixr four and five hun-.
dred min; and it was fought upon a Friday. This Viftory very much dejeRted the
Brethren, and encouraged the Catholicks, for if you once begin ro drab your Enemy,
you may certainly conclude that you have che better of the Game, for they will ever at-
tcr be fo afraid, that chey will never dare to ſtand before you.

The ncxt morning an hour before day I began to march, and thought ro have entred_
into le Mas deAgenois, bur I found that there was there three Enfigns of the Enemy
who had taken poſlefſion before me, and was thereupon conſtrain*d to quarter at Graere
and Calonger, cloſe by the aforeſaid /e Mas, both by reaſon of thelong march I had made
the day befores and alſo becauſe the Secretary of the Queen of Navarre call'd Barbant,
broughe me lecrers from che ſaid Queen from Duras, wherein ſhe wrir me word, that I
aid not need to proceed any further , for that CMonſtenr de Burie and ſhe had compos'd all
things, and thas ſhe was come out of France purpoſely to appeaſe theſe Commotions, and to
make thoſe of the Religion to lay down their aArms. In anſwer to this Lecter I cold Bar
bant, that I would not return back unleſs I was firſt commanded by Monſieur de Burie ſo
todo; for that if the City ſhould chance tobe loſt, the whole blame of the miſcarriage would
be laid at mydoor, We there diſputed ir above two long hours in the field, he (hill ex-
poſtulating with me, whether [ thunght the Oneen of Navarre was againſt the King, and
if I thought ſhe had a mind to make his Majeſty loſe the (ity of Bourdeaux ; to which I
anſwered with all moderation and reſpe&, for that was the way I was to proceed in this
affair ; bur all he could get of me was, that I would ſend two Gentlemen along with him to
the Oucen of Navarre, to ſee in what piſture aff airs were betwixt her and Monſieur de Bu-
ric, and that in the mean time 1 would make forr dayes march, of what I had defgn'd only
for two, to give the ſaid Lady time to make an end of the Treaty ſhe had begun with Monſieur
de Buric : and accordingly deliver'd him to the two Captains Peng and Sexdat, who
were in danger to have been kill'd more than twice by the way z for in all the Corners and
Viilages ch: Hugonors had planted Courts of Guards to hold every one in ſuſpence, and
to fright people into their Party. In che Evening I call'd a Council of all the Captains,
where they were all of opinion, © that I ſhould lend no ear either to the Letters or Meſſa-
« pes of the Queen of Navarre, who ſhould ſhe falſifie her word, the loſs of the City of
© Bourdeaux was of ſo great importance, that what excuſes ſoever I might make , they
© would not be ſufficient to juſtific me from the blame that all the world would juſtly lay
«tomy charge : and on the other fide ſhould I be pur ro vindicate my reputation with
© my {word, I could not fight with the Queen of Navarre, inſomuch that all the world
«would laugh meto ſcorn, and ſhe her ſelf the firſt of all, ſo that the faule would ill
« lie whereitdid ; and I ſhould have no poſſible means co clear my own honor, I was
very glad to hear them all of this opinion, becauſe ſhould my actions be diſapproved, T
had to ſay in my excuſe, chat all the Captains had advis'd me toir 5 for if a man commir
an error, It 1sat leaſt more excuſable if jc be done upon deliberation and advice, than up-
onthe meer account of his own humour and fancy ; for alwaies to truſt ro a mans own
headpiece is not ſo well.

In the morning ewo hours before day I departed from my Quarters, and paſt over a-
bove the Vines, leaving /e as on the right hand, and came bur by break of day onely
near unto Caumont, by reaſon that the Paſſes were very ſtreighr, and I would nor leave
the Baggage behind me, for a great many people entred all night long into le Mas ; who
came from thar fide rowards the River. Thoſe of the Caſtle of {aumont ſallyed our,
and came thorough the Vines, where we could not charge them by reaſcn of the ditches,
{o that we continued on our march , till we came near unto Reofte , and there I found
Monſficur de Courre, who at his return to Boaurdeaux had raken the reſt of Monkeur de
Burie's Company, and was come out ro meer me. A little before I had ſent ro Monſieur
Dexmet my Couſin-German, who was raiſing ewo Companies, to go and put himſelf in-
to Reulley, which he had done 3 bur che Hugonors had beſieg'd ic before my coming, and
batter'd it with ſome field-pieces ; but they could do no good, and raiſed the Siege. By
which it isro be concluded, that they were Maſters of the field, fince they durſt adven-
ture ro march with Canon, and had not God infpur'd me to oppoſe them, and to hang
ap thÞſe chat fell inco my hands, I do believe the whole Country had been loſt ; for
Monficur de Burie's moderation was by no means ſcaſonable in ſuch a time as this, LI
quarter'd my {elf in ſome houſes overagainſt Reofe , choſe of the Town bringing us in
proviſions, and at midnight without ſound of Trumper or beat of Drum (by reagon of a
certain jealouſfie Monficur de Conrre had poſſeſt me withal) we began to march, and never
ſtaid rill we came within two or three leagues of Boardeanx, I there quarter'd my men
in cercain Villages, and my ſelf went ſtraight to the City, where I found Meſſieurs de

Cancon,

-
{£< :
ow

g*
of + 1 o po
Ls
-

Book V: de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 247
pts wy ws —_ IE EAN OO eee eee eee ee ce eo
Cangon, and Montferran, the Vicount 4'za, Ciurac, and others, who were there expeRt-
ing my. coming, and where by reaſon of the great ſcarcity of all things in the City, I
could ſtay bur three dayes only; in which time ic was concluded berwixt Monfiear de
Burie and me, thac the fourth day we ſhould paſs over the River, and go fight Monſicar
de Duras, who was in the Territories of Monſieur de Candalle in the County of Benanges.
Accordingly I began to paſs the River, and by noon had got over all che Foor, and ina
few hours after my own Company , and the forty Launces belonging to the King of
Navarre : when, ſeeing 1t began to grow late, I was of opinion that Captain aſſes
ſhould return to his Quarter with the Company belonging to the Mareſchal de Termes,
and ſhould paſs them over at midnight 5 which order being given I return'd into che
City again to conclude with Monſieur de Barie, that at midnight he ſhould begin ro pals
over the reſt of the men. He had cauſed four field-pieces ro be made ready, which al-
ready were upon the thore, and che Company of Monſieur de Randan commanded by
Monſieur d* Argence was arriv*d , as allo that of Monficur de Vanguion commanded by
Monfieur Car/zs. So ſoon as it was nighe Monſieur de Burie cauſed all the Boars co be
brought up under Ch.ſteau Trompette, expreſly forbidding that any one ſhould paſs the
River without leave, ſo thacin che night when Captain CMaſſes came to the water fide,
it was not poſtible for him to ger Boats to carry him over. I ſhall not here declare
what every one ſaid upon this occafion, and what they reported was the cauſe why che
River was nor paſled ar the time appointed ; for it ſignifies nothing, bur Monſieur de
Maſſes in excufing himlelt ſpoke very plain, and without caring who heard him. I was
quarter*d not above halt a league from Bowrdeanx, and above an hour before day mounc-
ed cohorſe, and (ſending word to Captain Charry, who was Camp-maſter, thar he ſhould
ſtay tor Monſieur de Burie with all the foot Companies, excepting thoſe of the Baron de
Clermont, and Monſieur de Sainftorens) march'd on till I came to la Seave, ſending
word to Monſieur de Barie, that I had left him the Foot to accompany the Arrtillery,
The Meſſenger paſl?*d the River, and found him in his Chamber not yer quite dre(t,
though it was then paſt ſix a clock in the morning, by which time I made account he
was come over, and ſo ſoon as I was come to Sexve, Monſieur de [a Serve, Uncle co
Monſieur d' Andaux, told me that the Enemy was at Targon, and had no intelligence of
our paſſing the River, and lent me on? of his Seryants to go carry the news to Monſieur |
de Burie, whom in my Letter I entreated to advance, for that the Enemy was in a very con-
venient place to be tought withall. Now from [4 Seuve to Bonrdeanx ic was abouc three
leagues, and as Monſieur de [a Senve's Servant came to the water fide, he ſaw Monheur
de Termes his Company going aboard : I alſo by the ſame Meſlenger ſenc ro Captain Charry
to ſolicite Monljeur de Burie to advance, who ſeeing them make fo liccle haſt , and
knowing that I was gone to attaque the Enemy (as I had ſent him word) he took three-
ſcore light horſe chat he had of his own, and leaving the other Captains to waic upon
Monſieur de Burie, and to guard the Artillery, came away after me.

So ſoon as I came within fight of Targon, which is a Village (as I chink belonging to
Monſieur de Candalle ) Mefſicurs de Sainforens and de Fontenilles went on before, where
at ſome ſcatter'd houſes, they fell upon che Enemies Quarcers, and kill'd fourteen or fif-
tcen men, by 1caſon whereof the Alarm in their Camp was ſo great, as made them draw
all their Foot into Barralia in a grear field, and their Cavalry all along by a lictle River
there is in that place, whom I could nor diſcover by reaſon of a Wood berwixt them and
me, and chey were alſo ina Valley. The field where cheir Foot was drawn up, was a
little more advanc'd than the River, and when Monſieur de Sainforens fell into their Quar-
ters, ic might be abour ſeven of the clock in the morning, after which they never ſtir'd
from this field where they were firſt drawnup. I was upon a lictle Eminence at three or
four houſes that were there, from whence I diſpatch away another Meſſenger ro Monficur
de Burie to entreat him to make haſte, for that I was at the head of che Enemy, think-
ing that he was near ac hand, The Count de Candalle who was then very young, and full
of ſpirit, came to me tq.chis place, with ten or twelve Gentlemen in company with him,
and amongſt ochers the Szeur de Seignan, who had been a Captain of Foor wich me in
the Kingdom of N ples, art which time we call'd him Captain Afontlawr, who alſo broughe
two of his Sons along with him, all chree very brave Gentlemen. There the Count told
me of the promile the Queen of Navarre had compelld him ro make, without which
he could nor have eſcap'd our of her hands; in anſwer to which I merrily cold him, that
1 would cauſe the Biſhop of Bourdeaux to abſolve him from that Engagement, neither could
that promiſe any way bind him, foraſmuch as he was not a priſoner of Warre, and beſides, | _
it was made tothe Queen of Navarre, who profeſt her ſelf 50 be a moſt humble ſervant of
the Kings, and very paſſionate for his Hajefties ſervice. |

Kk 2 O Ahout

%

—_—

' The Commentaries of Meſfice Blaize Boox'V?

Diſpure abour
the fight,

The fight re-
{oly'd upon,

The order of
the Fighr.

The Fight.

Abour twelve of the clock the two Meflengers I had fcnt ro Monſieur de Barie returp'd,
and brought me word, that they could not be paſt over the River till after noon, and
that the Company of Monſieur de Termes only was already landed on this fide. I had
ſent back all our Horſe to /a Sexve to bait, having kept with me only twenty, or five
and twenty Horſe, and chere I ſtood Cenrinel, letting our horſes eat the while under a
Hedge, wirh the bridles in our hands. The Enemy ſaw me, and I ſaw them, and our
men having gor ſome victuals came back to me, Juſt as the Enemy began to remove and
co take the way directly towards me. We obſcrv'd that they march'd off by Companies,
by which we very well underſtood, rhat they meant to take ſome other way than to
come tous, and thereupon te!] ro conſalc whether we ſhould fight them, or no. In which
Conſultation che greateſt part of the Company ſaid, ** Thar in caſe we ſhould fight them,
* we (hould pur all Gaj:ane in danger, they being twenty for one, and that therefore ic
*© was betrer to ſtay for Monſieur de Buriey than commic ſuch an error, which would
* neicher be approved of by the King, nor by any other perſon whatever. Whereupon
*1 granted them that whac they ſaid was very true : but thar nevertheleſs we ſaw all the
** Gentry in Gajenne in fear, and chough it be true, ſaid T, that you are not here above
* thirty Genelmen, yer che whole Country is poſleſt with ſo great a terror, that they dare
** norriſe againſt chem to afhiſk us, which when they ſhall hear, thar we came to face them
&« without daring to fight, will be ſo augmented, thar in eighc dayes time we ſhall have
* all the whole Country againſt us3 therefore fall back, fall edge, ir is my opinion, that
© we ought rather to hazard che loſing our ſelves by fighting, than by avoiding the Com-
* bar, which is equally pernicious, eſpecially confidering that all chings arc in che hands
« of God. I have already taſted theſe people, where I have had che forrune ro meet them,
© and have found them men of very little reſolution ; bclieve me rhey will never ſtand
« us, and we ſhall certainly rout them ; neither ought we to have come ſo near if we had

©« not intended to fight ; and moreover you ſee that they are abour to ſteal off, and to.

<< eſcape away. As to what concerns our overthrow, ſhould it ſo fall one, Bowrdeanx
&« will notwithſtanding be in no more danger to be loſt for chat, Monfeur de Barie being
* there, and a Court of Parliament to defend it. Monſieur de Seignan then being the
oldeſt in the Company anſwered, and ſaid, that it was very true, we ſhould have all the
Country infallibly upon us, and therefore ſeeing we were reduc't to this neceſſity, and that
there was uo bope of Monſieur de Burie's coming np to us, we onght to fight , whereupon
they all in general began to cry, let ws fight, let us fight 3 when as we were mounting to
horſe, the Mareſchal de Termes his Quarter-maſter, called Jfoncorneil , came up to us,
and told me, that their Company having been on horſeback from the beginning of the
night, they had been neceſſitated co ſtay,.and bait ar Sexve, at which news I was almoſt
fit co deſpair. The rwo foor Companies were marching as faſt as they could 3 but it was fo
exceſſively hot that we ſcorcht as we ſtood , however Moncorneil ſeeing us going to fight,
gallop't away to la Seuve to make Captain Maſſes mount to horſe.

We then marchr on the lefr hand of the Enemy, when being come within two Har-
quebuze ſhor of them, I divided my horſe into two Troops : we might in all be de-
rwixt a hundred and fixſ{core Light-horſe ; for I had not above thirty Launces in my Com-
pany, it having been that of Monſieur de a Geiche, and the Soldiers being almoſt all gone
hometo their own houſes, cxcepting a very few, and I could nor ſupply their places with
others, The Enemy {till by lictle and liccle mounted this Hill, ſending moſt of their Har-
quebuzcers down into the Copſe below, which was there very thick, and to come to them
we were to niarch rhorough a great high-way enclos'd on both ſides wich Vines, I made
Captaia Charry follow in their Rear, and gave one of my Troops to my Son Captain Xſont-
lac and Fontenilles with the Cornet of Guidons, and kept ro my ſelf che other Cornet of
Gens-d'armes, which was carried by Monſieur de Berd#ſan the Seneſchal of Bazadois.
When wecame to the Vines Ifaw we could not paſs them to come to fight, and therefore
cook on theleft hand under the Vineyards. Captain CMontlac was abour two hundred
paces before me, who ſeeing us take on the lefr handy they marcht on by the higher way
before us, and when we were got clear of che Vines, and {ome ditches that were there,
we ſaw Capcain Afontinc ſtill making on to gain the top of the Hill, ro whom I then
joyn'd Monficur de Sainforens with his Harquebuzeers on horſeback, and kept with me
the Baron of Clermont, who alſo had ſome few.

Now, ſo ſoon as we came within berwixe twenty and thirty paces of them, they began
co fire, and not before, whereupon the Harquebuzeers of Monficur de Sainftorens fir'd allo,
whilſt inthe mean time Captain Xontluc charg'd full drive into the middle of all their

| Horſe : I hadan eye to him, and ar the ſame infſtanc a lircle on the lefe hand charg*d

quite thorough their Foor, where we routed and put them ro flight, bur not without ha-
ving

} GI Pe" = Fe EC Ma IT PPS, _ COT en 2
" CMB ah REiE EE cate ht SE AI er eek ef bee” TE, ny i Re © 09: Nh - Cadet Ho 4; Y % . « 4 1

LE Got 2 bs > Gen ignite we £0 es CE yr hey ns, Darn, ! 5 ; 4
* i —A Set BIS PEA LEI - OE” ESR ES (IE oy 9, CS Bp: 1% 15% Py EN . -aS ki

Book V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 245

ving firſt ſtood our thock, and maintain*d their ground, Their Hor(e ſeeing cheir Poor de-
teaced, fled down the Hill all along by the Wood, and the Foot I encloſed in che Copſe. The Hugonots
Though being we had no Poor to do execution (for every one knows, that Horſe do not defearcd,
ſtay to kill, buc purſue the viRtory) there was. not many men lain , yer chough their

loſs was not very great, the reputation of the Victory was of as great advantage co us, as

che ſhame of che defeat was prejudicial ro them, and every one on our (ide began to take

hearc, as theyz and thoſe of their Religion began to loſe ic; boch Gentry and Common

people now taking arms, and declaring for us. My Son had ewo horſes kill d under

him, and was himſelf wounded in two places ; both the horſes were mine, and one of

chem was my gray Turk, which next ro my children I lov'd above all things in the world,

for he had three times fav'd my life, or ar leaſt my liberty, The Duke de Palzano had

given him me ac Rome, I never had, nor ever hope again ro have ſo good a Horſe as thar

was, The Prince of Conde would fain have had him of me, but I pur him off as well

as I could, for I ſaw thar ſuch a Treaſure was not every where co be found. Monfieur

de Seignan loſt his, the Vicount d'VUza, and the Count de Candalle their*s alſo; to be

thort, after the charge we rallyed upon the very place where we had fought, and found

that 1n fo grear a necefſicy we could not make twenty horſe to fight had the Enemy ral-

lied upon us, almoſt all che horſes being either kill'd or ſhor, and above rhe third parc of

our men : bur rhey had not the judgment to examine their own condirion, nor ours net-

ther ; and I muſt needs ſay, 1c was one of the radeſt and moſt furious charges, withour

a Battaily that ever I wasin in my whole life neicher can ic be ſaid, that chey ran away

for fear withoue being fought, for they fac*d abour npon us, either ro give or to receive

che charge, and implain truth I did not expe to have found them fo brave. We loſt

upon the place bur one Gentleman call'd Monſieur de V joneaux only ; bur two or three

char were wounded di:d after of their wounds. From the top of this Hill we diſcover'd The Enemy
che Enemy marching off as faſt as they could, and ſaw that they rallied {till as they went, Fecires.
ſtill gerring furcher off from us; and then we began to retire, ſome on horle-back, and

ſome on foor, for moſt of the horſes were kill'd, and thoſ® that were not, were almoſt all

fain to be led off, for they were wounded. IT was in ſuch a condition, that chere

was nota horſe of mine to be found to remount me; ſo that had an hundred horſe only
rerurn'd upon us, I had been a loſt man, and the reſt that were wich me ; for as for my

parc it was not to be hoped thar all the world could have ſav'd my life, theſe new Saints

had ſuch a malice to me above all others.

This was the Engagement of Targon, which was very ſhameful for the Hugonots, con-
fidering that they ſuffered themſelves ro be beaten by a handful of men 5 and as we were
returning back, the two Foor Companies arriv'd, who all day had run as faſt as they
could, and were ready to faint with exceſſive heat. Monſieur de Termes his Company,
though hey came ar a good round trot, yer could they not poſſibly come up 1n times for
before Moncorneil could get ro Seuve, which was a long league from the place where he
lefr ns, and they mount co horſe and march another league and a half, which they muſt
do to the place where we were,: we. had done our buſineſs, at which they were all very
much concern'd, eſpecially Captain Maſſes : I never ſaw man ja ſo furious a- paſſion, fo
that I was fain co entieat him to be quiet, and to hold his rongue, for he had a great
mind to ſay more than I had a mind he ſhould. And ſo we return'd back to Sexve, k
where we found Monſieur de Burie, who was bur juſt come, and yer it was betwixc
four and five a clock in the afternoon. He was glad co hear of our ViRtory, and I be-
lievehad made all che haſte he could ; bur he wasold, and old men cannot be ſo diligenr
as young. We cannot have it twice, I know it by my (elf.

We here concluded that Monfienr de Brie ſhould return to Boaurdeaux to bring from
thence three pieces of Canon, with which to go and batter Montſegur, and the other
places the Enemy held upon che River of Garonne, to clear the River, chat proviſions
mighr come into Bozrdeanx , for they were in a manner reduc'c to famine, and carry
back with him the four Field-pieces, knowing very well chat we ſhould be no morein pro-
babilicy of a Barrail, by reaſon of che Bruſh the Enemy had lately receiv*d 3 and thac in
the mean time I ſhould march with the Army up che River cowards c Mont ſegur and
Reolle, there to ſtay ill che ſaid Sicur de Barie ſhould come wich the Canon. . Bur before
we ſeparated Our {elves, it was neceſſary to turn towards Bowrg, being that one of the Sons
of Montandre had poſleſt himſelt of ic, whoſe buſineſs ic was to hinder all forts of pro-
viſions from: going down the Dordepne to Bourdeanx, which we did, and when we came to
the River near unto {#uſ«c we caus'd our Cavalry and Monſieur de Sanftorens to advance be-
fore cowards the Town, who coming before it, the ſaid Afontandre quirted the place, into
which we put ſome few men, that we ſent for from Bourdeanx. I then remonſtra-

ced

«is. A VE O——TTRC_ TT".

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize

Boox Y

$

Juſtice execy»
red by the
Sicur de Moat-
IuC,

Navarre 2
mortal enemy
ro the Seiur de
Montluc.

_

red co Monſieur de Burie, char we were tornn a dangerous forrunc, and that cherefore jr
would be convenient for him to cake the Caſtle of Blangaefort, which belonged to Mon.
fieur de Duras, and was his habitarion, and retrear, and that in 'the mean time IT would
go ſeize upon che Caſtle of Caumont, which we did, and I garriſon'd Caumont by the way,
A thing that Monſieur de Canmwont was by no means pleaſed withal, being afraid that ]
would make prize of all I found within ic 2 buc I was very far from any ſuch intention,
as I made jrevidencly appear 3 for though there were in ic goods to rhe.value of aboye
an hundred chouſand Francs, yer did he nor loſe che worth of one ſingle penny, ſaving
that the Count de Candalle, and Captain Montlac rook ſome Chaplers of Corel from
the Warden of the Caſtle, and thoſe with a receipr and an obligation ro make them good.
And yer if I would I might have taken all che goods in the houſe, and it had been law.
full prize, forarmuch as within it there had been a party of Hugonots, which had made
2 Sally upon our people coming from Bowrdeanx, where Captain Sendat had his horſe
killd berwixt his leggs, which was a ſufficient reaſon 3 for that was to declare himſelf an
Enemy.

Ar The ſame time we had intelligence brought us that the Enemy had abandoned Bazar,
out of apprehenſion that we would paſs the River, becauſe they heard chac Monſieur de
Burie was recurn'd co Bourdeanx, and thar 1 went up to la Reolle - and fo they began to
carry in ſome little Corn to Bozrdeaux, I had notice that ar Gironde there was three or
fourſcore Hugonots, that were recir'd thither upon che rouc of Monfheur de Dwras, whom
I crapt, and without more ceremony hang'd chreeſcore and ten ac che pillars of the Town -
Hall, which ſtrook fo great a terror into the whole Country, that in every place they
quitred the Banks of che River, and fled cowards Harmanda, and Thoneinsz to which
place Monfieur de Duras was recreated to rally his ſ{catrer*d people, and recruic his Troops,
and was forc'c to remove from thence, and to retire ro Dordogpne. One might ſee all chere-
abours which way I had gone, the Trees upon the High-ways wearing my Livery. One
man hang?d, terrified more than an hundred that were kill'd. The Queen of Navarre
who was at Daras, after haviffg heard of the defeat of Monſieur de Duras, departed from
the Caſtle of Canment (which was before I ſciz'd upon ir) where ſhe had been, bur made

The Quzen of no ſtay, and ret1*d into Bearn, and we came after co the ſaid Caſtle of Caumont, God

knows how dearly ſhe lov?d me and how the baptiz'd rae, calling me the Tyrant, and all
the i] names ſhe could invent ; bur ſhe was a Princeſs, and moreover a Woman, and con(e-
quently not to be queſtion'd. Being a Servant to the King, and a Catholick, 1 did my
duty, and had every body elſe done ſo, we had never ſeen ſuch doings as have been pra-
Qifed fince, Both I and mine have eyer been moſt faithful ſervants to her and her Fa-
mily, but ic was then when che Kings intereſt was not in queſtion,

Monficur de Burie being come to Reolle with the Canon, we went to beſiege Montſegar,
and lay one night at Sauveterre, where I took fifceen or ſixteen whom I hang'd every Mo-
thers Son, without the expence of paper or ink, or withour vouchſafing to hear chem
ſpeak ; for theſe people would promiſe mighty macters, which chey never incended co per-
form. Now in CMHonſegar there was berwixt ſeven and eight hundred mem. The Town
is liccle, but fortified with walls as good as good can be, and of a very advantageous fitu-
ation. We beficg'd ir on that fide by the Tannery, wherethey dreſt their Leather. Mon-
fieur de Burie quarcer'd himſelf in che Houſes before the Gate which looks towards la Sau-
wvetat, where there are greac Towers, and I hard by um. Monſieur d'Ortobie and Frede-
ville, Commiſlaries of the Artillery would needs go view the Town 1n open day, where
we wanted for no Harquebuz ſhot, and after the diſcovery had been made, we concluded
roartaque it by the ſaid Tannery. There was on thac fide a Gate of the Town, which

they had lately covered with a Wall, and had let down the Portcullice, which the Wall

cover'd, and within had caſt up a Rampire of earth and rabbiſh. I made the approches

by night, and lodg'd Bardachins Company in the Tannery. We let Monſieur de Burie

take his reſt, and preſently after midnight our Artillery was planted upon a lictle Emmi-
nence overagainſt, and within a hundred and fifcy paces of the ſaid Gate, Againſt che
opinion of the ſaid Commiſſaries I would cry to ſee whac was behind this Wall thar co-
ver'd the Gate, and co that end cauſed ſome Fagots to be ſet on fire hard by che Gate ; by
the light whereof I cauſed five or {ix Canon ſhot to be made ac the ſaid Gate, which beac
down all this new Wall ; whereupon I ſent Captain Bardachins Enſign all alone co diſco-
ver the place.

The Tannery was berwixt the Artillery and the Gate, and berwixc the Gate and the
ſaid Tannery there was a great Walnuc Tree, behind which Captain Bardachin and [

planted our ſelves, ir being no more than five or {x paces from the Gate, where che En-

{ign came and brought ns word that the thing we ſaw that lookt white was the Poxtcullice.
: We

—_ " ket my 7 ” n eas Qah EEO TI - _ COTS Coane dn f; —_ hed _ 2 © _
Oy" , L n " SATAN Sts Se ler, arte Pd EEG 2 of ALL AN ra et on SN 2 2239 Ste te Po Race, Court > : » + en ESE IS bats WT CR a LI ORE: : 4 Fed * . : + oY BNE 5 "54 BEST We - ES: _ >
WS Rs Cn TENOR PT YEW eto do end ob or ire 3 OED a fp.) bird 6 6 Rs MO EI + EEE Eu hats LEES IEG O08 ID $5. ) a - 8 '% : y ES La K $ - > ig $054 Vets bo ny X ” F aL. <> », FR T7”; F * ” - ,
SF; Ao 5 EC PET Ws - "<0 $ pot tn Y © 6 bo Lp 3 "4: SV . x 's TIO 2 x * Iafy. «6s « IT . s IT Ps:
Be, CE EEE II ar et cg es a a EDI EE Eon SEEDS wenn 87) pak LTD Ie 4 4p Ge, :

Boox V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

We chereapon made him to rerurn back again, and to climb up ge Portct: 'ice 3 which
he did, and ar [is return told us, that over the top of the Portcullice he had perceiv'd
a Terraſs within, buc that ic was but low, and a man might paſs berwixt the Arch of
the Gace and the Porrcullice, creeping upon his belly. The Enemy could not ſee him, by
reaſon of the fire, bur we conld who ſtood behind the Tree, and yer they made above
ewenty Harquebuz thor, I then ſent in all haſte ro Captain Charry, to bring all the
Companies without bear of drum, or making any noiſe, whom ſo ſoon as they came I
made co ſquat cloſe upon their bellies behind the Artillerie, bidding Monfieur d'Ortobie
begin to ſhooty though it was nor yet day, and try to make a Battery hard by the Gate;
when ſo ſoon as he had made two volleys, I ſent away the ſaid Bardachins Enfigne called
Captain Vines, who had a Targer upon his arm, a Morion upon his head, and a Coat of
Mail wich ſleeves of the fame ; and afcer him ewo Harquebuzcers withouc Morions, who
all went creeping with their bellies almoſt to the ground, Captain Yines began tomounr
che Porecullice, and Bardachin and I were again advanc*r behind the Tree. The dawn-
ing of the day began to appear, and Monfienr d'Ortobie (till continued firing at the Wall,
and rhe Enemy advanced to entrench behind che Battery, which was on one fide of the
Gate, taking no hced ar all to the Gate it ſelf, as not ſuſpeting the Wall which cover'd

ir was bearen down. So ſoon as Captain Vines was gor to the top of the Portcullice he Captain Viaes
gave is Targer to one of the Harquebuzeers, and mounted upon the Rampire, afcer enters the firſt
which caking his Target again, hedrew in firft one of the Harquebuzeers, and then the 79 Monsſegur.

other, when ſeeing three to be got in, raking the advantage of the Thunder of the Ca-
non, I ran to the Tannery , making Bardachins Harquebuzeers one afcer another to
march ſtraight up to the Walnut Tree, and again my ſelf recurn*d immedaarely behind it,
Arthe next Volley I made Bardachin approach the Portcullice, having a Target and a
Morton, and the Harquebuzeers one after another concealing their marches, when ſo ſoon
as Bardachin had got fiveor fix men about him he mounted the Portcullice where at the
rop his Enſign drew him in, and the Harquebuzeers one after another as they came ; and
ſtill as the Harquebnzcers came behind che Tree I made ther lip in, when ſeeing there was
already twenty got into the Town, I my ſelf drew up to the Portcullice. They within
entred into a Jittle Chamber of the Tower, ro which there was two little doors , which
open*d upon two pair of ſtone ſtairs on cheright hand, and on the lefr, by which they
went up and down on the inſide of the Town to the {aid Tower, In the mean time I
ſtill putin more men, one after another, till Bardachin ſent me word, that he began co
be ſtrong enough to be Maſter of the Tower, and that he was nor as yer diſcover*d.
Whereupon I ſent to Captain Charry and the Baron of Clermont, that they (ſhould riſe
and come running all along a high-way there was that came directly np to rhe Gate
which they did, bur before they could come up Bardachin was diſcover d, Where they be-
gan to fight, and to defend the ſtairs. Immediately upon which came the Enfigns of
Captain Charry and Clermont, and mounted with all their men afrer them. The Enem
made good thoſe ſtairs, bur our people gain'd the top of the Tower, by the help of a little
hand ladder they met withal, and were Maſters of the infide of the Gate, when the
Captains on the right and lefr ran deſperately down the ſtairs, and came to diſpure it
hand to hand in the Srreers. The Enemy once repul{*d our men, bur in the end being
overpower'd by numbers they reir'd, the Aſlailants falling in pell mell amongſt them, vill
they came to the Markecr-place, where they found three hundred men in Battalia, who
made head and diſpured it for a time, but in the end were put to rout, and fled every
man to ſhift for himſelf. I ſent an account of all co Monſieur de Bxrrie, but hehad heard
of ir before, and he muſt needs know alſo by the Harquebuz ſhot that they were fighting ;
whereupon he ſent ſome Gens-d'armes about the Town; bur they could do norhing there,
I cook fo ſcore or a hundred Soldiers, and with them marcht round the Walls, ſo thar
as many as leapr oyer were diſpatchr, The {laughter continued till ren of the clock, or afcer,
becauſe they were fain to ferret them out of the houſes, and there was not above fifteen or
ewenty taken priſoners, whom we preſently hang'd up, and amongſt the reſt all che Kings
Officers, and the Conſuls with their hoods about their necks. There wasno talking of
Ranſoms unleſs for the Hangmen. The Captain who commanded there, was called Cap-
tain Heraud, who had formerly been of my Company ac Montcallier, as brave a Soldier
asany was in Guienne, and was raken alive. There were many who would fain haye
ſav'd him for his valour, bur I ſaid, thar if he ſhould eſcape here he would make head
againſt us at every Village, for I very well knew his courage, which made me hang him.
Nevertheleſs he (ill chought I would fave him, becauſe I knew him to be valiant : buc
that made me the rather pic him to death ; for I was very well aflur'd that he would ne-
ver return to our ſide, as knowing him to be a ſtubborn obſtinare fellow, and moreover

before

y Mont [cgur ears

ried by aflaulr,

248

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book V:

The number of belouted with this new Religion,otherwiſe I wonald have ſav'd him. We numbred the dead,

the dcad.

Duras ſurren-
ered.

Agen abandon-
ed by the Hu-
gonots.

and found them to be above ſeven hundred, all che Screers and the Walls were cover'gq
over with dead badjes, and yer I am ſure a great many died without, of thoſe who leape
over the Walls, whom I cauſcd to be ſlain.

Thus was Montſegur taken ; bur I believe it would have been a hard diſpute, had we
been put to have entred by the breach we were about to make, and yer ic would have coft
us above five hundred Canon ſhot before we could have madea Gap wide enough for
two men to enter a breaſt only : for the Walls were buzlt of admirable good ſtone, and ex-
cceding thick, asſtrong as any whatever in the whole Province z and withal ir had been
a matter of great difficulty to enter, though the breach had been never ſo ſufficient, they
having means to entrench themſelves wichin, and I do believe they would have found us
work, and it would have been a Marr of honor both for them and us but it was better
as it was.

Two dayes after, we went to befiege the Town and Caſtle of Dxrar, in which there wag
a hundred and fifty men. All nighc long I never reſted to lodge the Arrillery to batter the
Town ; for to batter the Caſtle was a thing of extraordinary difhcalty, unleſs on thac fide
of the Garden bchind it, and there alſo it was very hard to bring up the Artillery : which
made us conclude, that it was bceter to attaque the Town, and afterwards from within
to batter the Gate of the Caſtle ; when ſo ſoon as T had made all things ready, they call'd
to usto know if Monſieur de Buri? was there, to which they were anſwered, that he was
quatter'd at the Farms two or three Harquevurz thor diſtant from the Town : but that I
was at the Artillery 5 whereupon they defir'd to know it I would give them leave to come
out in lafity, which I promiſed they ſhould, and ſo they came ro ſpeak with me z bar
T referr*d them to Monſieur de Byrie, The day began to break when they return'd, and
they told me they had capitulated. Monſieur de Burie with ſome few with him preſencly
encred into the place, bur I cntred not till eight of the clock in the morning, bur laid
me down to ſleep after the Capitularion ; for I wak*d when others took their reſt. Mon-
fieur de Burie told me that there was no:hing in the place, bata hundred and fiftry Cor-
ſlers that belong'd to the King of Navarre, which the Warden of Thontins a Hugonor
had left there, intending to have carried them to their Camp, but that he was afraid of
being ſnapt by the way. We cauſed them to be divided amongſt the Captains to arm the
Soldiers; and from thence Monſieur de Barie went to Bourdeaux, and I with the Arm
marched down tovvards Marmanda and Thoneins, Every one quitted the places they held
for fear, {o char T met with none but ſome few Catholicks ; and from thence marchr di.
realy to (lairac and Aguillon where I paſſed the River. And as I was paſſing it I halced
before the ſaid Town, becauſe thereavere three or four thouſand men in Agen, and I
would go to environ them to trap them withinir. Having then reimbarkt the three Ca-
non at la Reolle, which T made to mount up the River, it was night before I had paſſed
overall the men, and as I was marching in the night I had news brought m2 from Apen,
chat in the begining of the nighe they had abandoned the City, and were gone away to-
wards ontauban, 1 wondred that theſe people ſhould be ſo damnably rtimerous, and
that they did no tetter defend their Religion, they having not ſo much leiſure as to take
their priſoners along with them z a ſadden terror having {urprized them, when they heard
that I was at hands for they no ſooner heard my name , bur they fancied the rope al-
ready about their necks. Thoſe whom they had clap up in priſon were Meſlicurs de [a
Lande, de Nort, all the Officers of che King, and the Conſals, excepting the Preſident of
Agen, againſt whom they had no prejudice. Theſe poor Officers, very honeſt men, had
been two or three months derein*d in prifon, in which ſpace above a hundred times the
ropes were preſented defore them co hang them up, ſo char I wonder rhey d1d nor die for
tear.

Monſicur de Burie being arrived at Port St. Marie, we there and in the adjacent Vi-
lages quarter'd the Army, and from thence went with a few men only to Agen, wherc
we found the City ruin*d ; tor theſe people where ever they came tefc ſad marks behind
them, and there we ſtaid three or four dayes. Monſieur de Burie ſent to Ville-Neafse,
and to Montflanquin three Companies of Gens-d'armes, namely his own, chat of Mon-
fieur a Argence, and that of Monſieur de Cars, Lieucenant ro Monſieur de Yangaion.
They ſentro Monſieur de Bxrie to ſend them four or five hundred Foor, and that chey
would go and fight Captain Bordet, who was coming from Xaintonge with three hundre«
Horſe, of which fixſcore were Cuiraſſeers, and Lances all, the reſt Piſtoleers, and Harquc-
buzeers on horſe-back, cogether with three Enſigns of Foot. I offer'd my ſelf to Monheur
de Barie for this ſervice, who told me that he would go himſelf, and be engag'd in this
aR:on, and thathe would go away ar midnight, I would not contradict him leſt he ſhould

think

a FREIE "EW As hb es 4.24. + edn EZAHDBaENCA. we... od. 6 MID SEACREST AC A- aw, 2 Pea
ny WEL RE Ie PEAT ERS Dd, oe RS + r PIC; % ” 4 a ; - oy £5 *%..- od : X
4 db R525? Hs IFD, OF SEES SES i Er 1 ET O . <

Boox V.

think thac I had a mind co do all my ſelf, and getan advantage over him, and therefore

retir'd my felt ro Eſſillac to take ſomeorder in the affairs of my Family, hearing that my

Wife was lately dead. The next day Monſieur de Burie was yet at Apen, and the nexc

day afcer thar, and in the mean cime Border paſſed by, and marche to. ger to Montauban,
where Monſieur de Daras ſtaid co expe& him. . I know very well that Monficur d'4r-

| gence and his Companions advertized Monſieur de Burie in all haſte to ſend them the Foot

chey defir?d, thar chey mighc fight, and am very confident the fanle was nor in them : buc

Monſieur d' Argence 1s yer living, who 1s able cogive an account where the faulc lay, I have

nothing to do ro meddle, or make in che buſineſs. PS =
At my recurn back to Agen we concluded to go and aſſault the Caſtle of Pere ; for du» - |

ring the time that our Company lay abouc eAgen, there came to us three Spaniſh Com- Spaniſh Com3

panies commanded by Don Lewis de Carbajae, 1n the abſence of his Uncle Don Fohn de Fnet

{arbajac, who afterwards came and brought the other ten Enfigns, We artaqu'd the Caſtle The Siege of

in the Front of it, for we could batter it in no other place, ic being very ſtrong both in *< Caſtle of

fruftare and ficuation ; and there we made above three hundred Canon ſhort. They had Pene,

here a great Terraſs caſt up within, and in the Terraſs had made a Trench where the Sol-

diers lay ro defend the Breach, which alſo was of very difficult acceſs, becauſe we were to

mount by ladders from the Breach up to the Terraſs, Novv vve had che firſt night raken

che Town, for Captain Charry and his Companions had. ſer fire to the Gares, which the

beſieged having long and bravely defended in vain, they all recir'd into the Caſtle. They

might be within ic about three handred men ; and I went to diſcover the Breach by the

Houſes on che right hand, which I cauſed to be pier*d charough, paſſing from one co ano-

cher till I came to che laſt, which was ſo near to, the Caſtle, that there was no more than

the way berwixt them; from whence I perceived an out- jut of ſtone at the flanck onthe

right hand in the Wall, and ſent a Soldier creeping on all four to diſcover this place,

He went up the half-way, and found that it was made, as if they had purpoſely lefc ſteps

to goup by in thar place ; which having done, he came back to me, and upon his reporc

I wencimmediacely ro Monfieur d'Ortobie, where we drew a piece of Canon alittle on che

righc hand this place. We had enough to do to lodg it there, by reaſon that it was a

very great Precipice that went down to the River ; and from thence we ſhot ſide=wayes at

this Wall, which being nor very ſtrong, was in four ſhots pierc'd quite thorough , ſorthat

one mighc ſee thorongh the hole into their Trenches ; whereupon I immediately wenr

down, and made che ſame Soldier climb up by thoſe ſteps (> far as to diſcover if che hole The Breach

was over againſt the Trench, bidding him in no wiſe to diſcover himſclf $ which he ac- 4iſcover'd.

cordingly did, and brought me word, that they ſtood all in Battalia in the Trench, and

thar there was a great number of Corſlets, as it was true, I then cauſed che Ladders to

be brought, which I had made to be ſought for in every place, and which might be ſome

twelve or fifteen in all. Monſieur de Barie was with the Arnllery, whither I went to con-

clude the Afaulc before him, entreating him that the Gaſcons migh: go on firſt, and che

Spaniards afier : bur Don Lewis defir'd chey might fall on together, which was allo granc-

ed. In the mean time I made choice of four Harquebuzeers to moune theſe ſteps, for

morecould nor ſtand upon the top to ſhoot thorough the hole into the Trench, when ours

ſhould give the afſau'c ro the Front of the Caſtle, and ſo I committed to them the aſſaule.

The Soldiers themſelves crook the Ladders, and I went to the forementioned ſteps with my

four Harquebuzeers, when as the one were rearing their Ladders, che four went up b

the ſteps, and ar che ſame inſtant that the Spaniſh 2nd Gaſcon Foor mounted the Ladder,

the four Harquebuzeers fir'd into the Trench, They kill'd one of them, who tumbled

down dead ar my feer, and [I ſent up another 1n his room : but when the Enemy ſaw

themſelves Kkill'd thorough this hole, they recir'd into another Fortreſs, where they de- The Afailants

tended chemielves above three long hours, and twice repull 'd our people to the very Breach. pulſed.

Where I perceiv'd cwo things, though I had very well obſerv*d them before, the one thac

the Spaniards are not more valjanc than che Gaſcons; and the other, that che brisk di-

ſpures are alwayes made by che Gentlemen, for above five hundred Spaniards and Gaſeons

were overturn'd either upon the Ladders, or down to the ground, yer muſt we not de-

prive thoſe of their due honor, who worthily achieved ir; for though che G aſcon Cap-

rains, and che Genclemen of cheir Companies, all day bore the brunt of che fight, I will

not ſay but that the Spaniſh Captains very bravely behav*d themſelves, bur in truch cheir

Soldiers did very liccle. In che end I enconrag'd our people, making them again ro mount

the Ladders, encouraging ſome, and threatning others, for I had my ſword drawn in my

hand, ready co have given them a caſt of my Otfice, had I perceived any Polcrons. Bur

they all now began co do better both Spaniards and Gaſcons, infomuch thac they gain'd

the ſecond Fort. The Encmy then divided themſelves into rwo other Forts, namely che

de Montluc, Mareſchal of Fratice. 249

———— ——. —

.*

I grcat

250

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox Y*

Captain Chayry
jeaps thorough
the fire.

Pene taken by
a{lau'r,

The Sjeur de
Saiaftorens
ſent to relieve
Cabors,

great Tower, and another quarcer of che houſe on the lefr hand, Now we were to go up
a pair of ſtone ſteps into baſe Court, betwixc the ſaid Tower and the ocher Fort, ſo thar
our people were conſtrain'd to ſer fire to the Gate of che ſaid Baſe-Court. On the top of
theſe ſteps, and cloſe by the Gare there was a corner on the left hand, where fifteen or
ſixteen men had room toſtand. Captain Charry and the Baron de Clermont were in this
place encouraging the men to ſhoot thorough the Gate into the Baſe-Court, and ſo ſoon as
the Gate was burnt it fell down juſt in che Paſſage. I was upon the middle of the ſteps,
when ſeeing the Gate fall'n down, I calld ro Captain Charry, that they ſhould leap in
thorough the fire, which chey did without d1puting che buſineſs, a man needed not to bid
him twice, he fear'd nor death. I puſhr forwards choſe who were upon the ſteps before
me, whether chey would or no, and ſo we all encreq in fury, but found no body in the
Baſe-Court ſave Women and Maids, of which ic wasall full, even to che very Stables,
Thoſe of the Tower of the other Fort on the lefr hand ſhot at us in the Court, and kill'd
five or {x Soldiers. Captain Charry was rhere a little hurt, and the Sieur de Bardachin
alſo. We made the Women go down by thoſe ſtone ſteps, where the Spaniards who were
at the foot of the ſtairs in the great Baſe-Courc below, kill'd chem ſaying chey were Lu«
cherans diſguisd. We redoubled the aflaulc upon this Forr on the left hand both by a
door, and by two windows that went into it, which we carried, parting all we found
within it to the Sword, Now we were: afterwards to aſſault the great Tower, and the
Gate that was between. IT there left the-Captains who were not hurt in this Fort on the
left hand, and in the Stables ro keep them penn'd in, and as fortune would have ir, chey
had all cheir proviſions in this Fort on the lefr hand, and none ar all in the great Tower ;
and that was thereaſon thar in the cloſe of the Evening they ſarrendred chemſelves to the
Caprainsupon Quarter for lif.» The Spaniards were lodg'd in the Town, who knew the
were ſurrendred, and that in the morning our Captains were to bring them to Monſieur
de Burie and me, who were quarter'd in the Houſe of Monſieur de Cathus a Harquebuz
thot from the Caſtle. Monſieur de Pons lay there alſo, being come with Monſieur de Bu-
rie, and ſo ſoon as the Priſoners came, who mipghe be forty or fifty in number, we deliver*d
chem co fifteen or twenty Soldiers in guard ; but the Spaniards came and took them from
choſe fifteen or rwenty Soldiers, and kill'd them all excepting two ſervants of Madam 1a
Mareſchalle de St. Andre, chat I had kept at my lodging ; ſo chat of all theſe chree hun=
dred men there wasnot a man eſcaped, ſaving theſe two that I ſav'd, and another thar
went dowe the Wall of the Caſtle by a Rope, and ſwam the River, who had alſo a great
many Soldiers at his heels plying him all the way with cheir Harquebuz ſhor, bur he mira-
culouſly eſcap*cin deſpight of them all, His hour was not come, for he had an infinite
number of ſhots made at himybur none of them had the fortune to hit. I here perceiv*d that
Don Lews his men were for the moſt part raw raſcals ; for old Soldiers do not uſe ro kill
Women, and theſe kill'd above fourty, art which I was furioufly angry. Their Captains
were ſorry for and aſham*d of che ation, bur they could not help ir, for they ſaid they
were Lutherans in diſguiſe, becauſe having been fumbling with one of them to lye with
her, they had found that is was a beardleſs Deacon, who had diſguis'd himſelt in wo-
mans clothes, This was the taking of Penez which was of no little imporcance, as being
an extraordinary ſtrong place, and in a good Country upon the River, where a great ma-
ny Rogues were diſpatcht out of the way, whoſe bodies ſerv'd ro fill up a very deep Well
thar was in the Caſtle. Ir may truly be ſaid, that every one here play'd his parr, asal-
ſ{o did Monſieur de Burie, who never ſtirr'd from the Canon, bur cook as much pains as
any man of his age could poſlibly do,

Now fo ſoon as Captain Bordet was joyn'd with Monſieur de Daras, their Army began
very much to encreaſe, foraſmuch as thoſe who before had forborn to declare chemſelyes
in expcRation of the ſaid Bordets coming, now that they ſaw he was come . conceiving a
better opinion of cheir affairs, they repair'd boldly co the Army, The Enemy then being
in this condition, we were one might afraid that they would take from us Moifſac , or
elſe {ahors, by reaſon that the Rivers were fo low, that they were almoſt every where to
be foarded, which made me tell Monſieur de Barie that it was neceſſary vve ſhould ſpee-
dily ſend avvay ſome men to Cahors; for the vvater being every vvhereto be foarded 0-
ver, they vvould at the very firſt carry the Tovvn, there being no body there bart the In-
habirancs only co defend ir; vvhereupon he preſently made choice of Monheur de Sain-
forens vvith fourſcore or a hundred Light-horſe he had beſides his Foot Company, vvhom
I entreated to make all the haſte he poſſibly could, and never to reſt day nor night, ill
he had put himſelf into the place. I made account that from the place vvhere che Enemy
lay he vyould go in eight hours ro Cabors, and (as God vyhen he pleaſes vvill prevenc che

evil from coming to pals) vve had nevvs brought, and d1d believe ir, that the Enemy vvas

defign'd

_—— ORC CI

251

— _-— => ——— —_——
——— -. —

BooxV. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Frarice.

defign'd for Moiſſacy and had no thoughr of Cahors at all. Monfieur de Sainforens made
very great haſte wichour cicher ſtop or ſtay, unleſs coear a lictle bread, and drink a little
wine, he had caug'd to be carried along with him for che Soldiers by the way ; and alſo ic
ood him upon to loſe no time» He was to go very near to their Camp, and as he march
by night, the Enemy ar che ſame time did the ſame, fo that in the morning by ſun-riſe,
juſt as he was got over the River, che Enemy came to the water fide, fo lictle had lie the
(tart of them, and ſo narrowly they miſt of him. Ar his coming to the Town he found all
che people in ſo grear a tetror and confuſion, that they were forſaking the Town to fly to
the mountains for ſafety z but at his coming they cook courage; and immediately wichouc
entring into any houſe, Monſieur de Sainftorens went out to skirmiſh, and put himſelf
upon the paſſage of the River ro defend it, for he had very good men, and it wasalſo the
firſt Company that had been rais'd. All day the Enemy was hovering aboart the River,
making a thew as if they intended co paſs it, and Ibeheve ſtaid for the reſt of the Army,
who were marching after them z bnc made no attempr to paſs, At laſt the night drawing
on, Monſieur de Sainfturens fortified himſelf with Barrels, logs, and ſtones, and ſuch
macerials as he could find 5 wherein the whole City were employed at work, and plied ic
{o well, that in the morning the Enemy ſaw there would be no good. to be done; fo thar
the remainder of their Army coming up to them, they all quarte1*d themſelves i1 che
Villazes neareſt to the River, and chere ſome dayes remain*d without making any furcher
attempt. In che mean time we went to Moiſſac, to which place Monſieur de Burie had
cauſed two great Culverins, and two Field-pieces to be brought from Boardeaur, and
where we left che three pieces of Canon, and marcht toward Canfſade, Hirabel, and |
Realville ; ro which places their Camp was retir'd. A liccle before this the King had The Sicuc de
ſent ro Monſieur de Malicorne, to-give us an accounthow affairs ſtood in France, and al- Malicorne lent
ſo to bring him word in whart poſture they were with us. In two or three dayes we came LO.
ro EMirabel, during which I could not make it fink into Monkieur de Buries head, thar
we vvere to make haſte to ſnap che Enemy, there being fome who continually laid diffi-
cultcy upon difficulcy before him.

All of us vvho vvere there, and vvho are yet living, muſt needs confeſs that vve vvere
all rronbled at him, and at thiscold proceeding of his, becauſe he had ever had the reputa-
cion of a fighting man, and was reputed a great Captain, of which he had alſo upon {e-
veral occaſions given ſufficient proof : where as we found him fo heavy, and £ flow, that
ic appeared to every one as if he avoided fighting only to give the Enemy opportunity co
efcape out of onr hands, infomuch chat he ſtood highly ſuſpeed ro many, both by rea-
{on of this ſupineneſs and remiſs way of proceeding, and alſo for that almoſt all his Ser-
vants, eſpecially a Secretary of his, whom he extremely lov'd, were Hugonors. A Servanc
of his a Baſque, whoſe name was Haftſe, told us, that would Monſienr de Burie have gi-
ven car to him he ſhould have chang'd his Servants, knowing very well chat they rendred
him ſuſpeRed,eſpecially to che Spaniards ; and in truth it was intollerable, by reaſon of che
jealouſie weall had, thar che Enemy had perpetual intelligence of our deſigns; for I never
knew any of that party, how moderate ſoever they mighc ſeem to be, that did not hear-
tily defire the King's ruine, As for my own parc I do really believe thac never any ill
entred inco his hear, and that which made him deferre things ſo, was only the continual
buzzing him in the car, thac I would make him loſe himſelf, |

So ſoon as We came to Pecornet, which belongs to Monſieur de T honetnus; Monſieur de
Burie vvould take up his Quarters there , and I with my own Company, and a good
Troop of Gentlemen march on ſtraight to CMirabel, ſending my Son upon the Forlorn
Hope before ; who coming to Hfirabel, found the Enemy newly riſen from their Quarcers,
and marching away towards Cauſſade, where he fell upon the Rear, and defeated a Troop,
_ the reſt putting themſelves into two or three houſes, vvhich being near unto Cauſſade,

where cheir vvhole Army was, and he having no Foot vvich him, he was conſtrain'd to
ter them alone, and to retire to Mirabel, where I Raid to expect him. Now I had ſent
co Monſicur de Burie to encreat him to come and quarter at Mirabel, ir being no more
than a league only from Pecornet ; to which he ſcnc me anſwer back, char the greateſt
part of the Army was already ſettled in their Quarters; yvhereupon I vvent my ſelf in all
haſte, vvhere ar my coming I found thar he had already taken up his lodging in a Grange
belonging to Monſieur de T honeins : bur vvith the help of Mefficurs de Malicorne, d' Ar-
gence, and other Captains of Gens Marms, I prevailed (o far apon him, chat vve per-
{waded him to march. I never (as I have already ſaid ) vvhar reporcs ſoever yyere made
of him, ſuſpeed him 1n the leaſt, buc evcr attributed his flow and wary proceeding
only co his fear of miſadventure, being unwilling to hazard any thing, as knowing very
well, char ſhould he loſe a Batcazl, che Country would be corally loſt, and on the ocher

LT'2 de

— — _ *. <4

%
%
$
WE
-
"0
of

252. The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox V?

Ade, he {aw alfo char the Enemy was going into France : but Talwaies ſaid 1c would be
a good fervice ro the King to defeat them betore they ſhould joyn with their Confede.
rates there, and that a hundred Rebcls and Traicors would never dare to ſtand ten honeſt
men. He would often complain of me to Monſicur de Conrre his Nephew, ſaying thar
one time or another I would make him to loſeall, and conſequently rhe Province of Gaj.-
enne would be 1:ft roche King ; fo thar as co my own particular I durft anſwer for him,
that it was this apprehenſion only thar reſtrain*d him 3 for he was neither corrupted nor
di{loyal ro his Maſter, and neither waned courage, nor condu bur he would hazard
nothing, which was a great faulc in him.

Twice chat night we ſent our Parties co diſcover the Enemy at Canfſade, wich was no
more than half a league diſtanc from us, and the ſecond rime ir was by Monfeur de Vere
daſzn my Enfign, who tell upon one of their Courts of Guard. Nov I would #21n have
beat upthejir Quarters in the night : for all cheir Army lay wi:hour the Town, and far
enough from cne another : bur it was impoſſible ever to perſwade Monſieur & Berie to
it. The next morning I went with the King of Navarrs Company, that of Mondeur
de Termes, and my own, todifcover, raking Monheur de Malicorne along with me, and
Found that there was ſome Harquebizeers in the Town, vvho ſhor ac us, Now Monſieur
de Daras and Cap:ain Bordet vvere gone to Montanban, it being bur two Leagacs thither,
and had |cft chere all the good Horſe, that Captain Bordet had brought, behind rhcm ;
Mon{cur de Daras 2nd he having taken only ten or ewelve along vvich them, and had
lain all wghc at Mortaubany by realon of whoſe abſence chey never offer*d to appear,
and were in very grcittear, left a!] onr Army ſhould come down, it being from Mirabel
to Realville, no more than a quarter of a league. We dallied there above two hours be
fore the Town, not kno»1ng that theſe people were within it : *s rrue the Country
people told us, that Monficur de Daras was gone the day before to Montau5an, bur

Conſulcation they did nor know vvhether or no he night nor be reruri?d. At 1ght we return'd to
about the Bat- Monſieur de Barie, and cntred into Counce!l, ro which vvere called all the Captains of
tall, Gens d'arms, and Don Lewis de Carbajac alſo, vvhere vve fell ro debate , vvnetner the
Walls being of no ſtrength, vve ſhould not go vvith the two great Culverins, and aſlaulc
them in Cauſſade. To which propoſition ſome ſaid I, and others no; bur in theend che
Neeative voices carried 1t, which fo {oon as I perceiv'd, I made a morion, that after dinner
vve ſhould deſcend into the Plain, and there draw up mm Batcalia, by which I ſaid we
ſhould produce two effeRs3 the firſt, that we ſhould by that means diſcover the ſtrength
of the Enemy, and diſcern by their countenance whether they were 1n fear, orno; and
ſccondly we ſhould order our men as if they were to fight, and ſeparate our Harquebu=
zeers from the Gens d'arms, ſo thar every one might know his own place when we came to
fight, which we could nor do where we were quartered ; by reaſon that there was no even
ground. This in theend was concluded of, and agreed, that ſo ſoon as we had caten a
little we ſhould mount ro horſe. All che Gentry, which was a ſprightly and brave Treop,
retir'd with me, and we ſoon diſparche our dinner after which T ſenc away a Gentle=
man io Monſieur de Bxrie to give him notice thar I began to march to- raxe my7 place in
the field ; when preſently there came Monſieur de alicorne, who had been preſe-it at the
firſt deliberation to cell me, that Monſieur de Barie was reſolved not to come down int > the
Plain, nor to {uffer the Army to do it, and told me moreover, that thoſe whom i tioagac
tro have been the molt forward to have ſtood to the former reſolution, were the firit who
retreated, and were now of a quite contrary opinion ; which is an abominable thing, chat
men ſhould our of reſpe& to authority go contrary to their own ſenſe, I entreatzd him
thac he wonld go back again, and remonſtrate ro Monſieur de Byrje the great error he com-
mitted in not ordering our men as they ought to fight, and that I would engage my ho-
nor to him we vyould not fight, bur only obſerve the countenance of che Enemy, and
play upon him vyith our Artilleric in caſe chey ſhould preſent rhemſelves on the other fide
of the River : bur I had ſomething elſe in my thoughts, and had T ſeen a fir opportunity,
vvould have come ſo near that ir ſhould not have been poſſible to have reried vvichour
fighting. Hovvever the ſaid Sieur de Malicorne abſolutely refuſed to go, ſaying that he
had already ſaid al! he could to perſwade him, and vyould meddle nor make no more
in the buſineſs, nd I perceiv*d vvas very angry, though he forbore to ſay all char he thought.
I therefore ſenr Moniieur de ZAadaillan, bur Monfieur de Malicorne aid vvith me, and
vvould no more return, We then march'd and paſs'd before his Lodging, all of us ho-
ping that yvhen he ſavy us upon our march, his humour vvould come abour, and that he
vvould comes and fo ſoon as vve vvere come into the bottom vvere avvare of the Compa-
nies of the King of Nawarre, and the Mareſchal de Termes, commanded by Captain Arne,
and Captain Maſſer, vuho rold me that Monſieur de Burie had ent to proteſt _—_
| ENem

PR RG REES neo f eos HEREIN

Boox V9 de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

ee,

them if they came dovvn co me, bur they had return*d him anſvver chat before dinner
they had concluded to deſcend jnto the Plain, and that for their parts they vvould ſtand
ro the firſt reſolution, that IT vyas chere alrcady, and chat ſhould the Enemy come our co
fight me, they vvould ſhare in the ſporr. He proteſted alſo againſt the other Captains
(1 have heard fince , thar Don Lewis vvas one of thoſe vvho ajrer'd his opinion) and
particularly againſt Caprain Charry the Camp- maſter, vvho thereupon lefr him the Com-
panies , and came himſelt alone ro find me our, and torun the ſame fortune vvith ine.
In ſhort vve vyvere all in diviſion, vvhich is an unruly Beaſt vvhen ic once gets into an
Army ; and therefore you, vyho have the command of Armies as much as you can oppoſe
ics entrance, for if it once geta tcot within the door, itis very hard to thruſt him our a»
gan. |

The Enemy departed from C-«ſſ::de, taking their way direQly to Realville, to eſcape
tovvards Montanban, vvhen fo ſoon as they came into-rheir fide of the Plain, they vvere
aware of me, and made a halr : after which rhey began to pur themſelves into Batcalia,
and were above a long hour in doing it, by which I very vvell pcrceiv?d they were but
raw Soldiers, and that their orders were either not well given, or not well obeyed. They
duiſt not venture a ſtep further upon cheir march) fearing leſt T ſhould charge chem in the
Reary and (o we ſtood facing one another above four long hours with a lictle River betwixt
us, I would not ſufter ſome Harquebuzcers on horſeback that I had to r:3ke any attaque
upon them, to the end that Monficur de Burie might ſee thac Thad no mind to fight un-
leſs he himſelf was there, hoping that his knowing us to b< 1{o near would bring him ouc
into the ficld, bur all fgnified nothing, and ſo we were conftrain?d ro retire from thence.
As we were retreating towards Mira] ſome of tne;r Cavaltly thar was in Realville, and
char before had nor dar'd to {he chejr heads pals's: the River (which were Caprain Boy-
dets men) they had all white Caflocxs, which were tte fir{t char Thad ever ſeen, bur ſo
ſoon as they ſaw us face abour upon them, they writs 74% avain to repaſs the River, and
in our fight croſt the water above Realville, taking ite way ro Montauban, Irthen retir'd
ro my Quarters as angry asever I was in all my litz, char we had loſt ſo fair an opportuni-
ry of fighting the Enemy, and what promiſe foever I had made to the contrary, had the
erols of our Army come down to us, we would have had a bruſh wich them, and I would
(as T have already (aid) have approache them fo ncar, that it ſhould not have been poſſible
for enher fide to have reiir'd without fignting.

In the Evening Monſicur de Burie ſent to me to know if I would come to the Council,
which afcer many entreacies, with much ado I did, bur they had much ado to perſwade
me to it. Where being come, I remonſtrated tohim whar a piece of cowardize we had
committed , who thereupon told me, thatit had not ſtuck at him, we had nor fought ;
bur he did not go without an anſwer. Metlicurs de Malicorne and d* Argence arc both of
them yer living, who I believe can better remember what I ſaid chan 1; for I was ſcarce-
ly my ſelf, I was ſo cranſportcd with paſſion. To be ſhort, in this huffe I lefe him and
his Council, upon which occafion he ſhewed himſelf ro be wiſer chan ], and more pati-
rent to bear with my imperfe&ions, and I do believe in his conſcience knew himſelf co
be in fault. Ar night Captain Maſſes, eArne, and I, with my Company, and the
Gentlemen went our thinking to find the Enemy on chis fide the River Labeyron ; nor ima-
gining the paſſage being very dangerous and bad, char they would offer co venture over in
the night ; bur ſo ſoon as cverthey came to the water fide they hurried over in great diſ-
order, and went togain a Wood near unto ontauban call'd le Ramier, Captain Maſſes
and Captain Arne met with ſome who ſtaid behind in che Farms on this fide the River,
as being afraid co vencure over, having ſcen (orae of their men drown'd in the paſlage, and
thoſe they rook an order wichall for drowning, and ſo we return'd back without being able
to doany thing more ; having reſolv'd to have fought could we have met with them, chough
ir had coſt us all our lives, and I do believe that the rage wherein we were, would have
redoubled our Forces co have fought them ro ſome purpoſe ; it but in ſpite to have lefe the
ſhame and reproach at their doors, whole gums were fo tender chey would noc bite. The
Farmers affur'd us that they would neither ſtop nor ſtay till they came ro HMontanban,
which was the reaſon we did nor paſs the River, and they moreover aftirm*d, thac had a
hundred horſe only come in, when they began to foard che River, they had defeared them
all, or chey would have drown'd themleſves, they were 1n fo great a fright, and chat a
great many of them were drown*d upon a falfe alarme, Horſe and Foot throwing them-
{elves deſperately into the River to eſcape away. And this was the fine piece of cowar-
dize we committed, which never went off my hearc till atcer the Battail of Ver , thar
we fought a lictle while atter. Mc thought the very ſtones lookt upon us, and thac the
Peaſancs pointed arus ; for we had here a much beccer opportunity to haye done cheir bu-

=

fineſs , than we had afterwards ar Yer. [

The ſtrange
fear the Hugo»

nors Wcre 1n>

Ah—_ onto.

oo

A faule in 2a

The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Book Y,

I was in fo greata rage, that I was very near going away from Monhear de Burje in
the morning, and had it not been for che Captains and Gentlemen, who were with us,
and diſlwaded me from that reſolution, I had done it, being very ſure that the greateſt
part of che Army would have gone along wich me - bur he char of all others moſt pre-
vail?d upon mr to ſtay was Monficur de Malicorne, who remonſtrared to me, that the
King would cake it highly ill ac my hands, that all things would go amiſs, and thar
afterwards all the blame wonld be laid upon me , which would be ſufhcient ro pull
down upon me the Queens hatred and indignation, and ruine me for ever. As for m
own part I had a minde to have purſued the Warre atter my own way, wherein I fancied
ar leaſt I ſhould ſucceed much better, the buſineſs of Targon evermore running in my
mind, where I had defeated them with ſo few men ; and I had alſo an opinion that che
Sieurs d' Argence and de Carlnus would go along with me, although chey came with
him. Nevertheleſs I ſuffer'd my ſelf to be govern'd by the ſaid Steur de Malicorne, and
the reſt who reconal'd me to him for my anger though it be ſuddain and violent, is
none of the worſt ſort, and beſides he was the Kings Licurenant. He was pleaſed upon
our reconciliation to aſſure me, that upon che firſt occaſion that ſhould preſent it ſelf he
would lay fide all fear of lofing the Province, and reſolutely fight them z and that which
made him bear with my rough humour was, that he knew all my heat proceeded from the
zeal I had to his Majeſties ſervice, which made me calk after char diſreſpe&tive manner,
neither had any thing elſe reſtrain*d him bur only the fear of diſaſter, being certain chat che
King would lay all the fault ro him with whom he had encruſted the Government and
care of the Province.

Oh ?cis an ill ching when a Lieucenant of a Province 1s alwayes in fear of loſing; in

Lieutenant of the name of God be ascautious as you will when you are to keep a place, raiſe fortifica-

a Province.

The Siege of
Montawnban.

tions as high as Heaven if you can, watch, ward and ſtill be jealous of {urprizes : but to

| have ſufficient Forces, and evermore to be in tear of loſing, this ſavours of I know not

whar, and believe me (Lord Lieutenants) *cis an il Omen. For my part I wasof a quite
contrary humour ; for I evermore ſaw that if the affairs of Gaienne went well, thoſe of
France would ſucceed the berter, and if we defeated the Forces on this fide, we might
afcerwards go over into Languedec, and by thac means fruſtrate the Prince of Conde from
having either men or money our of thoſe two Provinces.

A tew dayes after Monſieur de Malicorne return*d back to Court, and I believe ac-
quainted the King with what he had ſeen, which I preſume was the reaſon of his Maje-
{ties ſending Monſieur de Monpenfeer into theſe parts, having heard that there was no ve=
ry good intelligence berwixt Monſieur de Barje and me. A thing very prejudicial to the
ſervice of thoſe we ſerve, and I ſhould. never adviſe thar the ſupreme power be divided
berwixt two, for an indifferent Captain will do better alone, than two good ones in
joint Commiſſion. Ir is true that I took more authority upon me than the King inve=-
ſted me wirhall 3 and perhaps it was neceſſary ſoto do z there are enow that can witneſs it.
Would to God the King had taken the ſame courſe in this laſt War, he did here in ſend+
ing Mouficur de Iontpenfier, which if he had, there would perhaps have been a better
account given of his ſervice in this Country ; neither was I fingle 1n this opinion, for I
was very well accompanied, and with men of the beſt underſtandings. And I would
alwaies adviſe his Majeſtie, that when ever he ſhall hear of any diviſion in an Army,
evermore to ſend away a Prince of the blood ro command in chief, and the ſooner
che becter, before the diviſion have got any great footing to endanger his affairs : for af-
ter it isonce eſtabliſhr, and chat the diſorder js once hapned, it is never to be remedied
bur with grear difficulty and dammage ; or by ſeparating thoſe who diſagree, which alſo
is not to be done wichour great inconvenience, conſidering that both the one and the 0+
cher muſt needs have many friends and ſervants depending upon them,

A little while afrer Monſieur de Barze propos'd an Enterprize, which was to goe and
lay Siege ro Montauban on that ſide towards Tholouze, and that in order thereunto we
ſhould return back co Moiſſac, and there paſs over the River ; and to this end he cauſed
another Canon and anocher Culverin to be brought from Bowrdeanx , and took rhe wa
diredtly to .Moiſeac. I was reſolv*d to let him alone withour contradiRting him in the leaſt
(having made a vow not to ſpeak a word ) to ſee what he would do, though I was certain
beforchand that his- Encerprize would vaniſh in ſmoke and come to nothing 3 for ſeeing
we had not dar'd to fight them in the field, what hopes could we have of doing any
good upon them in a Town,and ſuch a one as that was? Nevertheleſs I followed as others
did, and we came to the Bourg, where we ſtaid (cven or eight daies, having ſpent ſome
Canon ſhort againſt che Tower of che Bridge where there was a Church the Enemy had
fortified. In ſhort ] know not at which end to begin to give a Narration ofthis brave Enter-

Pr)zey

# »
F r
2
7
$1
WK.
Ku

%
£01
$1
#;
o
*
i
FM
|

ma _

Boox. V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 255

prize» neither can I make of ir either good Potcage, or good Broth, and therefore I con-
ceive ir better wichouc ſaying any more to let it alone, and only to tell you, that after
cheſe ſeven or cight days, ir was reſolved that we ſhould retire to ontech. |

Ar onr coming to Moifſac, I had there intelligence, that thoſs of Lefowre had taken
che Field, making prodigious havock, and committing infinite inſolences upon the Gentle-
men and cheir Eſtates, in all places where they could ger in, and that chey expeRed Forces
ont of Bearne, that Captain CMeſmes was bringing into them, being five hundred men.
Their delign was to make a flying Army, which was che reaſon that I ſent back Captain
Mantluc with part of my Company ; upon which occaſion the Count de ( andalle, the
Sieurs de Cangon, de Montferran, Guitinieres, and ſome other Gentlemen would nceds
bear him company ; Caprain Par7on alſo went along, taking with him the Company of
the Baron de Porrdeac commanded by Captain la Rorque d'Orman, for the Baron himſelf
had ſome dayes before this been wounded in a skirmith Captain eMontlac had made be-
fore Leftoure. So ſoon as they came to Florence they underſtood that the Begolles, Ne-
phews ro Monſieur 4 Auſſ#n, were the Heads of thoſe who were gone our of Lefonre,
and thac they had taken their way direaly ro Sampoy to go meerthe ſaid de Meſmes, who
was to be that morning ac Aigzetint, Moafiear de Baretnau , who was railing a Foot
Company hapning to be there, went to pur himlelf berwixt Terranbe and Lefoure, be-
cauſe hey chere intended to fight them ; bur the Enemy having intelligence of his depar-
rure from Florence, thought to return back co LeFoure, and alſo becauſe they had norice
char Captain Meſmes could not that day come to Aiguetint, when having paſſed Teyranbe
co return to Leftoyrez they ſaw they mult of necefiny fight Captain Montlac by the way,
who had incercepred their rerrear, which rather than do they would return to Terraxbe ;
chough they could not do that neither, bur ſo as there was ſome skirmiſhing ar che en-
cring inco the Town,and had chey had bur five hundred paces further to go, Captain Mont -
lac had defeated chem betore they could have got in. He then diſpatcht away ro Auch,
Florence, la Sawvetat, Ia Sampoy, and as far as Condoms for ſuccours to come in to beſiege
them, which every one did, ſo that there came in to him above two thouſand men. He
diſpatcht away a Courier to me alſo in all haſte, giving me to underſtand, that if I would
come thicher wich the Artillery, we might take Lefonre, for that all the good men thar
belong'd to it he kept {hut up1n Terranbe ro the number of four hundred men, together
with the two Begolles, Nephews to Monheur d'«Auſſzn, who were alſo coop'c up with
the reſt. 1 ſhewed che Letcer to Monſieur de Burie, and we had ſome diſpute upon it, he
being unwilling to ſuffer me to take any of the Foot Companies, bur in theend he granted
ine the Baron of Clermont my Nephew, to whom I had given a Company of recruic, and
Monſieur d*Orrobie, and de Fredeville immediately yoked three pieces of Canon z and
went before to Moiſſac to prepare the Boats, ſo that when the Canon came they found
the Boats all ready, and all night long we did nothing but paſs che River. I then ſenc a
Quarrter- Maſter from Village to Village to ger Oxen ready to relieve the others, which ha-
ving done, I gallop'd away before, and found that Captain Montlzc had befieg®d the
Town, and hatthe four hundred men which were in Terraube had ſurrendred co him up-
on Quarter for lite. |

Captain Meſmes advanc'c as far as the River Baiſe within a League of the ſaid Terrawbe,
when hearing the orhers were belieg'd, he went back the ſame way he came, and recir'd
himſelf into a liccle Village called Roquibrane near unto Viefezenſac. My Nephew Mon-
fieur de Gohas, who had been Lieurenant ro Monſieur de Ia MMoth-Gondrin in Piedmont,
and had married his Daughter, hearing of his motion, had raken the Pield with ſome
Gentlemen his Neighbours, and ſome Country -fellows, whom he had call'd together by
the ringing of a Bell, and putting himſelf in his Rear had conſtrain'd him to take inco Ro+
quebrane for his ſafety : where the Peaſants imparient of lying all night co befiege him, al-
moſt all of chem ſtole away, fo that Caprain Meſmes went away in the morning towards
Bearn, from whence he was come, to tell his friends there the news of the fine frights he
had been 1n.

Now Monſieur 4 Ortobie made {o good haſte, that the next morning two hours before
day he wss got over the River, and come before Leftowre, Ar break of day, he, Monſieur
de Fredevslle, Monſieur de 12 Mothe-Rowge, and I went co view where we ſhould plant che Lefoxre bez
Artillery, and concluded to plant it on a little Hill on thac fide by the River, where there fiegeds
was a Windmill, to barter the Town on that fide by the Fountain. And here we bar-
tered ir all day long, and to ſo good effet, that a Breach was made berwixt ſeven and
eight paces wide. They had entrenchr themſelves withiny and had Baſtion'd the ends of
che Streecs with the way chat went all along by che Wall, and pierced two or three houſes
that lookt into the Breach, In the interim that the Canon was barter ng I was buſie

cauſing

#4 -
o
WED = * = SO PEmg_m—_———=—_—_ -  ——o_

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book Y,

—

A mine ſprung
ac Erffoure,

The Sicur
d'Ortobie mor-
tally wounded,

Treachery of
the beſieged.

—-

cauſing Ladders co be made wherewith to aflaulc the Bulwark chat flanckt the Breach,
to hinder thoſe that mann'd that Bulwark from ſhooting.into the Breach : but bein
they had environ'd the Bulwark with Pipes and Gabions fill?d with earth, and that alſo
the Breach was not yet reaſonable, T would not this night do char which I did che: nighe
acer. |

The next morning I canſed the Artillery to play upon theſe Pipes and Gabions, and to
widen the Breach, and lay it lower, and the night tollowing we put our ſelves into. Ca-
miſado, where I ordered that Captain Iontlue ſhould aſſault the Breach with the two
Cempanies of the Baron de Clermont , that of the Baron de Powrdeac, and ſuch Gentlemen
as would go along with him, of which che Count de Candalle was one, a young Lord full of
noble courage, who alſo has ſince loſt his life in a Breach in Langaedoc, as I have been rold ;
and as for me I was by the Ladders to ſtorm the Bulwark, with the Sieur de Batternan's
Company, and another with my own Company of Gensd'arms, whom I had diſmount-
ed tor that purpoſe. This order being concluded 1 cauſed them to take up the Ladders,
putting Caprain Aontlwc and his men before, and marching my ſelf in their Rear, to ſee
what would be the jſſue of their aſſault, and after me came the Ladders, and: my fellows,
They cariied the Breach with very great boldneſs and bravery, entred thorough it, and be-
gan to diſpute the Rampires they had caſt up in the ſtreets, and were already almoſt
Maſters of one.

Now the Enemy the night before had made a Ditch betwixt the Breach and the Ram-
pires, and had puta very great train of powder into it, to which they were to give fire
from within a Houſe in the Town, We ſet up our Ladders, and two Enfigns mounted
up to the very top of the Baſtion : TI was making the Soldiers ſtill co mount, and to rear
the reſt of che Ladders, when juſt as our people of the Breach were as good as Maſters of
the Rampires, ſome of thoſe who came after, clapping a foor into the ditch of the Train,
which was cover'd over with Bavins, began to cry out we are in the Train, and took ſuch
a fright, that they overturn'd one another upon the Breach. Upon this accident, the for
moſt who were dilputing the Rampires, had no other remedy bur to retire, and there Cap-
tain [a Rocque was hurt, Lieutenant and Kinſman to the Baron de Ponrdeac , who died
the next day, one of the braveſt Gentlemen that cheſe fifty years has come our of G aſcony,
Others alſo were ſlain there, and ſome of thoſe were hurt who ſtorm'd by the Ladders
when ſecing thoſe of the Breach retir'd, I alſo drew off mine, very glad to have efcap'd
ſo good cheap; for had they ſprung the Mine in time, they had made a terrible
Fricaſlce. | |

The next day Monſieur d'Ortobie, the Governor of 1a Mothe- Rovge, and I went to view
the other fide of the Town towards the liccle Bulwark ; but could find no place where
we could conveniently plane any more than two pieces of Canon, for this Town (for a
Town of War 1s one of the beſt ſituated in all Gxienne, and very ſtrong) and there. alſo
was the little Bulwark that flancke che place where we had a mind to batter, which pac
us cOſuch aſtand, chat we could not reſolve what to do 5 fo that about noon Monſieur
d'Ortobie recurn'd to batter again by the Breach at ſome Flankers there were chere, becauſe
the next morning I was reſolv'd to give an aſſault in open day, where as he himſelf was
levelling a piece of Canon, he was wounded in the chigh by a Faulconer ſho from the
great Bulwark ; which went very near to my heart, for he was a valiant Captain and an
admirable Engineer, He died two dayes after. *Tis of all others of our Trade a Com-
mand of the melt danger ; nevertheleſs in all Sieges where I have been, I was ever by the
Canon, and fancied that all chings did not go right, if I was not there. This Gentleman
very well underſtood his bufineſs, which is very rare, and (as I have faid) exceeding
dangerous, and few eſcape of thoſe who expoſe themſelves too much. In che mean
time the Enemy parlied, where ic was agreed, that they ſhonld give me three of choſe
within in Hoſtage, and chat I ſhould ſend them in other three, which they defir'd might
be Meſſicurs de Berd#zan; de la Chappelle, and another, who being accordingly advance
near to the Gate, and thar we expetted the others ſhould come out, thirty or fomty Har-
quebuz ſhor was fir'd upon them all at a clap, by which they narrowly eſcap'r being ſlain,
and one of my Trumpets was wounded z whereupon I caus'd them to call out to Bri-
mond, that this was nat the faith of a man of honor, but of a Raſcal 5 he excus'd himſelf,
faying it was a Rogue who had begun it, and that 1 ſhould ſoon ſee him made an ex=
ample,

Bur the treacherous Rogues inſtead of execuring juſtice upon the oftenders, hang*d a
poor Catholick at the Bartlements, who could be in no faultatall. Now they were ever-
more asking to {ce me, ſaying they could nor believe I was there, whereupon I was ad-.
vis'd by ſome to ſhew my {elf ; bur they could never perſwade me to ic, and it was well

Yor

am furan - -—” ou -———_

Book V. . de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

for me. Old Birds are not canght with Chaff : (uſpe& every thing from an Enemy, with«
ouc diſcovering nevertheleſs openly your miſtruſt, Afﬀeer the hang'd man was dead, che
cut the rope, and lzrthe body tumble into che Graff z after which it was again concluded,
chat the ſame Depurtes thould go in, and cheir Hoſtages come our, for we bcliev'd, that
he who had been hang?d was che man that had committed the treachery, and now every
body went confidently into the ſtreet near unto St. (laire, andin a Crowd to ſee whar
the Deputies did, and 'when the ochers would come ont. The Enemy had levell'd and
prim'd chree or four pieces of Ordinance they had, and ſome Muskets exactly upon the
Company, thinking char I was there 5 ſo thar when our Deputies were again advanc*c al-
moſt ro the Wall, they began to fire their pieces direRly at the Crowd, and there kill'd a by
Gentleman who liv'd hard by Ager call'd Monficur de Caftels, and hurt three or four
others.

I faw all chis from behind a little Wall, and wondred chat our Deputies were not kill'd,
for they fired ar them above threeſcore Harquebuz ſhory bur they got off, running as faſt
as they could Crive ; when ſeeing this creachery the ſecond time pratiſed upon us, I ſenc
co tell chem from behind che Wall, chat fince they had made ſo little account of their faith,
and promiſes, I would make as little of mine, and accordingly ſent Monſieur de Berduzan
my Enfign, who was one of che Deputies, with my own Company of Gens-d'armes, and
another of Foot to Terraube, to kill and diſpatch all choſe that were there, giving him with
him the Hangman to truls up che Chief, which he perform'd with a very good will (as
he had reaſcn, conſidering che foul play thoſe of Lefowre had twice praiſed upon him)
and after they were dead threw all che bodies into a Well of the Town, which was very
deep, and yer ſo well fll'd, char a man might reach che bodies from che top wich his
hand, which was a vcry good riddance of a pack of very great Rogues. They brought Their treache=
me the two Begolles, and two others of good Families of Leftoure, whom I cauſed to be Ty required:
hang*d upon a Walnut-cree by the Town in the fight of the Enemy, and had it nor been
for the honor I bore to the Memory of Monſieur d* Auſſun, the Begolles his Nephews had
fared no berter than che reſt : they were within two fingers breadth of ic, for I had once
given the word co diſpatch them ; bur afcerwards, T know not how, alcer'd my refolucion, +
Their hour it ſeems was not come, and as tor the other two, had ir not been co give choſe
of Lettoure che pleaſure of the ſpeRtacle, they had nor been pur co the pains of coming o far
for their hanging, buc had been lodg'd in the Well with chercſ,

The night following I began to remove my Artillery to the other ſide, where Monſicar
d'Ortobie, the Governor of [z Mothe- Rouge and T had diſcover*d, by which removat ,
which the Enemy was preſently aware of, they perceived where I incended co begin a new
Battery, and thereupon began to doubr they had not men enow co withſtand an aſſaulc ac
two Breaches 3t oncez which made chem defire to ſpeak wich Captain Montiac, who ac- The belicg's |
cordingly had ſome conference with Brimond, who told him, chat he would capitulace, parly,
provided he would beftorchand give him hisfaith to ler them march our with cheir Arms,
and quarter for life. Inche mean timerhe day appear'd, when ac the impor:unicy of the
Caprains I granted their conditions , for 1 ſaw very well I was not yer at che end of Sarrender.
my tasKk.

When I parted from Monſieur de Barie I carried Monſieng de $ainftirens alcng wich
me, and Captain Gimond ; but when I came to CMoiffac, T was there advertiſed by Mon-
fieur de Brie, that the Enemites Camp was upon their March from 4ontanban, and wa-
king the way towards Cahors, which made me ſend back Monſieur de Sainforens and
Captain Gimoend, to pur themſelves into Cahoys , where if Monfieur de Sainflorens had
wich great difficulcy cncred before, he found ic much harder co do it now, which was the -
ſecond time, that by great and extream diligence he ſaved the Town. The ſaid Sicur de
Barie (cnc me word alſo, that in caſe I ſaw I conld nor carry Leforre in wo days time, I
ibould lec ic alone, and come joyn wich him, for that without me he was the weaker
party, having fince I parted from him 1ſt tour hundred Spaniards of che chree Spaniſh The Spatiards
Companies, who had murinied, and were Geparted towards their own Country. mutiny,

I cherefore ſent a Gentleman after chele Spaniards, who being able ro prevail nothing
_uponthem, I was fain to ſend again Monficur de Darfurt de Bajaumond with letters and

entrearies co reduce them to reaſon, which letcers fo ſtagger'd chem in their ill caken reſo.
lation, chat they call'd a Council codeliberate what chey were beſt ro do. In my lecters
I cold them, that I would not give the aſlaulc unleſs chey were chere, which fo tickled
their vain humour, and was taken ſo kind'y by chem, rhac they all reſolved co urn back
to me ; ſothar juſt as [ had ſign'd the Capiulation, they arriv'd ar Florence a league from
Leftoure, which was upon a Friday. Taro L:ftoure I pur the Baron de Poxrdeac with his
Company, for he was naw come up to us with his foor bound un
L M m

257

——

Ms,

and

P3 and upon Saturday
morning,

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book V+

They are ap-

morning I made all che Hugonots march out of Town, that every one might go whithex
he pleaſed ; ſome whereof liſted themſelves intro our Companies. They had never heard
any thing of the death of their fellows at Terrawbe, till I had raken poſſeſſion of the
Town, and then expeRted to ſcape no better than the reſt ; but I kept my word with
them. T then immediately'ſent away the Baron of Clermont with the five Enfigns I had,
bidding him go and paſs the River Garonne at Leyrac, and went my elf to talk with the
Spaniards in a great Meadow , where I promiſed to reconcile them to their Captains,
remonſtrating to them ſo many things, that in the end they reſolved to follow me ; whom
I lefe under the command of Monſieur de Darfert, and they march away with the five
Companies to paſs the River at Leyrac. The remainder of che day I ſpent 1n reſertling the
Clergy in the Biſhoprick, and the Monaſteries, and thoſe of the Long-Robe in their
Courts and Tribunals, leaving with the Baron de Pourdeac {uch orders as he vvas to obs
{crve for the Government of the Town. Which being done, on Sunday morning I went
ro dine at Sti//ac a houſe of mine own, and tolie at Apen, vvhereI vvas told chat Mon-
ſicur de Daras had caken the Caſtle of Marques belonging to the Biſhop of Cabors, and
the Biſhop himſelf in it, vvhom he had carried away priſoner ; vyhen having heard thac
Monfieur de Sainforens had pur him(elt into (ahors, they marcht avvay direRly to Sar-
lac, IT vvas told alſo that Monſieur de Barie followed afcer them, and moreover heard
news of Monſicur de Montpenſier, vvho vvas cometo Bergerac, having vvith him the Sei-
gneurs de Candalle, de la Vanguyon, dEſftiſſac, de Lauzan, and de Chavigny.

All Sunday and Sunday night our people were concinually ferrying over at Leyrac,
for there was but two Boats, ſo that they conld nor get over till near ten of the clock on
Monday morning, by which means I could that night march no further than YVilleneufae z
and there the Count de Candalle fell fick upon our hands, ſo that we were conſtrain'd to
ſend him home to his own Houſe, and Captain 1Zontluc alſo, who had already had two
firs of an Ague. Upon Tueſday the Baron of Clermont ſent me word, that upon Monday
he could march no more but two leagues, being hindred by the paſſage of che River, and
that he was making all the haſte he poſſibly could ro Belve, to which place I had appoin=
red him to come : wherefore to give him ſome advantage, T marcht but three leagues on
Tueſday morning, which was to CMontaignac, near unto Monflanguin, Upon Wedneſday
ewo hours before day I was on horſeback, and went co bait ar Belve, where the foot Com-
panies began to arrive, and where I made them ſtay rwo hours, whilſt I went before to
Ciurac upon the Dordogne, There I was advertiz d that Monſieur de Brie was at the
Mirandes (which belongs to Monſieur de Canmont) with the Army, and that Monſicur
de Montpenſier was at Bergerac. Immediately upon my Quarters being made, a Gentle-
man of Cizrac of the new Religion lent me two of his Servants, one to ſend to Bergerac
ro Monſieur de Montpenſier to give him notice of my arrival, and of the taking of Leoure ;
of which till chen he had heard nothing, and wirhall to tell him, char if he pleaſed to ad-
vance a little cowards us, we might find means the next day to joyn, and to fight with
Monſieur de Daras, who was encamped upon a little River called Ja Yezere, near unto
Fages. I writ to Monſieur de Burie to the ſame efteR, that he might by break of day
paſs the Dordogne, as I had already done : at which Monſieur de Burie was ſtrangely a=
Rtoniſhr that 1 could be ſo ſoon there, conſidering that but rwo days before he had receiv*d
intelligence from Agenoz, that I was yet before Leftoure, and in danger not to carry the

lace.

s I had fcarce made an end of my diſpatches, when che Baron de Clermont arrived with
the five Enſigns, and the Spaniſh Foot, whom I made to paſs the River in two great Boats,
and goto lye at Saint Szbran near unto Fages, to which place they came not till ewo hours
within night, and there found already quarter'd the Companies of Meſſieurs dt Barie, de
Randan, and de la V augayon; ſo that had ir not been for Madamoiſelle de Fages, Mother
to Madam de Lsoux my Siſter-in-law, they had not that night gor one bit of any thing to
eat ; bur ſhe ſhewed her ſelf to be che Wife of a brave Captain, which was the late Mon-
fieur de Fagesz for (he nor only gave them all the bread the had in the houſe, and ſeven or
eight puncions of wine, bur moreover did nothing elſe but make her people bake bread all
night long, giving them all her Bacon, and other Proviſions, withouc ſleeping a wink of
all night, and was never ar reſt till chey had all eaten enough.

In the Morning, which was Thurſday , I foarded the River Dordogne (for the River
was foardable here, and there in ſome certain places my Guides led me to) having with
me in all nor above fourty or fifry Light-horſe, and upon my deparcure from (frac I re-
ceiv'd an anſwer from Monſieur de Bzrie, who ſent me word that he was exceeding glad
of my coming, and that I had taken Leftowre : bur that nevertheleſs he was nor of opi-
nion to paſs the River Dordogne by reaſon the Enemy was ſtronger than we, and thac

cherefore

eh I O WT ERIR a Yan I _ CD "ye laced P ad ode Laden _ a "I IP ER Os Pe : PEG CEO IC IN * CERA IIENS wy aA pee " w my , p _ —_ R | | _ _ | | _ | | | | | | ' | | | =
S ee # IS $i > ro Eq 2 0 PETER RD - bs : cy AWE FIT Wy bs ed Lb - TTL ” He I 6 . f * ET" 1IFB : - 5 WW, 7 TIE _—_ : - v - P . - m_— : ” , EONS A 4 Ore" " dal - $ IE ig TY IJ oE- wank F 7 n d : n MS - TE hs 9; ops LR; g c
Brad #2 TY Tp6+$:; 4 < Me Do, ny; af Wh OT NES: <1 at £33 ACTS EEIE \ . WEL + ED PE £ re, Bn A . 6 < OSS 4 9 7 _ , MY 6 k Ls he ia bst 17; he IS +; 59 pL > OS, "Is ; ls #2, ae ME L - k 6 I 8A s " ; , : .
S: NN GE. PA AR "ES CSS Ps, et OK EST TIENTS WW ABC ALY ac. ID RE nite SS 4 +" INE Rents Ee A EIS coi ear ii bar FR OI Wy I FF p . bn He 4 6; 4; ues " is on oy 6 435. CE I rs Lam TE ts 4. * ARS a op 08 fo I . we {6 fs: Ws Ss , oY x: Sings Wage: th 4 | : — ; | ”

i yn OS IE OS On CD——_ + —— Or r—_—

Boox V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

therefore it was our b«{t way to try to joyn with Monheur de Montpen/eer, after which
the ſaid Sieur would himſelf determine wherher we ſhould fight or no, This anſwer put
me inco a ſuddain fury, fearing we ſhould do hereas wehad done before at Mirabel, and
was adviſed by the Gentlemen who were with me to ſend to proteſt againſt him if he did
not paſs the River, and chat I was my ſeif gone with a refolucion to fight 3 which nor- Diſpute bes.
wichſtanding I did not chink fic to do + buc by Seignan one of my men at Arms, ſent *vixt Meſlicurs
however to proteſt againſt Mefſicurs d' Arne, du Aaſſes, and de Charry our Camp-maſter, & bo-elogty 3g
who thereapon immediately went to Monſieur de Barie , and plainly told him, char as ;
for their parts they were reſolved to paſs the River, and that they would not have it laidin
their diſh before Monfieur de Aorpenſier, whom we already lookt upon as our General,
and immediately cauſed their Trumpers to ſound to horſe, whilſt Captain Charry drew our
his Enſfigns of Footinco the field. And then it was, thar ſeeing no other remedy, he pre-
par*d himſelf rogo. Caprain Ch47ry according to his cuſtom pat himſelf before with his
Footy and coming to the water ſide, ſuddenly madea Bridge of Carts, and paſſed over in
all haſte.
I ſtaid not at Sr. Subran under Fages, but only ſpoke with Meſſienrs d' Argence, and dx
Courre, enrreating them to mount to horſe, and telling them that I had wrir co Monſieur
| de Barle to come, and that ar noon we were to fight, They promiſed me they would
mount to horſe, but that wichal they muſt of neceflity ſend away a Meſſenger poſt co
Monſieur de Burie to acquaint him wichir, I then ſpoke to the Baron de Clermont imme-
diately ro make his Soldiers car ſomeching, and Monſieur de Darfort ro do the ſame by
the Spaniards, and preſently ro come away afrer me to the Ferry of Vezere, when as I was
calking with chem, came Seignan (tor he had gone away ar midnight to go ſpeak to Mon-
fieur de Burie ) who brought me word that he had lefc Monſenr d* Arne , and Captain
Maſſes ready to ſer out, and that Captain Charry was already paſſing che River, I then
went before. Now from Fages to the Ferty at Vezere, it is no more than a good league,
{o that I was preſently there , where I met with ſeveral Conntry people coming back from
the Enemies Camp , who had been to look after ſome Aſſes they had taken from chem,
who told me, that the Enemy were diflodging from two or three Villages where they had
lain that night, and char we were not above a league from thence. I paſled che River, and
at night ſent cur Monſieur de Fontenilles with ewo or three horſe to ſcour. Mefſieurs d* 4--
gence and de Coxrre had alſo ſent our the Quartermaſter of Monſieur de Randan, fo that
Monſicur de Fontenilles and he hapned to meery, where the Quartermaſter aſſur'd him that
he had fcen the Camp diflode, and upon their march, and (as God when it pleaſes him
will ſomerimes aſſiſt ſome, and punith others) it was from the Quarters they roſe froin,
bur rwo lictle leagues only co Ver, and from Fer but two little leagues more to the paſlage of
the River de U /ſle, where they had made account to paſs over that day. Bur being they
ſaw Monficur de Aonpenſi.r was at Bergerac with very ſmall Forces, and Monſieur de
Burge at the Mirandes, they would make no great haſte, foraſmuch as they had rwo good
Quarters berween : Fer tor the Foot and the Artillery, and St. Andras and two or three
other little Villages for the Horſe for they knew nothing of me : bur it had been better
for them to have conſulced cher eaſe leſs, and their ſafery more.
Monſieur de Burie came having only wo or three horſe with him, and found me talking
with the Quartermaſter, who was telling me that the Enemy was going to paſs rhe River
de PIſl+, as he had been told by a priſoner he had taken, and ſome Peaſants that came from
their Camp ; and that from thence they were going into France to joyn with the Prince
of Conde. T then told Monſieur de Burie , that it was neceſſary he ſhonld make haſte and
fight them that day ; to which he made anſwer, *©rhar Monſieur de CMontpenfier would
© rake it all if we did nor ſtay for him : bur replied again, that he was ſo far off, The Sicur de
*© ic would hardly be pcfitvle for us to joyn chat day , and thar therefore we were not to Montluc's rea-
& forbear to fight our of char conſideration z for ſhould we ſuffer them to paſs che River, "os why ey
« and joyn wich Monſieur de [a Rochefayucant, who waited with his Forces 1n expeRation mc _
© of them abour St. Jean @ Angely, the King and Queen would never more look upon us
as men of honor. 1 warrant you, faid I, they are onr own, my good geniua tells me ſo, As we
were in this diſpuce came Caprain Charry, and I began to diſcover his men coming down a
liccle Hill chac ſhoocs down on che ocher fide towards 1a Vizere. I alſo ſaw the Cornets of the
King of Navarre and Monlicur de Terwes, and at the ſame time the chree Cornets of Mon-
fieur de Burie, de Randan, and de la Vaugayon , at which I very much rejoyced, telling
Monſieur de Berie chat we muſt inftancly march, and fall into cheir Rear, and thar ac the
paſſage of the River we would fight them. To which he made anſwer, that jt ſhox/d
not ſtick, at him ; bat that if Monſieur de Montpenhier ſhould be diſpleaſed, or that matters
did not ſucceed well, he would lay the blame upon me. To which 1 rephed in the preſence
Mm 2 of

C—_Yy

259

As,

ws + [ __—
8 REIN”
C - E

” —_—

mom,

260 E The Commentaries of Meſlice Blaize Boox V?

[I

of a great many, Sir, Sir, let every one charge the fault npon m2 , and ſpare not, 1 will
| bear the blame of all, my ſhoulders are broad enough , but I do aſſare you 1 will be loaden with
honor, and not with ſhame, or be left with my belly toaſting againſt the Sun. Whereupon
Monſieur de Eurje making a fign with his hand, ſaid, /et #s go then in the nam? of Ged. In
the mean time the Baron de Clermont and the Spaniards were paſſing the Vezere, where the
water was dcep tothe middle of the thigh only, and Captain Charry return*d co paſs over
his 3 when (lll as che Foot got over they drew up in Batcailia 1n a Plain there was in that
place. The Captains Arneand Meſſes then came to me full gallop to embrace me, and
all the Gens d'arms after them ; Mcfſieurs 4" 4rgence and du Comrye, and de Carlns did the
ſame, having already underſtood by the Quartermaſter, thar the Enemy was nor far from
Good omen for us, and we all hoped, that within three or four hours we ſhould fight, LI have been in
the Bartel. ſeven or eight Batrails beſides this, bur never ſaw che Captains and Soldiers both Horſe and
Foot fo chearful as ar this time, which T look upon as a very good Omen. Now that I
- mighr ſtay to give all the Army time to paſs over, and be drawn up in order to fight, I
drew all my Horſe along by the fide of a Hedge , ſending to a Farm hard by for a little
hay wherewith to bait chem, for every one had brought a few Oats along with him, and
Commendai- to ſay the truth, I never in my life ſaw Monficur de Burie ſo pleaſant as that day, which
on of Monlicur ye me ſufficiently ro underſtand, that all his delays had proceeded more from his appre-
ae But.  henfion of lofing the Province, than from any defeRt in himſelt; and I dare anſwer for
him, that neither creachery nor cowardize ever entred into his heart z for he was an old
and a valiant Cavalier, and one that had ever given very brave teſtimonies of his worth and
valour z buthe was atraid of tailing. I ſent Monheur de Fonteniltes, and the foremention'd
Quartermaſter wich thirty Horſe to follow in the Rear of the Enemy z and my ſelf, who
might have ſome fifreen Curaſſeers of my own Company , and about thirty Genclemen
(berwixc forty and fifty Horſe in all) marcht inthe Rear of chem, intreating Monſieur
de Burie to follow after ; and ſo we ſer forwards. |
Monkheur de Fontenilles had nor gone above half a league, before in ſome certain Farm
upon the way he met with ſome ſtraglers of the Enemies Camp whom he car to pieces.
They had three Corners of Horſe in the Rear of their Army, who ſome of them ſomerimes
fac?d abont upon Monfieur de Fontenilles, and now and then the whole Body made a halc.
I full follow?d after him, ſending Monſieur de Barie continual notice of all char paſt,
and {olliciting him withal to march as faſt as he could, for that I was within fighc of
their Army ; and ſo I marchr continually in the Encmies Rear, till about two of the clock
in the afternoon, about which time there came to me Monſieur de St. Genies, the Father of
Monſieur d' Audax, whom Monheur de.Barie had {cur to me ro enquire of my news, and
ro bring me an account of him ; by which I found that he was ſtill inthe Plain of Vezere,
where I had left the Army 1n Batcalia, and he told mz ſo many ſtories, that my joy was
ſoon turn'd into vexation. I entreated the ſaid Sieur de St. Genies, that he would return
back to him, and entreat him to come away, which he refuſed tro do, being reſolved nox
ro leave me; ſecing which I rook him aſide, where we concluded togerher to ſpeak to
the Captains of Horſe, and tell them plainly what we thought, which perhaps might en-
cline them to come away, and then he return'd, and found them yer 1n the ſame place,
| bur after he had ſpoken to the Captains, and as a ſecret rold Monſieur de Byrie what had
2 m_ been concluded berwixe him and me, he was then reſolv'd to ſer forwards. And I muſt
Cauſe of the PEcds give Monhieur de St, Genjes this due commendation, that he was che cauſe the Bar-
Barrel, - tel was fought. |
Thus chen Monſieur de Barie marcht after me, with an intention to quarter all his Army
at St, Alvare, About half a quarter of a league above the faid St. Alvare, there were ten
or twelve Honſes that kept entertainment for paſſengers, and chiefly for the trading Mer-
chants, it being a great Road from Periguenx to Bergerac. So ſoon as I came to theſe
houſes, I joyn?d my (elf with Monſieur de Fontenilles, who ſhewed me that the Enemies
Camp was taking up their Quarters on the further fide of a lictle River in cercain lictle
Villages that lay beforc us 3 wherctore we were of opinion to bait our horſes, for we found
there Hay and Oats, bur no people, ſaving ſome fevy poor vvomen, the Peafanrs being all
fled avvay upon the report of the Enemies approach ; and fo ſoon as our horſcs had baited
(vvhich chey did vvich every man his bridle on his arm) there came a ſervant of Monſieur
# Alvare, who had been to vvait upon tvvo Nephevys of the ſaid Sicur, and the younger
Bordet to their Camp, and cold us that the Arcillery and the Foot vvere quarter'd at Yer,
vvhich isa grear Bourg, and Monſieur de Daras vvith the Cavalry at St. Andras vvithin
half a league of the place vye vvcre, ſhevving us the Villages, We ſavy that there vvere
three Cornets of Horſe of them, and he told us that on this fide, cloſe by the River vvere
quarter'd the Caprains Salignar, Hlimeant, and another vyhoſe name I have forgory vvho

might

Boox V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. | 261

EE.

might have with chem ewenry or five and twenty horſe only ; bur thac che Village where
che three Cornets lay was wichin Teſs chan rwo Harqueburz ſhor of the ſaid houſe, and that
he had lefc the faid Salignac preparing a Snapper for young Monferran, fince called Lan-
goirau, Lepuch de Pardailian, and hve or fix others , whom he had left hawking in a field
hard by, having brought their Hawks along with them. You may judge whether this
was a time to hawk 1n, or no, and whether this was to march like Soldiers, when they
had an Enemy ſo near. I then askr the fellow if he would guide me thither, to which
having made anſwer that he wonld, we immediately mounted to horſe. I gave half the
Troop to Monſieur de Montferran to tall upon the Houſe, and with the reſt went to pur
my ſelf berwixt the Hovſe and the Village where the chree Cornets lay : bur I would nor
give Monſieur de Fonteniller, who was quarter'd at an odd Houſe at the end of the Village,
notice of my deſign, becante I intended that the Company ſhould remain all nigh on
horſeback, and fo we went, and came up ro the Houſe fo little expected, that they never The Encmy -
dreamt of an Enemy within ewo leagues of them, Monſieur de Montferran flew (ud- _ ill incels
denly into the Court of the Houſe, and ac his firſt coming took Salignac and Moncaut, BE
and forcing a lower room 1nto which ſome of them had retir'd' themſclves, kill'd all they
found within it. Monſieur de Can/en was with me, and Monſieur de St. eAlvare's Ser-
vanc adviſed me to retire, telling me that the three Cornets in the Village were the beſt
horſe in the whole Army , it being Mnficur de Tors his Troop, who was come with
Captain Buydet. I took his advice, and we retreated to the place from whence we came,
where at my coming I found that Monſieur de Barie was paſſed by, and was gone to quar-
cer at St, aAlvare, the Army going afcer in file, I ſaid the five Enſigns that had been
with me ar Lefoxre, and the mutinous Spaniards, whom I quarter*d promiſcuouſly among
our Horſe. Fleſh, Wine, and Cheſnuts we found ſtore, and I got ſome great loaves of courſe
brown bread they make in that Country, which I gave ro the Spaniards; which being
done without alighting , I went to wair-upon Monficur de Barie , taking Monhicur de
eMonferran only in my Company, who alſo carried Captain Salignac his Priſoner along
with him. I found him lodg®d in Monheur 4 Alvire*s Caſtle, where at my coming into
the room I ſaid to him, Look you Sir, I have taken one who was once in times paſt a preat
favonrite of yours, (aptain Salignac, He then demanded of we where I had raken hum :
I made anſwer 1n the Enemies Camp. He thought their Camp. had been three leagues
off rowards che paſſage of the River de P7ſle, and askt me where their Camp was, where-
upon I rold him ic-was cloſe by, and that we were quarter'd' promiſcuouſly amongſt one
another. At which news he ſeem?d ro be ſomething amaz'd, when I rook occaſion to ſay
theſe words ro him, Sir you muſt now juſtifie the old Proverb to be true, That a good horſe
will newcr tire. Inlike manner you muſt reſolve to fight to morrow morning, and ſend order
to all the Gens-d'armes who are not yet alighted, that they muſt bait their horſes with their
bridles in their hands, and not a man of them to unarm :, for we are come ſo near, that it is
not poſſible to avoid fighting : In ſaying of which I was aware of Monſieur de St. Alvare,
whom I falured, deſiring him to call in his Servant, whom he had ſent along with his

zphews to conduct them to the Enemies Camp, who ſtood wichour, which he did, and
being come 1n I entreated him co tell Monfiear de Burie where the Enemies Camp lay,
which he accordingly Cid, place by place, and ſo exaRtly, that their own Quartermaſter
could not have given a more perfect account, Whereupon Monſieur 4? Alvare ſaid, you
are quarter'd within four Harquebuz ſhot of one ancther, excepting the Infantry which lies at
Ver, from whence tis a league and a balf ts St. Andras, where Monſienr de Duras is quar-
ter'd, and whoſe Quarters take up all the ſpace betwixt St, Andras and this place, Well, ſaid
Monſieur de Brrie, I ſee we are engag d to a Battel, and ſeeing it is (0, ws muſt fight it as
well as we can, Whereupon 1 taw joy ſparkle in his cyes, which 1 was exceeding
glad of, and taking him in my arms, faid co him theſe words; Sir, if we muſt die, we The Bartel rez
cannot. hogor our deaths mir: than by dying in a Battel fur the ſervice of our Prince, to which ſoly'd upon;
he made anſwer, and faid, that is the leaſt of my concern, 'tis no matter what becons:s of me,
bat I fear to looſe the Country. I then entreated him thar by break of day, every one mighc
be on horſcback, and char we mult ſay with the Iralian, Q#i aſſalta vince, and thereupon
bad him good night, and recir'd co my own Quarters, leaving him very well reſoly'd
ro fighr. | | |

All night we remaiw'd 1n arms, and our horſes ſadled, their Centinels and ours being
ſo near, that they could hear one anorner talk, and by break of day we were on horſeback,
when I ſent to ſee if Monlicur de Barie was ready, and to cell him, that ic was his wa
to paſs by my Quarters. He ſent me word, that as ſoon as ever the Army could be gor
ready to march, he would immediately come away, and in the mean tne I marche di-
rely to St. Andras, where I found.that Monfieur de Daras was alrcady diſlodg'd, and

gone

262 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox V,

T———  —

Al

A

gone to Ver. I then ſent Monſieur de Fontenifles with five and twenty horſe upon the
Forlorn, giving him order to halt at the entrance into a little Wood there is under Yer,
and cclling him that I would halt at a lictle Village fonr or five Harquebuz ſhots on this
fide, till Monſieur de Burie hould come up to me. Monſieur de Daras this while made
no haſte ar all, believing char our Camp was yet upon the Yezere, and char thoſe who over-
night had taken Salignac were only ſome Avant-Coureurs of the Army, Monſieur de Fon-
tenill-s ſent me word, that he had ſent our two Light- horſe to diſcover the Enemy, who
had broughc word back, that their Camp was drawn up in Battalia in the Meadow of Yep.
Whercupon I ſent to Monſieur de Berie to make haſte, and to haſten away four Field-
picces he brought along with him, which he did, when ſo ſoon as I was advertiſed that he
vas within halt a mile of me, I marchc up to Monheur de Fontentllcs, and the three
Compamies of Gens Marms, namely that of Monſieur de Barie, and thoſe of Meſſicurs de
Randan, and dela Vauguyon, advanced to come up, and joyn with me. Bur they miſt
their way, and went by the Cheſnur Trees direRly into the view of Yer, thinking that I
was alrcady art Fer, and never perceiv'd their error, tall they were juſt upon the Enemy,
having with them alſo a Company of Light-horſe which Captain Pechie of Perigort com-
manded, So ſoon asI cameto the Wood I commanded Monſicur de Fontenilles to ad-
vance, which he did, and it was well for us hedid fo, for he came juſt in the nick of a
charge thac Captain Bordet made uvon the Companies with a hundred or fix{core Horſe,
Launceers all; which ſo ſoon as Captain Pechie's Light-horſe ſaw coming upon them,
they fac'd about, and fled aimoſt into the three Companies. The Charge was fo rude,

Commendati. that all our three Companies were once difordet*d, and there Monſicur d* Argence bravely

on of Monheur Gonaliz'd himfclt, bat for whom, as I was told, they had all run away. Monſieur de For-

4 Argevcee.  Fenilles then with only five and rwenty Launces that he had with him, charg'd deſperarely
in amongſt che Enemy, and ſo fortunately, char he madethem retire three hundred paces,
where they made a halc as ours did alſo. Upon this I came in, ſeeing which the Enemy
clos'd up with the other Troops of horſe. There were above twenty Launces broken in
this charge, and all the Enemics Camp made a halt. I then took Monlieur de Montfer-
r.,yonly, and wenc to diſcover the Enemy at my eaſe, where I ſaw that they began to
march with Drums bearing, that they had left in a corner of the ficld on rhe lefc hand
Harquebuzeers both 'on foot and on horſeback , and ina little Wood on the right hand
Harquebuzeers on toot.

In the meantime Monſieur de Brie arriv'd, where I acquainted him with all Thad ſeen,
encreating him to cau(c his Field-pieces to advance to the brink of a Ditch, and to ſhoot
at thoſe people 1n the Corner , which-approving of my advice , he did; I then ſpoke co
Monfieur 4# Maſſes to place himſelf on the right hand by the ſide of a lictle hill chere was
there, and placed the King of Navarre*'s Company, and my own on thelett hand towards
that Corner, as I allo d1d the three Companies ot Meſſeurs de Barie, de Randan, and de
V augayon in the Meadow berwixt chem. Monſieur de Burie then began to make his Ar-
tillery play, and fo ſoon as we had put our ſelves into this poſture, all our foot came up
rogether, the Gafſcons before, and the Spaniards after within fourſcore or a handred paces
of one another. I chen rid up to the Spaniards, where addrefſing my {elf ro Don Lewis de
Carbajac, and the reſt, I ſpoke to them in Spaniſh after the beſt manner I could z for du-
ring the cime of the War I had learn*c ſomething of their languagez and you Gentlemen
who have Eſtares to allow your Children a liberal education, cake ir from me, that ic isa
very good thing to make chem, if poſſible, acquainted wich forreign Languages, which
will be of great uſe to chemy both upon the acconnt of Travel, Eſcapes, and Negotiations,
and alſo to gain che hearts of Scrangers. I ſpoke to them then after this manner, which
I had been hammering in my head the night before, and God has given me a gift, chough
I am no great Clerk, chat I can expreſs my ſelf well enough upon occaſion.

The Sicur de © Remember, Fellows in arms (for ſo I may now call you, ſince we fight together under
Mecatluc's © the ſame Enfigns) remember the great and noble reputation wherewith your Nation have
Specch ro the , © ac al[ times fignaliz*d chemſelves throughouc the whole world, where they have obcein'd
Spamtards, «® {9 many famous ViRories, as well over the Turks, Moors, and Barbarians, as againſt
* thoſe of our own Faich, You have ofcen made us feel the valour of the Spaniſh In-
«* fancry, which chroughout the Univerſe are allow'd to have the precedence of all others,
* and ſince it has pleaſed God chat we , who not above three dayes ago were Enemies, are
© now aſſembled to fighe under one and the ſame Srandard, make jr appear, thar the opi-
*© non we have ever had of your worth and valour is juſtly grounded, Our French Foot
© will have an eye to your behaviour, chey are emulousof your reputation, and have an
« ambition co excell you , ther:fore maintain your antient renown, or you diſhonor the

* Srani(h

Boox V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 26}

« Spaniſh Nation for ever. The King your Maſter hearing how bravely you have behay'd
« your ſelves, will rake 1t berter at your hands, chan if you had fought in his own parti-
« cular concern, for chis 1s Gods quarrel againſt the Lutherans, who will cut you into a
« thouſand pieces if you fall into their hands z a conſiderations that if it have not alone the
« power to encourage you to go bravely and cheerfully to the fight, irisnor to be expeRed
© that any thing in the world can excite your courages, or enflame your hearts. I fancy
« chat were I fighting in Spain, my arm would be as ſtrong again, and youare (fellow
« Soldiers) in France , thar rejoices at your coming, expeRts great advantages by your
« affiſtance, and our being thus far reconciled, begers in us a hope, that theſe two great
* Kingdoms will one day be united to juſtle the great Turk our of his Dominions. Go to
« then (fellow Soldiers) berake your ſclves tro your arms, and were ir not that I will not
« deprive Don Lewis of his due honor, I would put my (elf in the head of your Battalion,
« with a Pike tn my hand , to ſee how you will lay about yon, bur I ſhall nor be yery
« far off, that] may {ce how well you can imitate the ations of your fathers, of which
« T my ſelf have been an eye witneſs both in 7taly and in Piedmont, at Rouſſillion, and
« Fontarabie, Merhinks I long for co Morrows light, that we may ſend an account to
« both our Kings of che brave ſervice you have perform'd againſt an Enemy a hundred
« times worſe than the Moors of Barbary, having broken down the Croſſes and Altars,
« and polluted the Churches of God, bailt by our pions Anceſtors, Sacriledges, of which
« I aflure my ſelf you will take an honourable and ſevere revengee No gquieren voneſtras
Mercedes nos otros que ſermes Hermanos, y Compagneros por todas las fonereas noueſtras per
hoara de Dios y ProteClion del Rey Chriftianiſſimo Hermano de |' Rey Catholico, which when
I had ſaid, Don Lewis making anſwer for them all, {aid ro me theſe vvords. Crea wou-
eſtra merced que nos avemns bien apelear del primero aſta e poſtero, y quanto averemo unu
gotta di Sungre nellos cuerpor. Nos tarda il Tiempo que non veniamos a las manog contra

los Hereges.

As Don Lews had made an end of ſpeaking, I defired them all as a token of their
chearfaulneſs to hold up their hands, which they did, after they had firſt kily'd the ground :
after which I recurn'd to the Gaſcons, bidding Captain Charry remount tohorſe, and go
bring all che Harquebuzeers on horſeback on my left hand, that they might be ready to a-
light when I ſhould command them, which he accordingly did. 1 then made a ſpeech to
the Gaſcons, wherein I cold them, * that there had been a long diſpute berwixe the Spani-
<« grdsand the Gaſcons, and that they were now to end the Controverſic, that above fifry The Sicur
« years agoe had been begun 3 which was, that the Spaniards pretended to be ſtourer de Moutluc's
« chan the Gaſcons, and the Gaſcons on thecontrary to be braver than they 3 and char ſince _— to the
« God had done us the grace to bring us upon this occaſion to fight a Bartel under the voy.
« ſame Standard, the difference was to be determinately decided, and the honor made
« clearly our owne I am a Gaſcen, ſaid I, but I will henceforth renounce my Country,
« and never own my {clf to be a Gaſcen more, if this day you do not by bravely fighting
« win the Prize, and gain the proceſs of your adverſaries, and you ſhall fee T will be a
& 200d Advocate in this cauſe. They are Swaſh-bucklers, and think no people under
« the Sun ſo brave as they ; therefore ( fellow Soldiers ) let them ſee what you can do,
« where they give one blow, give you four. You have more reaſon to fight than they ;
« for you fight for your Princes for your Altars, your Fires, your Wives and Children ;
« and if you be overcome, beſides the ſhame that attends your defear, your Country 1s
« [oſt for ever, and which is worſe your Religion, I aſſure my ſelf 1 (hall not be pur co
« the trouble of thruſting my Sword into the reins of ſuch as ſhall ſhew their backs co the
« Enemy, and that you will every one do your devoir. Theſe people are no other than
© a Crew of baffel'd Raſcals, gather'd ſeditiouſly rogerher , -people inm*d to be beaten,
« and that already fancie the Hangman at their heels, ſo highly do their own conſciences
&« accuſe them. Ir is not ſo wich youz who fight for the honor of God, the ſervice of your
&« Prince, and the conſervation of your Country ; therefore fight like men, and hold vu
&« your hands in coken of your chearfulneſs, and conſent 5 which chey all did, and began
to cry with one voice, Let #s go, and we will never ſtop till we come to grapple with them
with the Sword, and thereupon kiſs'd the earth. The Spaniards then drew up to our men,
and I commanded both che one and the other co move but a foor pace only, thar they
might nor put themſelves out of breath ; which order being given, I gallopr up to the
Gens-d*arms, entreating them to move gently forward, and ſaying to them, Jt is not to
you (Gentlemen ) that fine ſpeeches are neceſſary to enflame your breaſts, I know you ſtand in no
need of ſnch encouragements ; thert is not a Gentry in France equal to ours in Gaſcony, to uns
then Gentlemen, to um, aud you ſhall (ce how I will ſecond you.

Monſieur

I} 5;

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox V:

Tl:e Order of
the Bartel,

The grear

Judgment of
the Sicur de
Montluc.

The Sicur de
Montluc n=
courages.
his people.

The Batte].

Monſieur de Burie then mounted upon a great horſe, having pur on his arms behind che
Artillery, where Irold him, chat if he would pleaſe ro march ac the head of the Pogy
with che Artillery, the three Companies of Gens- d?armes ſhould flank him, and he ſhould
mate the main Battail, which he inſtantly conſenced co, and in cruth I never ſaw him
ſo brisk, nor more full of noble reſolucion to fight than ar char time. Neither did he
contradict me in any thing whatever, as if I had been in his place, and I was told that he
ſhould ſay, this man is fortunate , let him do what he will, $9 ſoon as the whole Arm
lexgan to move in this order, I gallopt away, Monſieur de Monferran, and the Sicur ds
Cajelles (who is of the Family of Aong irel, and now Knight of che Order) along with
mc, and ſtaid nor till I came within thirty or fourty paces of five or fix horſe who were
under a Tree. The Sicur de Pach de Pordaillan has fince told me, thar theſe were
Monſieur de Dwras, de Bordet, and himſclf, Captain Peyralongae and another , whoſe
name I do not remember. The ſaid Caprain Peyralongue was their Camp-maſter of Foor,
and in the Charge that Caycain Boydet had made, they had taken an Archer of Monſieur
de Randan's Company, whom they led priſoner near unto this Tree, and chere gave him
ewo Piſtol ſhot in cold blood, and being not yer dead, demanded of him, who was in
our Camp, and who commanded in chief. To which he he recurn'd chem anſwer, tþas
I was come to the Army, and that I commanded., Monſ:ar de Burie having referr'd all
things to my conduft, which he ſaid, as knowing very well that news would ſtartle them.
Caprain Peyralengue then went to Monficur de Daras, vvho vvas under the forementioned
Tree, about ſome ten paces from the Archer, who himſ:{f came ro himy and again de-
manded of himif 1 was in the Camp, to which he anſwered, that I was, and was come
thither the night before, having taken Lefloure, at which they were baſely down in the
mouth, They thereupon return'd roundly to their men, vvho vvere marching a foot pace
only, and vvere nor ye: got clear of the Meadows vyiere I perceived that upon their
coming the Foot began to double their pace, and ſaid ro Monficur de Aonferran, do you
ſee theſe five horſe that were und'r the Tree, they are run to make their people mend their
pace, do you not ſee what long ſirides they take ? which having laid, Irurn'd upon the ſpur
tothe Troop vvhere Monfieur d eArgence was, and ſaid to him theſe vyords : O Monſieur
d*Argence (my Camrade) ſee, ſee the Enemy are in fear, upon my life the day's our own,
and cried our aloud, O Gentlemen, let as think of nothing but killing, for the Eneryy is as
fraid, and will never this day make head againſt us. Let as only go boldly to the fight, they
are our own. TI have a hundred times had experience of the ſame, they are only endeavoaring
to fleal off the Field, 1 then embraced the Cap:ains, and return'd to Captain Maſſes,
and faid as much to him, after which I return'd to Captain Arne , and the Gentlemen
vvho rid under my ovvn Cerner, being come along vvith my Company, and we began to

march art a falſe trot. I then galloped towards the Enemy, being my ſelf very hor, and

my horſe all of a foam, having only Monſieur de Menferran with me : vvhen being come

very near them, I obſery d their councenance, and ſaw their deſign vyas ro make all the:

haſte they could to recover a little hill that was hard by; and on the other fide our own
men coming on 11 great fury : I obſerv'd alſo their Cornets of horſe, and ſaw onemarch-
;ng, and another facing about, T took notice Iikewiſe of three or four Horſe amongft
the Foot, and perceiv'd by their geſture, that they vvere haſting their people forward,
and thereupon turn'd back to our own Horſe, crying out co them, they are afraid, they
are afraid, let us take them at their word, Camrader, let us take them at their word , that
they fly not backs Theſe are Poltrons, they tremble at the very ſight of as. I then ſemt to
Monhieur de Burie to leave the Artillery , and advance co pur himſelf into the Squadron
of the three Companies of Gens: d*arms, and vve began to march at a good rount trot to-
wards them. Some there were who call'd our to me to ſtay for the Foor; buc I made
anſwer, that vve muſt nor ſuffer them co recover the Mountain , for they would make
head againſt us, and fight at their advantage. I evermore remembred Targon, where they
had made head againſt us upon che Hill, ſo thac we were conſtrain'd to charge them a-
gainſt the aſcent of the Mountain, vvhere had thcy come down upon us we had infallibly
been defeated. Our Foot made all che haſte that Foot could poſſibly make, and when the
Enemy ſavv they could not recover the Mountain , they rallied a thouſand or cwelvc
hundred old Soldiers they had left in the corner of che field 4 whom Monfieur de Barie
had plaid upon vvich his Arrillery, and fo all cheir Forces march*c fide by fide ar a good
round trot; when ſo ſoon as wecame vvithin two hundred paces of one another, I be-
gan tocry out, charge, charge ; vvhich Thad no ſooner ſaid, bur that weall fcl] in pell-
me!l amongſt their Horle and Foor, except Captain Maſſes , who ar the ſame time tha:
he ſaw their people overthrown , ſaw allo: another great party of them hard by che Hill,
who did not offer ro move, and therefore did not charge till he came up co the party, and

che

Amma —etEHERI ae ESSE

—_———  ———

ook V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 265
then flew in furiouſly amongſt them, Monſieur de. Fonteniles, vvho had rallied ſome
few of our men, vvas in this ſecond charge alfo, and there they were all defeated, and

| cheir Artillery raken. We purſued the Vittory all along the Plain, and thorough che
Vineyards, vvhere many of chem threw themſelves into a Wood on -the lefr hand, and
{warm'd up the Cheſnurt Trees, vvhere the Spaniſh and Gaſcon Foot ſhor at them as they |
do at Rooks. Ir vvas vvell for me that I vyas vyell arm'd, for three pikes had encloſed The Sieur ge
me amongſt them, and pur me ro my Trumps, bur Captain Baretnan the younger, and MHontlne cn
:wo others had diſengag'd me, vvhere the ſaid Captain Baretnar had his horſe kill'd un- $*t 4:
der him, and mine was hurt in the noſe, and 1nthe head, wich two thruſts of Pikes :
for my horſe had carried me wether I would or no into cheir Battalion, and I never knew
char he had an ill month till chen, chat ichad like to have coſt me my life : the Caprains
Arne and Bourdillon were both wounded cloſe by me. My bring thus engag'd was the
reaſon that I could not rally with the Cavalry, for they vvere following che Chace on
the lefc hand ; and 1 vvith fitreen or twenty horſe char vvere rallied purſued the ViRtory
on the right hand towards a lictle Village, vvhere chircy or forty vvere ſlain. I there
made a lirtle halc to rake breath, atrer vvhich I returned co the Artillery vve had taken,
vyhere I found Monſieur de Buyie, and vvhere vve ſtaid the return of our people, vyho
vvere yet purſuing the Chace, and rallied our men. We found that ſome of ours had
followed the purſuir tor above rwo long leagues from the Field of Bartel, and about two
a clock in the afternoon rerurn'd to quarter at Yer, from whence vve ſent Oxen to fetch
in the Artillerie vvc had taken, and all the nexc day continued there, |

The Runawayes faild bur a very little of meeting vvith Monfieur de Montpenſier, vvho:
vvent to put himſelf into Aidan, thinking co joyn vvith us, which had ir pleaſed God
thac ic had ſo falPn out the buſineſs had been done, though he had bur very few Forces
vvith him ; for men that fly {c|dom or never face about, and are ſo afraid of every thing,
that they take Buſhes for Squadrons. Thoſe vyho eſcaped of their Foot (vvhich vyere
very few) rallied to their horſe, and marcht all the reſt of che day, and che night fol- Es
lowing towards Xaintonge to carry the good news to their Brethren, Ofchree and rwen- Nineteen En-
ty Enſfigns that they had we took ninetcen, and of thirteen Cornets of Horſe, five, all ngns _
which we ſent to Monſieur de Montpenſier, by that Complement acknowledging him for = og
our Chief, The Country people killd more chan we, for in the night they ſtole away
to retire themſelves into their houſes, and ſome hid themſelves in the Woods, bur ſo ſoon” gy
as eyerthey were diſcover'd, both men and women fell upon them, ſo that they could find Number of the
11o place of ſafery. There was numbred upon the Plain, and in the Vineyards above two cad.
chonſand ſlain, beſides thoſe who were diſpatch*c by the Boors.

Atter this Victory we marchr ſtraight to CMuſſidan : Monſieur de Burie went beforc
to atcend Monkheur de CHMontpenſier, and we left all the Army at Grignonx in wo or
three great Villages thereare berwixt Ianriac and Maſſidan, where after Thad ſeen them
ſertled in their Quarters, I alſo went ro pay my duty to him at 2duſſidan, where I was
as well receiv'd as I ſhallever be in any Company what ever fo long as I live, and do chink |
that Monſeur de Aontpenſier took me above ten times in hisarms, making me ſtay a- The Sieurs de
bove four hours with him. He was a good Prince a truly honeſt man, and very zealous 3*11% and de.
for the Catholick Religion, He was of opinion that I ſhould recurn into Gaijenne, which ©? wo _
was alſo the Judgment of all che torementioned Seigneurs who were with him, and in- Rn 7 Toy
deed 1n the King of Nawarre's Company and mine there were not thirty Horſe that ou”
were not wounded; and was reſolv'd ro cake along with him Monſieur de Burtt, the
three Companies of Gens-d'arms, and that of che Mareſchal de Termes, rogether with the
three Spaniſh Companies to go and joyn with the other ten led by Don Jan de Carbajac,
who was that day to be at Bergerac, This was the lucceſs of the Bartel of Ver, and be-
cauſe ſome perhaps may ſay chac I commend my {elf as the ſole cauſerhar the Bartel was -
fought, and acrtribuce to my own courage, and condu& the entire glory of the victory .
Monſieur de Montpenfier, and Mellieurs de Chevigny, and de V a1iguyen are yer living, who
if they pleaſe can bear witneſs, whacthey heard the whole Army ſay, and particularly che
very Servants of Monſicur de Brie, which Steur de Barie himſelf did not deny, bur thaex:
he refer'd the whole management of that bufineſs to my conduct : fot he was old, and
not fo aftive as I to command, and to run up and down trom one to another as] did.
being ar the end of che Batcel as wee as if I had been plung'd into the River. Neither is
the ſaid Sieur de Burie to be reprehended , for he came jn good time, and chough he did
not meddle himſelf, yet the Batrallion he brought along with him ſtrook a terror into the. -
Enemy, which made us have a better match. If chis Body of Hugonots could have joyn'> Imperrance of
with the Prince of Conde they had mated the King's Army , as may well be ſuppoy?d,'the Bartel of
»hen without them he was very near winning the Bactel of Drexx : and belides, had ig er.

N n

E—_— — — OS woo ere —_ a

a en i rae

.

OT

|

266

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book Y*

The Succours
of Guicane lent
© the King,

The qualities
of Monſieur de
Laktrec.

A Genera!

not been for this Bactel the Spaniards would never have dar*d co have entred into France,
ncicher could Monkeur de Montpenſier himfelf have been there, buc had been ſent ro de-
tend and relieve Gajenne, whereas by means of chis viftory he carried all che Forces of
Gaienne and Xaintonge, which confiſted of four Companies of Gens-d'armes, and (ix, *
what of his own, and what of Xaintonge, and Monſicur de Sanſat with his three and ewen-
ry Enligns of Gaſcons and Spaniards, which were no contemprible ſaccours that he car-
ried to the King, of which a good part alſo were at the winning of che Barrel, and I have
been told, char all thoſe who went from that fide behay'd themſelves admirably well at
the Bartel of Dreix (and indeed there are no Soldiers in the Kingdom chat ſurpaſs the
G aſcons, if they be well commanded ) eſpecially the ren Enfigns of Capratn Charry, whom
the King fince honor'd ſo far, as to take them into his own Guards, and keeps them to
this day, thar Monſieur de Stroz.zy has the command of them after the execrable murcher
murcher of Capcain Charyy moſt viley aſſaſſinated ar Paris. And although a man ſhould
not commend himſeſf, I ſhall not nevertheleſs forbear to deliver the truth, and to give ir
ander my hand, that I did at that time as greac ſervice for the King my Lord and Maſter,
as ever Gentleman did, and ina time of extreme nced, and the greateſt neceſſity of his
affairs. And if the Queen pleaſe to lay her hand upon her heart, Tam confidenc the will
confeſs the ſame ; the better knew than any other the condition affairs were in, and how
much I craverſt and prevented the intelligences che Prince of Conde had 1n Geieane , of
which he counted himſelf cock ſure.

You Lords then and Companions of mine, who ſhall read my Book, rake example by
the great diligence and ſudden execurion I perform'd after the taxing of LeHoure, and do
not (you who are Lieutenants of Provinces) I befiech you depead npon rhe reports others
may make you of the diſcovery of an Enemy, ar leaſt if you be able to do ic your ſelves -
for you your {elves ought to {ce and oblerve their order, countenance, and motion ; and in
ſo Going ſhall ever be berrer able ro command, than upon the report of another. Your own
eyes will better diſcern whac is neceſſary to be done, than any other whoever you can fend
ro perform that ſervice, you may take an old Captain or twoalong with you; bur aboye
all chings have a care of caking an old Captain out of any particular afteRion you have to
him, in company with you when you go todiſcover for it 15 to be fear'd,” that that affe-
ion of yours may make you take ſome ſwaggering inſignificant Coxcomb, inſtead of a
good Soldier, who fo ſoon as he ſhall diſcover the Enemy, will find a falſe friend abour
his hearc, which will be the canſe, that our of the opinion you have of his judgment and
valour, andthe friendſhip you have for him, he will make you' commit ſo great an error,
and loſe ſuch an opportunity as perhaps you ſhall never again retrieve : bur alwayes take
ſome old Captain, who inall places whereever he has been, ſhall nor only have fought
but have been moreover the occaſion of fighting ; and although he may have been ſometimes,
unfortunate, and beaten, provided it was not thorough default of courage or underſtand-
ing, do nor forbear ont of that conſideration to take him abour yon. For all the world
2re not ſo fortunate as Montlur, who was never defeated. Rather take ſucha one, than
one who has never either wonne or loſt, and that has never ſerv*d in an Army otherwiſe
than as a looker cn. I do not ſay this without experience, I have learnt theſe Leflons
under the lace Monfiear de Lautzec, who was a brave commander, and if he was unfor-
runate, it was rather thorough the defe& of his Councel, than thorough want of courage,
or good conduR, for he had as much of both thoſe qualities, as any Lord Lieucegant IT
ever ſcrv'd under. I continued my Apprentiſhip under Meſſienrs les Mareſchaux de
Strozzy, and de Briſſac, and others, I have ſeen errors enow commited by the King's
Lieurenants upon the reports have been made chem by thoſe they have ſent out ro diſco-
ver, and will moreover be bold to ſay, that when a General has himſelf ſeen and diſcover'd

ought to diſco: the Enemy, he 1s more confident, and commands with greater boldneſs ; and if before
ver an Enemy he was in ſome apprehenſion (as no man living 15 withour fear, when he ſees his Enemy

in his own pcr-

ſon,

make head againſt him) he wall reaſſure himſelf, and forget his apprehenfion, How ma-
ny times did Monſieur 4" Angaien curſe and revile himſelt upon Eaſter day ar night, be-
fore the Batrel of Seriſolles, that he had not truſted to his own opinion, and that of the
reſt who were for fighting, when he ſaw the Enemy face to face, and had nor his Army
with him? Afute your ſelves (Lords Licutenancs) I do not write this withourgrear
reaſon on my fide; bur you will ſay, that this were to put the perſon of the Chief in ha-
zard, though ir may be done without any ſuch apparenc danger. Ler ſuch as are afraid
of danger lie abed , go to diſcover in your own perſon, no one can be a better judge than
your ſelf, who will cafily diſcern if you have never fo little experience, by your Bnemies
countenance and motion, if he be rimerous or reſolute. And pardon me if I be conſtrain'd
co write my own praiſes, for ſecing I am to write my own Life, you ſhall have checruch,

neicher

q

aw u——

_—_— —— —— *
is MS at. on. <a en AR

Book V. de Montluc, Mareſehal of Fratice.

TY Ys EY

neicher would I have ſcrupled , had I been bzaten, co have conteſſed it, TT lye in any
thing I have ſaid, tlicre are a chouſand Gentlemen that are able to diſprove me, |
Bur to return to my Subject, and to make an end of this War, Monſicur de Montpen-

fier went with all h:5 Forces to ſtay for the Spaniards at Barbezieax, where he mer with

intelligence from Monſicur de Sanſac, that Monſieur de Daras was retir'd, and Monſieur
de la Rochfoncant, and t'1ar they made a ſhew 8s if they intended to turn towards him.
] was come to Bergerac, to which place Monkeur de Afontpenſier diſparcht away to me
ewo Conners, cnc in the heels of another, intreating me with all poſſible ſpced to return
back to him, for tha: Meſheurs de Daras, and de 1a Ronchefoncant were rallied together,
and as he was cnform'd , were turning towards him. As God ſhall help me, amongſt
all the Gentlemen, both of the King of Navarre's Company and my own, I conld nor
find thirty Horſe that could go a ſ{tep without great pain , however ewo hours wichin
might I ſet our, and except to cat a bit or twoby the way, never reſted till I came wich-
in two leagues of Barbezieux ; in which march I rwice met parties of the Enemy by the
way, of thole wio were eſcap'd from rhe Battel, whom I cat to pieces, and about one of
the clock in the night rook up my Quarters at Se. Private my Brother Monſieur de Lieux
was with me, wiio could not come time enough to the Bartel, and we were ar Monſieur
de Montpenſrers riling, who took the great haſte Thad made co come to him very kindly
ar my hands : and chere I found Monſieur de Sanſac, who told me that the Enemy in a
day and a night had marcht eghieen or twenty Leagues. There being then nothing to do,
Monſieur de eMontpen/ier dilmiſt me, and I recurn'd to lie at Se. Privat near unto eAu-
beterre, and the ncx: day to Bergerac, where at my return I found Don Jaan de Carbajac
with the ten $pniþ Companies, who ſtaid one day there, and the next morning marchc

away. Thus | return'd and diſmiſt every one to his own houſe, there being nothing that Gyyenre free;

Rir?d inall Gzienne, nora man thar dar'd to own he had ever been of that Religion, eve-
xy one going to Mals, and to tne Procefſions, and afliſting at Divine Service, and che Mi-
miſters who had ic:n the Trumpets of this Sedition were all vaniſhr and gone, for they

knew very well that in whar corner {otver they could lic, 1 ſhould trap them, and then
they knew what would follow,

Being come to gAgen I there heard that Monhieur de Terride was gone to engage himſelf The Sieur de
before ontanban, with the Artillery of Tholuaze, and the two Companies of Bazordan, Terride before
that T had lefc to guard the Country, and ſeven or eight more thar thoſe of the City had Hontau9n.

ſer on tooty which Sicge he had undertaken immediately upon the news of the Bacrel being
won 3 and after I had been eight dajes there the Cardinal of 4rmagnac, who at that rime
commanded To!ouze, ſent to entreat me, with whom the Court of Parliament allo joyn'd
in the requeſt, that 1 would go to Montanban, they conceiving that matters there went
very {lowly on, which pur them our of all hope of any good account of that Enterprize,
I 3minediately then departed, and took the way dircGily to Tholouze, where I recieved a
Letter from a friend of mine, wherein he writ me word, that Monſicur de Terride had
ſent a Letter to the Cardinal, another to the Court, and another:o che Capitouls, where=
in he writ, that he had heard they had ſent for me to command at the Siege of Aontanr
bany complaining that they did him great and manitc{t wrong, and invaded his honor
for by chat mcans after he had beaten the Buſh another muſt come and take che Hare.
Theie were the contents of his Lecters, which were brought by Captain Bidonnet. Being
then at T holouzes 1 was preft*d ro go tothe Leaguer ; but I made anſwer co che Cardinal
and the reſt, char I wopld not do my triend that wrong, eſpecially fince ic appear'd by his
Letters, that he made himſelf ſure of the place; when ſceing they could nor prevail with
me, to cake npon me the command of the Siege, they cutreaced me at leaft co go thither,
co ſee how marters went, which I did.

At my ceming thither Monſieur de Terride thewed me all he had done, by which I
found that in welve daycs he had lain before it he had not done two dayes work, and
ſaw the beginning had nor been very good, which made me doubt the end would be worſe :
for I tound chart he had quicred the Faxxboarg St. Antoine, which is upon the way from
Canſſade, by wich they carried oar, and broughc into the Town whatever chey would.
He had indced been necethjrared to do ir, becauſe rhe Soldicrs had forſaken him afcer the
deach of Captain Bauzwrdan, who had been chere ſlain, and ſerv'd him in che qualicy of
Camp-naſter, which had itnot fo fallen our, ic was my opinion, and ſeveral ochers w

man, and a good Soidier. Neither 1s1t co be wondred at, 1t Monſieur de Terride was
not very peite@ in the bcfieging of places ; for I will maintain char no man nnderſtands a
Sicge bur a Maſter of the Ordnance (who has alſo been long in that employment) the
Commiſlarics of the Artillery, an Engineer, we Camp-maltcr, and che Colonel, it chey

1\ 2 Doe

ee n— ee

267

Captain Boo

; cre 701daz flain
of the ſame, rhar matters would have gone much better ; tor he was an underſtanding before Mon

tauban,

. 268

——
” " PC — —— — —————— 2
__

The Commentaries of Meſflire Blaize Book Y,

The Sjcur de
Montlac at
Bordeaux.

be old Soldiers, who in theſe commands (it chey have been long in them)) muſt neceſlarily
have ſeen much of that kind of ſervices All che reſt underſtand nothing of it, nor the
General himſelf, if he have nor learnt by being very much with them, bur having us'd
rogo with them, when they have gone to diſcover places, learns tro know what belongs to
a Siege, but orherwiſe not : for the Capiains of Geng-d armes never go to diſcover ; nor
ro the approaches, it being their buſineſs ro bein a readineſs to fight, and co watch thar
no kind of relief enter into the place, How then thould they be expert in Sieges, confide-
ring that they have never aftiſted at diſcoveries, nor heard che debares chat old Soldiersencer
into with one another upon that Subje& ; for there they argue upon what they chemlelves
have diſcover'd, and in fight of the ſtrengehs and defects of the place, ?Tis a thing of all
others in War of the greateſt difficulry and importance, and by which many who are 0-
therwiſe great Captains are pur toa ſtand ; and jt requires a long pracice ro underſtand
fortification,, to obſerve and know the defe&ts of a Baſtion, a Spur, a Flanker, and to
enels what may be within It, by what you your (clves would do if you were 11 the place.
Monficur de Terride was a good Horſe Officer, and very proper for fighting, bur not for
beleaguering of places, no more than ſeveral others) who have never had other command
than thoſe he had been trained up in 5 although in his Quarters every one will be giving
his vote, and ſpending his jadgment upon a Carpet, or over a ſheer of Paper. Its in-
deed good ro {ce the Map, bur that very often deceives. I could wiſh, that when any
one, who has never been employed in any or the forementioned Commands, nor ever
folloy?d the Kings Lieatenant when he went to view a place, nor heard che diſpute of the
above named Officers upon their ſaid diſcovery will be prating, and offcring to put in
cheir Verdi : the Kings Lieutenant would bid him, firſt go hazard himfelf through the
Enemies ſhort at the diſcovery, and then deliver his advice. *Tis alwayes the cicklieſt
place, foraſmuch as if the befieged be men of any mecal , they will hinder as much
as in them lies, the aſſailant from diſcovering their Fort : and as much as they poſſibly
ean will diſpute all they have without, as much as to a hut, for if they ſuffer them to
make their approaches at fuſt, they either diſcover themſelves to be weak, or that they are
no Soldiers. |

I lefr then this hopeful Siege, and return'd to eFpen, having told Monkeur de Terride
my opinion, that he would have no better ſucceſs, chan whar I had prophecied to him.
A few dayes afcer the Parliament of Boxwrdeaax, and Monſieur de Novailles Governor of
the City, ſent to entreart me that I would come to Boxrdeanx, to help to pacifie a Tumule
was rifin in the City, which I accordingly did, and there ſtaid ſome dayes ; after which
I returned again tro Agen, that I mighr bein the heart of the Country, to which all che
Gencry ordinarily repair, And there it 15that the Lieurcuant of a Province ought to relide,
and not at Bowrdeaux, although that be the Capital Ciry, ic being too farre off. And
moreover there 1s a Court of Parliament, that will have a hand in every thing, and the
Gentry cannot go thicher without grear expence, and beſides rkere is alwayes ſomerhing
or other amiſs, and ſome one or another queſtion'd, which frighrs the Gentlemen from
going thucher.

Not long after the Cardinal of Armegnac, Court of Parliament of Tholouze, and the
Capicouls of the ſame, ſent co entreat me to come thither about ſome affairs of importance
they could not commir to writing, which I did, they needed norto ſummon me twice,
and when I came there they called a Council whercin were affiſting Mefſteurs de Cardi.
nals of Armagnac, and de Strozzy, Monheur le primier Preſident d Afﬀfir, the Seigneurs de

The deſign of Terride, de Negrepelice, Fourquevanx, du Fant the Kings Advocat General, and the Ca-

thoſe of Tho-
louRg.

pitouls, where they gave me to underſtand that they intended to ſer ſome Forces on foot
togo into Langaedoc, and that they had choſen me for head of the Army : but I excus'd
my ſelf, repretenting to them, that the Conſtable would nor take it well, confider:ng ir
was in his Government, and that beſides he had no great kindneſs for me. Now che
Bactel of Dr«x had already been fought, where, as every one knows, his Majeſties affairs
were very foul ſhaken, bur the ViRtory remain'd to the King, thorough the valour and
condu& of che Duke of Gaiſe. Nevertheleſs the ſaid Conſtable was taken priſoner on
the one fide, as che Prince of Conde was on the other, and ſo both the Generals were ra-
ken, a thing that was never known before ; which ſhews thac it was well fought , bur be-
ing that I was not there it nothing concerns me to ſpeak of that buſineſs. T was ſo im-
poreun'd by theſe people, that in the end I was fain to accept the Commiſſion, and we
ſer down in writing all chings that were neceflary to be provided for the expedition, Of
which the Cardinal de Strozzy undercook to cauſe twelve hundred Canon ſhot, and a
proportionable quantity of Powder ro be brougar from Marcelles, and Monſieur de Fenr-
guevanx took upon him to ſend ſome allo from NVarbonne 3 and {o we began to diſtribure

the

R——Rer_—[—n_wLw@eQow c_—Co_Aee_ wo ouQCQCQucoccouoKQu£c G(9/ococw_=c  ccuww@QQowcwc cow. @£o.w@_@ÞDD— w©.a@ccQ lo. .c6Þo. oc... oa. o a@©—©£<.—. A A Lt AE a att tht tte, tt ett tenet et ed. ee i at

Book V. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 269

the foot Commuiliions , concluding within thircy dayes to have all things in a readineſs,
rogerher with the money chat was to be levied by che City and che Country of Langaedce,
who were alſo aſfociated in the D:fign. | |
Daring theſe cranſ{aRtions ina day 2nd a nights rime no leſs than three Couriers came
to me from Bourdeanx, of which che eldeſt Son of che Recorder Pontae was the firſt, the
Kings Advocat 14 Het (who fince has been Atturney=General) the ſecond, and a Gentle-
man belonging to Monſieur de Nowvailles the Third ; who all came upon one and che
fame errand, which was to tcll me, thar if I did not ſuddenly, and with the extremeſt
diligence go to rehieve the City of Bourdeanx, it would infallibly be loſt, through an un-
happy difference was fali'n out chere berwixc the firſt Prefident Lagabaffon, and Monſieur _,
de Novailles the Governor : wherefore the Court of Parhamenc, che Jurars, and rhe ſaid alas ”
AUR ordeauz.
Monſicur de Novailles, all of them entreated me to make haſte, or otherwiſe I would come
roo late, for Monfiear dg Nowailles had already ſent for all the Train'd- Bands to bring
chem into the City by the Caſtle of Ha, that was in his poſſcion, and ſome of thoſe of
the Town poſleſt themſelves of the Gates, for part of the City ſided with Monſicur de
Novailles. I had much ado to prevail with rheſe Gentlemen cole me go thither, till I
was fain co promiſe chem upon my nonor within fifreen dayes to return to Tholonze, de-
firing them in the mcan cime to haſten their Levies and Preparations, thac I might find all
chings ready at my return ; and {oI put my ſelf upon my way, for I was never a man
of delays5 and being I had a greac number of Gentlemen wich me, I could not go by
water, bur was conſtrajn'd to make my journey by land, by reaſon of the armes and grear
Horſes we had, fc that we were chree dayes in going to Agen. I had diſpatcht away Pon-
tac, and Monftear de Novailes his Gentleman, to aſſure thoſe of Bourdeanx of my com-
ing : bur Monſieur de Het would not go away cill he firſt faw me on horſeback, and af-
trerwards 11d fo hard, that he fell fick, and had like to have died. Their arrival held
every one in ſuſpence, both on the one fide and the other. We ſtaid but one night ac
Agen, and went forwards, and in three dayes more I came to Boxrdeavx, where I found
a Patent the King had ſent me, by which he made me his Licutenant in the one half of
the Government of Gwzienne jn the abſence of the King of Navarre, and the other half co
remain to Monſieur de Byrie, withour making nevertheleſs any diſtinCtion as then, which
pare ſhould belong co Monfiear de Barie, and which to mc.
They believ'd that at my coming I would vreſently have had recourſe to arms, and
have kill'd all thoſe of the Preſidents Party, and on of that beliefe many were fled away :
buc I knew very well chat thathad been to ruine the Ciry, and that the King would be a
great loſer by it 3 for had I gone chat way to work the Earch could not have faved che Cicy
from bcing ſacked. I went by Cadillac, where Monſieur de Candalle did methehonor co bear
me company , and we ſhipt our ſelves in his Galion, and ocher Veſſels, for there was a
oreat number of Gentlemen, and by the way met news, that Monſieur de Novailles died The death of
thac nighc, having lain only ewo dayes ſick, which gave occaſion to ſome afterwards to Monſieur de
fay that he died of poiſon, how true it was I know not, bur it was great pity, for he was Novaites.
a prudent honeſt Gentleman, and a good Subject. |
The nexe morning after my arrival I went to the Palace, and there propounded to the
& Court what I had retein'd from the Sicge of Siennay and after what manner we oughc
« to proceed in a great City , either in Warre or in Sedition; telling them that ſhould
«we put our hands to blood, the City would be corally deftroyed, wherein both parties
«would ſuffer alike, laying before them the example of Tholouze, where had T permitteg
&© thoſe who came from the Mountains, and {omenge, to enter the City, it had nor been in
« the power of man co have preſerv'd it from being fackr, which would alſo befall them,
& if we once procceced to blood, and gavercins to the peoples fury, eſpecially thoſe from
& without, bidding them remember what hapned when Monfieur de CMonens was (lain,
& char che people rook the Authority upon them. Thar chey were therefore ro begin with
« 1e00d reconciliation and union, without engaging in any diforders or trouble, after
&« which they might proceed co punith the Delinquents by che way of juſtice. All che
Aſſembly approvid of my advice, and return'd me infinite thanks. Ar my departure
from thence, ſo foon as I had din'd I went co the Town Hall, where I had appointed the
Furacrs and all the Council to mcet me, and made them the ſame remonſtrance, where
chough chere were ſome who had a mind to blow the coals, nevertheleſs I laid fo many
exemples and good reaſons before them, that they all alccred cher reſolution, and abouc
fonr of the clock 1 went to the Arch Biſhopricky where I had affign'd all che Clergy to
expect me, and there made them alſo a Remonſtrance touching the Eſtate of the Church,
as I had done to the ocher two concerning theirs : ſo tha: thar very day 1 appeagd the
City, and the next day we fell co conlul of the order was to be obiery?d, thar the paci-

cation

= AS. 5 _—_— —— of 6 | LD bf

The Commentaries of Meſſre Blaize Boox V;

fication might endure, wherein I ſo beſtirr'd my felt, char in three dayes all rumulr;
were converted into peace and perfe& union, 1 will be bold to ſay, and call all che Ciry
of Bonrdeanx to witnels jt, that had I proceeded otherwiſe the City had been deſtroyed ;
neichcr ought we to have recourſe to violence, where there 1s any other way lefc open, e-
ſpecially conſidering, thar it was a diviſion amongſt the Catholicks, or at leaſt choſe who
profeſſed themſelves ro be ſach, for I am not God Almighty to dive into mens
hearts. |

Oh that the King onght well to conſider to whom he entruſts the Government of a Pro-
vince, and above all things to make choice of ſuch as have formerly becn Governors of
places; for if by a long experience he be nor intelligent in ſuch employments, che Country
or City where ſuch Tumults ſhall ariſe, run a manifeſt danger. I had been Governor of
CMontcallier and Alba, and the Kings Lieutenant firſt at Sienna, and afrerwards at 3fon-
talſin: Where the various accidents I had had experience of, had taught me to know,
and to foreſee the ruine or preſervation of a place 5 without which experience I do believe

The Nature of I had taken the way of execution, I being in my own nature rather encln*d to ſcuffle,

the Sicur de

Montluc.

Conſiderations

than to pacifie affairs, and more to fighting and cutting of throats, than co making of
ſpeeches : bur my diſcretion govern'd me upon this occaſion z neither ought a man to
ſufter himſelf ro be hurried away by his own inclination, or tranſported by his paſſion,
foraſmuch as his Maſters affairs will ſuffer by ic. There were enow in the City that would
have bcen glad to have cut out work enough, in hatred to the chief Prefidenr, who was
never much belov'd amongſt them : bur wherher he were hated with reaſon, or otherwiſe
I referre to others to determine. Monſieur de Bourdeanx who 15 yet living, knows very
well what intelligence a certain perſon brought me as I was walking with him in his
Garden,

I was then ſolicited by all the Court of Parliament, all the Gentry, and the whole Ciry,
to accept the Charge the King had conferr'd upon me, which nevertheleſs I would by no
ineans be perſwaded to do, and had ſent away a diſpatch ro the King and Queen to re-
turn their Majeſties my moſt humble chanks, and to excuſe my {elf from that employ-
ment ; for I {till fancicd ro my felf that that would happen which has fince befaln me,
and that this Government would bring upon me the envy and hatred which peradventure
T might otherwiſe avoid : neither did Iever prophefie any thing of my ſelf that has nor
come to paſs, Ler any one ask Preſident Lagebaſton, who made me the Harangue in the
Palace to perſwade me to take the Government upon me, what anſwer I made him there
in publick, and what I afterwards ſaid to him in private. There are alſo other Prefi-
dents and Counſellors yer living, who heard my reaſons, and who I am confident can re-
member it the PredictionsI then mide of my {elf be come to paſs, So it was that at that
rime I did not accept it, nor of two dayes after z nor that the King did not herein con=
terre a greater honor upon me than I deſerv*d 3 nor that I would not have been glad of fo
good a fortune z but ] had evermore a thouſand niceties before my eyes. But the pre-
mier Preſident Lagebaſton, the other Prefidents his Brethren, and the antient Councellors,
came to my lodging, and gave me very many argiumcn:s to perſwade me, and on the 0-
ther fide Monſieur de (andalle , Monſieur d'Eſcars (whom T found there) Monheur de
Lieax my Brother, Meſtieurs de Barſac, d'Vza, and all the Gentlemen who were with me,
were very prefiing upon me, ſaying that I ought to accepr it 3 and the Jurars, together with
the whole Body ot the City did the ſame ; by which means being lefc ſingle in my opi-
njon, I was conſtrain'd to paſs the Wicker, like a man chat is thraſt into rhe Gaol ; for
ſo Lmay ſay I was torc'd in, and had I been lete ar liverty, T wonld have loſt my life, or
have perform*d ſome {ervices that ſhould have becn acceprable to the King, and trom which
I would have deriv*d ſome recompence, whereas by the ſervices I have perform'd 1n my
adminiſtration in theſe parts, I haye reapr no other advantage than reproaches and
diſgrace. And yer I will be bold to ſay chat no man under heaven could have behav'd
himſelf better than I did, by the teſtimony of all che three Eſtates of Gaienne, and had
I done ſuch ſervices in the lite cime of either of the late Kings, Francis, or Henry, there
had not been a Gentleman in France under the Title of a Prince, who had been higher
preferr'd, or in greater eſteem than I had been. Bur God be praiſed tor all; all che re-
compence I have had 1s a grear Harquebuz ſhot in my face, of which I ſhall never be
cud fo long as I live, which makes me erernally curſe the hour that ever I had chis Com-
mand. Many better men chan I would have cſtecn*d themſelves honor'd by it, and fo

of the Sicur de did 1, bur being to ſerve a King in his Minority, and in a Country where I foreſaw I

Montiuc,

{ſhould have enough to do, and very little means wherewirhal co doit, I conceived ic might
have been more advantageous to me, to have gone further off from my own Dunghil. And
I would ever adviſe avy fricnd of mine rather co accept a remote Command, than one

NCAL

” a

TRIS

ce Txt A OST I EE or UII WT &
Oe EY PIE. CRRPAT EO TT PRRR WOORS

LAGER):
a "PP

Boox Vo de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

near home 3 tor no man is a Prophet in his own Country, However for the benefic ot my
| Country I was content ro cake this great burthen upon me. I one i ;
Now as choughe to have departed from Bourdeaux togo to Tholonze after I had ap- The Peace af-
pealed all chings here, the Peace came, which was brought by Captain Flewrdels. <r we firſt ,
He had mer with Captain /font/uc hard by Afuſſidan, who was carrying twelve Compa- evo Os
nies of Foot (rhe fineſt Companies, and che beſt arm'd chat ever had been raiſed in Gujenne) ROY
and one Troop of Lighthorſe, co the King ; the Sicur de Langon was his Lieutenant, and
che Sicur de £Montferran his Enſign. The City of Bourdeanx had ſent him two pieces of
Canon, and one Culverine, which che ſaid Captain Fleardelis mer two leagues from Mnſ-
{dan : bat Captain eMontiwe would not ſtop his Marcheill fiſt he heard from me. The
Peace being publithr, every one was of opinion that I ſhould countermand him, which I
therefore did , brought back che Artillery, and disbanded all che Foot and Horſe, that
the people might no longer be eaten up 3 ſending in like manner to Tholonze to do the
{ame 2 fo char in eight dayes time every one was retir'd to his own home, I making no
queſtion of ſecuring Gmienne withour Gariſon either of Horſe ,or Foot : which I did, and
{o well, char for che ſpace of five years neicher Trooper nor Foot Soldier eat fo much as a
Hen chroughour the whole Province upon the account of arms. I had chree pieces of
Canon at Ages, and with threats and bravadoes kept all che world in awe, making every
one lay afide his arms, eſpecially fire arms, ſo that not a man was ſeen to wear any arms,
che Gentlemen excepted , who were allow?d their Swords and Stillettoes. And for two
Catholick Souldiers that I cauſed to be hang'd for tranſgreſſing the Edi&t, I ſtroke fo great
a terror int0 the whole Countrey, that no one dar'd any more to lay hand co his arms.
The Hugonors thinking to eſcape better cheap, and that I would nor offer to puniſh chem ;
two other Soldiers of the Religion alſo tranſgrefſed the Edi, whom I likewiſe immediately
traſ{?d up to bear company with the others ; ſo that the rwo Religions leeing there was
no impunity for either of chem, and rhac neither the one nor the other could promiſe c9
chemſelyes any aſſurance of me if they ſhould offend, they began to love one another, and.
ro frequent one anothers houſes, Thus did I maintain the Peace for the ſpace of five
years berwixt both parties 1n chis Country of Gienne, and do believe that if every one
would have taken the ſame courſe, wirhour partiality to the one ſide, or che other , and
have executed juſtice indifterently upon thoſe who deſerv'd ir, we had never ſeen ſo many
troubles in this Kingdom. And ir was no little ching that I perform*d, for I had co do
with as capricious and fanatick head-pieces as any in the whole Kingdom of France, or
$19" tron in all Exrope z and who governsa Gaſcon may afſure himſelf he has donea _ |
aſterpiece, who as he is naturally warlike, ſo is he proud , mutinous, and inſolent ; The Nature of
nevercheleſs by playing one while che gentle, and another the auſtere, I lubjeRed all ro me, the Gaſcons,
without any one {o much as once daring to lift up his head. In brief che King was ac-
knowledg'd, and his Laws obey'd. _ |
This was the end of the firſt Civil War, and the firſt troubles in choſe places where I
was, with che account of what TI did in them, which is in ſ\umme, that if God had nor
inſpir'd me wich courage to oppoſe the Hugonots in due time, they would have been fo
eſtabliſht, that ic had not been 1n the power of the King of a long time co have remoy?d
them : for I am nor of che opinion of thoſe, who fay ir had fignified nothing, and char
though rhey had been canton'd here, one might have ſhut them up : Tr isa rich and plen-
tiful Country as any in the Kingdom of France, abounding in Navigable Rivers, ſtrong
Holds, and very good Harbours ; how then ſhould {ach a Country be ſhut up, confider-
ine that che Engliſh, and other forreign Nations may ar all timescome to it by Sea? The
King has {er bur two little value npon it; *cis well if he do not one day repent ir. Bur
provided theſe fine talking Gentlemen, who prate at their caſe, may have their own arms
at libercy, they care nor for any body elſe, and when one comes to demand of them affi-
ſtance of money (for of every thing elſe we have but too much) they cry, let them raiſe
it xpon the Corntry, and ſo the Soldier, not bcing paid, 15 neceſſicaced ro plunder, and rob,
and the King s Lieutenant to endureic, *'Tisall one ſay they, a Country ſpoiled is not loſt.
O lewd expreſſion, and unworthy of a Counſellor of the Kings, who has the managemenc
of affairs of Stare ! He has nor the trouble of 1t, nor does he bear the reproach ; bur he
who has che charge of the Province, and whom che people load with continual execra-
£10ns. |
Behold then our G#lenne thus loſt, and recover'd, and fince maintain'd in peace for che
good of the people 3 and co my particular and great misfortune ; for my Son Captain
Montlac being no more able to live ar reſt than his Father, ſeeing himſelf uſeleſs in France, The Defion ©
as being no Courtier, and knowing of no forreign War wherein to employ his arms, dc- Capaain ; "by
Ggn?d an Enterprize by Sca, to go to make his fortune 1n Affrick, and to this end followed juc, |

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book Y;

—————.,
— —

He is {\un,

Commendarti-
on of the Munt -
lucs.

by a brave number of Gentlemen Volunteers (for he had above three hundred wich him)
and by a great many of the beſt Officers and Soldiers he could cull ouc, he embarke at
Bonurdeaux in a Fleet of fix Men of War, as well equipt as Veſlels could poſſibly be, 1
ſhall noc inſiſt upon the deſign of this unfortunace Expedition, wherein he loſt his life,
being ſlain witha Musket ſhort in the Tſſand of EMaderas going athore to water, and where
being the Iſlanders would nor peaceably permic him to refreſh his Ships, he wasconſtrain'd
to have recourſe to violench, to their loſs and ruine 3 but much more to mine, who there
loſt my right hand. Had it pleaſed God to have preſerv?d him to me, they had not done
me thoſe charitable Offices at Conre they have fince done. In ſhort I loſt him in the flow.
er of his age, and then when expeRed he ſhould have been both che prop of mine, and
the ſupport of his Country ; which has very much miſs'c him fince- I had loft the braye
Mark Anthony my etdeſt Son at the Port of Oſtia, buc this that died ar the Jaderas was
of ſuch value, thac there is nota Gentleman in Gjenne who did not judge he would
ſurpaſs his Father, Burt I leave it tothoſe who knew him, rogive an account of his va-
lour ard prudence. He conld not have fail'd of being a good Captain, had God
been pleafed to preſerve him ; but he diſpoſes of us all, as ſeems beſt ro his own wiſdom,
I chink this lictle Montlac that he has lefe me will endeavour to imitate him both in valour
and loyalty to his Prince, which all the 2ontlauc*s have ever been eminent for, and if he
prove not ſuch, I diſclaim him. Every one knows, and the Queen more than any other,
that I was never the Author of this unfortunate Voyage ; and the Admiral knows very
well how much I endeavour'd to break the deſign ; nor that Thad a mind to keep him
idle by the fire, but out of the apprehenſion I had it might occaſion a Breach becwixc rhe
two Crowns of France and Spain, which though I might perhaps in my own boſom de-
fire, to remove the War from our own doors, I would alſo have wiſht that ſome other
might have been the occaſion of the rupture. My Sons deſign was not to break any
Truce with the Spaniard 5 bur I ſaw very well that it was impoſſible, bur he maſt do ic
there, either with him or che King of Portagal : For to hear theſe people ralk, a man
would think that the Sea was their own, The Admiral lov'd and eſteem'd this poor Son
of mine but too much, having told the King, that never a Prince nor Lord in France, up-
on his own fingle account, and without his Majeſties aſfifliance, could in ſo ſhorr a time
have made ready ſo great an Equipage. And he faid true, for he won the hearts of all
that knew him, and that were enamour'd of the praRtice of armsz and I was fo wiſe as
co think that fortune was oblig'd to be as favourable to him as ſhe had been to me. For an
old Soldier as I am, I confeſs I commirted agreat error, that I did not difcover the defign
ro {ome other (conſidering chat the Vicount 4UVza, and de Pampadoar, and my young
Son were of the party ) who might have tried their fortune, and purſaed che Enterprize

projefted ; which nevertheleſs I ſhall nor here diſcover , becauſe the Queen may perad-
venture another day again (ct it on foot.

The End of the Fifth Book.

THE

COMMENTARIES

Mefiire Blaixe de 0Montluc,
FRANC

The Sixth Book.

DOALIS DQ Or the ſpace of five years France enjoyed this tranquility and re-

i %

1

poſe with the two Religions that divided the Kingdom ; neverthe-
leſs I ſtill doubred there was ſome Snake lurking in the graſs:
though for what concern*d the Province of Gayenne, T was in no
great apprehenſion 3 for I had evermore an eye to all things, ſend-
ing theQaeen notice of every ching I heard, with all the fidelity
and care wherewith any man living could give an account of his  _
cruſt, The King ar this time went a Progreſs to viſit the ſeveral The King ac
| Provinces of his Kingdom, and being come to Tholouze, I went to Tholonne.
kiſs his Majeſties hand, who gave me a more honorable reception than I deſerv*d. The
Hugonots faild not upon this occaſion ro make uſe of cheir wonted artifices and praQtices,
and made me falſe fire under hand, for openly they duſt nor do it 3 bur I did not much
regard cheir malice. The Queen did me the honor to tell me all, wherein ſhe manifeſted
. the confidence ſherepos'd in me, and I by that very well, that the did not love the Hu-
gonots. One day being in her Chamber with Mcfhicurs che Cardinals of Bourbon and Gaiſe,
ſhe repeated to me all her fortune, and the perplexity ſhe had been in, And amongſt other The Queens _
things, that the night news was brought her of che loſs of che Barrel of Drexux (tor ſome diſcourſe ro the
brave fellow who had nor leiſure to Tay co ſee what Monſieur de Gaiſe did after che Con. i*u de Monte
ſtable was routed and taken, had given her this falſe Alarm) ſhe was all nightin Council e_
with che ſaid Cardinals, ro conſulc what courſe the ſhould take to ſave the King ; where
in theend it was reſolv'd, chat if in the morning the news ſhould be confirm'd, ſhe ſhould
try to retire into Guienne, though the Journey was very long, accounting that ſhe ſhould
be ſafer chere chan 1n any other part of che Kingdom. May God for ever refuſe to affiſt
me, if hearing this {ad ſtory, the cears did not ſtart into my eyes, ſaying to her theſe ver
words; Good God ! Madam was your Majeſty reduc'd to that neceſſity? which ſhe aflur?d
me, and (wore upon her ſoul, ſhe was, as alſo did boch che Cardinals, and to ſpeak the
truth had this Bartel been loſt, her Majeſty had been in a very deplorable condition, and
I do believe chere had been an end of France 3 for the whole State and Religion had been
turn'd rophie- turvy, and with a young King every body does what they will.
| Now their Majeſties having paſſed thorough Gujenne, found all things in a becter po=
ſture chan had been repreſented co them : For my good friends the Hugonots had ſpread
a report char all was ruin'd and loſt : bat their Majeſties found ic in a much better con-
dicion than Languedce. They ſojourn'd ſome time at Mont-de Harſan in expeRation of
the Queen of Spains coming to Bayonne ; and I will here ſer down a thing that I diſcover'd
there, to ſhew char 1 have cver inviolabiy kept with the Queen the Promiſe T made her
at Orleans, after the deach of King Francs, that I would never depend upon any other than
the King and her, as I have never done, and alchough I have reapr no greac advanc
O |

V

age

by

P og

274 "oh Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book VI;

by ic, yer I hid rather the defaule ſhonld be on che other fade, chan chac I had faiPq
A League ſ.r of my word. I heard then ſome whiſper of a Leagae chat wss forming in France, where-
on foot is jn were {cycral very great perſons, both Princes and others, whom nevertheleſs I have no.
France. thing to doto name, being engag by promiſe to the contrary. I cannor certainly lay
to what end this Leagne was coutriv*d : but a certain Gentleman named them to me
every one, endeavouring ar the ſame time to perſwade me to make one in the Aſlociacion,
aſſurins me it was to a good end 2 bur he perceiv*d by my countenance, that 1t was not a
diſh for my pallate, I preſently gave the Queen privace incimation of it z for I could
not endure ſuch kind of doings, who ſeem'd ro be very much aſtonithe ar ir, telling me
ic was the firit ſyllable ſhe had ever heard of any ſuch thing z and commanding me to
enquire further into the buſineſs, which I did, buc could ger nothing more our of my
Genileman ; for he now lay upon his Guard, |

The Sicur d! Her Majeſty then was pleaſed to ask my advice, how ſhe ſhould behave her ſclF in
Mozluc's Þ this buſineſs, whereupon I gave her counſel to order it ſo, thar the King himſelf thould
Queen  fayinpublick, that he had heard of a League thar was forming in his Kingdom, which
| no one coald do withour giving him ſome jealouſie and offence : and that therefore he
muſt require every one withour exception to break off this League, and that he would
make an aſſociation in hzs Kingdomy of which he himſelf would be the Head ; for ſo for
ſome time it wascalld, though they afterwards chang'd the name, and call'd 1c che Con-
federation of the King, The Queen at the time that I gave her this advice d1d by no
means approve of it, objecting, that ſhould the King make one, it was to be feared that
others would make another $4 bur T made anſwer and faid, that the King muſt engage in
his own all ſuch as were in any capacity of doing the contrary , which however was a
thing that could not be conceal*d, and might well enough be provided againſt. Two dayes
after her Majeſty being at Supper called me to her, and cold tne, that ſhe had confider'd
better of the affair had ſpoke to her about, and found my counſel to be very good, and
that the next day , without farther delay, ſhe wonld make the King propound che buſie
neſs to his Council y which ſhe accordingly did, and ſent ro enquire for meat my lodging,
bur I was not within, In the Evening ſhe askr me why I did not come to her , and
commanded me not to fail ro come the next day, becanſe there were ſeyeral great difficul-
ties in the Council, of which they had not been able ro determine. I came according to
The advice of her command, and there were ſeveral diſputes. Monſicur de Nemonrs made a very ele-
Mcflicurs de 4 gant Speech, remonſirating © That it would be very convenient to make a League and Aﬀeo-
ie Ame ** cjation for the good of the King and his Kingdom, to the end , that if affairs ſhould fo
* © require, every one with one and the ſame will might repair to his Majeſties perſon , to
« ſtake their lives and fortunes for his ſervice, and alſo in cafe any one of what Religion
« ſoever, ſhould offer to invade or aſſault them, or raiſe any commorion in the Stare, that
« they might with one accord unite, and expoſe their lives in their common defence, The
Dake of Montpenſier was of the ſame opinion, and ſeveral others, ſaying, that this could
not chooſe bur ſo much the more ſecure the peace of the Kingdom when ir ſhould be

known, thzrall the Nobilicy were thus united for the defence of the Crown.
The advice of The Queen then did me the honor to command me to ſpeak ; whereupon I began, and
the Sicur de ſaid, © Thac the League propoſ?d could be no wayes prejudicial to the King, being that
Montlyc. «jrtended to a good end for his Majeſties ſervice , the good of his Kingdom, and the
&« peace and ſecurity of his People ; butthar one which ſhould be form?d in private could
« produce nothing bur diſorder and miſchief : for the good could not anſwer for che
«eyil diſpoſ*d; and ſhould the Cards once be ſhuffled berwixe League and League, ir
« would bea hard matter to make of jt a good game; that being the moſt infallible way
« to open a door to ler Strangers into the Kingdom, and to expoſe all things to fpoil and
« ruine ; bur that all of us in general, both Princes and others, cught to make an Aſſo-
« cjation, which ſhould bear the Title of the League, or the Confederation of the King,
& and to take a grear and ſolemn Oath, not to decline or ſwerve from it upon penalty of de-
& ing declar'd ſuch as che Oath ſhould import : and char his Majeſty having fo concluded,
& ought todiſpatch Meſſengers to all parts of the Kingdom, with Commiſſion to take the
« Qathes of ſuch as were not there preſent, by which mcans ic would be known, who were |
« willing to live and die in the ſervice of the King and State. And ſhould any one be
« ſo fooliſh or impudent , as to offer to take arms, lt usall Sir ſwear to fall upon them z
« T warrant your Majeſty I will cake ſuch order in theſe parts, char nothing ſhall ſtirre co
«the prejudice of your royal Authority. And in like manner lec us engage by the faith
« we owe to God, thar if any Counter-League ſhall diſcloſe ir (elf, wewill give your Ma-
« teſty immediate notice of it : and let your Majeſtie's be ſubſcrib'd by all che great men
« of your Kingdom, The Feaſt will not be right withour them, and they alſo are eafie
ro

TI 4 Lora aoiÞ ns . odd myo 6 il ode 2H 6. id ei Add ers Le tek

wa w_——

de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 275

SIE

Bookr VI.

«co be perſwaded co it, and che ficceſt ro provide againſt any inconveniency may
« happen. TT | | _ | :-

This was my Propoſition , upon which ſeveral diſputes enſued ; but in the end the
King's Aſſociation was concluded on, and itwas agreed, thar all the Princes, great Lords,
Governors of Provinces, and Captains of Gens d'arms ſhould renounce all Leagues and
Confederacies whatſoever, as well without as wichin the Kingdom, excepting that of che
King, and ſhould take che Oath upon pain of being declar'd Rebels co the Crown to
which there were alſo other obligations added, which I do not remember. There aroſe
ſeveral difficulties about couching the Articles, ſome ſaying they were ro be couch'd after
one manner, and others after another; for in theſe great, as well as in our inferior
Councils there is black and white, and obſtinacy and difſimulationy and ſome perhaps
there were, who though they ſer a good face on the matter, wereelſewhere engag'd, So
goes the World. O ?.is a miſerable thing when a Kingdom falls co a King in minority,
had he then had the knowledge that he has had fince, I do believe he would have made
ſome people ſpeak good French. In the end all was paſt and concluded, and the Princes
began to take the Oath, and co fign the Articles, where though I was buta poor Gentle-
man, the King would alſe chat I ſhould fign with chem, by reaſon of the charge I had un-
der him, and it wasalſo ſent to the Conſtable at Bayonne, who fign'd it there. On the 0-
cher fide they ſent to the Prince of Conde, ro the Admiral; Monfieur d' Andelot, and other
Lords and Governors of France 3 and at che recurn of the Mcfſengers the King (as I was
cold) caus'd an Taſtrumenc to ve ingroſt of all, and put amongſt the Records of the Crown.
I do believe it cannot be loſt, and that there a man may ſee in black and white ſome peo-
ple forſworn to ſome purpole. I know not who was the beginning of the War ala St.
Michel ; but whoever it wasI know he wentcontrary to his Oarh, and char the King, if
he ſo pleaſed, might juſtly declare him perjur'd, foraſmuch as he ſtands obliged by his
Qath, and his own hand and ſeal are againſt him : neither would he have any wrong
done him, becauſe he was conſenting to the conditions. And although there was no fight=
ing work in this affair, I do nevertheleſs conceive, that I did the King and Queen a good
piece of [ervice in diſcovering this practice , which had ic not been diſcover'd , matcers
might peradvencvre have gone worſe than they did.

The King ac his recurn from Bayonne took his way towards Xaintonge, and Rochelle, to
which place I attended him, and there he commanded metro recurn, giving me inftruRi-
ons to cauſe the Edits of Pacification to be inviolably obſerv'd ; which I have ever done;
neither can Ir be ſaid thatthe War began in my Government : and alfoif chey had begun
wich me, they would have had no great match on'r, neither could they have taken me
unprovided : bur their deſign was at the head. The Queen who is yer living may re-
member what I (aid to her concerning Rochelle ; for had this feather been pluckt from rhe
Hugonots wing , and {ecur'd to his Majeſties devotion, as I advis'd her it ought to be, ;
France had never ſeen thoſe many miſchiefs that have follow'd ſince. Bur ſhe was ſo ti- The timerouſ.-
merous and fearful of giving any occaſion of new crouble, that ſhe durſt atrempr co alter neſs of the
nothing, and I know very well, chat ſhe one night entertein'd me-above two hours, talk- Queen Mother
ing of nothing bur things chat had paſt during the life-time of che King her Husband my
good Maſter. And yer one, who was none of the leaſt, went and reported that T was
contriving, ſomething co the prejudice of the Peace, Would to God her Majeſty had ta-
ken my advice, Rochelle ſhould never have dar'd co have mutcer'd.

Now as the King was going out of Brittany, to take his way to Blojs, I had intelli-
gence from Re#ergue, Yuercy, Perigord, Burdelois, and Apenois, that the Hugonots were
ſeen rogo up and down with great horſes in ſmall parties, carrying Sumprers along wich
them, wherein *cwas ſaid they carried their Arms and Piſtols. Three or four times I gave
the Queen notice of it, but the would never give credir to my intelligence. In the end
I ſenc ro her CMartineas, the ſame who at chis preſent is * Comptroller of the Wars, who * A kind of
was not very welcome to bring ſuch news, and three dayes after his arrival at Court Bozry Secrerary who
a Secretary of mine arriv'dalſo with other intelligence from me to the Queen, thac .chey 1* *2 £1 an

all march'c openly day and night, chough I think ſhe would hardly have beliey'd 77 account of the

; a : ; | charge and cx»
had it not been, that ar the ſame time her Majeſty had advertiſements from all the other _—_ of tbe

Govergments of the Kingdom, which made the King go in all diligence aurely ro Hoy Warts.
lins. 1 know not to. whar chis tended, nor why chey march*c up and down 1n Troops
after char manner, butir ought. ro have been known, and ic wasa fign of no good 3 for
without the knowledge of che King, or his Lieutenant, no one ought to have atcem red
any ſuch thing : and had it nor been that I was afraid of being accuſed for breaking the
Peace, I would ſoon have (cnt chem ro their own houſes with a vengeance x for I did nor
fleep. I went hawever very well accompanied with a good number of Gentlemen , and
Oo 2

my

256 | The Cortdentaries of Meſhre Blaize Boox VT,

th

Li

my own Company of Gens-d'arms into Roergar, Qurrcy, and all along by che $kirts of
Perigurd, to (ce 1t any one would openly ſtir, and ſent co the King to tell him, char if his
Majeſty pleas'd to give me ſeave to talk with chem ar cheir recurn, I hop'd I ſhould be able
to give him a good account of cheir intention : Bur the King ſenc me a poſitive command
not to do 1c, but Jer them quietly recurn every man to his own houſe, and then ic was,
thac I perceiv'd che League of ont de Marſan would not long be obſerv'd. I thought
fic to write this paſſage, to the end thar every one may ſee how vigilant in my Govern-
ment I have ever been, ſeeing that I who was the furtheſt off , gave his Majeſtie the firſt
intelligence. And now I will begin the War de 1a St. Michel, which were the ſecond
Troubles. |
Though it has been ſaid, and T know it alſo to be true, thac the Hugonors did perfeR-
ly hate me, yet was I not ſo negligent in my adminiſtration , but that had acquir'd
The Sieur de ſome friends amongſt chem, and even ſome who were of their Confiſtory. Ic was not
Moztl vc has in» now as 3n the former troubles, our Cards were ſo ſhuffled, and confuſed, as nothing could
telligence 2- be more, and theſe people were not now {0 hot in cheir Religion, as they had formerly
Det = * been; many cicher our of fear, or for good will, came to us, ſo that we began to be ſoci-
LOBE able, and co converſe with one another. The fear alſo they were in of me made ſome few
B my friends, or at leaſt ſeem robe. About two Moneths and a half before la Saint Mi
chel, T had notice by a Gentleman, and another rich man in the Country, who knew no-
thing of one another, that the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral, had ſent ro them all to
make themſelves ready, with horſes and arms, as many as had wherewichal to procure
them, and chat choſe who had nor, ſhould arm themſelves as well as they could ; and al-
ſo that they ſhould lay in great ſtore of Corn and ocher proviſions of Vietual ar Hontars
bans TI judg'd chis intelligence to be very probable, foraſmuch as there was not a horſeto
be bought for money fn the whole Country, and ſome chere were who ſent to the Paſles of
Spain to farnith themſelves from thence, and nothing was too dear, young nor old. T
rherefore diſpatcht away the Sieur de Lyſſan poſt tothe Queen, to give her an account of
all theſe things, but her Majeſty would belicve nothing, ſending me word that I was nor
to give credit to ſuch informations, and was only to take care, that the EdiQs were duly
The Hugonors obſery*'d. In che mean time from day to day I had continual advertiſements, that their
beginro arm. practiſe ſtill continued, and that they had a privace Aſſembly at CMontanban, and ano-
'ther at Tholouze in the Houſe of Dacetat. I again ſent the Queen word of all I had heard ;
| bur her Majeſty would never be induc'd to believe any thing, though I ſent three or four
| Meſſengers oneafcer another, In the end ſhe grew fo angry at my frequent and reitera«
red Advertiſements, that ſhe commanded Araignes Sindic of Condommois, to bid me fend
her no more, for chat ſhe knew the contrary of what I ſent her intelligence , and ſaid
morcover, it {cem'd as it I was afraid , and I had word alſo ſent me by others, that they
laughr and jcer'd at me in the Council, calling me Trompecter and make-war, they might
have ſaid more becauſe I did not hear them ; but had I been within a Pikes length, I
ſhould have made ſome of them filent that ſpoke very loud. I except thoſe char ought
ro be excepted : bur theſe Courticrs, who never handle other Iron than a knife and fork,
prace at their own pleaſure , and play the Demi-Gods, and keep a clutter, as if nothin
could be well but what pales chrough their learned Coxcombs. Nothing of this kind is
ſtrange from ſuch people as thoſe ; bur T could not but wonder thar the Queen being a
| woman of ſo great underſtanding, and knowing what ſhe ſaid ro me, ſhould uſe me ſo,
| There was no remedy ; for I was ſo far off T could make no reply.

Abour fifteen or twenty dayes before Ia Sainf# Michel, I went to dine at a Gentlemang
houſe a friend of mine, to which placealſo came one of thoſe who uſed to give me intelli-
gence, -who told me, that but ewo dayes before one of the Admiral's Gentlemen paſſed by

CMontauban, and thathe was going poſt from Church co Church, to give them notice co
| be all ina readineſs to riſe at the time, when another Gentleman from the ſaid Admiral,
| or the Prince of Conde ſhould come to call them our, which at the furtheſt would be within

fifreen or twenty dayes, I thereupon entreaced him, that if he ſhould be in Montauban at
the time when the Gentleman ſhould come thicher, char he would ſave all che Catholicks

chat were init, which he promiſed he would do; and ſo departed thence and came to
. Caſſaigne, where I mer with a Letter from a Gentleman, who was at that time ar T holowze,
wherein he gave me the ſame advice : bur being the Letter was not fign'd, I would nor
ſend it to the Queen, doubting ſhe ſhonld nor believe it. The next day there came to the
ſaid Caſſaigne the Baron de Gondrin , whom we now call Monſieur de Montefpan, who
was going poſt ro Court to obtein her Majeſtics Letters in the behalf of his Facher and him-
ſelf, concerning a Suit they had depending in the Parliament of Tholonze. I gave credic
to thoſe who gave me intelligence, aud they were faichtul ro me ; foraſmuch as of three

chey

Ars AS vob nets dA lite” EA YE ob S562 6, tr td. es is a Ee Ein tet a. M6. + +» -

\

w»

Book VI. de'Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 277

they werez two of them had occation to uſe me, in the concern of ſome Eſtates they were

in ſaic about, and npon that occaſion it was, that I knew by their complexion they were nor

ſo zealous in their Religion , but that they had a greater kindneſs for worldly concerns,

and would forſake Religion, Miniſters, and all, to gain that for which they were in con-

reſt, (I believe this Religion is nothing but a meer cheat ) and without me chey could not

do cheir buſineſs : nexcher was I wanting to affiſt chem all I could, that T might have conti-

nual intelligence from them : for I had ſome intereſt, and was well beloy'd in the Par- The Parlia-

liaments of Tholowze and Bonurdeanx, and by the Kings Officers. They had reaſon to do ments of Bour-

as they did, and I to requite cheir kindneſs, foraſmuch as I ever found them very affe- 44% _ "x

Qionare to the Kings ſervice, © I chen inctreared the Baron de Gondrin to preſent my moſt —_ S =

« humble and obedient ſervice to the Queen, and to defire her Majeſty to remember, that Kings ſervice,

« ſhe had never been plcaſed togive any credit tothe ſeveral advertiſements I had contiriual-

« ly given her upon all occaſions ; and co cell her thar her own eyes would ſhortly weep for

« her unbelief ; char her Majeſty had ſent me word the chought I was afraid s and thatin

« the Kings Council they had been pleaſed ro call me Tromperter, and Make-war ; but

« that I did moſt humbly beſcech her Majeſty to believe, that I had no other apprehenſi-

« on for my ſelf, who God be thanked was born without fear, and knew not what be-

« longed to any other than whar an honeſt man ought to have : Bur that I was afraid of

« che King, and of her, they being chreatned with no leſs than death, or impriſonment ;

« 2nd char therefore he ſhould look to her ſelf for a few dayes, and detein the King from

&« 90ing fo often a hunting, and appearing fo much in publick as he uſed to do ; eſpecial-

« ly if ſhe had a mind co ſave his lifeand his Crown. The Baron de Gondrin acquitted

himſelf faithfully of his Commiſſion, and told me her Majeſty had made anſwer, chat

the would give car to no intelligence I (ſhould ſend her, and that ſhe berter knew the Hu-

gonots intentions than I, and alſo their power how far it could extend ; and that they de-

fir'd nothing bur peace. Theſe people purſued their praCtiſes with great cunning, and a

far off, and the was certainly charm'd by ſome of their Agents, The ſaid Sicur de 2fon-

teſþan made fo great haſte, char he return'd ten or twelve dayes before /a St. Michel, and

rold me what anſwer her Majeſty had given him, Ic 1s impoſſible, but that as I have ſaid,

ſhe was either gull'd or bewicch'd by ſome one or other ſhe had about her, who did it ci-

cher our of malice or ignorance : but 1t was however a molt ſtrange ching, that ſhe ſhould

be ſo deluded, it being a thing ſo notoriouſly publick with us, that ſo much as the very

Pages and Footmen knew of the Preparation the Hugonots made to riſe, and before che

ſaid Baron de Gondrin return*d, I had intelligence, char eight dayes before or eight dayes

afcer 1a Saint} Michel, the Admirals Gentleman was certainly to come. Upon thele {light

anſwers of the Queens I had like to ave commited a very great error, in laying aſide all

ſuſpicion, believing that her Majeity was better enform'd than I, and that therefore Þ

ought no more to give credit to thoſe who gave me theſe daily advertiſements. Where-

upon I made a match with the lace Biſhop of Condoms, and the Sicurs de Sainftorens and de

7 3lladet, Brothers, to go the Baths at Barbottan, as I had been by the Phyſicians a ppoint-

ed to do, for a pain in my hip I got atthe taking of Quires, which Monſieur d' Aumale I

know does very well remember, and char I believe I thall carry along wich me co my

Grave. | :
We went upon the Saturday from Caſſaigne to go lie at Monſieur de Panias his houſe, The Sicur d:

taking two Taflcls of Goſhawks along with us, wherewith to paſs away the time at the MHontluc goes

Baths : and the very night chat we came thicher in my firſt fleep I dreamt a dream, thar ©2 *Þ* Barbs:

did more diſcompoſe and weaken me, than jf I had four dayes had a continned Feyor,

which I will here ſer down, becaule there are many living to whom I cold ir, for theſe are

no tales made for pleaſure. I dreamt thar all che Kingdom of France was in Rebellion, A ſtrange

and chat aſtranger Prince had feiz*d upon it, and had kil®d che King, my Lords his Rro- Dream of the

thers, and the Queen, and char I was flying night and day on every fide to eſcape ; for Sicur de Mont -

me thought I had all the world 1n ſearch of meto rake me; ſomecrimes I fled co one place, es

and ſomerimesto another, till ac length I was ſurpriz'd ina houſe, and carried before the

new King, who was walking berwixt ewo great men 1na Church. He was low of ſtacure,

bur groſs, and well knir, and had on his head a ſquare velver Cap, ſuch a one as che BD

wore in former times. The Archers of his Guard were clad in yellow, red, and black ei onal

and me-thought as they led me priſoner thorough the Streets, all che people ran after _ er an og we

crying, kill theVillain; onc prelented a naked Sword ro my throat, and another a P;ſt.1 againſt me,and

to my breaſt '; choſe thac led me, crying our, do not kill him, for the King will have him *v<ls ſcrvants

hang'd in his own preſence. And thus they carried me before the new King, who was walk- CI: for

ing, as I ſaid bctore, There was in the Church neither Image nor Altar z and fo 7 feb

q : 2 E oy {oo0n as pielen;ly bang
I came before him, he ſaid to me 1n Italian ; (a) Vent que forfante, tu mai fatto 1s guerray thee, -

&

RS

1 mg a aa re on rs

—- Wo ———_—- i HUG I
Ny + » t - menos bo, —_—_— -_ » _ a_ —_ s

276 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book Vt;

& a quelli i quali ſuono mei ſervitori, io ts faro apicquar adeſſo, adeſſo. To which I made
anſwer inthe ſame language, (for me-chought I {poke Tuſcan as well as when I was in
þ Sacred Maje- Sienna) (b) Sacra Maeſfta, io ſervito al mio Re, fs come ſuono obligati fari tutti gli hnomj-

ſty , 1 have ni da bene, ſu Maefta ne deve pipliar que ſto a male. Art which, enflamed with fury, he
ferv*d my King (4;4 to the Archers of his Guard, (c) Andate, andate menate lo adpicar quel forfante, que

eo agen mi farebbe ancora la guerra. Whercupon they would haveled me away bur I ſtood firm,

lip'drodo 3 and ſaid tohim, :(d) 10 ſmpplico ſs Maeſta voler mi ſalvar la vitay poi che il Re mio figni=
your Majeſty re & morto enfiemi gli pgniors ſuoi frateli : To vi prometto che vi ſerviro con medeſinga fidelta
ought not tO con la qual is ſervito il re mentre viveva. Vpon this the Lords who were walking with
rake that in © hm heoo*d of him to ſave my life : upon whoſe interceſſion, looking ſtedfaſtly upon me,
vil part, he ſaid rome, (ce) Prometti tu queſto del cuore ? or Su io ti da la vits per le pregiere di
c Go go hang | ye ; ds me- thoughc ſpoke French, b X
chis Raſcal; qnelli che mi pregano, ſie mi fidele, Theſe Lords me- thoughr ipoke French, but we two
who will apain ſpoke /talianz whereupon he commanded them to take me a little alide, and thar he
make war a- would by and by talk ro me again. They then ſer me by a Cheſt char ſtood hard by
GEES. the Church door, and thoſe who were to look to me fell to ralking with the Archers of
your Majeſty the Guard. As I was chere ſtanding by this Cheſt, I began ro chink of che King, and
ro ſave wy life, repented me of the oath of Fidelity I had raken ; for that peradvencure the King mighc
and ſeeing the nor be yer dead, and that if I could elcape away I would rather wander alone, and
King my Lore ,, fo,0X. throughout the world to ſeck the King if he were yer alive ; and thereupon took
> SN a reſolution to run away. Thus reſoly'd T went out of che Church, and being got into
wk wy Touts the Street began to run, and never chought of my hip, for me-thoughe I ran faſter than
his Brothers, 1 I would, when on a ſudden Lheard a cry behind me, /fop the villain; whereupon ſome
do promiſe 10 came out of their houſes to take me, and others ſtood in my way ; but {Ul I eſcap*d both
gia. £3c. from the one, and the other, and recover'd a pair of ſtone ſtairs that went up to the
lity | 4d the Wall of the Town, where coming to the top, I lookt down, and methought the Precipice
King when he was ſo greac, ther I could hardly fee to the botrom. They mounted the ſtairs after me, and
was alivc. E had nothing wherewith ro defend my ſelf, but three or four ſtones chat Tchrew ac them,
e Doſt thu 14 had agreart mind to make them kill me ; for me-thoughr chey would pur me toa
promiſe this 1 deaths when having nothing lefr co defend my ſelf withall, T threw my ſelf head-
from thy Dm Ar my
heart? Goto, long from the Batclements, and in falling awaked, and found my felf all on a water, as
I give theethy if I had come out of a River , my Shirt, the Sheets, the Counterpain all wringing
lite ar che re- yyer, and I fancied that my head was bigger than a Drum. I calPd my Valet de Chamire,
a of theſe ho preſently made a fire, took off my wer ſhirr, and gave me another. They went alſo
bs fainkfal to Madam de Pariar, who commanded another pair of Sheets to be given them, and her
Fe ſelf roſe and came into my Chamber, and ſaw the Sheets, Blankets, and Counterpain
all wer, and never departed the room «ill all was dried 5 which whilſt chey were in doing,
I told her my dream, and che fright I had been in, which had put me into this ſwear;
She remembers it as well as 7. The Dream / dreamt of the death of King Henry my good
Maſter, and chis put me into a greater weakneſs than if 7 had had a continued Fever for
a whole week together. The Phyfitians told me that ic was nothing bur force of imiagina=
tion, my mind being wholly taken up with theſe thoughts: And 7 do believe it was ſo ;
for I have fancied my {elf in the night fighting with the Enemy, dreaming of the miſ-
A haps, and the ſuccefles alſo / afterwards ſaw come to paſs. JI have had thar misfortune
all my life, chat ſleeping and waking 7 have never been at reſt, and was alwayes ſure
when I had any thing working in my head that / was to do, not to fail ro dream all that
night; which 1s very troubleſome,
The next day being Sunday they would needs have had me away to the Baths ; bur 7
would never be perſwaded to go ; for it ſtill ran in my mind, that ſome diſaſter wonld
befall the King, ever remembring my dream about King Henry; ſo that for all they could
Encelligence of ſay upon Monday we return'd, Upon Thurſday came a Conſul from Lefoxre, who told
che deſign up» me chat Monſicur de Fonterailles, Seneſchal of Armagnac, kept himſelf ſhur up in his Caſtle,
on Lefrowe. 1d ſtirr'd not out, and thac all night they heard a knocking within againſt ſome Wall,

or Wood, and chart the Hugonors of the City were ſecretly providing arms. 4 made
him to recurn, aſſuring him, that the Sieur de Fonterailles would never do any thing pre=-
judicial to the Kings ſervice, which 7 ſaid, relying upon his word, and a promiſe he had
made me in my Houſe at Agen. Bur the ſaid Conſul would not take this for current
pay : wherefore 7 bad him to pry more narrowly into what the Seneſchal was doing.
Lipon Friday there came to me two Conſuls from Moiſſac, who came to tell me, that rwo
of the Kings Officers of Xontauban, and ſeveral others were fled to WMoiſſac, upon ſome
apparencesthey had ſeen in the ſaid Montanban of the raking of Arms. 7 made theſe alſo
co return, giving them in charge chat withour any buſtle, or raiſing of arms, they ſhould

be careful of che preſervation ef their Town, and that if chey ſhould hear, chat the others
r00%

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. |

|  rook arms they {ſhould beciake themſelves ro arms alſo , and ſend me an account of all.

| Upon Sunday Monficur de Sainftorens came to dine with me, where we made a Macch

{ the nextcayto go ſce our Hawks fly, and that he ſhould come by break of day in the

'  morningto Caſſaign?e, Art midnight there came to me a Meſlenger from the Sieur de la

L:nde, Canon of eFgen, who broughe me a letter from him, and another that had been |

ſent co him by Monl:eur de Lauzun, Monſieur de 12 Lande's Letter was, I ſend you a The Sicur de
Letter, which Monſieur oc Lauzun has ſent me in [0 great haſte, that the man who brought Leaxun ſends
it ts able to go nofarth:cr, In chat of Monſicur de Lanuznn there was Monſienr de la Lande res of the
1 pray ſend ſpeedy notice to Monſieur de Montlue, that the Hugonots have taken arms at TD ww
Bergerac, aud are gone in all haſte to ſciz.e upon ſome herſes of the Marquis de Trans, which FE:
are kept at Eymet, and that all thiſe of this (ountry take horſes where ever they can find

them. Now becanſe the Marquis de Trans was in ſuit with his Brother-in- law call'd

Monſieur de St. Lawrence, it preſently came into my fancy, that theſe might be ſome of

the ſaid St. Laurence his rcople, who were going to execute ſome diſtreſs for Coſts againſt

che ſaid Marquis, and made no other account of ir. About break of day I aroſe, and

looking out of the window whillt my man was trufſing me, to ſee if Monſieur de Sainfto-

yens came , there comes 1n a man on horſeback, who came from a place upon the River

' Garonne, whom I will not name, for fear he ſhould be kilPd ; for the man thac ſent him

rome 1s5yet living z and as I was opening the Letcer my Valet de Chambre (aw a Ticket fall
 _downupon thefloor. T icll coreading the Letter, the contents whereof were, that be en-

| treated me lo give him leave to ſell a Quintal of Pepper to a Portugueſe, which made mcin

a rage tear the Lecicr to p:eces, curſing all the Portugueſe to the pit of Hell z for it putme

in mind of the death of my Son at the eMaderas. This Letter was only purpoſely con-

rriv?d co encloſe the Ticker, and my Valet de Chamlre began to gather up the Ticker, tel-

ling me it fell ouras I open'd the Letter, Then fell co reading the Ticker, where it was

chus written, Betwixt the twenty eighth and thirtith of this preſent September , T he King Advertiſement
taken, the Queen dead, Rochclle then, Bergerac taken, Montauban taken, LeQour taken, tothe Sicur d
and Moncluc dead. Theſe were the very words of the Ticket 5 which put me quite our RC

of the humour of Hawking, and reconci'd me to the Portugal ; ſo that I immediately

{en away Captain Xavrics, who had been Lientenant to the late Captain Zfontlac in Pied-

mont, Captain Fean of eAren, and Tibanville Commiſlaries of the Arcillery, commanding

them to go direAly cowards Monſieur de Sainforens his houſe, whom they would meec

by the way, and bid him return home, and ſend notice to Monſieur de Tilladet his Brother,

and the Gentlemen his Neighbours, co come by ten of the clock co Sampey (a Town in

the Kings poſſeflion, where I have a houſe) with their horſes and arms, without any noiſe

at all ; for we were within a league of one another. I gave them alſo in charge, that ſo ſoon

as they had {poke with Monhieur de SainForens , they ſhould gallop away to Lettcare,

which was three Icagues from Caſſaigne (for whar the Conſul had told me came into my

head, and it was very probable, that to cut out work in Gaſcony they would begin wich

this ſtrong place) giving chem inſtruCtions withal, that ſo ſoon as they ſhould come with-

in Gghc of che Caſtlc, to ride ſoftly, pretending to be Merchants, and enter in by the

Gate of che Bulwark (doubring che Seneſchal might have raken ſome people into the Caſtle

by the Poſtern Gare, whoit they percciv'd themſelves once to be ſuſpeRed, might preſent-

ly ſe;ze upon the Town by the help of the Hugonors who were in 1t) but that ſo ſoon as

they ſhould be gor 1m, they ſhould talk privately with the Conſul, poſſeſſing chemlelves

of che ſaid G:re of che Balwark, and thar dead or alive TI might find them within it ; for

I would ſoon be with them ; which they accordingly did. I ſent Diſpatches alſo co Mon-

fenr de Virdazan, Scneichal of Bazadois, and to ſeveral other Gentlemen his Neighbours

-ff121ing them all ro repair to Sampoy by ten of rheclock ; to which place according to ap- Diligence of
pointmenc 1 went my ſelf, buc found no body there but Monſieur de $ainforens, who by ** age de
misfortune had found none of the Genilemen his Neighbours at home, and Monficur de oy 727m eng
Till:det had been let blood that morning , ſo that no body came bur an Archer of my

Company call*d Seridos, and two Sons of Monſieur de Beraud, who were alſo of my Com-

pany, their Facher being fick, and a Kinſman of mine call'd Monſieur de 1a Vit. I ſtaid

there for Monheur de Verdazn till rwelve a clock, when ſeeing no body come, I reſolv'd

wo g0 to Leffore without expecting any longer, where alſo I doubred I ſhould come with

the Jaceſt, Thoſe who were jn my company remonſtrated ro me, that if che Seneſchal

was cratty, and char he had men in the Caſtle he would eafily defeac me in the Town ;

ro which 1 made anſwer, that ſhould I longer deferre going, he would have nocice of the.

chree Gentlemen I had ſent betore, and would fo ſecure the Gates, that I ſhould not be

able co enter, and that it was betcer for us co venture our lives in the Town, than to keep

out, and ſafter the Town to be loſt, We then mounted co horſe, being no more chan fix

Light-

pen hee
Og

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Boox VT?

Liakt-borls, and we might be 1n all (che Servants compriz*d) thirty horſe, I command.

| ed fourteen Harquebuzeers to follow after me, under the conduR of a Prieſt called 11a.

The Sicur de
Montluc 1n
Lefoure.

Ocder given to

the Caprains,

The Sicur 4e
Foaterailles

Laubere, commanding them to follow at a good ſhog trot, and ſo we marche with theſe
mighty Forces, When we came near unto Terraube, a little league from Leftonre, there
came a man on horſeback, diſpatcht away by the Conſul and Caprain Manriez, by whom
they ſent me word, that they had poſleſſed themſelves of che Gates, and char the City
was all in arms, deſiring to know by which Gate I would enter, I cold him by che Gate
of the Caſtle 5 whereupon he return*d upon the ſpur as he came. By good fortune
there hapned to be in the Town the Sjear de Luſſan, and the Captain his Brother, who
came our co meet me, knowing nothing of all this buſineſs, they being come thicher by
appointment of Proceſs, and ſo weentred into the Town. So ſoon as we were come into
Monſieur de Poiſegurs houſe, 1 entreated rhe Sieur de Luſſan to go bid Monſieur de Fon-
tercilles come and ſpeak with me, for I had ſomething to ſay to him that concerned his
Majeſties ſervice. He ſent me word back, that he would not come, and that he was in the
Caſtle in the behalf of the Queen of Navarre, Lady and Miſtreſs of the ſaid Caſtle and
Town, Whereupon I ſent him word again, that if he did not come I wonld aſſault the ſaid
Caſtle, and at the ringing of the Tocqueſaint call in all the neighbouring Towns to my aſſe-
ſtance : which I chink ſtartled him, for he came, Art his coming I told him, that I would
have the Caſtle to put people into it, who were of the Religion of the Ring , and a Gentleman
to command them, till I ſhonld ſee to what the beginning of this Commutian tended 3 to which
he made anſwer, that he was a faithful Servant of the Kings, and that he would rather die
than do any thing contrary to his Majeſties pleaſwre. To which I replied again, that I did
belleve bins to be ſe, but that notwithſtanding I would in the mean time ſecure the Caſtle, and
that I bad a greater confidence in my ſelf than in him ; and after ſome diſputes Monſieur
de Sainforens pur in, and ſaid ſomething, to which che other replied briskly upon him :
but he did not go without his anſwer ; and had he not ſuddenly refolv'd, I was about to
have taken him priſoner. Monficur de L»ſſan chen took him aſide, remonſtrating to him,
that he was highly too blame not to 6bey, and that it was as much as his life was worth; for I
would die there but 1 would have it, and that he himſelf knew well enough what akind a man
7x4. Monſieur de Foxterailles thereupon came to me, and told me, that he was ready to
deliver up the Caſtle into my hands, but that he earneſtly begg d of me, that I would permit
him to reenter into it, and ſleep there that night, that he might pack, up all the goods he had
there, ready to go away in the morning. 1 delir*d him on the contrary, that he would not
efter to ſtir out of the Town, and that I would deliver the Guard of the ('aſtle to ſuch Catho-
lick Gentlemen as he ſhould name. He therefore nam'd ſeveral, bur I would like of none
of them, when ſeeing 1 would not purin choſe he defir'd, he nam*d Monſieur de Caſſaigne
(a neighbour to the Town, who fince has been Lieutenant ro Monſieur d'eArnes Compa-
ny) with whom I was concent, and ſent preſently for him, However I plaid the Novice
in one thing, for I ler the ſaid Sieur de Fonterailles go in again upon his word into the
Caſtle, which was not diſcreetly done ; for a man ſhould alwayes in ſach cafes take all
chingsat the worſt.

In the mean time Monſieur de Verdazan arriv'd with four or five Gentlemen in Com-
pany wich him, and preſently afcer Monſieur de CAaignas, and every hour ſome or other
came in to us. Afﬀcer Supper we went our of the Caſtle, where I fell ro view and confi-
der the Poſtern of the falle Bray, and began to remonſtrate to thoſe friends who were wich
me, that in caſe the Seneſchal ſhould have made an appointment for choſe of his Parr
co come that night to the Portal, the Guards and Cenrinels of the Town could not polhibly
hinder him from letting in whom he pleaſed, wherefore I was reſolv*d to lodge Thean-
ville Commiſſary of the Artillery, and che Prieſt with the fourteen Harquebuzeers in the
falſe Bray, berwixt the two Portals; and it was well for me I d1d ſo, for otherwiſe they had
crapp?d us, and cut all our throats chat night. Sce how a man may fall into danger
chorough his own fault : for I choughc my ſelf wonderful wiſe and circumſpeR z and
yet notwithſtanding I pur a place of ſo great importance, rogether with the whole Country
in danger to be loſt. I was nor yet ſatisfied with chis Guard, bur I moreover order'd all
the Gentlenien and cheir Servants to lie down in their Cloaths, and ſent a command to all
thoſe of the Town to do the ſame, In the morning by Sun-riſe the ſaid Seneſchal came
ro me again, to encrear me to leave him the Caſtle, and thar he would give me ſecurity,
with a great many other fine good-morrows; but I told him he did bur loſe time in fuch

delivers up the propoſals ; for I was reſolv*d ro put men intoir : ſo that ſceing no other remedy, he re-

Caſtle of Le-

ceiv'd the Sieur de 1a Caſſaigne with twenty Soldiers into the place, and then came to take

foure ro Mon- his leave of me. I did what I could to perſwade him to ſtay 1n the Town ; bur he made
fieur de Moilz , nſwer, that he wonld not truſt himſelf with the Inhabitants, beginning to tell me, that /

pat

Inc.

C4 Leen nds. wits not at its inn nile and — zz

Book VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Pratice. "oh

pat a very great affront upon him, in not confiding in hi TOE
| ; | g in his Loyalty; that h
gre 4, once fi of 11 ſervices, and fidelity £0 the ag f ns . © hs laſs hy
Father if : __ os Dy w_ d po q _—_— To which I made anſwer that FO T ;
. . 0 ſpeak, did never ſave the Kinopdom ; el
7 ; and th ;
pi HY es by ot » ouT oth Kingdom had 2. Jerk in pa fp fg
at King Charles retir*d to Bourges, that be i 30Ty
Owe yy ls » attributed to Potton, and la Hirc,of whoſe va ages * hp onion to ſpeak,
Kinodom of Pri ne two Gaſcon Gentlemen , were indeed cauſe of & yrs
0 4 My wi : Jet my not deny but that bis Grand father was a great pe” 9 the
Fas Lig 's q* oe bt af bf dich n des Ordonnances, and being Gene of arr ky von |
In recompence wheresf the x tis alſo ode : 2 perf, orm'd great ſervices for the Crown. =” py
he bad ſeven or eight th g alſo married hin to the Inhetitrix of Chattillon, by whom | LEN
4 ouſand Livers yearly revenne + but that th & Fog wage” Dre vi
Father deſcended which Ip th ; cF . Jat t e Houſe from which his reduc'd by
ey at of Fomterailles, was as mean 4 Famil : "0
he broke out into a ſudden paſſion, ſay) amily as mine ; At which ; aries he 7h
2 : : Patlony 12ymngs would toGod, would to God - "in the year
infant, provided the Prince of Navar , d to God 1 might die at this .y
jou Navarre was at age tocommand ! why ſaid 1? h 1444 into cer-
ave you to wiſh your own death for the Prince of Navarre, ſeeing th Gur þ what reaſon tain Compa-
of your Race, have ever receiv'd j/ » ſeeing that neither you, nor any 9s, and un-
'd any benefit or honor from the H. N: g eater”
than from the King ? to which | Bed ; ouſe of Navarre, nor other, particular
Prince of Navarre, that h ;h he replied, that it was trae, bat that he did ſo love + he vers y one
tifoekt th 2 - e would be content to die on that condition, I then b & whereof was
: peCt there was ſome xnavery in the wind, and fo he bad me farewel Monſ; egan tO thar the Gen-
aſſ aigue, who was preſent at all this diſcourſe ,. waited upon hi oe onf1eur de [a darm muſt ac
 riertdar? al; £ tell arver aol] , he out like a man in diſpair, O #nforts- rwenty, and
70841 have the confidence f one and FR
honor ! Whereupon Monſieur d : 0 ſhew my face among ſt men of cwen
blame to complain of me he Saya Cale ne took occaſion to tell him y that be was too XA pede
o had treat ; , mu
or deſire, and that verhays another would re _ ng ; be civility ht could himſelf expett, been one be
: © have uſed him with (o great reſpeQ, A4$ Il at leaſt an Ar-

had done; to which he ed 1
replied in theſe words, b |
, bat you do nit know all * this cher, which no
k 2 day the man was to be

 Kinodoms is ſet to [ail, farewell bran:
g ſet to ſail, farewell France; and fo mounting to horſe, he went durcttly to bur a G
ur a Gentle.

la CS: en TOE of Monſieur de Firmacon his Uncle
crore tne dIcur de Ia C afſaigne could ret : man born, or
Peaſants loa Jon wich Hargucbuzes, my ry oe " 26 there came fifceen or {ixteen 12* char had
Ls wich then, whom chey broaghrines a ora 5-bows, leading a boy priſoner a- cen 2 Cap-
men that were there, tell - y Chamber, in the preſeace of all che Gent! Bains Licuce
of Left hi DE IS of: they were of 1a Maſquere, within a quarter of a | * enant, Enſign,
Leftoure (which is alittle Hamler conſiſting of ſey ; quarter of a league or Serjeant-
be ters clo & Sen ccamptay, of ind of on or eight Tenements) and that at Major of a
| , en
themſelves into a great Meadow cloſe by the houſes NO horſe and foor, and drew Foor Company
the ground. The poor le , where they laid chem down upon ix yeais,
oe tanks. poor peo e oy them, and durſt not ſtir our of their houſes : bur ” bee Was Alle
gence, that I with a great ker of Le mars x rent Ng ey incl th amiſs
| | . nen was entred into the Town 3
—_ ro diſcover thoſe whom I had planted without to hinder rhe dif : by wes wo Horſe wes
rheir enterpriſe was defeated, and concluding that the Seneſch : by which ſeeing (..yiceand __
return'd tall ſpeed ro their T : eneſchal was taken priſoner, the Vice,and one
had taken the Seneſcal as. wh ws wp Gar Twas cured. foro; the Town, and "a agMns.
ge” L [ 9 WILCrerore ney muſt retire b , p ge, inregard
might not be known. And (as the night has no ſhame) the pork bs was day, that they whereof he had
news, that they began to throw away their arms 1n fly! y rook ſo great fright at the 55 em
Plieux, whore the cormmod provie IN Lymng, and by break of day paſſed b Tournon yearly
boon thew's ir ny ople began to purſue them, and they running awa Y encerrainment,
mar ay rms, which che Inhabitants of Plieax had almoſt all, except! y tO 2- Theſe Gens-
” chat fell into the hands of thoſe of Ia Maqnere, The horl A xcepting ſome d'arms were ac
other Troop that had made a halc at St, Roſe till ch orle_ ran Uraight to-their AE IC. 1400
who alſo took a terrible fright 1w ret) F, ROſe, THLINCY ſhould be commanded to march : 12 3!): bur they
ce has to his ary oaks. - Th iring, running every man as faſt as his horſe would have fince been
WL HF Te" . e chief Leaders of theſe two Parties of Horle and F encrealed ro a
NE (ontamat, brother to the Seneſchal, the Sieurs de Caſtelnan, dA "q ————_
- P 5, An dare I knew nothing as yer of Ta Troop at $2. Roſe p 1 Wh Panies,
2y nor the Boors of 12 Maſquer bad heard of any other ch » for neither 44. x7
All che Gentlemen hercu dvi(” y other chan thar they had ſeen, __
Rh eg pon advi{'d me to go take the Seneſchal, and clap him v <CN» come too late
pe . < nevertheleſs I would not do our of reſpe&t to the Houſe of Firmac P priſo- to relieve Le-
las ephew, remonſtrating to them, that ſhould 1 take him priſoner = SR OT:
n £ ar ag of T holouze would immediately ſend eo demand him Ke ob Dom
, juſtly deny, and if they once got him, he would not be two hours ali Ages i AnerT
y no means be the occaſion of his ruine. rs alive, and I would

Pp Whilſt

NED n= —ARIGEASS. oF — Ce ; Daten Res A —— ____

—————— — — — — — — —— —  __
- = . ww 4 Gard . 26. - Pn——_

_—_—

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize BoOK VI,

Delipn vpon
the King,

Whilſt we were 1n theſe diſputes, Monſieur de la Cafſaigne came, and cold me ihe words
he had ſaid to him ar his going away, no body being by ; whereupon I entreated him
to g0 into the Town to ſeek our ſome Hugonot , who wasa friend to the Senu(chal, and
to give him all aſſurance that he ſhould receive no manner of injury, nor diſpleaſure, pro
vided he would reveal the Enterprize, He went then to ſpeak with one who was a ,very
zntimare friend of his, celling him what words the Seneſchal had caſt our at his depar-
ture, and char it was as much as his life was worth, it he did not diſcover all he knew :
who after he had given him all che aſſurance he defir'd, made him this reply. what did
th! S-neſchal mean to enter into ſo many diſputes with Monſieur de Montluc, [ was behind

him when he cont:ſted ſu highly with the ſaid Siear, and do wond:r that he did net ſeize hin

priſoner, which had he done all we of the Religion had been dead men : I pray be faithful,
and take care, that we my have no harm done 14. for there is not a perſon of the Religion,
»ho knows any thing of the Enterprize of France, and of this Town, but thoſe who are gone
ot with him, my (e1f excepted, who durſt not go. This diy wr to-morrow the King or the
Queen ſhall be taken or dead, and all the whole Kingdom of France revolted.

I pray conſider a lictle how cloſely theſe people could carry on ſuch an Enterprize as
this : I wastold thatin their Conhitory they m:de chem {wear to renounce Paradice, if

' they ever reveal d any thing. Monſieur de 1a Caſsaigne returned preſencly ro me, and ra»

king me aſide told me all chat the other had ſaid co him, and then I remembred my ſelf
of the Advertiſements in the Ticker, and of my unfortunate Dream, and began with
tears 10 my eyes to declare all I had heard co Meſſteurs the Seneſchal of Bazadow , de
Sainftorens, and toallthe Gentlemen who were preſent, who all began to cry out, that we
ought to monnt preſently to horſe, and gallop after the Seneſchal , which nevertheleſs L
would not do for the aforementioned reaſons, remonſtrating ro them, that though he
(ou!d be taken, the evil would not be prevented by the ſcizing of his perſon, and that the
miſchief was ſuſſiciently diſcover'd by the words he had caſt out to Monſieur dela Caſlaigne 3
which alſo this other had confirm'd to him : but that I would preſently ſend away to all the
Gentlemen, to give notice to all the other Gentry, and their Neighbours, 80 aſſemble tog*ther
for the common ſafety, which I did, and was very glad within my ſelf, in this ill alpcet of
affairs, to have pluckt ſo conſiderable a feather from their wing. |

I {ent immediately poſt co Tholouze to advercize the Court and the Capitouls, that chey
muſt forthwith betake chemſelves to arms, and employ all they could wrap and wring,
either to {uccour the King, it he was living 3 or to revenge his death, if he were dead. [
cauſed ſome proviſions immediately ro be pur inco rhe Caſtle, and left the fourceen Har=
quebuzeers with Monficur del: Caſſaigne, ſending to the Soldiers of Florence and Pan=
cillac forthwith to come, and put themſelves into the Town, and that they were to obey
Monſieur de la Caſſaigne. Whilſt I was abour theſe diſpatches there arrived Monſieur de
la Chappelle, V ice- Seneſcal, and Monſieur de Rem:gas (the ſame who has fo fignaliz'd him
{elf againſt che Turk at CAalta) who had both of chem been all night on horſe-back,
by reaſon that a Hugonor (whoſe life Monheur de 1a Chapelle had ſay*d) crme ad midnighe
co give them notice that we were marching dire&ly ro Lefoure, where the Senelchal wag
by che Poſtern tolec them in. Upon this intelligence they had mounted co horſe (fox
thcy were near Neighbours) and pur themſelves into alircle Wood, where hey diſcover?d
theſe people, who wereretiring in great fear, bur duiſt not ſtir our of che Wood, having
no more than ſeven or eight horſe; bur ſo ſoon as ir was day took their way towaids Le
Hoare, though they fear'd it wasalready taken, and as they. came to the Town were jin«
foim?d, thac IT was within ic, where they told me of the diſorder they had ſeen in the
Troop of St. Roſe, and then we knew thar they had been in two Troops. Monſicur de 1,
Chappelle hen began to enform himſelf on his parc, and the Court of Parliament ſent in
all dill:;gence to enform themſelves on theirs. The Indictment was drawn up, and a hun-
dred or more Witneſſes examin?d, the moſt of which were of the new Religion, and who
had atually been in thoſe forenamed Troops , who all depos*d one and che ſame thing,
cf a Conſpiracy plotred againſt the King and State.

In the progreſs of the Tryal the Witnefles gave evidence of the Enterprize, which was,
That thar very night de la St, Michel the Senefchal was to let in the rwo Companies of
Foot into the Town by the Poſtern of che Falſe-Bray, and afcerwards into the Caſtle by
che Poſtern belonging to it. Of theſe the Conſuls of che Town xepr one key, and the
Seneſchal another, and ſo ſoon as he was gone che Enterprize being dulcover'd, they went
ro examine the rwo Locks, and found thar thoſe of the Conſuls were broke open, and pur
again into their place, with nails chat were noc clencht. (All chis 1s couch'd in the Pro-
ceſs) and thatatter the rwo Foot Companics ſhould be Maſters of the Town, the Horſe
were to come at a good, round trot before Caſſaigne where 1 was, which was but three

leagues

ee inn Ad Ih wt ed Ate ai dr oh tr ro i 6 arch.

oa ac—

———e— err re > ok Tet rt rr Se ns cms | —_ | ] —_
Book VI. de Montluc, Mare/chal of France. 283

_ ” 0 I OS OO
-

leagues from Left: z4r;, and (ſhur me up 1n the Caſtle ; and thar at the ſame time all their 'Y
Charches of Ner-c, Cufte/gelonx, Thoneins, Cleirac, Mourejan, Condem, Moncrabeau, and
ocher adjacent places were to come flocking about the Caſtle. Theſe were the fruits of the
good prayers of the:r Godly Miniſters 5 and being the Caſtle had no Flanckers, they made
ſure ro have me in four and rwenty hours by ſapping. Rapin the ſame day came with
four hundred mcn ro Grenade, being come from Afontanban, who ſo ſoon as ever he
ſhould have notice thar I was ſhut up, was to march day and night to come before the
{aid Caſſaigne, they making account chat Þ could not be reliev'd in eight dayes, there be-
ing no place of any ſtrength ro which any one could repair, they having poſſeſſed them-
ſelves of Lefoure, The Entcrprize was ſo laid, as ic had been certain, and would infal-
libly have taken cftc&, had I been aſleep in the baſineſs; or if to move in State like che
Kings Lieutenant, I had ſtaid till morning, that choſe I had ſent for had come in,

The Kings Licutcnants may here take a good example by me, both as to the good in-
telligence I was carctul to keep, 1n my judgment to provide againſt che preſent extremity,
and in my prompr reſolution (not regarding whether I was weak or ſtrong) togo, as L
did , to put my ſelf into the Town : for all theſe things together preſerv'd the place in
the Kings obedience, rogether witn my own life, and conſequently the whole Country,
which had becn ab{olucely loſt had I been kilPd, and LefFoure raken : for thar being ſar-
priz'd, there had been no place of ſafery, but within the Gates of Tholoxze and Bourde-
aux : and when all France had heard that Gxienze was loſt, I leave men of underſtand=
ing to judge how che Kings affairs would have been diſcouncenanced, and che ardour of
thoſe who ſtood for him cool'd at tne news. I believe che greateſt parc of them would
have cloſed wich che Enemy. Therefore do not you who are the Kings Licutenants pro-
poſe to your ſclves ; I mult ſtay for che Nobleſs, I muſt go well actended ; for if you be
f{uch as you ought to be, that 1s to ſay, fear'd, and belov'd, you your ſelf alone are
worth a hundred. Every one that ſees you march will come in co your aſſiſtance, and
rake courage by your example, and your Enemies for one man that you have will ſay you
have a hundred. Ic 1s no timeco dally, and ſtand upon punGiillio's 1n ſuch affairs, for
whileſt yo deferre time, to Lord it 1n greater ſtate, you loſe your place. And take warn-
ing by the crror I had like ro have committed in permitting the Seneſchal to go again in-
to the Caſtle upon his word 3 we live in a time wherein it is the faſhion with many co
diſpence with the breach of their faich ; and a man ſhall excaſc himſelf chat his promiſe
was extracted from him by force, .and in che mean time you are ſhut out of your Fort.
Never deferre that till ro morrow that you can do to day, for it failed bur very little char
I was not loſt; and had I nor (er thoſe people without, the Saccours had cnrred, and the
Seneſchal had had good reaſon to laugh ar my eafineſs. This was the Enterprize upon
Grienne ; and Idarebe bold to ſay, that Bourdeanx it ſelf had not been very ſecure had
my throat been cut : for a Country without a head 1s in very great danger, and the Hu-
gonots had very great intelligence, and a very ſtrong party in that City.

After I had left order with Monficur de 1a Caſſaizne abour Lefoure ; che ſame Tucl-
day (being Michaelmas day) I went in all d:ligence co Agen, where ſo ſoon as I arriv'd,
] immediately ſent for che Sieurs de Nore the Kings Counſelior, and Delas the Kings
Advocate to come to me , who were alfiſting ro me in all my diſpacches, and were ever
my Counſel in all affairss We ſenc then for rwo Clerks of the Town, and two Secreta- Diligence of,
ries of mine, and of all night long we did nothing bur write Lecters to all che Lords and < vicur de
Genttemen of the Country, and I do believe amongſt us we writ above two hundred, Montiuc,
The Elder Brother of che Counſellor call'd de Navy was Conſul , who did nothing all
night long bur run up and down to ſeek our . Meſſengers to ſend every way, I gave no-
tice in my Letters to every one, as well of the acrempr upon Lefoure, as of the words
the Seneſchal had caſt our, and of the other who had confirmed chem. I gave them
&« likewiſe ro underſtand, thar now the Kings good and taichful Subjects would be known,
« 2s alſowho were good Frenchmen, and that (inte there had been a King in France, ſo
« fair an occaſion had never preſented it {clf, wherein tro manifeſt che fidelity we owe to
&« the Crown of France ; for at thac very time the life of the King was in apparent dans
« 9er, if not already raken from him, which ſhould ic prove ſo, we were all bound by
« the Law of God, Nature, and Nacions to revenge his death : or at the leaſt he was
« threatned with Caprivity , and in ſuch an extremity , choſe who thould fic at home,
<& ought ro be branded for difloyalty, and mark'd for Traitors to their Prince and his
& Crown for cvcr : that the Gaſcons had never hitherto been branded, with choſe CharaRers,
«and thar therefore I begged of them we might norleave ſuch an obloquy upon our own
« Poſteriry , nor our Childrens Children, char ſhould ſucceed them. In ſhort I omicced
nothing I could chink of chatmight excite or encline them co berake chemſelyves co arms,

Pp2 ang

- ie
—— LA AIZASITS 2 "re <mat_as.
-s —-—_— Do ITS ne Worm FBS Son ee tn Rom nn nary ” —_ _

am hw —_— _—_— —— en AP tr ares a cec<dh :
_—

284. The Cortiiientaries of Meſlire Blaize Book VI;

and to {uccour the King ; afſigning them all ro meer ar Agen by the tenth of Ofober fol-
lowing. The foremencioned perſons and I continued five dayes and five nights, ſending
away diſpatches to a'l parts, inſomuch that Ido not think any one of us had ever of all
that while an hour in four and twenty to ſleep in, which pur all three: of us into fo great
The Sieur de © a diſtemoer, that we verily believ'd we ſhould fall fick. TI haveall my life hated writing,
<= * Iv- having ever much racher paſs over a whole night with my arms on my back, chan to ſpend
: half ſo much c£:me in writing ; for I was never cut out for that employment, though per-
haps there might be ſome fault in my ſelf, as I have obſerv'd in ſome others, who have
been on the contrary ſo over-addiRed to it, that they had rather be in their Cabinets, than
in the Trenches. News came to me from every (ide, that every one prepar'd to march,
and I diſparch'd forty Captains of Foor, tour Companies of Gens-d'arras, which had been
thoſe of the Sieurs de Gondrin, de Maſſes, @aArne, and dr Bardozan, and eight or ten
Corners of Harquebuzcers on horſeback. Of theſe I gave the Command of the Foot to
Monſieur de Sainftorens, who was Colonel of che Legionarics, that is to ſay, fifreen En-
;*ons for him, and fifteen for my Son the Knight of CHalta, who was in Piedmont, and
to, hom I writ to come away to the Army» Aﬀeer I had heard what had paſt at the
fine buſineſs of Meanx, I ſent him to the King, befieching his Majeſty ro conferre upon him
the Command of che fifreen Enfigns 5 which alſo he did with a very good wills
The ninth day after 1a Sainft Michel, asI was walking upon the Sands of Agen to ſee
the Horſe and Foot come in from all parts, which I quarcei*d on both fides the River
Garonne, there came to me Capiain Barce, who had been eight dayesin coming, and ſcap'd
narrowly four or five times of being taken, having come moſt part of the way on foot,
not daring to ſhew himſelf at the Poſt-houſes, moſt of the Poſt-maſters being Hugonots,
He brought me a Letter from the King, and another from che Queen, wherein cheir Ma-
The King ſends jefties acquainted me with cheir fortunes, and how they had been very near being taken,
= = _ his Majeſty exhorting me once more to preſerve for him the Province of Gajenne, as T had
4 done in the former troubles, His Majeſty in theſe Letters did not ſend to me for any
Succours, tearing I ſhould have enough to do to ſecnre the Conntry with all the forces
] could make jn ic. The faid Captain de Barje ſtaid but ewo hours with me, I ſending
him back in all diligence (for fo I was to proceed, and had alwayes done ſo) to aſſure their
Majeſtics of the Succours I was about to ſend into France, and to tell them that IT hoped
to ſecure Grienye with the Gentlemen only who were Natives of the Province, and the Peos
ple of the Country. Bur Idid nor fail to wrice to che Queen, that ſhe ſhould. no moxe
be ſo incredulous, nor deaf to my advertiſements ; and thac had ſhe pleaſed to have be-
oun the game, and got the ſtart of her Enemies, ſhe had pur them quite our of their
play. I then preſently diſpatch'd away new Meſſengers to Tholouze and Bourdeanx, and
to all the Gentlemen of rhat part of the Country , with Copies of the King and Queens
Letters, defiring them to march with all poſſible expedition to relieve the King, whom
the Enemy had beſieg*d in Pars, and one thing I can aftirm with truth, that I never in
my life either ſaw, or read in any Hiſtory of ſo wonderful a diligence, as every one made
The People of boch Horſe and Foot to this effe&t. There is not in the whole world ſo good a People,
Frazce very nor a Gentry ſo affeionate to their Prince, had not this new Religion corrupted them :
good and loy- fox in truth that has ſpoil'd all 5 I do not know who will ſalve ir. I wasin Limoges in
ah nine and twenty dayes (accounting from the thirtieth of September, that I wrote my dif-
patches) wicha theuſand or ewelve hundred Horſe, and thirty Enfigns of Foot, whom I
there muſter'd together with the Gens-dL'armes, the Treaſurer-General de Ia Gonrgues ha-
ving broughc along ſome money he had taken up for that purpoſe; for I for my own
part was never accuſtomed to finger the Kings money. Being ar Limoges I afſembled all

che Lords and Captains of Gens-darmes in my Chamber, and there deliver*d my elf to
them after this manner.

* The Sicur de © Gentlemen and fellows in arms, of all the good fortunes I have had finceT came into

Montluc's Has ©& the world (and1I have been bleſt wich as many perhaps as any Captain in France} nor

rapges ro ths &« of all the ſervices I have pertorm?*d for the Crown (which have been no inconfiderable
ords an

ery re moggy; n ones,as you your ſelves know, and have alſo therein had all of youa part, and ſtak'c your
Gaſcony ar lives and fortunes in the Quarrel) I never met with any that gave me ſo great latisfaCtion
their going to © ag this occaſion that now preſents it ſelt, of manifeſting our loyalty and courage. And
the Kings © you ought to feel the ſame joy in your boſoms that I do : for whar greater blefling could
« God Almighty have conferr'd upon you, than to ſee your ſelves aſſembled rogether in
&« ſo brave and ſo ſpritcly a body in ſo ſhort a time on horſe-back to go to the relief of your
« Prince, for whoſe defence God has given you life, and mace you men, and me alſo; 1
« ſay for the defence of his Perſon : for, as you very well know, the Maſque is now taken

away,

Book T7. + Montluc, Mareſchal of France. I 7 295 7

—__

« away) and there 13 no mote queltion of the Maſs, or the * Preſche, buc 1c 15 1mmedi- » &o they -ule
& xely and direRtly againſt his perſon, char this Rebellion is ſer on foot, and thoſe who to call he Hu»
« were engag'd in the wicked Encerprize of Mean, as you your ſclves very well know, gonort Aſſems
« direed the attempr immediately againſt his Majeſties ſacred perſon. How great a blew.
« o50d fortune is 1t then to ſce, that God has reſerv'd you to revenge {o great an injury,

« and to affiſt your King, and natural Prince in ſo great a neceſſicy 2 O my Companions !

« how much oughr you co eſtcem your ſelves happy, how highly onghe you to be (aiſ-

« fied with your fortune ? How will the King bc ravithe with joy to ſee ſuch a Nobleſs

« from the extreameſt parr of his Kingdom, in fo ſhort a time, and in ſo brave an equi-

« page come in to bis rchicf? He will never forget ſo great, and fo timely a ſervice, but for

« ever acknowledge it to you and yours. Believe me Gentlemen, though I am infinicely

«« pleaſed co think, that I nave ſome ſhare in this ſervice, yer I am very ſenſibly afflicted,

« thar I am like to have no hand in che main ſtroke of the buſineſs, and rhar 1 cannoc

« have the honor co lead you to this glorious work, that we might go cogerher ro lay down

« our lives at his Mazcſtics fcer for the defence of his life and Crown. May God never

« proſper me, if I do nor defire 1t more than ever I did any thing in this world, but you

« ſee it cannot vc without putting the whole Province into manifeſt hazard, which I hope

« to preſerve with thoſe tew Forces are lefc me in deſpite of the Enemies praRices. Iconly

&« then, Genilemen, remains chat you make the haſte requir*d, remember what you have

« {cen me do, and how ofcen you have heard me ſay, that diligence is the beſt part of a

&« Soldier, You know nor what condition the Kings affairs may be in, nor how preſſing

« his danger may bez therefore do not delay time I beſeech yon. I know there are ma-

« ny amongſt you, not only worthy to lead a Troop, bur to command an Army : bur ler

< me increat you to approve the choice I have made in the perſon of Monſieur de Terride

&« for the leading of this, tro whom Monſitur de Gondrin ſhall be affiſting. He is the old-

« eſt Captain, and ot greateſt experience amongſt you, and will, I am confident, acquir

& himſelf worthy of his charge ; and reſt you affur'd, thar I will remember co have a care

&« to preſerve your Houles 1n your abſence. Do me the favour alſo rochink of me when

& you come to the work we have ofren been employ'd in together, and then make it known

« that you are Gentlemen, and Gaſcons, and thar there is not a Nation in the world co be

« compar'd to ours for feats of arms, I have been converſant with all che Soldiers of che

& world, but have never ſccn thelike co ours, andin all engagements and exploits of war,

<« whether lictle or great, that Ihave been an eye-witneſs of, the Gaſcins have ever carried

© away the Prize. Maintain I beſeech you this reputacion, you will never have ſuch an

« opportunity again wherein to maniteſt your valour, and chezeal and affeRion you bear

« to your natural King and Sovcraign,

They all rerurn'd me thanks, afluring me, that they would not ſtay longer than was
neceſlary to bait, 11 any place till chey came ro the King, and Monheur de Terride made
me a particular acknowledgment for the honor I had done him. After, they fell into con-
ſultation, which way they ſhould go, where every oneadviſcd whac he thought beſt, for
in matter of Counlcl, it has evermore been my cuſtom, to make every one deliver his opi-
nion; I have found advantages by 1c : bur afcer many diſputes, it was at laſt derermin'd
tha chey ſhould rake the way directly ro Moulins, For me, Monkieur de Monſalles had
ke to have made me a littleangry 5 tor he would needs have been going before, as if he
had had more deſire, and a greater afte&ion than the reſt : but Z rold him, thar it was
neither ſafe nor fic to leave the Party z and ic was atrer ſuch a manner thar he ſaw very |
well he had diſpleaſed me, 7 deliver'd to him the leading of che Vant-Guard, and co Monſieur de
Monſicar de Sainforens the Command of the Foot, and before my departure from Limoges, Morſales leads
1 ſaw chem all march away. 7 ſhall fay nothing of chis Enterprize of St. Mich?l, it of he Ga
was {o foul and unworthy a Frenchman, and worſe than the buſineſs of Amboiſe, where- $5yccour.
in 1 perfeRly diſcern'd the cff:&s of the League, or Counter-league '/ had heard whiſ-
per*'d ar Mont-de Marſan. I know not what ule was made of choſe Succours 1 ſent, bur
1 dare be bold to ſay, thr never any Licutenanc of Gaienne drew ſo many Gentlemen,
and fo great anumber of Foot, all ona {udden out of the Country as / did : nor fo many
men of fingular nore for cheir parcs and valourz of whom / had ſo good an opinion,
that had 7 met the Prince of Conde without the Traitors, I would not have given our Vi-
Rory for his; and as I return'd back / {till met ſeveral parties who were coming in to joyn
with che reſt, Neither ſhall 7 meddle ro ſer down how theſe Saccours behav*d them-
ſelves in the occaſions preſented, foralmuch as the Montieur hunlelf was there, and all
che Princes and grcat Captains of France.

Now

,
,
|
:
,
|
|
|

*

286

—

© The Commentaies of Meſſire Blaize Boos VI;

—_ —_— co wru_—_———
— yg een ap m——c xx

—————

Now when / thought to have this great diligence of mine very kindly taken, and ex-
pected to receive a rerurn of thanks from their Majeſties for ſo opportune a ſervice, I was
quite contrary preſented with a Parent, that one Dragon) Deputy to the receiver of Gulenne
brovght from Court, and that was ſcnt by the King to Monſieur de Candafle, by virtue
whereof his Majeſty made the ſaid Sicur de Candalle his Lieutenant General in the Cicy of
Bourdeanx and Bourdillois, with as ample commiſſion; and full power, as if I was there.
I was very much ſurpriz?d at this, and knew very well that ſome one or another had gi-
ven me a Traverſe at Court, and that the King and Queen would never have pur ſuch a
trick upon me, had it not been for ſome back friend of mine ; and thanks be to God the
Kings of France have ever ſuch kind of Vermin to ſpare, who have evermore lent cheir Cha=
ricics to the beſt and moſt faithful ſcrvants our Kings have had, which made me not ſo
much wonder at this laſt kindneſs of theirs. Ir was not the firſt office of that kind I had
receiv'd ar their hands, Monſieur de Ia Malaſſize, who 1s yet living, did me one in Ro-
mania to Monſieur de Gaiſe, endeavouring by that means to make me be pur our of the Go-
vernment of 7 ſcany, to make way for Monſieur de [a Meofe, making the Duke believe
that I had ſpoke unhandſomely of him, which che ſaid Duke gave credicro, and for a
time bore me ill will upon that account; Since in the preſence of Monſieur d' Anmale,
Monficur de Montpezat, Meſſieurs de Cipierre and de Randan (which two firſt are dead,
and the other twoliving)) at Afarherate, IT acquitted my elf; yer could I not fo far diſ-
poſſeſs him of his ill conceiv'd opinion, but that ſome ſeeds of it remain'd, fo that he was
never abſolutely reconcil'd till the bufineſs of Thionville, Art my return to Montalſin it
faild but very little that I did not cut che throat of him that was the cauſe, and cherefore
*cis no wonder if he continue to do meall the ill offices he can : yer I will nor here inſert
the reaſons for ſeveral conſiderations, I ſhall ſtill let him proceed to do as he has hicherto
done, managing, the Queen, though I hope her Majeſty will one day alter her opinion, as
did Monlieur de Gmiſe.

I had another good office done me when King Hexry ſent me 1nco Piedmont after my re-

Of the Siege turn from Senn, at the raking of VIpian, only becauſe I kept about Monfieur d' Aumale,

of Yulpian,

not ſparing my life no more than the meaneſt Soldier in che Army, and Ichink they had
no mind thac Monſieur 4' Aumale ſhould have the honor to take it, nor other places that
he took ; I had there a Letter brought me from the Conſtable, wherein he wric me word,
that the King had commanded him to writeto me, that I ſhould refire to my own houſe
till farther order, charging me, chat I had ſaid I would not obey Monſieur de Termes, as
if I had not alwayes been accuſtomed to obey him; for I have all my life preferr'd him
before my ſelf in all things; and he did deſerve it. Notlong before, ſome body had done
him ſuch another courteſie, ſaying, that by reaſon of his Marriage in Piedmont, and the

Charity lent ro friendſhip he had contracted with the Biragaues , he might eaſily ſeize Piedmont into his

Monſieur de
Termes,

and

ro Monſieur
d' Aumale.

St, Blangay
bang'd,

own hands; as if either the one or the other had ever ſo much as thought of any ſuch
thing : however this was ſufficient to make him to be calld back cut of Piedmont : bur he
was too honeſt a man, and that was not a fir recompence for ſo many ſervices as he had

| done. Monſieur d' Aumale alſo had the ſame piece of ſervice done him, it beingreported

tothe King, that the Princes would not obey him , and that therefore his Majeſty muſt
fend Monſieur de Termes to command z aS if Monſieur d' Aumale was not of a bertet Family
than Monficur de Termes, and that the Princes would ſooner obey a private Gentleman,
chan one who was a Prince, though he was not of the Royal blood ; I can affirm, as having
been an eye-witneſs, and no man can give a better teſtimony than my ſelf, chat the ſaid
Princes no more ſpar'd themſelves than the meaneſt Gentleman in the Army,and perform'd
a piece of bravery worthy the noble Families from whence they deſcended; for they went
on in their own perſons to the aflault, and mounted the breach at V!pian, ſcrambling up
with the help of their Pikes, and ſome few Ladders of Ropes, for the Breach was not
xcalonable, as I have ſaid elſewhere before.

And fince I am entred upon the diſcourſe of the good offices honeſt men have done
them art Court, I will reckon up {ome others chat I have ſeen in my time, as alſo ſome that
T have read of in the Roman Hiſtories. And of theſe I will firſt mention that which had
like to have coſt Monhieur de Laxtrec fo dear ; which was, that a certain perſon detein'd _
from him a hundred thouſand Crowns, which the King had commanded St. Blanzay to
ſend him, wherewith to pay the Swiſs, which ſumme had it accordingly been ſent, che
Swiſs had nor retir*d into their own Country z for they only retarn'd for want of pay,
and by that means the Dutchy of Millan was loſt. Upon which occaſion this poor Lord
Monſieur de Lautrec was hardly thought good enough for the Dogs, for a certain cime,
and could never obtein the favour to be heard to juſtific himſelf : burn the end che Kin
was pleaſcd to hear him, and thereupon cauſed St. Blanzay io be hang?d, though the faulc

Was

- 4 a _— ett CONE. _y_—_ ML ” P Mo bs - 4 7", 4 = 4
MOSES. no eg IS Po IR Ur Tal nr "EEAY? ” /
Re LEES Wo 54 s T... —

rs

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 237
was none of his; but che poor man vaid tors, 1 know who was the cauſe of all chis diſe

order : bur I have nothing to do to write ir, Oh *is a tickle ching to ſcrve chele greac

ones, and the paths are very ſlippery men are to walk in, bur we mult choroagh. God

has ordein'd them to c:mmand ,, and us to obcy, and others alſo obey us, and yet we are

all of one Father and Mother ; bur it js coo cold fled to derive our Pedegrees.

I ſaw alſo the trick that was playd Monſicur de Bourbon, by which he was reduc'd to wonſicur ge
that deſpair, thac he was conſtrain'd todo many things unworthy of a Prince ; tor they Bourbon, =
would take his Eſtate from him, and reduce him to his Childs part only ot che jnhert=
ance of the Houſe of Bowrbon, of which he was a younger Brother, At the Camp of
Meſſieres, and in the Expedition of Valentiennes, they made him (wallow ewo injuries |
at once ; it Monlieur Bonivet, who was Admiral, was or no the cau(e I am not avle to Movſieur de
ſay, but itwas fo reported ; ſome one or other muſt alwayes bear the blame, 1 think Bontver,
had not the King of himſclt been diſpos'd to uſe him I, nether bis Mayelty, nor the
Queen his M her would have driven this brave Prince into {ch extremes. However It
was, the foul play thar was oflcr*'d him was the cauſe of a orcac miſchuet ro- France, and
the King repen:< him of ie more than once atterwaids. The Prince of Aurange, who The Prince of
commanded ihe Emperors Army after the death of the laid Seignzui de Brarbon, had- alſo Aur ange,

a liccle before quiced rhe Ring's ſervice by reaſon his Majeſty had commanded che Mareſ(-
chal de Lopes to dg lim for the King of Po/and?s Embaſſador. The occaſion indeed
was very light, bur it 15 nevertheleſs very cruc, that a brave heart diſdains to be de-
ſpis de | | ED

There was another god office alſo done to Andres xria, who was Admiral of his Prince wie.
Majcſtics G Ileys, at che time when he accounted the K:vgdom of Naples as good as ſure;
and that was by e'vins the Gallics to Monſicur de Barbezieax, winch for any defan!r on
his parc could voi juitly be done, for Count Philippin P«Auria his Nephew had won
the Battel &y Np/es, which I have already writ of, againſt the Viceroy Don Hugaes 4e
Aoncalde, wh v5 there flain, and the Marquis de Gaaff, with ſcveral other grear per-
ſons taken priſone's. The ſaid Count was fo careful and vigilant, that ſo much as a Cac
corild not enicr inioche Ci'y of VNaplesz thoſe within werereduc'd to the laſt extremity,
che Viceroy dead. many of the Grandes priſoners, and the reſt revoleed ro che King yz iz
muſt therefore ct necefly: y be conteſt, that the Kingdom had been the Kings in defpire of all
the world, when the jult ſpice and indignation of the ſaid Andrea Aaria depriv'd him of ic.

When the King was raken priſoner at the Battcl of Pavie, and that chey carried hini

by Sca into Spain, Andrea Anria went our to meet the Galleys chat convoy'd him, to

fight chem co acliver the King our of their hands which he had done, and pur ic to ha

zard ; but the King ſent to adviſe him not to do it, for if he did he wasa dead man;

and they had derermin'd to pur him to death, ſhould Andrea eAnria preſent himſelf to.

fioht them ; which was the reaſon thar the ſaid Andrea Anria returned to Genoa, which at .
that time was the Kings. See here another greac misfortune, and an unfortunate Traverſe, Of how greas
which brought as great an inconvenience along with it, as that of Monſicur de Bourbon ; \Mporrance It
upon which occaſion we not only loſt all we had gor in the Kingdom of Naples, but Ge: he Fa gr
na alſo; for all the lofſes as well of the Kingdom of Naples, as of Genoa, hapned by rea- 166. he.
ſon of the revolc of the ſail Andrea Auria, who took offence ar the wrong and diſhonor contzne 4ndres
had been done him, in taking from him the Command of che Galleys to give ir to another, 35 one who a=
without having any way miſdcmecan'd himſelf, or having receiv'd any d:ſadvantage in his ane rg eh
Charge, and alſo for tha: they would make him give up his Priſoners of war withour an hs hk
recompence. Now the ſaid Andrea Aria kept the ſea 1n lo great awe, that the King duiſt

never offer to paſs into 1t:ly till ſuch time as he had won him intohis own ſervice ; and

he Emperor having heard how he had been uſed, fenc him a Blank to wrice his own

conditions, provided he would come over to his ſervice. After which the ſa'd Andres

Arnria (ent to Count Philippin his Nephew to retire from before Naples, and abandon-

ing the Kings ſervice to come co him at Gojettaz which he did, and beforche wenr, PILE

all che proviſion he ſuddenly could into the City , that it mighc nor be 1+}, and ſo he

that had done them the miſchief did them the good, wichour which they muſt within

eight dayes have been neceſlicaced co capitulace. O char ſuch a man as this ought ro have

been husbanded, for 1 chink thar he alone ruin'd the affairs of King Francis. Kings and

Princes ought not co ule Strangers ar thac ratez nor their own Subjects ncither, when

they know chem to be men of ſervice ; and it our Maſter was ill adviſed, the Emperor

was very diſctcer to pur inin time, to win the ſaid Ariz over to his fidey thar the King

mighc nor haye leiſure co reconcile himſelf ro him, and co recftablith him in his (exvice,

Wherein Princes oughc co take good example, and learn to be wiſe at anochers expence,

and thould have a care of difobliging a generous heart, and a man of employmcnr, elpe-
cially

Ee NR EEG > I . =

288

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VI:

The Prior of

Cie? Hs

cially when you have no ſuch rye upon him, as upon a natural Sabje& of your own,
who has his Wife and Children and Eſtate at your mercy. The King had none of all
theſe ties upon eAndrea Auaris, and it was one of thegreateſt incongruities I have ſeen in
my timc and alſo of far greater importance than thac of the Duke of Boxrbon,

I ſaw another done to the Prior of Caps, who was one of che braveſt men that theſe
hundred years has put to ſea, and as much feared both by Turks and Chriſtians, whom
they unjuſtly accus'd of Piracy, fo that he was conſtrain'd to go put himſelf and his two
Galleys into the proteRtion of the Malteſes, O how invincible a wrong did the King
there dothis worthy perſon, to be fo facile of belicf ro the prejudice of his honor ! how
oxcat a diſadvantage was it to himſelf, and how great a loſs to the Kingdom of France ?
tor this Signior was a man of ſervice, and one that very well underſtood his Trade, for he

The Maicſchal was a very able Seaman. 1 ſaw another trick alſo put upon the Mareſchal de Bies, I dare

dc Bles,

A brave Re-
UoAr,

pawn my ſoul that the Gentleman never thought of doing any unhandſome a&t againſt
the King , and yer he was highly ſlander'd a little afrer the death of King Frances the
Grear, it being laid to his charge, that he was the cauſe that Monſieur de Vervin his Son
in Law had ſurrendred Bullen, and one Cortel appointed to try him, the moſt infamous
Judge that ever was in France, Was it ever ſeen, or heard of, that one man ſhould be
puniſht for the treachery or cowardize of another > When he came to his tryal they con«
fronted him with three great Rogues, who all of them depoſ'd, that the day he had che
Encounter with the Engliſh he was mount:d upon a great Courſer, bearing a plume of
white Feachers for a mark, chat the Engiifs might not fail upon him, as if it had been an
eafie mark to be diſcern'd 3 when menare mixt in a Battel, che duſt, the ſmoak and the
crics confound a man's judgmeat z and befides *cs uſual with gallant men to appear in
their greateſt bravery, that they may be known in a day of Battel, eſpecially ina War with:
Strangers, which is for honor, and not upon the account of animoſity $ bur in a Civil
War 'tis not ſo proper, Monſieur de Gaiſe being very much endanger'd by ſo diſtinguiſh-
ing his perſon at the Battel of Dreyx, Thus did they calumniate this poor Lord, though
he that very day defeated eight hundred Eagliſh ; I do believe had the King ſent ſuch
a Judge, and thar he would have hearkned ro the Hugonots, he would have found Wit=
neſſes enow that would have been depos'd. I had promiſed Gwienne to the King of Spain,
though I never lov'd thar Nation, nor ever ſhall, Tam too good a Frenchman for that,
But to return to the ſaid Mareſchal, when thoſe who had given him this Traverſe, ſaw that
they could no way enſnare himy and that he was likely to be ſer ar liberty, to the greac
diſhonor of thoſe who had brought this trouble upon him z they then accuſed him, char
he made certain Skip- Jack hirelings paſs muſter in his Company of Gens-d*armes, to ger
ſo many Pays, which (as it was ſaid ) wasprov*'d to be true, but it was to pay men withal
he had in Flanders, to ſend him continual intelligence of all that paſſed in the Enemies
Country ; for we are ſometimes nccefſitated to make uſe of ſuch ſhifts for the Kings ſer-
vice : bucT leave any oneto judg, if this was ſufficient to bring him upon Scaffold, and

- to degrade him from his Nobilicy, his Arms, and Mareſchalſy, and to condemn him to

the loſs of his head. Nevertheleſs as they were proceeding to execution, King Henry cal=
ling to mind, that he had made him Knight cf the Order, ſent him his pardon, ſo that five
or fix moneths after, what of old age, and what of gricf, he died a natural death, and who
would have liv*d after ſuch an injury and diſgrace? The Judicature of France is not with=
our Cortels , for there are enow, who ſhould the King pur into their hands the honeſteſt
man of his Kingdom, would find out enough againſt him , as Cortel boaſted, who faid,
that deliver np ts him the miſt upright Lituicnant in the Kingdom of France (provided be
had been but a year or two in that employment) and he doubted nit, bat to find matter enongh
to put him todeath, This pocr Lord had perform'd a Soldier-like a&ion if ever man did,
at che Fort of CAontrean, when the Engliſh (allied out of Br!/en to give him Batrel z he had
with him the Count Rhinegraves Regiment (and as I think the Count himſelf was chere)
that of the French commanded by Monſieur de T is, and ſeven Enfigns of 1taliansr. So
ſoon as the Enemy charg'd our Horſe, they were immediately pur to rout, and fled, when
the ſaid Sicur ſeeing thediſorder of the Cavaltyy he ran to the Battaillon of Foot, and faid,
Oh my friends, it was not with the Horſe that I expeted to win the Battel, Int it is with
you, and thereupon alighted, where taking a Pike from one of rhe Soldiers, to whom he
deliver'd his Horſe, and cauſing his Spurs to be pull'd off, he began his retreat towards
Andelot. The Enemy after they had a great way purſued the Cavalry , return'd upon
him, who was four hours or more upon his retreat, having the Enemies horſe, ſomerimes

in his Front, and ſometimes 1n his Flancks, and their Foot continually in his Rear, with-

out their ever daring to break into him, and I was told by the Captains who were preſenc
in the Action, that he never advanc'd fifry paces withour facing about upon the Enemy ;

by

CI.

N ao bs eat” ht, or, a

= _ *& 4a

I

— .

————_—

Book VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 2389
by which chis may be call'd one of che braveſt recrears thac has been made theſe hundred -
years, I ſhould be glad any one could name me ſuch another , having upon him the
whole power both of Foot and Horſe, and his own Cavalry all run of the Field. Behold
what this poor Lord did for a parting blow, at above threeſcore and ten years of age, and
yet he was uſed after this manner, Let any one ask the Cardinal of Lorrain, who it
was that did him this courtefie, for at the Aſſembly of the Knights of che Order before
King Franc# the ſecond, he reproach'd him with this bufſines, and they grew into very
high words upon it 3 for my part lam roo little a Companion co name it, though I was
preſentthere, and alſo there were ſome Ladies who had a hand in the buſineſs. | |
A year after T ſaw another pranck plaid Monſicur de Tais, wherein he was accuſed ro Monſieur de.

have ſpoken unhandſomely of a Court Lady *tis a misfortune France has ever had, that Tais baaiſhr
they meddle roo much in all affairs, and have too grear credir and intereſt : for upon this Þ* Cour-
the command of the Artillery was taken from him, and he never after return'd into fa-
vour. The King of Navarre entreated the King not to take ic1ll, if he made ule of him .
in the taking of Hedin , which his Majeſty gave him leave to do, and he was kill'd in He is lain,
che Trenches of the ſaid Hedin, doing ſervice for him ro whom his ſervice was not accep=
table, which is a grcat heart-breaking, and the greateſt of all vexations, to die for a Prince
that has no regard for a mans ſervice ; wherein our condition is of all others moſt miſera-
ble : notwithſtanding I believe the King wonld in the end have made uſe of him again,
for in truth he was a man of ſervice : and I moreover believechat his Majeſty was ſorry
he had baniſht him che Court : bur very often thoſe of both Sexes, who govern Princes,
make chem do things againſt cheir own natures and inclinations, and afcerwards they arc
ſorry for 1c 5 bur ic 1s too late to repent, when their Traverſes havebrought upon a Prince
{ach an inconvenience as 1s irreparable, and thoſe who would afterwards ſeem to excuſe
chem, endeavour to make the marter worſe by contriving new accuſations, and laying 0-
ther aſperfions npon them. I ſhall not mention the Conſtables buſineſs , which drave
him alſo from Court, and all, as it was ſaid, abont women * nor thar of the late Monſicur
de Guiſe, we have {cen them ſomerimes our, and ſometimes in, The King would do well
to ſtop the mouths of ſuch Ladies as tactile in his Court; for thence proceed all the re- Th
ports and flanders ; a prating Goſſip was cauſe of the death of Monficur de la Chaſtaigneray, The death of
who would he have taken my advice, and that of five or fix more of his friends, he had Monſicur de 14
done his buſineſs with Monfieur dr Farnac after another manner ; for he fought againſt Chaſtwkueray,
his conſcience, and loft both his honor and his life. The King ought therefore to com-
mand them to meddle with cheir own affairs (I except choſe that are to be excepted) for
their ticrle cattle has done a great deal of miſchief, and after, as I ſaid, it is too late.
Theſe are the good offices that in my time I have ſeen done ſeveral great perſons, and alfo
ſuch poor Gentlemen as my ſelf, all which proceed from the jealoufie and envy they bear
to one another, who are near unto the perſons of Princes. In the time chat I have been
at Court I have ſeen great diſſimulations, and ſeveral carry it very fair to one another in
ſhew, who would have eaten one another if they could, and yet outwardly who ſo great
as they, embracing and carefling one another, as if they had been the greateſt friends Diſſimulaciog
in the world. I was never skill'd in that Trade, for every one might read my hearc in * Cour.
my face.

By this one may Judg , that the misfortane into which this Kingdom is fallen, is noc
come upon it chrough any defaulc of courage, or wiſdom in our Kings, nor for want of
valiant Captains and Soldiers ; for never Kings of France had ſo many both of Horſe and
Foot, as Francis, Henry, and (haries; who had they been employed in forreign Con-
queſts would have carried the War far enough from our own doors, and it was a great
misfortune both co them and the whole Kingdome , that they were nor ſo employed,
and yet can we not lay the blame thereof, either co the Charch, or che chird Eſtate, for all
chat have by the Kings been demanded of them, have been freely granted, Every Child
then may judg whereche faulc lay, and from whence ſprung the Civil Wars ; I mean from
the great ones ; for they are nor wont ro make themſelves parties for the word of God,
If the Queen and the Admiral were togecher in a Cabine, and the late Prince of Conde,
and Monſieur de Giſe together wich chem, 1 could make them confeſs, that ſomething
elſe than Religion mov'd them to make three hundred chouſand men cut one anothers
throats, and I know nor if we have yer made an end; for I have heard there. is a Pro-
phecy (I know not whether in Noftradamns or no) that cheir Children (hall ſhew their
Mothers as a wonder when they ſee a man, fo few ſhall be lefcy having kill*d one another.
Bur ler us ſay no more of ic, it goers my hearc to think on'c, mine who haye the leaſt inte-
reſt, and who am ſhortly going into the other world.

Qq | Shoald

FAS ae wc ered wat - X
= : q
- -

*” Din Ae > i , - . _
*- _ _ ” - i 8

ae—_ + reed...

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Bo or Vi;

The two
Scipin'se

* His name
was Lucius
Marcius,

— "FY

Shonld I repeac all the Traverſes and Charities chac I have read of in the Rowan Hi-
Rories, I ſhould never have done ; which Hiſtories T have formerly delighted co read,
wondting why, and what ſhould be the reaſon, that we are not as valiant as they. I thal!
only reckon one or two, and begin with that I have read in I know not what Book, of
Camilluu a great Roman Caprain , who after he had won many Bactels, and enlarg'd the
Roman Empire, with the addicion of a large extent of Dominion, was 1n the end call*d co
judgment, for having dedicated the ſpoil of his Conqueits to the foundation of Temples,
wherein to ſacrifice to their Gods, of which ſpoil the one halt belong'd of right to che
Soldier : but that the Gods might aſſiſt them in cheir Bartels and Conqueſts, he preſented
them this gift, ſaying, That the Soldiers ſtood as much in need of the aſſiſtance of the Gods
as he. So that upon his rerurn to Rowe, for the reward of che grear ſervices he had per-
form'd, and the famous ViRorics he had ovrain'd for the Common: wealth, they broughc
him to his Tryal : yet did chey nor nevercheleſs put him to dearh, but ſent him into ex-
tle to a City the name whereof I do nor remember, for it is long ago fince I read Livie,
not in Latin (of which I have no more than my Pater Noſter ) butin French. Now
when he had remain'd ſometime 1n this City, there came two or three Gazliſh Kings with
a mighty Army, and took Rome, killing almoſt all the Cicizens, ſaving ſome few who re-
tir*d into the Capitcl, and there held our for ſome time. Liwle reports, that one night thoſe
who were thus retir'd into the Capitol were all afleep, and che Enemy had already gain'd
a part of the Capitol, when a Goole begining to cackle awak?®d the Guards, who there-
upon ente1*d into a combat with the Enemy, and repelPd them. Ar this time the ſaid
( amillu, gathering togerher all the men he could, took the field, where the Enemy finding
nothing more to plunder, nor proviſions to maintain their pleaſures in Ryze, having di-
{perſed themſelves all over the Country ten or twelve leagues diſtant from the City, he flew
in the fields ſeven or cight thouſand of them. (When I was at Rowe in the time of Pope
Marcellinus, 1 cauſed whoſe fields ro be thew'd me, taking great delight in viewing the
ground where ſo many brave Battels had been fought ; for me-chought 1 ſaw before my
eyes the things T had heard of, and read ; buc notwithſtanding I ſaw nothing, either like,
or any way reſembling the great Camilla.) The rumour of this defeat having run tho-
rough all the neighbouring Cities, cauſed ſeveral gallant men to repair to Camilla's
Camp ; by which means finding himſelf ſtrong enough he march'd direaly to Rue,
poſſeſſed by an infinite number of Gauls, whom he defeatedy and fav'd a vaſt ſumme of
money, which choſe who were retir'd into the Capitol had promiſed to give, and was af-
terward call'd the ſecond Founder of Ree, The Hiſtorians can give a better account of this
Rory than 1, who perhaps miſtake it; ir being above thirty years ſince I have ſo much as
taken a book in hand 3 and muchleſs dare to read now by reaſon of my ill eyes, and rhe
wound in my face. |

In Spainthe two Scipio's were defeated by eAſdrubal in thirty dayes time, and with-
in thirty leagues of one another, to wit Pab. Scipio the firſt, and his Brother Cornelzes
Scipio afterwards, and of both the one Army, and the other ſome eſcap'd away, who all
retir?d to the Garriſons where they had lain all Winter, where being come they found that
all cheir Colonels were ſlain, and were therefore neceffitared to chooſe one, whom they
call'd che New Captain. Aſdrubal having intelligence that this new General had rallied

' the Riman Soldiers who were eſcap'd from the two defears, went immediately to affaulc

them ; bur was ſtoutly repu[*d, and conſtrain'd to retire himſelf co a certain place, where
this valiant Captain fell upon him by night, and nor only defeated che Army he had
there with him but another alſo chat lay in another place hard by 3 inſomuch, that by
his valour he not only ſav'd thoſe few Romans who were eſcaped from the rwo loſt Bat.
rails, bur moreover both che Spaynes for the people of Roxe, which but for him had been
loſt ro Rome for ever . Now the Senarein the mean time continued a great while with-
out hearing any news of the Scipices, or of their aftaires : bur had ar length inteliigence
brought of the loſs of the two Seipio's , togerher with che viRories of this new Capraine
( I do nor remember his name before he was created, 8nd calldche new Captain, the
Hiſtorians will better remember ir than I who have nor ſeen the book of ſo many years)
which ſo ſoon as the Senate had notice of, they ſent away Scipio the younger to com-
mand the Army ( I think ſon to the farſt Scipio who had been {lain ) and withall com-
manded the new Captain to Rome, whom, ſo ſoon as he came, inſtead of rewarding his
ſervice, they call'd co judgment, accuſing him that he had accepred the Soldiers Eleftion,
and taken upon him che command of the Army from them, and nor by Commulion from
che Senate, and I think pur him to death, ar leaſt I find no more mention of him 1
Livy. |

On

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal. of France. 291

4 GB

Rn eee nate,
_—_ CEEneoer wn OS we es

Oh how many other great Captains have been recompenced with ſuch rewards in the
time of the Romans, the H:i(torians are full of ſuch exemples, and the Judicature of France
being rul'd and eovern'd by the Laws of the Romans, "tis to be expeRted that the Kings
*Froxce ſhould govern themſelves by their Cuſtoms. Would to God the King would
perpetuate his own glory, and leave ſuch a memorial of his prudence as ſhould for ever be
commended 3 that is, that he would burn all the Books cf the Laws by which his Judica-
cure determines of aftairs, and cre a new, equal, and upright Judicarure (for I dare be
bold to ſay , there is nora Monarch in Chriſtendom, who is govern*d by his Laws, the
Kings of France cxcepted, all che reſt have Laws made by chemſelves to cut off all tedious
Suitsz ſo much as cven in Bearn and Lorrain, which are in two Corners of the Kingdom)
that no Suit might be above ewo years depending. Tf his M:jeſty would pleaſe to dorhis
he might boaſt ro have a world of Soldiers, who would be neccſicated ro take arms, ha- |
ving nothing to do in the * Palace : for this Profeſſion being taken away, to what would * Courts of
you that a brave and gcnerous heart ſhould apply ir ſelf, bur to arms? what 1s it that fo Law. :
much encreaſcs the Power, and enlarges the Empire of the Grand Signior but chis,he thinks The grearneſs
of nothing bur arms? O how many brave Captains would chis Kingdom ' then ſupply the of «he Tub. ;
world withal, whereas I do believe that rwo Thirds of the Nation are taken up in theſe
Courts, and pleadings, and in the mean time, though they are naturally brave, by degrees
degenerate into Poltrons and Raſcals. This Kingdom would chen be formidable to Strangers,
and befides how rich and opulent ? for the whole ruine of the Gentry proceeds from no
other cauſe, bur thoſe peſtiferous Counſels wherewich che Advocates ſeduce their Clients ;
"and ſer them rogecher by the ears, I remember I once read in the window of a houſe ar

Tholowze, which one of the molt eminent Advocates of that Court call'd 7ainery, had can-
{ed to-be written there theſe words,

Faux conſeils, & manvaiſes Teſtes ,
Mont fait baſtir ces Feneſtres.

Evil advice, and idle brains

Haye helpr me to ere theſe pains,

and fince they themſelves record it, I may well fay after them, that we are very great fooſs
ro deſtroy one another to enrich them : it being equally ruinousto him that prevails, with
him that is baffell'd, for they ſpin out the Suits in ſuch length, that when he who has gor
the better of his adverſary comes to reckon the money he has ſpent, he will find himſelf
{till a great deal our of purſe, beſides the loſs of his time. Andif the King would do this
perhaps the caſtom of Traverſes, and ill offices men now praCtice upon one another would
be laid afide with the Laws and his Majeſties good Subjeas, who meditate no other thing,
but how loyally and faithfully co ferve him, would cither be maintain'd about his Ma-
jeſties perſon, or cl{ewhere employ'd 1n his ſervice.

Now ſeeing I have the honor in my diſgracesto be rancked with ſo many great Perſon-
ages, both of former ages, and thoſe whom I my (clt have known in my own cime, I ſhall
the better enjoy my renirement, and be proud of being aſſociated with ſo many illuſtrious
perſons, being aflur'd of rwo things, one whereof is my fidelity, which no one can by
any means deprive me of , and the other that T have co do with a gracious King , who
in time will (1 doubt not) acknowledg the ſervices I have perform'd for him, and for hiis
Crown, And if Iam recir d inco my own houſe, itis with no grear regret, it being a thing
I have long defir'd, provided ie might be with the good favour of the King and Queen,
which alſo they cannot juſtly rake from me, for which I praiſe God, who has guided me
ſo well throngh all my ſeveral Employments, that I never gave them any juſt cauſe of of-
fence, and am 1n this privacy of mine more happy, and becter ſarisfied, chan they who
have given me theſe Tiaverſes : for I langh at che anxiery they are in, both how co wound
and defend rhem(clves from one another. I think che Souls in Purgatory arenot in ſogreac
pain, whilſt I live here in repoſe in my Family, with my kindred and friends abour me,
paſſing away my time, 1n cauſing co be wric down before me the chinzs thar I have ſeen 3 *
ſo thar were ir not for thegrear Harquevouz ſhot in my face, which I am conſtrain®d to
keep.open, I ſhould be very well concent, and chjnk my ſelf exceeding happy. Por con-
cerning the loſs of my Sons, I comfort my {clt char chey all died like men of honor with
their ſwords in their hands for che ſervice of my Prince, and as to the reſt, I ſhould bea
man void of {enſc and undaſtanding, 1t I did nor look upon them as cricks that are com-
monly praQtifed in the world, and confider my ſelt in a happy eſtate, who have no more
occafion ro do harm to any one, which continuing in ſuch, and ſogreat an employment

as that wherein 1 was before, Tconld not ſomerimes-poſhibly avoid.

.

Qq 2 Bur

ni al htoanatrbano— <a gvre- _ _ —_

; "7 — OE =
oy POE 21 - "=

K\.

__

_— —_— EEE =
—_— — tt. —_

292

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book VP

Preparation
for ihe Siege
of Rochelle.

Bar I (hall leave this diſcourſe, which has half made me angry, to return to what became
of me after T had caken my leave of all thoſe Lords and Captains who went into Prance,
I return'd thorongh Perigueny, where I gave the Seneſchal of Perigord Commiſſion to
make head againft whatever Inſurre&ion ſhould ſtir on that fide 3 and ſo ſoon as I came
ro Apen, I ſent a Patent to Monſicur de Bellegarde at Tholouze, in my abſence to command
in the Country of Cominge and Bigorre, and as far as the Fronticrs of Bearn + anatherro
Monſieur de N-grepeiice to command in the Juriſdictions of Verdun and Riviere, and a
third ro Monſicur de Cornufſon the Elder to command in Rozerpur ; which being done, I
Ictr yer fourteen or fifzeen Enfigns more of Foor, whereof part I quarter'd in Oaercy to
make head againſt che Vicounts (who never ſtirr'd our of the Country, and were cvermore
ſtirring new Commotiens) and thereſt towards Bourdelois, and nor long after the King
ſent mea Command to go and beficge Rechelle, in order whereunto he would ſend me a
Commiſtion to razſe money wherewith to defray the expence of the War.

Firſt he would that choſe of T holouze ſhould deliver me twenty thouſand Francs of the
money rais'd upon the Confiſcation of the Hugonots Goods, wherewith to pay the Foot,
and for the charge of the Artillery that I ſhould take fifteen thouſand Francs upon ſome
Revenues the King has jn X,zatonge, wherecf his Majeſty never himſelf made above nine
woniand, and that his ſaid Majeſty would ſend order to the Governor of Nantes to ſend
ne fur pieces of Canon , and ſome Culverine. Theſe were my affignments, wonderful
certain, and vey, proper for ſuch an Enterprize, which ſcem?d rather a Mockery, and a
Farce than any thing elle ; and thatthey would ſend me before Rochelle, either to be chrown
away, or to ſuffer ſome notable diſgrace. However I would try alwayes to execute his Ma-
jeſties Command, to which end I immediately diſpatch away a Courricr with his Maje=
ſtics Leccers to the Parliament, and Capitouls of T holouze, to which they return*d me an-
ſwer, that che few goods of the Hugonors which had been found in their City had long a-
eo been ſold, and the money diſpos'd ot for the charge they had been at in ſeveral occaſions.
Upon this an{wer I went forthwith to Bowrdeanx to try it I could perſwade the Court of
Parliament, and the Jurats there co furniſh me with ſome money for the En:erprize, bac
could never prevail with them to advance one Denier, they telling me, that they would re-
ſerve the Stock thty had to employ it for the defence of their City, if occaſion ſhould be, and not
lay it ent upon Rochelle, which was no member of their Jariſdiftion, I then diſparchr away
to their Majcſties to give them an account of the anſwers I had receiv'd ; bur notwithſtand-
ing d1d nor for all that forbear to march into Xaintonge, beſeeching them to ſend me other
more certain aſſignments, or that otherwiſe I could not engage my ſelf before Rochelle,
without lofing their Majeſties reputation, and my own, and peradventure che whole Army ;
for to beliege a place of that importance withouc paying the Soldiers :o keep them in their
Trenches, were to force chem abroad to pillage, and to leave my Artillery in the mean
time engag'd; neither was I to learn in thoſe affairs. I writ morcover to his Majeſty char
he would pleaſe ro command che Governor of Nantes to ſend me the Artillery with all
poſtible ſpeed, and caulc it ro be brought ro Bro#age, hoping that 1 ſhould ſoon gain the
Iſles. Having ſent away this diſpatch, I return'd into Agenois to march away twelve
or thirccen Enfigns, as alſo to take the Gentlemen of the Country along with me, when
being cometo St, CAMacaire, TI there found Monſieur de Lanznn, and the Muſter-Maſters,
who was muſtring his Company, whom I entreated that immediately after the Muſter
he would ſend away Monſieur de Mſ2daillan, who carried his Enſign direftly to Yaing-s
to which Sieur de Madzillan I gave a Cornet of Argoulcts belonging to the Sicur de Ver-
duzan Seneſchal of Bazadois my Kinſman, together with the Companies of Malran,
T hodias, and 1a Mothe Mongauzy, giving him in charge to make extreme haſte withuur
ſtaying till he came to Xaintes, and that 1n caſe the Jſarennis ſhould beat St. Seurin, fo
ſoon as ever he had baited his men, he ſhould immediately go to fight them, and if they
got the viRory be ſure to ply their hands, for they were only a pack of Raſcals, and when
the others ſhould hear cf the defear of their Companions, they would cake ſuch a frighr
ar the news, that they would never make head again, and that the fear would run as far as
Rochelle : but that he muſt above all things be ſure to make a great {laughter ro ſtrike a
terror into the whole Party. I writ alſo ro Monſieur de Pons an account of the whole des
ſign, ordering him to ſend ſome of his Forces to Xaintes, to the end they mighe jointly fall
upon this execution. TI had already ſent to the Enſigns that they ſhould move towards 4-
gencis, and to the Gentry alſo, and the ſaid Seneſchal de Bazadois rook upon him the
Charge of our Mareſchal de Camp of Gens-d'armes, I had no more bur the Company of
Monſicur de Lauz#n, my own,aud that of Monſieur de MHerville Grand Seneſchal of Gien,
for of that of Monſicur de Farnac, which the King had appointed to come ro me, the fourch
part Was not to be found, moſt of them being with che Prince of Conde : OT ES

wh:'c1

—W” hah WE ERIN ITS " ” m

OO ROE PII vas FINS rs. 2a ola RET. WOT WE PEE II RE ION . ESPE ET LOT OE PEE NSTIIOR "” ,
£ «2; I — = = Re Ms A SIESEES, > THOR pn 20 BL. LO STEgS $3 4 a. oa:
II ENS Ll IC et. G23.” > VIM et tap 2 ft 2s; us 27K PETE JS ty S245 _ * ”

=. nts +

Book VI. . de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. | 26 L-

which, I taid three Gaies only at agen : but return'd ſtraight into Boardelois with the
2w Forces I could ger together, giving the Command of che Foot to my Nephew the
Sieur de Leberon. In my ſecond dayes march from Apen I receiv'd !::rers trom Monſicac
de Hadaillan, wherein he gave me to underſtand, char he had made ſo good haſte, as chac
che chird night after I deparred from them they arriv'd at Xauipter, where having incell:-
ence that there were three Enfigns of Foot at Se. Sexrin, who had there lodg?.l and for-
tified themſelves, they had fallen upon them, and brought away three Colours. Five or ſis
daics afcer I came to Afarennes, where I found Monſicur de Pops, to whom his Ma icſty had ;
wricten, as alſo ro Monficur de Farnac, to come to me to the Sieve of Rochelle, Soon at-
cer I received a letter from the Governor of Wantes, wherein he ſent me word, thatT was
not to wait In expectation of his Artillery, for chac he had one picce of Canon only
mounted upon an old rotten Carriage, and that all the reſt were on ground, without poſ-
ſibility of being mace ready in leſs than three months time. See how our Frontier Citics
and places of 1mpor:ance were provided and forcified ! Rochelle was not ſo. 1 then fell
xo ſpinning our the time abour Se, Fean and Xaintes, in expeQation of an anſwer from
their Majeſties, and money to bring the Artillery from Boxrdeaux, very ſorry that I had
advanc'd ſo far. Day by day I fent new diſpatches to them to that effe 3 but could ne-
ver obtain any anſwer. The Jaft I ſent to Court was Dragon, who had recir'd himſelf to
Monſiear de Pons, and in the mean time Monſieur de Laude came near unto St. Jean, where
ata privat Gentlemans houſe we had ſome conference. He there ſhewed me the letters
the King had writ to him, wherein his Majeſty commanded him to joyn with mein the
Encerprize of Rochelle, telling me that he would as cheerfuily obey me as the proper per-
ſon of che King himſelf, as being the oldeſt Captain in France , that he would bring me
fix or ſeven Enfigns of Footy and chree or four hundred horſe. Tt did not then ſtick ac me,
nor at thoſe Gentlemen the King had commanded to aſſiſt me, neither ar the Forces of Foor
or Horſe but only at the want of means to bring up the Artillery, and a little money to
pay the Foot, thar this Siege of Rochelle did nor ſucceed, T will nor ſay I {hould have car-
ried jr, but I ſhould have frighred chem at che leaſt, and perhaps have done them no
200d.
In this interval Monſieur de Pons had reduc?d the Iles of Oleron and Alvert ; for they The raking of
are for the moſt part his own, and Captain Gimbandiere was in them, having his hoaſe *** ls.
there, and commanded as well in 4/:rt as Oleron, There only then remain*d the Ile
of Re, where they had ereed a Forc near unto a Church, and ſeveral others at the places
of landing. I cauſcd five handred Harquebuzeers to be choſen out of all our Companies,
with all che Capiains, Lieutenants, and Enfigns, the one half of JMonganzy the clders
Company excepred, who ſtaid aſhore to command choſe that were lefe behind, making
my Nephew de Leberon with the ſaid five hundred to embark at the Port of Bro# age.
Gillet, che Kings receiver 1n thoſe parts took great pains to victual and prepare the Veſleis,
whom the Queen of Navarre put todeath in the late troubles, bur I could- never learn
for what, I ever knew him to be a good ſervant of the Kings, and believe his diligence
upon this occaſion of our mens putting to ſea did him mire harm than good, and perhaps
might be the cauſe of his death, for the Qucen of Navarre did by no means love thole
people. My faid Nephew was a day and a night hindr2d by foul weather from landing,
as alſo the Enemy defended the landing places from the Forts they had made : burn the
end he unbechoughrt him in the nigh ro ſend away all the leſſer boats he had brought a-
long with him full of Soldiers to land amongſt the Rocks on rhe back of the Iſland, where
the Enemy kept no Guard, who fo ſoon as part of chem were got on ſhore, the Enemy
diſcovering the ſtratagem, ran to that part, and fonghr them ; bur ours remain'd Maſters
of the place. My Nephew who was one that was engag'd in the fight, thereupon preſenc-
ly diſpatche a Skiff co che Captains and Soldiers who were aboard the greater Veſlels, to
bid chem come away, which being ſuddenly done, ſo ſoon as they were all landed, they
marchr direQly to the great Fort by the Church, a long Teague and a half from thence,
which chey affaulted on two or chree liccs ar oncez ſo that rhey carried the place, putring
all they found wichin ir co the ſword, wiulſt che reſt who guarded the landings puc them-
ſelves intolirtle boars, and fled away rowards Rochelle, We imagin'd chem to be the peo-
ple inhabicancs of the Iſland , who cſcaped away, and that off people had gotten the
victory , and two Gdayes after my ſaid Nephew ſent me an account of the whole ation,
which ſooner he conld nor do , the wind being ſo contrary that they could nor poſlibly
ger ro Marennes, where the aforeſaid Sicur and I lay : upon which news we call*d back
my ſaid Nephew, leaving two Feot Companies in the Ile, I then lefc Monſieur de Pons
at Marennes, and went away to St. Jean, where Monſieur de Farnac came ro me, to take
order for all things neceflary for me 1m order to the Siege, I cauſed grear proviſion of vi-

Quals'

LS

— TCO

tne” tat

4 -— ra IT ee rn rn oye — 000r006 29> Dy Net Ip oe

_—_—

Ra 28

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book VI,

——.

Provifien for Cuals ro be made ready, whercin the Providore of the late Monficur de Burije was very

Y oy >iepe of aſſiſting to me, for he was of chat Country. |
on In che mean time I (till expeRed to hear from the King, but could never obtein the fa-
vour of one \yallable, neither did any of my Mcflengers ever returns and 1n truth there
vas very great danger by the way, the Enemy being poſſeſt of all the great Roads, by
F which they were to return into Xajntonge. The firſt that came was Dragon, who broughc
| news that the Peace was as good as concluded, and that rhe King would ſuddenly ſend
me word \. hat 1 was todo. I think that having ſeen the Prince and the Admiral with
their Forces at the Gates of Paris, ready to fight a Bartel, and afrerwards at liberty to over-
run all France , they mor? thought of that than they confider?d the affairs of Gujenne.
This was the ſucceſs of my expedition into Xaintonge 3 and feeing I haye been reproache,
chat for three years I had done nothing conſiderable, I could with that ſuch as propoſe
Enterprizes to the King would be as prompr to provide things neceſlary for ſuch deſigns,
as they are ready to give aſſignments that ſignifie nothing) like thoſe they ſent me, and chen
perhaps ſome good might be done : but as they order ir, a man muſt bea God to work
mizacles. Oh the happy time that theſe men have who are about rhe Kings perſon, and
never come within danger of a Bartel ! they cut out work , and very good cheap for
others, that the King may think them wiſe and politick 3 but they never care to offer his

- nr OI Eons: tt Pm Ii ITT

| Majeſty, that it Montlac or another ſhall refuſe ro go upon ſuch an Enterprize, the

themſelves will undertake ir, Tt is enough for them thar they can talk well, and ſuch
perhaps there are, who propound a deſign which they would beglad ſhould muſcarry, for
generally there is nothing but difſimulation, jealoufie, and treachery amongſt them, and
this is to betray ones Maſter like a good Frenchman. I am confident by the chearfulneſs
I faw jn the Gentlemen who were with me, and by the aſtoniſhment I diſcover'd inthe
people we had to do withal, that had I been ſupplied with neceſfaries requiſite for ſuch
The impor- an Enterprize, I ſhould haye fer hard to have carried this City, which has fince fo forti-
rance of Ko- fied ir ſelf, that it the King permit chem to rake ſurer footing, 'ris to be fear'd they will

; A Fx . O? . ry
chelle. | withdraw themſelves from his obedience ; but I was at this time (o 1ll affiſted, and his

Majeſty ſoill ferv'd, that Icould do no more than TI did.
A few dayes after the King ſent me the Peace to caule it to be proclaim®d at Bourdeanx,
- commanding me to disband the Foot, and to diſmiſs them every man to his own houſe «
which I accordingly didy and ſent the Proclamation to the Court of Parliament, and the
Jarats to cauſe ic ro be publiſhc : bur for my own part I would not be preſent at it, know.
Ing very well, that it was only a Truce to get breath, and a Peace to gain time to provide
themſelves better for a War to come, and not intended to be kepr, for the King who had
been taken unprovided I was confident would never put up the aftront had been pur up-
on him, who though he was very young, was notwithſtanding a Prince of great ſpirir,
and that bore this audatious Enterprize with very great impatience, as T have ſince been
The Sieur de told by ſome who were then about him. He gave ſufficient teſtimony of a generous cou-
Mont{ucs judg= rage, and truly worthy of a King, when he pur himſelf in che head of che Swiſs to eſcape to
menr of the p,,j,. and do you think, Gentlemen, you who were the Leaders of thoſe mutinous

- ichet” " Troops, that he will ever forget that inſolence? you would hardly endure it from your

equal, whar chen would you do with a Servant? for my part I never ſaw, nor ever rcad
of ſo ſtrange a thing, which made me alwayes think ic would ſtick in the Kings ſtomack,
The Prince and the Admiral commited a great overſight in this Peace z for they had by
much the berter of the Game, and might doubtleſs have carried Chartres , ſo that thoſe
who mediated, and procur'd this accommodation, perform'd a very ſignal ſervice for rhe
King and Kingdom.

This was all I did in the ſecond Troubles, and me-thinksit was no contemptible ſervice,
to ſend the King a recruit of eleven or twelve hundred Horſe, thirty Enfigns of Foot, and
to preſerve for him the Province of Gaienne, conquer him the Ifles, and nor to be wanting
on my part, that I did not try my fortune at Rochelle , and ſend him all the money the
Rebels had amaſſed together in thar part of his Kingdom. Bur I muſt do miracles forfooth,
thoſe who are about the Kings perſon haveever done me one good office or another, and on
my conſcience would his Majeſty hearken to them now, char T have nothing ac all ro do,
they would find out one thing or another to lay ro my charge ; for che cuſtoms of che
Court muſt nor beloſt , which isto do all ill offices, and invenr {landers againſt thoſe who
have a defire to do well. Was I near them I could quickly giveſome of chem cheir anſwer,
but the diſtance js too great berwixt Gaſcony and Pars ; befides I have loſt my Children,
and an od Beaſt has noreſourſe.

The ſhort This accommodation of the Second Troubles concluded at Chartres continued bar eight
Peace, 1567+ or njive moneths at moſt, and was thercfore called the Shoyt Peace, In this interval I went

,O

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

295

Er... rn,

to Buurdeaux in the beginning of May to lee how all things went, where, by che news that
was ordinarily brought from Court, by ſuch as came from thence, I very well perceiv'd
that this Peace would not long continue : For one while I was told, thac the Prince of
Conde, and che Admiral liv*d contenredly in cheir own houſes; bur for the moſt parc was
aſſur'd ro the contrary, and alſo thar che King had ſen no order co disband his own Forces,
as at the Peace of the former Troubles, and thar thoſe of the new Religion went and came
ro and fro from place to place, and frequently mer ar Conventicles, Ic was moreover bruited
chat Rochelle would not ſurrender, nor Montanban, Millan, and other places, inſomuch
chat ic ſeem'd to be racher a Truce, than a Peace concluded, On the other fide I was
entred into ſome jealoulie of the Governor of Blaje call\d Des-Rois, wherefore I went to
Blaye, taking che Atturney General of the Parliament, called Laket along with me, where
being come, Des=Rois began to tall into a Tong diſcourſe of the Courc of Parliament, and
the Jurars of Bourdeaux, complaining to me, that they had conceiv?d an unjult ſuſpicion a-
gainſt him, which made him atraid co go inco the Ciry, To which I made anſwer, that this
jealcuſie did not originally proceed from any diſ.ff-Qion that either the Court of Parliament, or
the Turats had to his perſon, but that himlelf was the cauſe he was ſuſyefted, foraſmnch as all
thoſe of his Garriſon wire Hugonots, whom he protefted and favour'd in the City, and who not far
from thence bad defac'd a Church in his own preſence : but that if he deſir'd no one ſhould ſuſpe#
or cenſure him, he would do well to new-madel his Garriſon, and form ( the greater part of it at
leaſt) of Catholick Soldiers : That notwithſtanding I very well knew the contrary, and thereupon
like a trae friend remonſtrated to him , that he ſhould call to mind from what Father he de -
ſcended, and remember that in recompence of the good ſervices he had perform'd for the Kings
Francis and Henry, they had firſt given him the Command of that place, and Ince continued
it to him his Son; with ſeveral other Remonſtrances, which I thought proper to wean him
from an ll-conceiv'd opinion, 1n caſe he ſhould peradventure really have cntercain'd any
ſuch thing in his fancy. Thad formerly evermore taken his part, and having ever known
him (as I chonght at leaſt) very afteCtionare co the King's ſervice, had writ to his Majeſty,
chac if I was to be reſponlible for any man, it ſhould be for him (ſee how. a man may be
deceiv'd in judging of men by their own fair ſpeeches) bur ſo ſoon as I was return'd co
Bourdeanx, and ſaw {ome f1gns that did not much pleaſe me, T had no more the ſame 0-
pinion of him that before ; of which I alſo gave their Majeſties preſent notice ; but ic was

| feven or cight dayes after I had parted from him, I heard fince that a few dayes after I

had been with him he had been ar Eanljers to conferre with Monſieur Mirmebear, and
the Baron de Pardaillan, where they had been five or fix hours ſhut up together in a Cham-
ber, that they [1ad another meeting three dayes afcer that, and I had further intelligence,
that he was determin'd to go to Courc to preſent himſelf to the King, to give his Majeſty

' more ample aſſurance of his faith. Whereupon I diſpatched away to the King) giving him

an account of all I had heard, and celling him thar I had formerly given his Majcſty aſſu-
rance of the ſaid Des-Rois, bur that I would now revoke that engagement, and no more
and caution for him, confidering the conference he had held ac Eftazliers, and thac if
his Majeſty would pleaſe ro take my humble advice, he ſhould remove him from his Go-
vernment , ſubſtituring ſome one of his Majeſties own Religion , which if his Majeſty
ſhould be pleaſed co think fic to do, ic would then be convenient to detein the ſaid Des- Reis
till ſuch time as I ſhould have pur in him whom his Majeſty ſhould appoint into his place,
and chang'd the Garriſon. Humbly beſceching his Majeſty, that he would pleaſe to take
my poor advice in this affair, or that otherwiſe himſelt would be. che firſt that ſhould
repent it.

"De Rat faiPd not to begin his Journey the ſame day chat Iſent away my diſpatch to
the King, which was upona Monday, and being come co Court, asI was told, addreſſed
himſelf co Monlieur de Lanſac, ro whom I believe he made his complainc, perſwading the
ſaid Sieur de Lanſac thar all cheſe jealoufies proceeded from no other cauſe than the defire
Thad to preferre ſome Gentleman who was ar my devotion, to the Command of that
place, which how true ir was God then knew, and time has fince diſcover'd : but I con-
ceive that the ſaid Sicur de Lanſac, as well upon the account of neighbourhood, ag our of
conſideration of the good repute of the Facher and Family of che (aid Des- Rois, was wil-
ling to embrace his intereſt, and conſequently ſpoke co his Mazcſty in his behalf, wherein
he was himſelf fti{t deceiv'd, and afterward aſham'd of his mediation. Ir was howeyer
hard to judg a man who had neyer been blemithr before, nor ever commirted any faulc,
buc rather behav'd himſelf well chan ill, as chis Gencleman had done. Men are not ty
be diſcover d by the fight, like counterfeit money 5 and God alonecan dive inco the hearts of
men, So jt was, chat he recurn'd back very well ſatisfied wich the King, to whom, chac

he might be more aftcRionate to hus ſervice, his Majeſty gave a thouſand Crow ns, where-

If\

The praQices
of the Hugo?
nots to win
Des—Rois over
to their Party,

The Steur de
Montluc's ad-
vice to the

King,

296 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox YÞÞ?

_ EE A — CLTE.. —eufioa—

——

in his Majeſty did not perhaps conſider, that he was of an ill hair, of which there are
very few good men z but, however it was, another might have beenas well deceiv'd as he,
for he had a ſmooth rongue, and knew very well how to diſguiſe che rancour of his
heart, |

See here how cautious a Prince ought to be, whether the King, ought not to have taken
more norice of this conference of one of his Governors with che Hugonots,and in a caſe of
ſuſpition like this, to have enclined to che ſafeſt counſels. There are wayes toſarisfie ſuch
as we would rid our hands of, without driving them to deſpair, whereas we run a very
erear hazard in leaving a place of importance in the hands of a ſuſpected perſon, as his
Majeſty did in the power of Des-Rois, and a very good place roo. When a woman once
hearkens to unlawtal ſolicitation farewel vertue, and alſo when a Governor of a Town
enters into ſuch ſecret Parlies as theſe, there 1s ſome knavery a brewing, and in ſuch a
caſe the King or Prince ought to be as jealous as the Husband, thac knows his Wife has an
A difcouſe 4, open to Courtſhip, if at the ſame time he who engages1n ſuch conferences, do not un-
_— derhand give his Majeſty or his Lieutenant notice of ir ; in which caſe there 1s ſtill ſome
Dinh of Cone danger, and it is hard to be ſubtle enough for a Traitor.
de. Before I departed from BoxrdeauxT in the morning aſſembled the Attorney General,

the General de Goargaes, Captain Verre, and my Nephew the Sieur de Leberon, ro whom
] would communicate what I had fancied with my ſelf upon the news char daily came
from Court of the difidence and difcontent the Prince of Conde was in, and what I ſhould
do if I were in his place, In which diſcourſe they may remember I told them, that 3
the Prince could paſs, he would infallibly come into Xaintonge, having Rochelle, and almoſt
all the (ountry at his dewotien ; that the Iſles when they ſhonld ſeeForces in Raintonge, and
at Rochelle, and Monſieur de la Rochefoucaulr fo near them, world preſently revolt, and
that then the ſaid Prince and the Hugonets would reſolutely turn all their defigns this way z
for in France Roan was no longer theirs, which being gone, they had not one Port-Town at
Brouage the thejr devotion ; and that it would be in them a ridiculous and a ſenſeleſs thing, to begin a
nh third War, without firſt baving a Sea- Port in their power. Now they could not poſſibly make
Choice of one of greater advantage to them, than that of Rochelle, on which depends that of
Brouage, which is abſolately the faireſt, and the moſt commodions Haven in all the Kin dow ;
for being there they might have ſucconrs out of Germany, Flanders, England, Scotland,
Brittany, and Normandy, all of them Countries abonnding in people of their own Religion, +
ſo that in truth ſhonld the King give them thelr choice to Canton themſelves in any Port of
the Kingdom, they could not poſſibly chooſe a myre advantageons nor a more commodious place.
They all approv*d of my diſcourſe as being near the truth, which I had fram*d in the
Night as I lay confidering the Rate of our affairs, for ſo I nſed to paſs part of the time
in bed; and this waking fancy of mine ſeem'd to preſage almoſt as much diſaſter and mis-
fortune, as the dreams Lhad dreamt of King Henry and King Charles.

Having entertain'd them with this diſcourſe, I then proceeded to tell them, that it would
be convenient to find out ſome fit remedies againſt the evil before it ſhould arrive ; for to com-
municate this conceipt to their CMajeſties, without propoſing at the ſame time ſome way ts
fruſtrate the Enemies deſigns, were, I thought, to make thers neglelt my intelligence, and to
ſtight my advice, We therefore fell to conſidering, that co prevenc the miſhaps which ſeem'd
co threaten us, there was no other way, than by making Forts upon the ſea , and berimes
co ſecure the Ports» which with four Ships, and as many Shalops to lie at Chedebois, 1;
Palice, and the mouth of che Harbour at Bro#age , might ſufficiently be provided for ;
and that the Ports being once our own, neither Engliſh, nor any other of cheir Party, could
or Would attempt to come into their aſſiſtance, knowing they were to land art places where
chey are almoſt always certain ro meer with very rempeſtuons weather z and thar Seamen
will never venture out to ſea to go to any place, unleſs they are firſt {ure of a free and a
ſecure Harbour to lic in 3 and on the orher fide, that our Ships lying abouc che Iſles would
{o awe the Inhabicants, that they would never dareto revolt, and our men of War would
ſo keep Rochelle, as ic were beſieged, that ic mult of neceſſity in a liccle rime cicher wholly
ſubmit to the Kings devotion, or at leaſt contein themſelves quier, without attempring any
' thing of commotion. All which being remonſtrated to them we unanimouſly concluded,

thar I ought to ſend an account thereof to the King and Queen.

Now the next thing we were to conſider of, was, which way the money was to be raiſed
to equip theſe Veſſels, and ro pay the men; and asto thar we made account that with ten
chouſand Francs, and two thouſand ſacks of Corn, which I offer d of my own for the
making of Biſcuit, we ſhould ſer them out to ſca. General Gorgyues would undertake
alſo to cauſe Carrel to be ſent from the upper Country upon the account of his own credir,
and all upon che confidence we had, that his Majeſty would in time reinburſe us ; The

Attor-

Advice to
Princes.

The delignofa
Nayal Army

th a et thes th t S S——_—

OY So ects oe anne CRE Pro" 03 = ho tO CNT ca - T.2% -
ES ee Eee ES :

[|

Book VI; de Montliic, Mareſchal of France.

- — — ee ee e——— on AA tes cs A GE co As AS a TE ng, — CO —  ——__

w=ooe>.,

297.

Attorney General then dealt very earneſtly with the ſaid Sieur de Gorgaes to perſwade the
Jurars monethly to advance ſomething towards rhe charge, and moreover to levy the Cu-
{tom (which the preſent Treaſurer had obtein'd from the Privy Council, and ſ\nipt from
che Kings Revenue, though the Graunrt had nor yer been execured, by reaſon thar the Re-
ceiver of Bourdeaux had oppol*d him in his claim, pretending it to be a Member of his
Farm, inſomuch thar che Treaſurer our of {pite had forborn to execute his Warrant) which
whea the Jurars ſhould ſce was to be laid our for the publics good, not only in the behalt
of his Majeſties particular intereſt, bur morcover for the benefic of their own City, every
one would lay to his helping hand, fo that what with this, and what with the foremen=
tion'd advance, jt would nor for the tucure coſt the King aperny. The Attorney Gene-
ral, and the faid Sicur de Gorges then with Captain YVerre caſt up the account before me,
which being done, we concluded rhat the Sieur de Leberon ſhould go carry an acorn: of all
to the Queen, very well knowing that her Majeſty would berrer underſtand che baſineſs
than any of che Council 5 whereupon I accordingly difpatcht away the ſaid Sieur de Lebe-
701 polt to Court.

The Queen hearkned to all my ſaid Nephew had to deliver wich very great patience, r2-
curning him anſwer thereupon, that ſhe wonld propomnd it to the Conncil, which the did, and
three Cayes after told him, that the Comncil did by no means approve of the motion, which I

| believe was occafion'd by ſome ones buzzing into their ears, that T made this Propolicion

more our of a defire torange along the Coaſt, than out of any reaſon there was to ſuſpe&
any ſuch thing, as I fancied ſhonld tail our, I remiember very well thar Tgave my ſaid
Nephew further in charge co teil che Queen, that { had been ſo unfortunate in all the ad-
vices 1 had preſumid to:ffer ts her 2ajeſty, that ſhe had never been pleaſel to give any credit
to any of them, notwithſtanding that her Majeſty had ſo often been convinc'd, that they had
been alwayes good, and my inteiligences continually trne : but that 1 did moſt humbly leſtech
her to give credit to me once in her life on'y, which if ſhe did not, ſh? would 1 donbted repent
it, and that it would be too late to be remedied, when the misfortune ſhonld be once arriv?d :
bur all cheſe remonſtrances Ggnifhied nothing, and the ſent me back my ſaid Nephew with-
out any other anſwer bur this, that the Kings Conncil had not approv'd of the thing, Which
prov'd very ill; I believe had her M:jity bcen pleaſed co follow my counſel the Hugonors
affairs would not have been in ſo good a condition as they now are: but God diſpoſes all
things as beſt pleaſes him. 1 know very well, thathad I wrought every day a miracle, the
Court would never have believed me to be a Sai: t, eſpecially thoſe abour the Kings per-
ſon, who would be ſorry their Majeſties ſhould believe that any in the Nation thould be
ſo vigilant, fo intent upon the affairs of the Kingdom, or ſo wiſe as they, and yer I have
often heard that thoſe who preſume ſo much upon their own wiſdom, are ofcen the verieſt
fools of all.
Oh how vigilant ought a wiſe and prudent King to be, to diſcover theſe Court Cheats,
] was too far off to diſpute it with them face to face, and lecters have no reply ; one Enc-
my aiſo in the Kings Council is able to do a man more miſchief, than thirty triends can
dohim good, of which I have had woful experience, and in the mean time all chings go
backwards, without any hopes of amendment, for any thing we can do or lay, I may
here aptly enonglt bring in the ſtory of ALarco de Breſſe an Ttalian, who had pettorm'd
ſome {1gnal ſervices for the Signiory of Yenice, for which having long (olliciced a recom-
pence, but full in vain; ic hapned at laſt char the Duke of Yenice died, which ſo ſoon as
ever Signior Marco heard of, he preſently preferr'd a Petition to the Senate, wherein he
encieared the Signiory to chooſe him Duke for the reward of his ſervice. The Senate cqually
aſtoniſhc, and fcandaliz'd at the ridiculous, and yer the audacious prerence of this man, « pa,qgn ne
{cnc {ome of their Senators to him to check him for his inſolence, and to remonſtrate co him you have f gs
the offence he had given to, and the affront he had purupon theRepublique by his impa- to riany rid:-
dent demand ; which being accordingly laid home to him, he retarn®d chis anſwer, culous things,
X Pardonate mi, voi bavete fatto tante colynerie, che io penſ, ave che faretti anchora queſta, 7a nat. 4 tough
baſta ſon contento, And ſo may we lay ro thoſe Getlemen char govern all, that we onghc raed A = .
not to wonder at any thing they do, nor hope for any becter from chem. The Kingdom buc *is ſuſfici-
at the long run will find che cftes of their doings. Inthe mean time T return to my eor;l am ſacis-
Subject. fied,

I chen rewurn'd COWArt's Arenois, waere upon my arrival at Ageny I fo bruiſed one of The Sieur de
my legs, that ir conſtrain'd me three moneths to keep my ved, atrer which when I chought Moatluc falis
my ſelf cur'd, I was (urpriz*d with fo ſharp and violence a Carharre, as I choughe verily fick.
would hayecut my throat, which had itnor vented ic {elf ar one of my ears, the Phyſicians
cold me would infallibly have done my buſineſs, $o ſoon as I was alittle recover'dy 1 re-
mov*d my (clf to Caſſaigne for change of , which was abour the end of Fuly, 1 had

SL there

Re ens __y_— in

TI . — =
R ys IF — ————————
mr ERR —— 7

:
i
i
4
[
|
[|

_—

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book VI.

Were intclligence ſent me ont of Bearn, rhat che Queen of Navarre was departed from Page
to go into Frix, to tike ſome order abour ker affairs 7 ſoon after I receiv'd news that ſhe
ſtaid ar Fic Bigorre, and immcdiatcly after I had another advertiſement, that on Wedneſ.
day night there was a Gentleman came to her from Monſieur de 1a Rechefoucan't, who had
above four hours been ſhure vp with her in her Cabinet. Whar Peace ſoever had been con=
claded I was evermore at watch, and alwaycs maintain'd ſpies ro give me an account of
what they did 1n Bern, for I very well knew, that no goodneſs was hatching there. I had

The Queen of ſyrcher notice given mey that upon Thurſday the was departed from Fic Bigorre in all haſte,

Navarre des
parteth our of

Bearn,

and was gone towards Nerac, as it was true, for ſhe arrived there upon Sunday morning,
Her arrival at this place filled many with expeRation of novelcy, and pofleſt che wiſer
fort with an opinion that the Peace would nor long continue. The next day I ſent my
Nechew de Leberon to wait upon her, by whom I did humbly beſeech her, th »t hey coming
into theſe Parts might turn to our advantage , and produce ſyme good effefts for the better eſt a.
bli;ment of the Peace concluded, aſſuring her spon my honor, that 1 on my part wen'd take
ſuch care, that it ſhou!d not be violated on the C atholicks ſide : 1n anſwer whereunto the ſent
me-word, that ſhe w*s come to Nerac to no other end, but to ſee the Peace inwolably ol ſerv d,
and to ſuppreſs any «v4 inclinations that ſome of her ( hurch might unadviſcdly nouriſh to the
perturbation of the publick quiet, as very well knowing that there were ſome both of the one Per=
ſwaſron and theother, who drſired nthing but war ; and that ſeeing I was ſo well diſpoſed to the
conſervation of the publick repoſe, 1 ſhould ſoon ſee th:t her deſire and intention was the ſame 5
in concurrence to which common benefit I was only to communicate to her ſuch things as 1
ſhuuld hear, and that ſhe would take order concerning all things that depended apon thoſe of her
Religion.

Fivs things oblig'd me to believe that this Queen ſpoke from her heart, alchough che
Court was pleaſed to cenſare me for that credulity , of which the firſt was, thar the
King had never given her occaficn to a& any thing againſt him, but on the contrary both
formerly maintain'd her intereſt agatnſt the Pope, and morelately againſt her own Sub-
JeAs of Bearn, which I conceived ought in reaſon to oblige her : and the other the greac
premiſes which both by Letters and expreſs Meſſengers the ordinarily made to the Kin
never to be againſt him, of which I do believe his Majeſty has no leſs than a whole hundred
ro produce. All which conſider'd, together with the near relation ſhe has co the King,
whac muſt he have been, who durſt haye manifeſted a ſuſpicion againſt her. Had I done
it ſhe would have ſaid, and have accuſed me to have been the cauſe that ſhe had altered.
the good inclination ſhe had everhad to his Majeſties ſervice, Wherein ſhe wonld have
wanted no {econds at Court againſt me, to load me with the Pack inſtead of the Saddle. I am
much better ſatisfied that ſhe has perſecuted me as ſhe has done without any cauſe chan that
ſhe had done it with any juſt pretence : but the weakeſt alwayes goes to the walls, It the
King or Queen had a mind to have had me done otherwiſe, why did they not order me
rodo it; 1 ſhould then have fear'd nothing z bur I muſt be a Propher. I had evermore
an eye to what chey did in Bearn, becaule it is a Country very much infected with the
new Religion, thac is crept in amongſt them I know nor how, nor I know nor who will
root it out. They had amongſt them, ?cis true, a pack of Godly Miniſters, who with all
cheir ſeeming humilicy, and pretended ſanQity , breath'd norhing 1n their Pulpits but
War and Rebellion : but ascrothe Queen of Navarre, I could never have imagin'd thac
{be would have committed ſuch an error , and have hazarded her State, which the Kine
had maintain'd her in, as ſhe did. Burl think thofe virtuous Miniſters under ſhew of
holineſs inveigled her over to their party; for to that end they would omit nothing, and

The Queen of would promiſe wondersco whoever would hearken to them, The Queen deparced from
Navarre de= Nerac on Sunday morning, the very ſame day chat my Wite intended to have gone thither

74s

parts from Ne- tg have kifſed her hand, and Monſieur de Sainforens and my Sons were to have gone along

with her , to run at che Ring, and to divert the Prince where they made account to have
ſtayed eight or ten dayes. 1 ſent my Wife thither on purpoſe to encerrain the Queen with
reiterated afſurances of me 8nd the Catholicks, that we would nor offer ſo much as once to
think of raking arms, but the ſame Sunday morning by break of day came a Comptroller of
hers, by whom ſhe ſent me word, that my Wife ſhould nor comethicher, for char ſhe was
going away to Caſtelgeloux, upon ſome intelligence ſhe had receiv'd, that certain incendia -
rics of her Religion had a mind to raiſe ſome commotion bur that ſhe would not fail to
prevent them. I then perceiv'd that it was ſomething elſe than to ſuppreſs thoſe pretended
Murineers that carried her away 3 forhad thac beenall, ſhe might have done the buſineſs
at Nerac without going to (aſtelgelonx : yer could I nor penetrate into the bottom of her
deligne. The next morning I went to Agen, from thence I difpatcht away ro Monſieur
de Madaillan , thathe ſhould in all ſecrecy gather together choſe ot my Company on the

other

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

a—_—_ RT TT HOT: ws Gr ORs tte A —— —  —
other fide the River Garonne, ar [a Sarvetat , where his own houſe was : I ſent another

diſpatch alſo to the Chevalier my Son, who was a Colonel in Gienne, that he ſhould give
notice to all his Caprains that day and nighr, in all diligence chey ſhould march co Por
St, Marie with fificen or twenty Harquebuzcers on horſeback each, wichour ſtaying for
any more, I likewiſe {ent ro Monſieur de Fontenilles, who lay in Garriſon at Aoiſſac to
do the ſame, and to ſend to thoſe of his Company who were not in the Garriſon with
him to follow after with all pcſible ſpeed.
The Queen of Navarre ſtaid two daics only at Caſtelgeloux, bur took her way thence dis
realy tro Thonens and Aymett. Her departure was (o ſudden, that the Chevalier my.Son fell
four hours ſhorc of being able to joyn wich Monſieur de Madaillon, by reaſon of the pal-
ſage over the River of Aiguillon, where chere were no more than two lictle Boats only,
and yet when our. people came to Aymett, it, was not above three or four hors that the
had been pared thence, aud gone 1n all haſte ſtraight ro Bergerac ; where the Sicur de
Piles with chree or tourfcore Horle was come out to meet her, and ſo ſhe paſſed over the
Dordogne, I had raken fo excraordinary pains night and day to fend away my diſpatches
ro give notice to all the Captains and Genilemen of che Country to betake themſelves to
arms, that being not yer perfectly car'd of my Catharre I relap('d into an extreme and
dangerous ficknel'» Every one concluced I could nst. poſſibly eſcape it, and I my ſelf
chought no leſs; for I now made my will, which before for any ſickneſs I had had, or
for any wounds I had receiv'd, I had never done, Tnall the fickneſfes and wounds I had
lain under before, I had never had other care chan of my arms, and my horſes; bur ar
this time, believing I ſhould certainly die, T thought of every ching, though thac which The Sicur ae .
moſt afflicted me, was to leave my Prince and Country in fo critical a time, ,and in ſo'dan- Oe "2
1dition. However during the time of my ſickneſs I made the Knight my Son 5.2?!
gerous a condito z n y ſickneſs I m eKnighc my ok
raiſe chiry Enfigns of Foor, wherein the Levy was ſo ſudden, that the Caprains could nor
get Soldiers to make up a third part of their Companies, by reaſon that almoſt all choſe
that Monticur de Sainttorens had carried to the King in the ſecond troubles were lefc be-

hind in France, and had liſted chemſelves into the old ſtanding Regiments there, and alſo
ſome of the Captains.

Being yer in checxtremity of my fickne(s, Monſieur de Foyes/e, who was abour Xfont- Monfeur de
pellier, ſent me word that he Provergals had paſled.che Roſne, and that Monſicur d' Acier Feyeuſe ſends *
was gone towards ſez, to meet and receive them ; that they were only five or fix thou- the Sicur de
ſand Ragamutfian Raſcals (which was his own expreſſion) who carricd their Wives and 2299*uc intele
Children along wich them, and chat I might eafily hinder their paſſage into Xaintonge, ace ke ws
whether they were going to offer rheir ſervice to the Prince, and the Admiral, who were Proveacils, :
already arriv'd in thoſe parts, The Queen of Navarre had alſo taken the ſame way, as
to a place of che greaceſt ſafery, where they had ſo many advantages to proſecute the War,
and the whole Conntry at their devotion, I had likewiſe news ſent me from Courr, chat
the King had ſent away Monſieur de CMontpenſier to come head the Forces of Gaienne and
Poiftou ; of which 1 was exceeding glad, being afſur'd chat if we were to ſerveunder him,
we ſhould be ſure to fight. The very day therefore that I firſt got our of my bed from
my dangerous ficknels I went cowards Cabors, taking a Phyſicianand a Litter along with
me, of which I had more necd than of a Spayiſh Horſe, and after that manner made a
{hift to crawl as tar as {aftelnin de Monrattler within five leagues of Cahors, there to a(-

{emble our Forces together.

To this place came Mcfſicurs de Gondrinz de [aValette, de Sint Colombe (who brought
five and rwenty men at Arms of the Monfieurs Company that were of this Country) the
Licucenant, and Enſign.of Monſieur de Afontpezat (who had ſome of the Marquis de Vil-
lars his men) and Monhicur d# Maſſes with his own Company, and mine, which ac chat
time conſiſted of threeſcore men at Arms. I ſtayd four or five dayes at Caſtelnaw, where
I began to gather a little ſtrength, and there received Leirers from Monficur d' Eſcars, that
he was coming to joyn with me wich his own Company, and a Company of Light=horſe
that he had newly railed, as alſo che Vicount de Limevil with his Company, and another Number ec
of Light-horſe, rogether with ſome Gentlemen of Leme/in and Perigord he had with him, the Catbolick
2nd I alſo had ſome. Whar berwixc the Forces that Monſieur 4'E ſcars wasto bring, and Forces,
thoſe of ours, we made account by the report of our Mareſchal de Camp, which was Mon-
fieur de [a Chappelle Lowſteres, Liencenant ro Monficar de Biron, that ws might be in alt
four hundred Light-horie, and asco che Foot in 8ll the thirty Enfigns there was nor good
and bad above eighteen hundred fighting men 3. for my Son having caken areview of them
ar his paſſing over the Bridge ar (ahurs, had catheer'd three or four hundred thac were
good for noching buc co pilter and rob the Country, fo thac in all hisenſigns he had vo
more remaining bur cightcen hiandred men, *Tis truce he had dai'y ſome or other £ill :

R r 2 coming

bl

y
$
$
= -
|
\F!
H
4:
24
IC
t#
2
+3
4
#5
Þ
I
15%
it
'F
F
'
q
'
is
,
'#E
,
"v5
"&

Ds. Ds

—_

z00 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize = Book VI:

coming in to him, for the Captains had letr cheir Lieucenanis behind, who every day picke
up ſome. With cheſe chen we marchr direaly to Cahors, where T lay twelve dayes, and
the Camp in the adjacent places, and there again receiv d l[ecters from Monſheur d' Eſcars,
who ftaid for me about Sowillac, and alſo from Monſieur de Jojenſe, wherein he adver-
tifed me, thatthe Enemy (till march'c on along the Mountain coward Rhodes, and fo we
departed thence, and in two dayes came to Soxillac. |
Ar Soxiflac I receiv?d letters from the Biſhop of Rodes, and frem Meſſicurs de ' Eftang
(eldeſt Son of Monſieur de Cornuſſin) and de Sint Benſa , all of one and the ſame tenor,
which was, that they had diſcover d the Enemy, who were no other than five or ſix thouſand
Raſcals with their Wives and Children with them, exaRtly after the ſame manner that Mon-
fieur de Joy:uſe had deſcrib'd them before, Now ſeeing this account of the Enemy came
from men of honor, eſpecially from Monficur de Fojeuſe, who ſent me word hehad cauſed
them to be diſcover'd by men of worth and underſtanding in thoſe affairs, and that che
others had themſelves view?d them in perſon, we all concluded ir tobe ſo, See here the
diflerence* betwixr cauſing an Enemy to be diſcover'd, and diſcovering a mans ſelf in his
own perſon the poſture of an Enemy ; for this advertiſement had like to have been the
ruine of as all ; and we were fo near being all loſt, that 1t was the work of God, and nor
of men that preſerv'd us; and yerwe were all of ns of one opinion, and could hardly ler
It fink into our heads, chat Mcfſteurs the Count de Tande, de Gordes, de Afangiron, and
de Suze having all the Forces of Provence and Danphine with them ( for they were all
The Sicur de joyn*d together , as Monſieur de Joyenſe had writ me word ) would have ſ{affer'd fo few
—_ Ma people in {o evilequipage to paſs the Reſne without fighting them ; or the ſaid Sieur de
the comin & J0euſe himſelf, who had a. Force ſufficient in Languedoc to hinder them from paſſing the
the Proven- - River on his fide : neither could I imagine that ſuch a handtul of men thould be ſo hardy,
£40x, ' as to march thorough the Kingdom of France z which made me alwayes cry , theſe are
brave bold Raſcals, we muſt ſee them, if they be ſuch as me are made to believe they are, we
ſrall have a goed bargain of them. On the ocher ſide the defire we had co fight them
made us more apt to believe, that the intelligence had been ſent us was true, for ottentimes
men are apt to deceive themſelves, and enclin'd to believe what they defire. In this reſo-
lurion we made account to go and fight them fo ſoon as ever they ſhould approach the
River of Dirdegnez to which purpoſe being remov'd to Gonrdon, Monficur de Monſales
arriv*d at our Camp, who brought me Letters from the King, and to Monſieur d'Eſtars
alſo, wherein his Majeſty commanded us forthwith to repair ro Monſieur de Montpenſier
(who was about Poifton) to fight with the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral. He came
in a very great heat to make us inſtantly depart, which made us immediately enter into
Councel upon the place, in which was Meſſieurs d*Eſcars, and de Bories, St. Genies the
elder, with two or three other Knights of the order, who were come with Monſieur
d'Eſcars, and on our ſide Meſſiears de Gondrin, de la Vallette, du Maſſes, de Fontenllles,
de Giveyſ.ic, de Saint Colemibe, de Cancon, de Braſſac, de la Chapelle Loſieres, Caſſanexil, and
my ſelf, with ſome other Knights of the Order, I had ſent back Monfieur de Sainftoreng
toward Aoifſac (toraſmuch as I had been enformed that the Yicompres were gathering to=
gcther to go joyn with Monſieur d'eAcier, and the Provengals) to the end thar I might
have continual intelligence, making account to fight theſe fellows with ſo many of us as
we were togerher, ſeeing they were no more than five or fix thouſand pitiful Raſcals, as
Conſultation we had bcen made to believe. There was not one Captain, nor Knight of the Order, who
concerning the was preſent ar che Council chat did not concur in the ſame opinion, which was, © thar the
COONEY o « Prince of Conde and the Admiral were no ſuch Novices in War, nor ſo young Caprains,
Menſales, *  & bur that they very well knew how to avoid fighting, unleſs when themſelves choughe fic
 _ &qgdo it, wherein alſo they would find the leſs difficulcy now, conſidering that they
« had already a River in their favour, which was the Charante, and over that che Bridges
«of Xaintes and Congruac in their own hands : and on the other fide they would never
« venture to fight without Foor, which they had not, being come chither naked, with no
& more than thirty or forty Horſe : but thac doubtleſs before they took the field co fight,
« they would ſtay for the Provengals which Monficur d'sAcier was bringing up to them,
«who ſince they were coming upon us, it would be much berter ro fight them our ſelves,
& than to go joyn with Monſieur de EMontpenſeer, who was a great way oft, and leave the
& Provergals behind at full liberty co march in all ſecurity along the banks of che Dor-
<« 4ogne direcaly to Congnacy now that there remain*d no Forces 1n Gwtenne to oppoſe cheir
way. Sothen we all reſoly'd, char it was neceſſary to ſtay and fight them, hoping in God
that the ViEtory would be our own, ſceing they were fo few, and foinconfiderable people.
Ic was moreover alledg*d in the Council, that the ſaid Provergals, when they ſhould ſee
themſelves at large, would take their way towards the icontes, for all the Rivers were

, fordable

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. ©

zo1

| fordable, and chat the Prince and the Admiral would come and joyn with them abour
Liboarne and Fronſac, foralmuch as at Boxrdeaux there would be none to hinder them:
and others ſaid, that whul{t we were meditaring to defend the Ciries of Xaintonge we ſhould
loſe our own, In fine there was not one Captain, or Knight of the Order, that was of
any other opinion, buc that we ougnr to fight, Monficur de Monſales excepted, who was

almoſt ar his wits end, ſceing he could nor carry away the Succours, as he promiſed to him-

{elf he ſhould do ; ſo that ſeeing our reſolucion to be otherwiſe he departed from us.
Whether hc wenc I am not avle to fay , but one thing I know, that he went away in
very great wrath. He immediately C1ſpatcht away his Brother to the King, and, as I have
ſince been told, ſaid my errand to their Majeſties, ſaying, that I had perſwaded all the Cap-
tains to return this anſwer, an anſwer that in truth went very much againſt his ſtomack ;
for he had a mighty ambition to have ſhew'd the King and Queen what a wonderful au-
thority he had in Gzicnne, that could carry in fo conſiderable ſaccours, and wherein were
{o many brave Captains; only to gain {Ul more favour and eſteem with their Majeſties,
ro theend they might grant him his demands, which came fo thick, that the King neves
fill'd him one hand, bat thar at the ſame time he par our the other to beg ſomething more.
And this I dare be bold to aftim, that never any King of France conferr'd ſo many bene-
firs upon any one Gentleman of Galenne as the King had beſtowed upon him 3 for he
gave him rwo Biſhopriczs, two Abbies, and adove a hundred thouſand Francs in mone
at one time, and yet notwithſtanding he was never con:ent, And TI will be bold to ſay
another thing, that al:hough upon this debate all che Captains had concluded to go to
Monſieur de £Mo1ntpenſicr, the Devil a one of them would have gone along with him, as
they atcerwards made it ſufficiently appear, for no body would follow him when he was
with the Monſieur, bur choſe to follow Monſieur de 1a Vallette, who was not half ſo much
a Favourite as he; but he was by much a better Soldier, Yet will I not ſay bur that che
Sieur de Monſales was a very brave Gentleman in his own perſon, but a man onght to
take meaſure of his own abilities, to moderate his ambition and to ſweat along while
under his arms, before he take upon him to play the great Captain, and to Lord it in
Command.

Attcr this Conſu/ration held at Gomrdon the ſaid Steur de Ifonſales being departed from
us, there came news from the Biſhop of Cabors his Uncle, who ſent us word, that the
Provengals Camp was come within three or fours leagues of Cahors, and that therefore he
conjur'd us for the honor of God to come fpeedily and relieve the City ; for they expeed
the Enemy the next morning ; and before we departed from Soxilac there paſt by one
whom I will forbear to name, leſt thould he be yer living, ic might canſe him to be killPd,
who brought a Letter from the Queen to Monſieur d' Eſcars, wherein ſhe writ to him to
ler the bearer paſs wich all the ſecrecy he could, for that ſhe had ſent him to the Proven-
cals Camp to diſcover what number they might be. Monſieur d'Eſcars thereupon came
co acquaint me witi the buſineſs, and carried me to his Lodging, and there into a Cabiner,
where he had conceal'd this man, who, ſo ſoon as I came in to him acquainted me with
che Command he had from the Queen, telling me, that if I would give him a man in
whom I darſt confide, and that was good at the numbring of men, he would undertake co
ſhew him all the Army ; for he himſelf was not to ſtand upon computing of men, he be-
ing to play another kind of perſon ; but char he would nevertheleſs order ic fo, that the
man I ſhou'd ſend ſhonld view the whole Army at hiseaſe, Whereupon I deliver'd a
Soldier co him, whom T knew I might truſt, who alſo was to counterfeit himſelf a Hugos
not, and ſo they went away together.

Now to return to the adverciſement vve had from the Biſhop of Cahorr, upon his Letter
we immediately turn'd that vvay to go fight vvicth the Enemy. Monſieur de 1s VL alkete
vvenc before vvich his ovvyn Company, and took Monfieur de Fontenilles along vvith him,
vvho at that time vvas my Lieutenant, vvich the one half of mine. I every day expe&ed
an anſyver from the King, to a requeſt TI had made to him to give the one half of my Come
pany to the ſaid Monſieur de Fontenilles, and the orher half co the Knight my Son, be-
Living I ſhould nor live long, both by reaſon of the long fickneſs I had had, of vyhich T
vyas not yet recover*d, and alſo by reafon of the violence vyherevvith I daily forc'd my (elf
to do more than I vvas able.

Monſieur dela FYalztte made fo long a march to go to diſcover theſe people, that of tyyo
dayes vve could nor meet again, their horſes being almoſt all unſhod. He vvas as dili.
gent a Capcain as any I ever knevv, but by this means he vyas conſtrain'd to ſtay a day ar
Cabhors to ger his horſes nevv ſhoos, for the vvay chey had gone vvas ſo ſtony, as had lefc
half his party barefoot 3 and Monfiear 4 Eſcars having heard that the Enemy took che
vvay tovvards Limoſin, vvould needs go to defend his ovvn Government : bur he vvas nor

long

_ nw

—
4 IIS
AI.
——_— __ R -

202 : The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book VI!

long before he repenced his ſo doing; tor che Enemy marchr towards Acier and Gramat,
which the ſaid Sicur 4" Eſcars having underſtood, and that they were gor before him, he
return'd back to us in all diligence, and we rallied at Gordon, a Town belonging ro Mon-
ſiear de Saint Supplice, I then diſpatcht away 1n all haſte to my Son, who was advanc?d
2 grcat way towards (ahyrs, that he ſhould immediately face abour cowards us, and to
Monfieur de la V allette, to advance with all poſlible ſpeed, and not fail tro come the nexc
day to Gramat, that we might fight that day ; or however the next 1norning. Monſieur
d'Eſcars and I, Monſieur de Gondrin, Mcflicurs le Vicompre de Lemivil, and du Maſſes,
{o {oon as ever we had baited, immediately departed, and marche ſtraight towards Gramat,
{ending Monſieur du Maſſes, and the Vicount de Limevil with the Company of Light
horſe, and the Mareſchal de Camp before diretly ro Gramat ; when being advanc*d as
far as the Gallows of Gramat, within berwixt three and four Harquevuz ſhot of the Town,
we there made a halt ro ſtay for Monficur de 12 Yallette and his Parcy, in which he had
Monſicur de Saint Colombe, and the reſt betore-nam?®d, and allo for our Foor. I divided
our thirty Enfigns into three Regiments , alchough the Chevalicr my Son commanded
them all, of which Monſieur de Leberon commanded ten, and Captain Sendat other tens
beſides the third ten, which was 1mmcdiately to be commanded by my Son himſelf.
Which becauſe the Country thereabour was very barren, we were conſtrain'd to quarter
at ſome diſtance from one another, by which means, what by reaſon of the long way
they had co return back , as alſo that the Quarters of the thirty Enfigns were ſeparated,
and thac Monſieur de 1a Villette could not come up to Gramat that day, we there (tayd
till it was fo lace, that the Sun was almoſt going down, where {t:]] from hour to hour
Monſieur du HMafſes ſent continually word that the Enemy (till marche cowards the Dyr-
dogne, and intended to take up their Quarters in certain Villages berwixit Gramat and the
Dordogne,

Monſieur d'gAcier very well knew whereabouts we lay, infomuch that it was put to
the queſtion, whether or no they ſhould come to attaque us, and their intelligence was ſo
good, that they knew how many we were almoſt to itry men. All his Captains were of
opinion that he ought co do it ; but he ſhewed chem a Letter from the Prince of Conde,
wherein the Prince conjur*d him by no means to engazey it he coald poſſibly avoid ir, for-
aemuch as npon thoſe Forces he had wich him, he ſaid, depended hisgood or evil tor-
rune. Now as we thus ſtar'd 1n expeCtation of our own people to come up to us, Captain

i - Pierre Moreau the Enemies Mareſchal de Camp hapned to come to Gramat, to view the
The _ A Quarters, not thinking that we were ſo near, where by three or four Light-horſe belong-
x Carp ing to the Vicount de Limevi), he was taken, and brought priſoner to us to the foremen-
taken priſoner, tlon*d Gallows, where we all were. Immediately upon his being brought before us, being

I was well acquainted with the {aid Captain £Morean, he having been formerly of my
Company in Piedmont, Monlicur & Eſcars and I took him aſide, where I bid him to tell
me the truth upon pain of death how many men chey were ; for you know Captain Moreau,
ſaid I, that 1 am not a man tote dailied withall, and you muſt not tell me ahe. Towhich
he made anſwer, thit he wou'd forfeit his head if he did not tell the truth, Wevery well
perceiv'd that he was damnably atraid, for ar the very firſt he had defir'd me to remember,
that he had once been of my Company, and had ſeru'd me upon ſeveral very good occaſions,
wherein 1 had ever ſeen him behave himſelf like a man of howr, I then gave him aſſurance
of his life ; whereupon he told us, that they were berwixr fixteen and eighteen thouſand
Foor, and betwixt five and fix thouſand Horſe, of which there might be chree hundred
Cuirafſiers well arm'd, and well mounted ; and theother two or three handred Harque-
The number bazecrs and Argoulets, of which they made no very great account. And as to the Foor,
of the Proven- that there were ſix thouſand Harquebuzeers old Soldiers all, of which he had never (cen
gals, ſo great a number in any Army of the Kings, that they had other ſix thouſand, of whom
they did not make alcogerher ſo much reckoning as of the firſt, bur char neyertheleſs there
was good men amonegſt them, and ſuch as he beliey'd, under favour of the firſt fix thou
ſand, would fight tollerably well, and thar the remainder co ſeventeen or eighteen thou-
ſand were for the moſt part Harquebuzeers alſo, and the reſt Halberteers, and ſome Pikes.
Monſieur d'Eſcars and I lookr upon one another, very much aſtonithtar the account had
been given us ; whereupon Monficur &Eſcars taid co him theſe words, Captain Morea
inſtead of ſuving your life you will throw it away, for you are oblig*d to ſpeak the truth upon
pain of hanging, and Monſieur de Montluc has very goed intelligence, that you are not above
five or ſix thouſand, and of thoſe the greater part are women, chi'dren, and ſervants, He then
made anſwer, Sir, we know very well you have been told ſo, but let me die if T lie to you fifty
men, but (aid 1, we are advertiſed by Monſieur de Joyeule, who has cauſed you to be diſcover d
toa man, that you are no more than five or fix thouſand, as alſo by ſeveral Gentlemen, whs

have

Book VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 303 4

have all taken a view of y*u near unto Rodes; we know wery well, {aid he, that Monſienr Captain Mo»
de Joyeuſe, the Biſhop of Rodes, and others have advertis'd you ſo : bat ſeeing we were (9 weau's anſycrs
few, why did they not then intercept #5, and hinder us from paſſing the Roſne ? let me periſh if
they ever gave us ſu mich as any one Alarm, judg you then hwy they could come to diſcover ns,
Monſieur de Montluc, m1» life lies at ſt:k-, I will not deceive yo, and ſince you are pleaſed to
ſecure it if I ſpeak the truth, I wiil not forfeit it by telling a ye ': of which to give you fur-
ther proof, ſee here the ſuſter Roll of our whole Army, Regiment by Regiment, for unworthy
as I am, they have m:de me their Mareſchal de Camp, Monſicur d'Eſcars then took the
Rolles, and read them before me, when ſecing the Sun was abour to go down, we wereof
advice not to quarter at Gramat, out to retire from thence to the Quarters from whence
we roſe in the morning, and there to receive Monſieur de 1a YVallette, and our Foot, and all
of us togerher to deliberare whar we had to do. We accordingly then began to put our
ſelves upon our march, cntreating Monhieur de Caſſaneneil to go draw off Monſieur du
Maſſes, and our Marcſchal de Camp for from Gramzt to the place where the Enemy
were ficting down in their Quarters, was at the fartheſt not above a quarter of a league,
and it was well for the Sieur d# Maſs that we did fo; for as he was incentively obſerving
the order of their Camp to ſceif he could muſter their Forces, and diſmounted with rwo
others only with him looking upon them againſt che Sun, which was then juſt upon ſer-
ring, the ſaid de Caſſanexeil was aware of all their Cavalry coming full drive to intercept
their retreat, which made him gallop upon the ſpur to give them notice of their danger,
who thereupon, as time it was rerir'd 1n all haſte cowards us, Thus then we began co
recreat toward Gonrdon, when being about the mid way, the Queens Spye overtook us, who
knew nothing of the raking of Captain Areas, and drawing Monſicur d'Eſcars, Mon-
fieur de Gondrin, and me apart, the Soldier there told us, chat the ſaid Spy had given him Th. Spy's reZ
opportuuity to {ce, and to number all the Enemics Camp in the Plain of Figere, where port, ”
they were all drawn np into Batralia to give an aſſaulc co che Town; but that the Inha-
bitanis had ſent Monheur d' Acer a Preſent, which had qualified their fury, and prevail'd
with them to forbear, He told ns that he had there counted a hundred, fifty, and two
Enfigns of Foot, and being the Cavalry were a liccle ata diſtance, he could not ſo exaatly
number them, as he had done the Foot : bar that he thoughc they might be berwixt fix
and ſeven hundred Horſe, and thac he had numbred the Foot to be berwixt three and
and four and twenty thonſand men. Monſieur d*Eſcars and I then took the Spy aſide
by himſelf, who gave us the ſame account thatthe Soldier had done; the Spy was in bo-
dily fear left Captain eMorean ſhould peradvencure have diſcover*d him, for ſo ſoon as
ever he ſaw him he {lunk out of the Troop, and before we were ſettled every man in his
quarcers it wasafter midnight. The nexr day we all mer together again, and all che Cap-
rains came to my lodging to conſult what we had to do, having found that we had to deal
wich other kind of people than wich five or fix chouſand ſcoundrils with their wives and
children. Ar night the aforeſaid Captain Aforear told me in private, that in caſe we
ſhould attempt to fight chem 1n the place where they were encampr, we thould infallibly
be defeared, were we four times as many Horſe and Foot as we were, by reaſon thac Mon-
fieur d' Acier who was of this Country, had purpoſely choſen this place nor co ſtir from
thence of cjoht or ten dayes, bur there co lie in expeRation of the rerurn of a Meſſenger
he had ſent to the Prince and the Admiral, rotell them, that he would go no farther;
and that they all humbly entreared che Prince to come and make Gjenne the Scean of the
War, which chey were confidently afſur'd they ſhould make cheir own, before the King
could draw ſufficient Forces together ro fight them : char to this end they would march
before him rowards Libowrne, and would try co carry Bourdeanx, for they fcar'd nothing
but our Horſe, and therefore it was that they had made c'1oice of thoſe Quarters, it being
a ſtony Councry, and the {tones ſo ſharp char they cur like knives, infomuch char a horſe
dares nor gallop, or indeed almoſt tread upon them, and moreover all the Country, and
all High-wayes are encloſed with dry ſtone wallsof che height of a man, and the loweſt as
high as a mans girdle, under favour of which chey made account to encloſe all cheir Har-
quebuzeers , and the Horſe in their Rear, ſo chat we could nor poſtibly go co fight chem,
without expoſing our ſelves tothe mercy of their ſhor.

All chete things conſider'd, as alſo the firuation of the place, and the number of men,
made us macurely co deliberate of the condicion we were in, and with che beſt diſcrecion
we had to provide againſt che odds againſt us, and to ſupply che weakneſs of our Forces
with the beſt reſolutions founded upon the beſt rules of War. Upon which conſultacion
icwas in theend agreed, that Montieur PEſcars ſhould ſend a Gens-d'arme of his, an
intelligent perſon, to ſound the Paſs of the Dordogne leading to Figeac, wherein if che
Foad ſhould prove co be good, we ſhould then encamp our elves here, and cauſe-our

proviſions

OL I rr ro * > WI FOES A Pn wen 1 IS > > -

i
-

IE 6 cs CE ECO —
Qs INE SETTLE IS 4

.
1
I
}
'
1
:
F
:
Þ }
\
8
3:
4
'%
iy;
oi .
2.
Þ
++
I:
DN |
:
1 |
=
YN
i'%
5

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book VF!

_—c

A ſecond com -
mand {rom the
King,

Reſolution,

proviſions to be brought in to us trom the ſaid Figeac, for that there we thould be out of
the ſtones, where the Cavalry could not come to fight, and that fiicing the Foards ſuch
as we bcliev'd they were, we mighr ar any time paſs over,either to fight the fi:ſt char ſhould
atrempr the Foard from the other fide, or the laſt thac were to pals, we being no more
thaw litcle league from one another, With this reſolution we diſparche away the ſaid
Gens*d'arms togo ſound rhe Foard, and the Commiſlaries to make reaty the proviſions,
concluding ro depart the day following, and not before, becauſe we would give the Com.
miſſarics time to prepare the proviſions, and the Gentlemen leaſure co found the
Foard,

The next day about ten of the clock in the morning there arriv'd the Brother of Mons
ficur de Villeenie (who had been no more than fix or ſeven dayes at moſt in poſting too
2nd again from Court) bringing a Lerrer from the King, wherein his Majeſty commanded
us, that whether we had already fought, or were upon the point of fighting, immediace»
ly upon fight thereof, leaving all things in order, or diſorder as co the affairsof the place,
we ſhould march away to Monſieur de Wontpenſier, We very well underſtood by the
ſtile, thar cheſe Letters were of Monkieur de 2fonſales tis contriving ys foraſmuch as he had
told ns at his ceming to call us away, that the Kingand Queen did notcare though Gnj-
enne was loſt, provided we fought with the Prince of Conde; for he being once defeated,
all the reſt would be recover'd of courſe : ar which time I remember there were fome who
in my preſence reproacht him, that he talk*d at hiscale ; for although his houſe ſhould be
burnt, he was very well afſur'd che King and Queen weuld give him three times as much as
be conld poſhibly lole, and chat hutherto-3t had never vecn known, thar ever the King had
conferr'd ſo many bencfi:s upon all the Captains of Gzienne, put them all rogether, as up-
on him alone : and th's was the thing that made us believe he had ſent this Lerter ready
drawnto the King, thac his Majeſty might write to us atter that manner, Per in the
Cabinets c> Princes ſuch tricks have been uſually playd, and ſuch extraordinary favours
eranted, with much leſs difficulty than men of our trade can obtcin the leaſt juſtice, The
above-named Captains who were preſent ar. the Conſultation are able to teftifie what a &iſ-
pute there was amongſt us, before we began to march, as ſeeing the apparenr loſs and ruine
of the Country, thould the Prince transfer the Scean of the War into Gzienne, as we did
confidently believe he would, ſeeing theſe people refuſe ro advance any further, and alfo
knowing Monſieur d* Acier to be ot that opinion; and that the Queen of Navarre being
with the Prince would erernally ſolicite him fo to do, 1f bur to ſecure her own eſtate : for
having once Gajenne at her devotion, ſhe might very well aſſure rhe State of her Son, and
moreover pretend to agrear deal more.

Bur afcer all che diſputes that have been concerning thar affair, I call ail the Captains
to witneſs, whether I did not propoſe to obey the Kings pleaſure, and ro march away to
Monſieur de Montpenſier in what part ſoever he might be ; celling chem withal, that in-
deed by reaſen of my indiſpoſition 1 could not engage my ſelf in field ſervice inthe beginning of
a turlulent winter , as being altogether uſeleſs in an Army : but that they might boldly
proceed, without fearing their houſes ſhould be burnt : for that with che Gentlemen and
the Common people who would be lefe in the Conntry, I did not doubt to ſecure them,
or at leaſt ro cut out ſo much work for the Enemy, that they ſhould pay dear for whar
they got. There was then a debate about marching the Infantry, all the Capcains ſaying,
that it was to ſend them to the {laughter rhey being no way able ro match che Enemies
Foor, and were therefore generally of opinion, that I ought ro place them in Garriſon t5-
wards St. Foy, Libozrne, and Bergerac along the River Dordogne, and thar in the mean time
they ſhoald ſee which way che Enemy would take 3 who ſhould they march into Xaintonge,
the Chevalier my Son might afrerwards go thorough Limonſin, and joyn himſelf wich
the King.

Thus chen I return'd towards Cahors, and to Caſtelnau de Monrartier,expeCting news of
the Enemies march, where ar the ſaid Caſtelnas I was ſurpriz'd with a Difſentery, thac pur
my Phyfitian almoſt to the end of his Ieflon, and me of my life : and ſeeing there are
ſome, whoto do me a good office, have ſaid, tha: I might have fought the Enemy if I
would ; and others, that ſeeing 1would nor fight them, I ought ſpeedily to have ſent a-
way che Forces to Monſieur de ontpenſier, I have here to a ſyllable ſer down the cruch
of the ſtory, from the beginning to the end, and all upon che reſtimony of the Captains
who were preſent, excepting thoſe who are fince dead ;z and I chink they are all, ſaving

Monſieur ds afſes,yer alive : fo that if there wasa faulc any where, it ought to be charg?d

upon the Governors, who firſt of all ſufter'd chem co aſſemble in their Governments, and
atrerwards to paſs the Rivers without offering to oppoſe them z and truly as © chem, if
any one have a mind to accuſe them, thar they did nor do well, I think they may do ic

with

Book VI. | de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. TY,

—_—_———

4

Rs =

with colour enongh. But they muſt evermore lay che blame npon me, who would never

depend upon the favour of any but the King and Qaeen alone ; and becauſe Thad no Idol

chat I ador'd at Court, (which I never had, nor never will have) to defend me from the

charities of thoſe vertuous Court-worms, It has not been my cuſtom to avoid fighting, I

have been roo much bred to that from my childhood ; neither was T ever in place where we

were near the Enemy , that I vvas not eyermore of opinion vve ought to fight ; and if I

commanded in chief have ever fought , though almoſt alwayes the weaker; and had II ac

chis time had my own will, I had tried a berter or a worſe, and would have brought a-

way a legor a wing, either from Front or Rear 3 by which means we might have given

Monſieur de &Montpenſier time ro have come and have joyn®d with us : but theſe Letters of

Monſales his invention muſt carry it againſt what we ſaw with our own eyes was beſt to

be done. To hear cheſe men talk whoarepleaſed to accuſe me, a man would fay I ought

co kill all before me with my nails, and take Rochelle and Montawban with my teeth 2

but I am no ſuch fool as co chrow ſtones againſt the wind, and in a diſadvantagious Coun-

try with three thouſand to fight with ewenty thouſand men, and by my overthrow to

draw after me the ruine of the Country. But I ſhall leave this diſcourſe, as not willing

ro enter into excuſes, for I was nor in faulc in the leaſt, and ſhall nor learn my Trade of

thoſe Musk-Cats thac prate by the fire- ſide, far enough from blows, and the while we are

engag'd in action, give the King (about whoſe perſon they have the honor to be) unpro-

fitable counſels. Bur it is the buſineſs of a Lieutenant of the King, to take his own ways

and do as he himſelf beſt ſees canſe 2 for itis not alwayes neceſſary to do as the King com=

mands, he is far off, and relies upon your conduR 2: it is therefore your part, if you have

any diſcretion at all, ro judg what 1s beſt to be done. No man living can deny but that

had I foughr a Batrel, I had manifeſtly expos'd the Province of Gwulenxe to ruine, for I

muſt have foueht againſt che odds of ten to one; and had I done as the King, at the

importunity of che Sieur de Monſales, commanded me, I had left all che Country at the

Enemies.diſpoſe, as I refer to any indifferenr perſon to judg. |
I then recurn'd back tro vAgen, where I recover'd a lad health, and upon that reco-

yery immediately reſoly'd to go ſeek our Monſieur de Montpenſrer 5; which determination

I fignified accordingly ro Monlieur de Teyride, and to Monſieur de Gondrin, who was come

back from Gowrdon by reaſon of a ficknels that had there ſeiz'd him; and wehad enough

to do to perſwade him to return, for ſick as he was he would have gone along with his

Company, in caſe they were to go with me, We appointed to meet at Fille-nen d Age=

neis, £6 which place I brought ten Enfigns of Foot conducted by the Knight my Son,

leaving che ocher ewo Tertias of his Regiment to be commanded by the aforenamedCaptains,

when, as we were all joyn*d together ready to march, Ireceiv'd a Letter from Monſicur

de CMontpenſier, wherein he ſent me word , that all affairs ſet apart I ſhould forthwith

pur my telf into Bowrdeaux, 1f I was not already there z for he had intelligence thar the

Enemy had a deſign upon that City, and was afraid I could hardly come time enough to

ſave ir. Arthe ſamerime alſo there came to me one of the Uſhers of the Court of Par-

Lament of Bowrdeaux, by whom the Court defir'd me to make haſte to their ſuccour, and

tha they gave the City for loſt, if I did not put my ſelf immediately into it. I was

Qrangely aſtoniſhr whence theſe enterprizes ſhould proceed, and was conſtrain*d to ſend

to Meſſicurs de Terride and de Gondrin to ( aſtillon, to gather together the ſaid Companies

of Horſe and Foot thar came along with us, and there ſtay to expe& my further order,

for T hop'd ſoon to provide againſt the preſent danger, and taking fifteen or twenty Gentle-

men only along with me, went away 1n all diligence, cauſing our great horſes and arms

to follow af:er- Being come betwixr Jfarmanda, and la Reolle, T there mer with Monſieur

de Lignerolles returning from Spain, and Monſieur de Lanſac the younger, who both of

them entreated me to tnake all the haſte I could, for chat chey doubted the next da |

(being Wedneſday ) the Ciry would be taken, which they had lefc ſo ſtrangely divided, Djvigons »

thac chey did not confide in one another. The ſaid Sieut de Lanſac had receiv'd two Bourdeays:

Letters, by which jt was evident enough that there was ſome conſpiracy in the Ciry it (elf,

I ſcarce ſtayd ro embrace them , bur went away to lie all night ar Langon, and che nexc

day by noon came co Bonrdeaux, having firſt ſent away the Uther poſt before, to give the

Parliamenc norice of my cotning, to the end, thar if there was really a deſign in hand char

michr hold chem a liccle in ſuſpence : I was there conſtrain*d to ſtay five or fix dayes:

The next morning [I enter'd into the Court, white I made chem a ſpeech che beſt I could

to ature them, ano put them onic of all doubt 5 which the Parliament cook exceeding kinds

ly from me, and retutn'd me their thanks. After dinner 1 went to the Town-houle,

where I made another to the Jurats, in concluſion whereof I gave them order the nexx

day to pur all che City into armes ; which was accordingly done, and I found chem co

( amounc

|
|
}
\
{
{

306 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VI?

ru

amount to two thouſand and four or five-huandred men, well arm'd, I found alſo thar
the two Companies of Monficur de Tilladet (who asyer was Governor) were there, and
three others, The next day T again went tothe Court of Parliament, where I gave them
an 8ccount of the Forces T had found in the City, remonſtrating to them the little occaſi
on they had to apprehend any danger, and the good diſpoſition I had obſerv'd, as well in
the Citizens as the Soldiers, exhorting them to do their endeavour in che defence of their
City : after which having made them all hold up their hands to live and die together in
the defence of their City, and that if they ſhould diſcover any one who (hold go about
to betray it they would all fail upon him, they all {wore co me ſo ro do, which greatly
rcjoyc'd the whole Aſſembly, to whom I further remonſtrated,, & That themſelves alfo
The Sieur de © ought to take np arms, if occaſion ſhould ſo require, and remember that the moſt vali-
Moitluc's Want Captains the Romans had were men of Lecers, who had chey not been qualified
> bed , 6 with learning would have been lookr upon as unworthy of great commands, and that
Bourdeanx, © their knowledge ought by no means to hinder them from the uſe of arms, and from
. « fighting, buc racher encourage them to Go like thoſe antient Romans, being men as well
&« 2; they , who had no more than two arms, and one heart, as they had. Gentlemen,
« ſajd I, I ſee by your coungenances, thar you are not men char will ſuffer your ſelves to
« be beaten, thoſe who have gray beards and heads ſhall be for the Councel, bur a godfl
« aumber thar I ſee here are fit to trail a pike, and how much think you wall 1t encou=
c« ;2gethe people, when they ſhall ſee thoſe who have power over their lives and eſtates
c& take arms for their defence? Not a man will dare to murter, and your Enemies will
« tremble when chey ſhall hear, char the Parliamenr ic ſelt is raking arms to ſuppreſs them,
&« by which they will underſtand you are in earneſt ; and morcover all the young men
& whom I have ſcen enter this place, and who are more fir for a Corſler than a Gown,
« will then dothe ſame, To this end I entreated them ro ſhut up the Palace for cighr
dayes, that in thoſe eight dayes time every one of them might be aquainted with the arms
he intended to make uſe of in time of need, and that they might divide themſelves into
two and two, toſtand ar the Gates with their arms, that in ſo doing the whole City would
take exemple 5 and on the other fide ſhould there be any Treaſon 1n the ſaid City, this
good order would be a means to put a ſtop to their proceeding, and put them out of hopes
of executing their defign 3 wherefore ſeeing ſo great a good was to be expeRed from this
prudent order in affairs, as the preſervation of their Ciry, their lives and fortunes, they
ought to ſpare nothing to that end, After which I cold them for the concluſion of all :
Gentlemen, conſider I beſeech you what I have ſaid to you, and I make you here a tender of
”) own life, and the lives of theſe Gentlemen my friends todo you ſervice, and ts eſtabliſh you
in the peace and ſecarity you yonr ſelves deſire. The Preſident Roſſignac, who ar that time
had the Chair ( for Monſicur de Legabaſton was retir'd, his ſervice nor being agreeable ro
this. King) made anſwer inthe behalf of the whole Court, giving me very many thanks
for the Remonſtrance I had made to them, for which they would for ever be my ſervants,
and telling me withall, that there was not a 12an amongſt them young or old who would not
Commendari- take arms for his Majeſties ſervice in the defence of the City: In earneſt the King owes a
on of the two great deal to this Society, asalſo to that of Tholouze, tor if either the one or the other had
can * fail'd Gaienne had had much to ſuffer ; foraſmuch as the loſs of one of theſe two Ciries
om ng carries a long train after ir, to wit theruine of the whole Province, In four dayes time
' Thad clear'dall the jealoufie and apprehenſion that was before 1n the City.

You Gentlemen that are Governors, it is a fine thing to know the humour and com=
plexion of the Nation over which you command, and one thing I will ſay for this people,
that if their Governor have once gain*d a reputation among them, and can fo percinently
deliver himſclf, as to demonſtrate to them any kind of probability in che thing he would
perſwade, he ſhall not only engage the Gentry, the Soldicry, and the Magiſtrates them-
ſelves, bur alſo the Monks, Prieſts , Labourers, and cven the very women to fight. For
they are a Nation that want no courage, but a good Chict, chat knows how to command ;
and you ought to believe, that ſeeing the Antients made ſo much uſe of Orations before
all their Battels, and found ſo great a benefic to accrue thereby , that we in theſe times
ſhould not lay afide char kind of encouragement. They found it of fo conſiderable ad-
vantage, that they have not thought fir to omit the {everal Orations- 1n their Hiſtories
and Records, and we likewiſe ought to believe thar in uſing the ſame means, and 1n fol-
lowing cheir exemplc, we ſhall find as grear advantage by its they did, and T look upon
it as a grear and neceſſary quality 1n a Caprain to ſpeak well. I was not brought up ro
this, and yer have eyer been ſo happy as in Soldierlike rerms to expreſs whar T had to ſay
collerably well, though wich a vehemency a liccle reliſhing of the Country from whence I
came: I would therefore adviſe all perſons of condition, who have the means to do ity

and

Book VI. de Montluc, Mareſchl of France. 165

—————

n y P ; . 6 Yea as
and deſign to advance their Ch'l:lrcn by Arms, the rather ro beſtow ſome Learning upon

them, for if they be call'd ro Commands, they will ofcen ſtand in need of j:, and will
find it of infinite uſe ro them ; and I believe a man who has read much, and retein'd what
he has read, is mach more capable of executing great and noble Enterprizes than another.
Had I made the beſt ouc of my little reading, it had been much better for me 3 and yer I
have naturally enough to perſwade the Soldiers to fight.

The fifth day chen I recur*d, and being that Monſieur de Merville, Grand Seneſchal
of Guienne, by reaſon of a late ſickneſs, was not able to go carry his Company to the
Army, we came together as far as St. Foy, where I receiv'd Letters from Monſicur de
Montpenſier, wherein he ſent me order, that I ſhould lie about the Dordogue, and above
all chings have an eye to Bourdeaux and Libourne , for that he was not yer able to gueſs,
whether the Enemy would fall back again into Gajenne , or continue on their march.
Which was the reaſon that I ſtayd about Se. Foy, and Monſieur de Terride at Caſtillonnes,
expeting what the Enemy would do, and alſo further orders from Monſieur de ont -
penfier, being certain that in two or three dayes march we ſhonld at any time be able co
joyn with him from thence. Soon after we heard that he was gone in all haſte cowards
Poiftiers, to meet the Monſieur Brother to the King, and that che Enemy marche along the
River Loire towards 1a Charite, there to meet and joyn with the Duke of Denxpents : ſo
char ſeeing it impoſſible to overiake the Army, that we might eaſe the Country along the
Banks of the Dordopne, I lefc cwo Enfigns of Foot only ar Caſtifonnes, and three ar Ss. Foy;
and ſent away the Sieur de SainForens with his Company of Gens-d*arms into Libourne,
and the Sieur de Leberon remain'd ar St. Foy, having three Companies with him, with
whom I left order chat in caſe the Enemy ſhould approach Gujenne, he with the ſaid chree
Foot Companies ſhould g5o put himſelf into Libowrne, The remainder of our Forces the
Chevalier my Son kept togecher abour Quercy and Apenozs, and we others retir'd every
one to his own Quarter. This was all that was done hucherto, from che beginning of
theſe troubles in theſe parts of Guienne.

So ſoon asthe Monficur came up to the Army he ſpun our the time for a certain ſpace a-
bout PoifHers, and along the River Loire, In che mean time nothing ſtirr'd in our parts ;
for the Vicomres kept abour (aſtres, Pay-Laxrens, Millan, St. Antonin, and Montanban,
making only ſome flight inroads to pilfer and ſteal, which I did not think conſiderable
enough, that therefore I ſhould ſer an Army on foot, for the little harm they were
able ro do; and beſides I was willing to ſave money for no ocher end bur only to ſend ic
ro the Monſieur, which made me averſe to all kind of unneceſſary expence. The Cap-
rains of the Gens d'armes, and ſome Captains of foot belonging to the Royal Army came,
or elſe ſent their infe1 1our Officers to raiſe men in our parts to fill up their Companies,
and others only to refreſh chem{elves, and immediately to return ; when afcer a lictle
ſpace I receiv*d Letters from the Monſieur, wherein he commanded me to go into Ro -
ergue to fight the Vicomes, if poſſibly I could. Whereupon I ſent away for my Nephew
de Liberon at St. Foy with his chree Companies z and alchough I was certain before hand
thac 1 ſhould do no good, 1mmediately began to march. That which made me doubc m
expedition would fignifie very litcle, was that I knew fo ſoon as ever the Vicomres ſhould
hear I had taken the field , chey would certainly retire into the holds and lurking holes
they heid by the right of War, where they were ſo wiſe as to fave themſelves upon every
rumour of an enemy ; and the leaſt place thar was diſpos'd . to reſiſt me had been ſufficient
to ſtop m:y progreſs, and for any hopes to find them in the field T had none : So thac I
knew I ſhould do nothing bur eat npon the Publick, and devour the people, ſhould IRtay
lone about Towns and Caſtles, to bolc them our of their Burrows ; eſpecially conſidering +
thar I could cake no Artillery along with me, which I could nor do for want of money
to det.ay the charge : neither indeed did I raiſe much, becaule I would have ic all go
to the Monſieurs Camp 3 for there it was that the main Game was to be play'd, and there-
for: ic was reaſon thac the main proviſion ſhould be reſerv*d for that uſe, all the reſt of
tl; var being nothing bur perty skirmiſhes 1n compariſon of what was done, and was ex-
pe£ic4} ro be done there, As1 was preparing for my expedicion rhere arrived Monſieur
d Pities, and with him the Sieurs de Bonneval, de eMonens, and a great number of 0-
ther Gentlemen, who were come from the Enemies Camp, either to levy men, or in re-
f:reace ro the defign they had upon Libexrne ; which nevertheleſs they fail'd in ; afcer
hich the ſaid de Pilles pur himſelf into St, Fey, which he made his place of Rendez-
your, foraſmuch as I had drawn from thence my Nephew de Leberon with the three Com-
»anies, to take them along with me 1nto Rewergue.

So ſoon as 1 came to Cahors I ſent my ſaid Nephew before with five Enſigns of Foot,
and part of the Company of Gens-d'armes belonging to Monſieur de Gramont, which

Si 2 Caprain

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VI;

Captain Manſon Quarter- maſter ro che ſaid Company commanded , and made him
depart in all haſte co ſurprize (ome of the Enemy that lay about Yille- Fraxche dz Rui»
ergue, who accordingly made ſo good haſte, that they marcht cight long leagues, and came
to the place by one of the Clock inthe night, chinking an hour before day in the morne
ing to furprize them : but they were no ſooner in the Town but that che Enemy had im-
mediate intelligence ſent them, and were all retir d into their Forts. Neicher js ir to be
thought ſtrange z for 1 wonder* thac either the Monſicur himſclt, or any other who
commanded the Kinps Armies, did any thing of moment, by reaſon the Ordonnance
2nd Edi his Majeſty had made, that no one was co demand any thing of the Hugonors,
provided they alftain*d from arms, and liv'd peaceadly in their own houſes, From
whence preceeded the ruine of che King, of his Armies, and all his Aﬀairs, and of the
People alſo : for thoſe furniſht out money, and were the occaſion that the women who
had their husbands in the Prince of Conde*'s Army, by their means and intelligence could
at all times furniſh their Hasbands or Sons with money, and fo ſerv'd for ſpies ro the
Enemy, that they needed not be at the charge of maintaining intelligence, nor trouble
themſelves to know what we did, thoſe people giving them continual notice when and _
where any of our men were at any time to be ſurpriz'd and taken, and dividing the
ſpoil when jt was accordingly effefted 5 which made me evermore maintain before the

The inconve= King, that that Edi alone was the cauſe his Majeſty was not victorious, and that this
niences inſuing new Religion was not totally rooted out. Ir had been a hundred times beter, that they

the Edi& in
fayour of the

Hogonors who

had all been with the Prince, than at heme in their own houſes ; for being with him in
his Axmy, they could have done no great matters that would have been of any fignifi-

liv'd peaceably cant advantage to them, your Town-bred people being men of no greac performance in

at homc,

Overſights it
thc King,

War, bur on the contrary would ſoon have famiſht his Camp; and then we mighc have
proſecuted the War withour being ſpied, or withour their being advertiſed of our deſigns;
neither could they have been able ro ger money, or any other neceſſariesz nay we ſhould
have made our advantage of their Eſtates, by which means they muſt of neceſfity either
have retir'd with the pardon the King was pleas'd to grant them, or have been ftarv'd for
want of bread. Tm ſure that in this Province of Gxienne there would not one of them have
been leftalive, unleſs they had abjur*d this new Religion, as they did in che firſt Troubles ;
for I knew very well how to handle them, and ſeeing I had found the way to do it {o
cheap, as with two yards of Maich in the firſt troubles, I ſhould not have been much to
ſcck in theſe laſt, But by means of this vertuous Edi& no one durft ſpeak to them, bur
we were oblig*d to endure them amongſt us. Ir is not therefore (as I ſaid) ro be wondred
at, if they have perform'd ſo many notable exploits, confidering thar at all hours they
were continually advertis'd of what we did, and deſign'd to do. *Tis very well known
that an Army can do no great matters without good Spies z for it is upon their report thac
a Council of War is to determine what they have to do; but we had none amongſt thoſe
people, for there was not a Catholick, let him be otherwiſe as brave as brave could be, chac
duiſt venture his perfon amongſt chem, it being to throw away himſelf, no man eſcaping
that fell into their hands ; thorough which defeR we could know nothing of their affairs,
and they were enform'd of all ours. O poor King how have you been gull'd and abus'd, and
are yet daily impos'd upon in the Edi&s that you have, and do publiſh in theſe mens fa«
vour ? I will not deny but chatin ſome occafions you have not been ſo well ſerv'd by your
Soldiers and Captains as you ought to have been : bur whoever will look narrowly inco ic,
will find thar the Edits and Ordonnances you have been made to fign, have been more the
cauſe of your Majeſties and our misfortunes, than any defe& in your Soldiers or Gover-
nors. Believe me (Sir) believe me, with this clemency and moderation you will never re-
claim theſe people. The beſt man amongſt them would be glad co kiſs you dead, and yer
you forbid us doing them any harm. Ir 1s better then to be of their party than of yours ;
for being in their houſes, ler what reports will be abroad they (hall be ſecure at home,
Sir, Sir, there are ſome about you, who corrupted by theſe people, perſwade you to fign
theſe EdiQs in their favour. Severity makes them tremble. Ar the cime when withour
the Ceremony of Tryal, or Inditment I brancht chem upon every Tree in the high-ways,
and craſs'd them up wherever I found them, nor a man of chem durſt quirch. Confider
then, Sir, I beſeech you of what importance theſe fine Edits are to your Majeſties aftairs ;
and yer they have moreover made you fign an Ordonnance to ſend Commiſſionersthrough-
out the whole Kingdom, to compel us to make reſtitution to the Hugonors of all whare-
ver we have taken from them, and nor co caule them to reſtore that they have pilfer*d and
purloin'd from us. Which, under corre&tion Sir, 1s a Law 1mprudently made, and wich-
out conſideration of the miſchiefs will enſue or elſe by clandeſtine malice contriv'd ro
make- you hated by us who are faithful to you, who acknowledge you for our lawful Sove-

raign,

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

PE EEE CO

raign, and have ever mauntain'd your cauſe, to the end that when anocher War ſhall
hereafcer break out, you may nor find one Cacholick who will rake up arms in your quar-
rel, But had your Majeſty and che Queen call'd co mind what I propounded to your
Majeſties before your Council at 7 holouz?, you would never have conſented to ſend Com-
miffioners to cauſe reſtirurion to the Hugonors, till firſt you had ſent others to do us righc
alſo, for the plunders and rapines they have made upon your Catholick Subjecs, They
have a great excuſe, The Commilſioners ſay, that we do not complain as the Hugonors do.
How ſhould we complain, for in the fir ſt place they ſay, char thoſe of cheirs who were in
arms only, planderd us who were in arms alfo ; but that we plunder'd thoſe who never
ſtu*d from cheir own houſes. A pretty pretence, when there was not one Hugonor who went
inco arms, that did not firſt ſecure his goods in the Houſes of thoſe who ſtayd at home.
And.on the other ſide by the peace the King has granted them » he has given them an
Indemnity for whatſoever chey have done, nor only againſt himſelf, but againſt ns alſo,
who have born arms for his Majeſties ſervice. Sccing then thar his Majeſty has been ſo gra-
ciousto them as to pardon them all, is it not reaſonable that the ſame Indemnity ſhould
extend to us alſo? Notwichſtanding it is quite contrary. Whar they have ated againt
us 15 approv d, and what we have cone againſt them cenſur'd and condemn'd, yea, and
moreover we are deliver'd up into thehands of juſtice. Tocounſe! the King then to make
a Law for the one, and not for the other, I doſay, and will affirm ic whilſt I live, thac
it was barbarouſly done, and that it is the moſt unjuſt Law that ever Prince in the world
was advisd to make, |

All this was diſpured at Thoſowze, 2nd the Commiſſioners, and Commiſſions, Ordon-
nances, and EdiCis were all 1eyok'd, and his Majeſty pardon'd all in general, as knowing
very well thac thoſe Commil}ioners would do no cher good, bur ruine both the one and
the other, to beger a perpernal hatred amongſt us, which would prompt us eternally ro
diſtruſt, and invade one another, from whence a new War would infallibly proceed.
His Majeſty round inc berefic of this prudent AQ, for the Peace has continued five years
fince, I know not whom to accife for the cauſe that it is again renew*d ; but I know
very well, thac I am no way guilry of it, Of whom ſhall a man demand ſatisfaRion for
the houſes of Monheur de Sarl:bur, Monſieur de Sainflorens, the Captains Parron, Cam-
pagnes, Lartigae. and an infinite number of others; all which have been burnt to the
ground, whulſt they were abroad in thc Kings ſervice, and their Wives forc'd to recire into
the houſes of their kindred and trieids ; and to this day neither they, nor their Husbands
have a houſe to pur their heacis 1n of their own g and when fatisfation is demanded, they
ſay the men are beggars, and worth noching. They (ay true, for the rich men never ſtirr'd
from their houſes, and ſo preſerv'd them and yer we muſt bz call'd to an accounr, and
not they, becauſe thoſe who commicred the outrage are beggars, and have nothing 3 but
if his Majeſty would have approv'd our doings, thoſe who continne of their Religion
ſhould another time have taken heed how any of their Party had done any injury to any
of ours 3: Bur T return to my SubjeR,

I diſpatch away another Courrier to Monſieur de Lebeyon , and to Monſieur de Gra-
monts Company, that they ſhould return in as great diligence as they went, eſpecially if
they defir'd to be preſent at the fight. The Courrier found thar they were riſen and de-
parted from their Quarters an hour before day, thinking yet to find the Enemy, and nor
meeting with them for the aforenamed reaſons, burnt all che Boats in which chey had
paſſed the River, wherein chey cid a great milchief ro the Country, So ſoon as ever they
receiv'd my letrers, they rarn'd immediarely back, and made more haſte in their return,
than when hey went ; for they came before St. Foy as ſoon as we ; ſo that had Monſicur
de Savignac and his companions made half che haſte they did, we had trapr Captain Pilles,
and not a man of them hadeſcap'd, Monfieur de Chemerant ſaw all the diſpatches I wric.
] came with the fi'c Companies that remain'd with the Knight my Son, my own Com-
pany, and ſome forty or fifty Gentlemen chat rode under my Cornet, in cwo dayes co
Mon flanquin, where I receiv'd an anſwer from Meftreurs de Terride and de Bellegarde da-
ted ac Moifſac, wherein they adyercis'd me of chedifficulty chey had found in paſſing che
Rivers, and cheill wayes che Infaniry had mer wichal in their march, and that chey could
not abandon their Foor, telling me withal, thac I ought not co engage the Enemy «ll we
had all our Forces of Horſe and Foot together s bur chat chevy wonld mate all the haſte
they poſſibly could, Immediately afrer my arrival ar CMo-flinguin, which might be a-
bour wo uf the clock in the afcernoon, I ſent away three M-tiengers, one co Monſieur de
Lanzun, cntreating him to ſend me word night and day where Monſieur de Pilles and his
Forces were ; for char 4 was reſol»*1co go and actaque him, 1 ſent another to Monſieur de
Salnttorens, chat he (ſhould not £24] ro be with me by Sun-riſe ar a Village call'd 24-nbaheo,

belonging

Complaints of
theCatholicks,

——_—

”

310 The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book VT,

belonging to Monficar de Lanzan, and 1m the laſt place I fent away the Sjeur de Lazy
the Kings Advocate at eAgen, to haſten away the Sieurs de Beliegarde and de Tirride, who
were yer chree lcagues behind, and could not petſwade their Foot to march till break of
day z and bcing come to Ville-nenfue, which was after one of the clock in the-afternoon,
could by no means prevail to go any furcher, by reaſon of che extraordinary foulneſs of the
wayes, wherein thcugh there was I confeſs ſ-me excuſe, and that they had reaſon on their
fide, I did not nevertheleſs rake it for current pay ; for methought every one ought co
march as I would havethem. Afﬀeer all cheſe diſpatches, having bated our horſes, and
the five Foot Enfigns, I maichr direaly towards the Village whereThad appointed Mon «
fienr de Sainflorens to meer me, and by the way found Monſieur de Fontenilles, and Cap-
tain Montlac my Son lodg?d in four or five houſes they had met with there, where I told
them they would do well to bait their horſes (for they had made a very long march in che
night to overtake me) and that T would go bait ar the forementioned Village. I thoughc
I ſhould there find Monſieur de Sainforens, and that they might follow after, and there-
fore commanded Monficur de Madaillan my Licutenanc, that he thould ſtay and baitmy
Company with them, and after follow me co the Village : to which I went, but at my com-
ing thithcr heard no news either of Monſienr de Sainfyens, or of Monſieur de Lanzun ;
tor the Meſſengers I had ſent to them, and who hzd been recommended to me by the
Conſuls of Afosflanquin for the molt truſty fellows they had in their Town, did not go
away with my Letters ly night as they had promiſed, ſo chat it was paſt Noon before the
{aid Sicurs de Sainftorens and de Lauzunicceiv'd my Lecters, as they told me afcer 3 and
co mend the matter, fo ſoon asever we were alighted, thinking to bair, we had an Alarm
that came fromwards iremont, which made us remount to horſe, and advance a good
quarter of a league upon the Road towards the ſaid Aſiremont, from whence the Alarm
came, wherein I committed a great folly in advancing ſo far with ſo few men with me,
I having no more than five and forty Gentlemen only in the Party, for my own Foot Come
pany was not yet come up. I cculd not there learn any certain news, where either Mon-
ficur de PiBes, or any of his Forces were, .only I was told by the honeſt people that he was
on the other ſide the River Lot cowards St. Venſa and Aymett, Marmanda and Toneins,
and that they were all Horſcs After I had Raid about two hours upon the Road, Meſſieurs
de Fontenilles, and de CMadaillan, and the young Montlac my Son came up to me, where
I gave them order that Monlieur de Madaillan ſhould go with my Company before, thac
Monſieur de Fontenilles and Captain Montleac ſhonld follow after ar a convenient diſtance
to be ready to ſecond him, and that I with my Gentlemen would ſuftein chem 3 and char
afcer this manner they ſhould march till they came within half a league of Miremont,
where they ſhould ſend our Scouts to enquire where the Enemy was, which (ſhould they
happen to bein £Miremont, that then they ſhould give the word back from Party to Party,
for 1 would immediately put my ſe'f upon the Trot to come up to them, which they ac»
cordingly did, Now I had caus'd my Foot to march without beat of Drum to avoid be.
ing diſcover'd, who afcer that filent manner arriv*d ar Monbabr, where my Son finding
me departed thence, marcht afrer, and Monſieur de Madaillan being advanc'd within half
a leapue of Miremont madea halt according to the order he had teceiv'd, and ſent out to
diſcover, where it was told him, that the Enemy were all on the other fide of the Lox,
and that there was not any one at Miremont, of which he gave notice to Monſieur de Fon-
tenilles, deſiring him to acquaint me with it, that he might know whar I would further
command him to do. Monſieur de Fontenilles accordingly diſpatchr away an Archer co
me, by whom hearing there was no Enemy on this fide the Let, Ifenr back word, thac
Monſieur de CMadaillan ſhould further advance as far as Miremont, to enform himſelf more
certainly of che place where the Enemy was, to the end thar the next morning Meſheurs de
Terride, de Bellegarde, and I being united cogether might go to arraque them, and thar in
the mean time I would fall back ro Monbahw, where we had lefr our Baggage to baic and
xefreſh my men. I accordingly did ſo, having tuſt plac'd my Son and his five Compa+
nies in five or ſix houſes near unto the place from whence I retreated, ſending an account
of all co Monſieur de Fontenilles, to the end thar ſhould they receive an uncxpeRed charge
The Sicur de from the Enemy, they might know where our Foot lay. So ſoon as I alighted from m
Montluc's dili- horſe, and before I entred into my Lodging, I diſpatche away ro Mefſieurs de Terride
"4 4 and de Belleg.arde, cntreating them not to fail co be with che Cayalry at Afonbahus by mid-
Pater. | night ; for chat Monſieur de Pilles had nothing but Horſe, of which there were not aboye
three hundred that were good, the reſt to the number of fitreen or fixceen hundred, being
all mounted upon pitiful Jades that were worth nothing. The Meſſenger was with them
within an hour and a half after day-lighr, for ic is no more than two leagues from 10n-
Lahua to Villeneufur, by whom they return'd me anſwer, and aflur'd me that by break of

_ day

 -hnl

—__—
—_—

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. | 31 "Ws

day they would noc fail robe with me, Bar I muſtrecuru co Mefſteurs de Fontenilles and
de Madaillan, 2yd Captain Montiuc, and muſt here in che fiſt place ſer down Monfieur ,
de Pilles his definn, Immediately npon wy arrival at Monfl-nquin, which might be about |
ewo of the ch+c!: inthe afternoon, the Hugonors of the ſaid Morflanguin advertis'd Mon- 2
fiear de Piles, who was newly deparced from Cahors, that the nexr day I was decermin'd
co draw neater tohim, expecting 1n the mean time Meſſicurs de Terride and de Bellegarde
rocome up' to me, which notwithſtanding they could not do yer theſe two dayes, and
thac I had nor above fifty or threeſcore good Horſe with me in all, Upon this intelli-
gence the ſaid Sic de Pilles Culparchr away all night co fix Cornets he had about Mar-
»ande and Thozeins, thar they ſhould nor tail to be the nexe day (which was the ſame
thac 1 arriv*d ar Sr, Paſteur) at a place the name whereof I have forgot ; and that he
would come 2nl bring the rc{t of his Forces to joyn wich them, before T could be rallied
with MeTreurs de Terride and de B-llegarde. They who had ſenc him this incelligence
believ*d that I wonld tay the nexc day at Monflinguin, or at leaſt if I departed thence,
]L vw ond nt march above a leagnc or twoart molt, Monkeur de Pilles had appointed his
Gunerz) Renlezron ar a convenient diſtance from their Quarters, and immediately the
fix To: ners departed one after the other, by reaſon they were quarter'd in ſeveral placesy
an tho Rendezyonr for thoſe ſix was appointed to be ar Miremont, there to refreſh chem-
{clvos oil midn'gt only, and after co go to the other Rendezvouz to Monſiear de
Piles. |

'Jn the mean time Monficur de Wadaillan went diretly to Miremont, when being come
within view of the enrrance into the Village where there was no wall, he was aware of
a great number of white Caflacks going to and fro 1n the great ſtreet : whereupon heims
mediacely diſpatcht away ro M nficurd? Fontenilles, and my Son Captain Aontlac, thar
they ſhould with all ſpecd advance, for that he was (ſo engag*d he muſt of neceſſity fighr,
and that they ſhould give me {peccy notice of iralſo, Irisa good league from Miremont
to CMonbakus, and the Siear de Fenterilles ſcat me word with all imaginable diligence.
There were at Mir:'mont two Cornets, who were firſt come, and already alighted, and
their horſes in the Stables, and the other two which were yer on horſeback were but juſt
arriv*d, and ſeeking for accommodation to bait and refreſh themſelves. Monſieur de Mar
daillen, v.ho ſaw hmſclf diſcovad, charg'd theſe two Corncts that were on horſeback,
and bear them our of rhe Village in rour and confuſion ſo that they fled with might and Four Corners
main towa: ds 1 Sauvetat, the other two that were already lodg'd, hereupon run to their 9 Hole of de
horſes, and juſt as they were mounting, Monkeur de Fontenilles and Captain dontlac ar- Piles deteared,
riv'd, and charg'd chem, and they fled as many as eſcap*d towards Aymet. In leſs than
halt a quarter of an hour arriv'd the other ewo Cornets, who ſeeing their fellows defeated
fad about towards Ponens from whence they came. Ir wasill luck ; for had not Mon=
fieur de Aadaillan icnt me word that he could hear no news of the Enemy, I had till
marchr on in the ſame order we began, and had not turn'd back again to bait. I came
up acthe ſame time char che laſt two Cornets did arrive, where I thought to have had as
good a prize of them, as the reſt of our people had had of che other four 3 but when I came
ap to our Foor, an Archer carne to tell me they had fought, and purſued the Enemy half
a league, and chat ſome priſoners they had taken afſur*d them, that Pilles and all his For-
ces were at St, Benſi and Amet, not above a league and a half from thence 3 where-
fore they were recreating towards me, not being ſtrong enough to withſtand the Enemies
Forces ſhould they come upon chem, This 1s the truth of what paſſed in this Engagement.
They brought me two Cornets, but in ranning away they had torn off the Colours.
\ Could we chus keep (pies amongſt them , as they do amongſt us of ſuch as the King The Recrear of
has given liber:y to live quietly in their own houſes, our affairs would proſper becter Monſieur de
than they do; andif I had been advertiz'd by ſome friends of ours, as they were by theirs Pilles.
of Monſicur de Pilles his retreat, I had eatily defeated him ; for Monſieur de Sain-
&orens had been joyn'd wich me, who was coming very well accompanied to ſeek me out
the very ſame way the Enemy fled , when ſeeing night coming upon him he drew into
Manſeger, to expect turther intelligence which way I was gone, and in purſuing them by
night I had means to ſend a man or two to him to give him an account of all chat had
paſſ'd. W clay upon our Guard, and kept very ſtri& watch, ſuſpeRing leſt rhe ſaid de
Pilles i}-ould come upon us for his revenge : bur he was quite otherwiſe diſpoſ*d, for he #
marche ai! che night as faſt as cyer he could directly to St. Foy, where he arriv'd, as we
wer" enform's) by break of day, thongh ic be the worſt way imaginable, for the Country
is ma, zeloully dry, and the night was fo dark, chat men could nor diſcern a yard from
one another, 1nus we ſec how the affzirs of War do oft miſcarry for want of good in-
clligence, for Monſicur de Sainforens his anſwer came not to our hands till the next day,

10T

_—

a

 Billes his Fer-

Fond

he _
L———

 - The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book VI,

—_ —{—_—

nor that of Monſieur de Lauznn ; and che Meflengers they ſent ro me had like to have falPn
3n amongſt the Encmy, which put chem into ſuch a fright, thar they hid themſelves till
the day appear'd. In the morning by Sun-riſe Mectheurs de Terride and de Bellegarde came
up tous, who, when they heard of the Engagement had pals d,were ready to tear their own
fleſh, curſing the Foot to all the Devils of Hell, and the hour chat ever they came from
about Tholonze ; for they might eaſily have been at Monbahw as ſoon as we, had ir nor
becn for the Foot, the ſtaying for them being the only reaſon they came up ſo late, and
the belief they had we would not offer to fight till we were firſt joyn'd all cogether, had
made them careful not to leave the Foot behind them, and I heard Monſieur de Bellegarde
A ſaying. of ſay a notable thing upon this occafion , That he now perceivd it was nit alwayes gord to
Monheur de proceed with too much diſcretion in matters of warre. He ſaid very true; for who ever will
Bllegarde, alwayes confine himſelf co the ordinary Rules of war, oft-times loſes more than he
ctS.
Y We march ſtraight to Xirement, and by the way met with one of Monſieur de 11a-
daillans Archers, who came to bring us news of the diſorder of Monſfiear de Pilles his
people, that the news of their defeat had reach as far as his head Quarter, that thereupon
che ſaid Monſieur de Pilles, and the remainder of his Forces had taken their way direRly to
St. Foy ; that twelve Soldiers Monſieur de CMadaillan kept in his houſe near unto la $au-
vetat, had kilPd two and twenty of them at the Gares of the ſaid houſe being mounted
upon pittiful Jades : that the Inhabitants of /a Sauvetat had alſo ſallied out upon them,
and had kill'd three or fourſcore, and taken their horſes; and had Monſieur de Sajnfo-
rens laid a quarter of an hour only in one place by which he paſy'd, the moſt of them
had fall'n inco his handss which alaſs he ktew not till the next day no more than TI, and
had chen his ſhare of vexation as well as the reſt of us. But a man cannoc prophecy things,
which makes the /talian fay Fa me indivino Ti darodenari.
We were conſtrain'd to lodg at [a Sauvetat, St. Venſa, and Aymet, from whence the E-
nemy wese cleparted, by reaſon there were no Quarters to be had from la Sauvetat till one
comes to St. Foy, and left Monſieur de Sanignac with his ewo Enfigns at Miremont, becauſe
there were no Quai tcrs for him beyond it, for the Cavalry took up all ; and ar the ſaid
Miremont there were above twenty men found hid in the houſes, whom they kil'd every
Mothers Son, and got ſome fifteen or ſixteen horſes; for none of us ever ſtayd to alight,
bur paſſed on forwards. The next morning very eai}:/ we marche directly for St. Foy, and
I dare be bold to ſay, that of a long time I had not icen ſuch a Cayalry, for the number,
as thoſe we bad with us; and when we cam: within fight of St. Foy, Meſſheurs de Fonte=
miller, de Madaillan, and Captain Moniluc with his fix companies pur, themſelves before,
and marcht direQly towards the Town, Monſieur de Terride with his own Company,
and that of Monſieur de Negrepelice marchr after to ſuſtain them 3 Monſieur de Bellegarde,
Monſieur de Sainforens, and I ſuſtein?d Monfieur de Terride ; and there Monſieur de Gra-
2onts Company came up to us, and Monſieur de Leleron with his five Enſigns. I think
the beſt Curtel in all our Troops could not have made more haſte than they had done, far
they were no more than two dayes only in coming berwixt Fille- Franche de Roziergne to
St. Foy. Monſicur de Lanzan, and the Vicount his Son were come up tous in the morn= -
ing with ſome Gentlemen only, for I think their Companies were in the Camp, and both
Monſieur de of them aſlur d us that Monſear de Pilles had eighteen hundred Horſe, three or four

hundred of which were well mounted, and in very good equipage and order, che reſt were
Harqueouzcers on Horſe-back, and very ill hors'd. The Chevalier then alighted,
and taking an hundred Harquebnzeers, put himſelf right before the Town, the reſt fol-
lowed him, and Meſſicurs de Fontenilles de Madaillan, and Captain Montlac after ; when
ſo ſoon as they approacht the Gare, fifteen or ewenty Harquebuzeers (allied our roskirmiſh,
The Knight preded ſtill forwards notwithſtanding, and thoſe of the Enemy reci*d, and
ſhut chemſeclves again within the Town. Monficur de Pilles had all night long been paſ-
ſing his men over the Dordogne in great hurry and diſorder, and himſelf at Sunzriſe paſ-
ſing over alſo had left theſe fifteen or twenty Harquebuzeers in the Town to amuze us, and
a great Boat, and a leſſer to bring them over alſo, for there were no more but theſe lefr bee
hind, who ſo ſoon as they were retreated into che Town, ran preſently to the Boars, and
paſſed over in an inſtant ; ſo that at the ſame time the Chevalier came to the Bank of
Why the Sieur the River, ( having paſſed thorough the Town, where he ſaw no body but women) they
Je Montluc is landed on the other fide. : ; |
ſo parcicularz This isthe truth of all char paſſed upon this occaſion, wherein I have been neceſficated
and has writ to give ſo preciſe and particular an account of this ation as may perhaps ſcem tedious to the

by —_ by Tr Reader ; foraſmuch as I have been cold that ſome reported to che King, the Queen, and
ength of this

AYY

A&on, che Monſieur, that ic only ſtack at me we did not fight with PiJles : but whoever will have

the

'
an_ es ee e——_

Boox VI. de Mon luc, Mareſchal of France. 312

_—— - | ——m—_—_— = ———_—_
_=_ eo Ro ett neuen em wy tn eo en ES See Ei — oe — — = —  ———_ —

the parience to read this Narration will ſee the truth of all as ir paſſed, by che reſtimony
of all che Captains who were preſent upon the place, of which two only namely Meſſieurs
de Terride and de Bellegarde are dead, and by that jr will appear whether I was in faulc
or no 2 neitherin truth can juſtly tax, orlay che blame upon any one, bat only che ll
wayes that Monſieur de Savignacs Company met withal x for as ro the ſaid Sicurs de Terride
and de Rellegarde, they govern'd thcraſelves more by che rule of War, chan thac they were
hindred by any want of good will they had to the cauſe, or any wanr cf courage and
defire they had to be at the fight. Monſfeur de Chemeraut who had brought me lecters
from the Monſieur was privy to all my diſpatches; for he would make one, and to that
end entreated me to furniſh him with horſe and arms, which T did, and of fifteen dayes
never lefr me. I am confident that he wil! always bear me wicneſs, thar every Title I have
writ of this Action 1s litcerally true, and that he was as glad of the occaſion of being there
asany one of the Army wharever, hoping to have carried che Monſieur better news than
he did. Such as are men of judgment in matters of War have ofcen found by experience
how hard a thing ir 1s co faſten a Bartel upon a man chat has no mind co fighr, eſpicially
an old Soldicr, and a circum{pe& Commander, as the Sieur de Piles was, who I think.
was by much che beſt , none excepted che Hugonors had, He knew he ſhould gain nothing
by us bur blows, which made him chat he would nor long abide in choſe parts,

Tao dayes after we came into St. Foy, Monheur de Terridde received a Commiſſion his Mooficur de
Majcſty {ent him to go into Bern, and departed from me, A Command wherewith Terride ſent the
he was highly pleaſed, as I alſo was our of che affeion Þ bore unco him, and moreover I wt xe
had an opinionchart affairs would better ſucceed. Monficur de Bellegarde lefc me alſo car- yearn,

tying away his own Company, and Monſieur de $ vignac's ten Enfigns along with him,

as Monſieur de Terride carricd away his, and char of Monſieur de Negrepelice. Monſieur
de Sainftorens and I remain'd behind. The. Knight my Son went with his ten Enfiens
ſtraight into Limoafin, to joyn with the Monfienrs Army, and five dayes after the Mon-
fieur won the Bartel cf Farnic, in which the Prince of Conde was flain, Many have The Bartel of
thought thac that his death has prolong'd our Wars; but TI for my part am of opinion 7474,30d ne

f DU WA death of che
thac had he liv*d we ſhould have ſeen our affairs in a far worſe condition + For a Prince of Wed of Crus

the Blood as he was, having alteady fo great a Party of che Hugonots, would have had ge.
much more credit and authority amongſt them chan the Admiral. This unfortunate
Prince loy*'d his Country, and had compaſſion for the people , T was long converſant
with him, which had like to have been my ruine, I ever found him an affable and a gene-

rous Prince : but he loft his Life in Bareel, maintaining a quarrel chac was unjuſt in the fghe

of God and man. Ir was grear pitty, for had he been elfewhere employed, he mighc have

becn ſerviceable to the Kingdom. The unadviſed Peace that ſome perſwaded King Henry

ro make has becn the cauſe of all theſe miſchiets we have ſeen : for to have ſo many Prince's

of the blood,and ſo many others of the ſame N:t:on,and to keep them unemployed in ſome
foreign War, is very ll advid'd. We mult either fight with others, or fall rogerher by

the cars amongſt our ſclves. Could we always continue in peace, fo that every one would
intend his own tillage, as the Romans did in their vacations from war, I do confeſs ic
would be very well : but char cannoc be, And therefore, Sir, I do ſay and affirm, that it 15

a very vain opinion, and fruitleſs, tochink of making peace ar home, if ar the ſame time The Sicur ds
you do not meditate a War abroad. You axe not to renew the War of the Holy Land, Montluc's ad-
for we are nor {o devout now adayes as our Religious Anceſtors were in thoſe berrer times ; vice co the
Ir were beter to do as the King of Spain does, and ſend your men into the new diſcover'd N'"8:
worlds, and fo to ſeparate choſe unruly Princes, (till ſending the young ones to be brought

np at the School. of alta 5, for it they do nor buſtle every one will fic (till. Bur if your
M:jcſty have a mind co quarrel ycucr Neighbours, you may renew your claim to the
Dacchy of M3!/.zn, char of right appertains to you by deſcent. Por it 1s not to be found

in any Records char the King of Spais has any right ar all co ir, which by che Females you
have. The King of Spain holds it by no other Title bur by right of Conqueſt, and the
power of the Sword, Your Majeſty will alſo find that a Dake of eAnjou deſcended from

the Houſe of France, and of your own proper Race, was once King of Naples, which che
King of Spain has alſo 1n his pcflefſton. The King your Grandfather would never lay down

this claim, buc ſeiz'd of che Terricories of Monheur de Savoy, alchough his Uncle, co have

a ſecure paſſage whereby to encer Into the Datchy of Millan. Your Royal Father rook
upon him the preteStion of the Dake of Parma, and che Siennois co no other end, bur

in order toa Paſs for the 1ecovery of Naples. You, Sir, are deſcended from theſe Heroick
Princes, and you have their right and tile; if God therefore ſend you peace ar home,

you may ſend a Tempeſt into the King of Spains Dominions, and ſhall have a berter ac-
coun: ot it than you arc aware of; for the King of Spain is a Prince more addicted co

T-£ Negotiations

: 4 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VT,

ww

——

N-goriations than to War :- be 15nor Ike hs Pather, jn five or fix years he will be old,
and you 1n che flower ot your age. He wall Ieave his Children very young, and fince the
Father was not generous in his youth, ir 1s not co be expected he ſhould beſo in his old
Age. Beſides if you know how to manage the Princes of /taly, you will fin1 them all
at your devorion, even the Duke of Florence himſclf, for ſomething chat I know, and ſome
reaſons thac I could give, as having fel his pulſe whilſt I was che Kings Licutenanc in
Tuſcany, The Dake hymſ{clf 1 am confident will nor ſay the contrary, nor dcny bur thar
he 1: more French than Spaniſh. Enpland will not hinder you, for that hasa Woman at
the Helm, and Scorland a Child. To be ſhort nothing ought co deterre you : but I leave
this di{courle to ancther thme. The death of the Prince of Conde was the occaſion of my
, encring inco ir, for I ama Frenchman, and lament the death of choſe brave Princes {lain
by our own hands, who might cl{ewhere be ſerviccable to us, and help to enlarge the French
Dominzons.
A command to Burco recurn to my Subject, I remain'd five or ſix weeks ar the ſaid St, Foy, having yet
diſmantle Ber. with me fix Enſigns of Foot, commanded by my Nephew de Leberon. Of theſe I ſenc
Lerac. four together with my ſaid Nephew himſelf to Bergerac to diſmantle che Town, as the
King and the Monſieur had commanded me, bur it was ill executed, Some dayes after
the Monſteur drew near, and came to Montmoreau, where followed by a noble Train of
Gentlemen of very good qualicy, I went to kiſs his hand 3 and where his Highneſs re-
ceiv*d me with very great demonſtrations of favour, commanding me hor to depart from
him, of which God knows if I wasglad. I therefore ſenc preſently home for Wagons,
Tents, and money, as allo did all the reſt of che Gentlemen that came along with me, ma-
king account we ſhould no more depart from the Army, as alſo there was not in all Gaj-
enne a man that durſt ſo much as mutter, nor a place that ſtood for the Hugonors but
eMontauban only. The Monhcur deparied from Aont-merear, and went to Ville-
bois |
Falſe intelli- He had not been above five or fix dayes there, all which time we ſpent in conſulcation
pence ſent to about the means to carry on the War, « hen there came a Gentlmen ſent poſt from Mon-
the Menfieur, fieur de Afonferran, Governor of Bourdeanx, to my faid Lord the Monſieur, to give
h:m notice char a great parc of che Admirals Army, both Foot and Horſe were come into
Aedoc, and that rwo toot Companies he had planted chere had been conſtrained to quit
the Paſs, and to c{cape away by night. The Monficur was nor over-haſty co believe his
news z tor we difcourſed abour the Paſs, where I reprefented tohim the vaſt breadth of
the Raver at thac place, which requir*d a whole Tide, and an infinice number of Boats to
paſs it : foran Army carried a mighty Train along with ic : and that on the other fide,
1t was not very likely chat the Admiral who was a Soldier would engage himſelf in the
Laxdts , a barren Conntry, and beyond Rivers; he could not well expect ever co repaſs.
The might following there came a Courrier with like intelligence from the Court of Par-
liamenc, and the ſaid Monheur de Afontferran, in yet much greater hear than che former,
and making the number of the Encmy much greater than before. Ir is crue thac he alſo
writ to my Lord the Monſieur, that he was juſt raking Horſe himlelf co go and diſcover
them. And accordingly, as have heard, he did go, but he had no horſe with him (a-
ving ſome few Harquebuzeers on horſeback only, and when he came within half a league
of the Paſs, thoſe he had ſent before to diſcover, came backs and brought him word,
that already a great number of the Horſe were got over, and that the Foot began to follow
after 3 ſo that being ſo flenderly accompanied, the ſaid Sieur de Montferran was neceſlj-
raced toretire 3 and on the other fide the people all fled cowards Bowrdeaux. The ſaid
Sieur de Montferran diſpatche away another Conrrier to the Monſieur, aſſuring him thar
che intelligence was molt certainly true, which was the reaſon char his Highneſs ſent me
back to my great misfortune, for (ince that time I have never had any thing bur trouble
and vexarion, whereas had I (till continned abour his perſon, all che mischief thar has
fince befall'n me had never come to paſs, for I had cither died in doing him ſome brave
piece of ſervice, or had never been wounded, as I am, to live in a perpetual languiſhing
condition, withour poſſibiliry of ever being cur'd. All which misforcune befel me for
want of five and twenty good horſe only, which had Monſieur de Montferran had with
him he had himſelf diſcover'd the Enemy, for he wanted no courage, and had then diſ-
cover'd that they were no other than three or four-{core Bearnols, and ſome others belong-
10g to the Queen of Navarre, who were going over Bearn tohelp to detend the Country,
whercof the one half were defeated by the way abour Mont de HMarſan, His Highneſs
may pleaſe to remember, that Rtanding by his Bed-fideT rold him, that apon my life and
honour it wag impoſſible this intelligence conld any way be tre, for 1 knew the Country, and it
could be nothing but ſume ſmall party going over into Bearn, or Chaleſle, for a great Party

could

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mayeſchal of France. rs =

could not, nr der ft not adventure to paſs for they muſt paſs over as it were in file. W hereupon The Monſeurs
his Highneſs ſaid ro me theſe very words, 7 perceive very well, my good man, that the deſire words to the
you have tobe with me makes you to ſay thi + Uut believe me in what part ſcever you ſhall be, Sieur de Mont-
1 will ever love you. The reaſon of war may perhaps draw me into Guienne, and / ſhould be 'plad (WE.

zo ſpend my Prentice age in ſo good a School as youre, Whereupon I took my leaye of his High-

neſs. Behold of what imporrance 1t is to diſcover an Enemy very well, before a man takes

che Alarm. | BUR FEES MES:

Captains, my friends and companions, you muſt rather hazard your ſelves to be taken,
and diſcover the truth, than rely upon the report of inferiour fellows, for their fear makes
ſo firange an impreſſion upon them, that they cake Buſhes for Squadrons, and will ſwear
ic; you may truſt to them if you will. ?Tis juſt the ſame as when they ſee a hundred
Crowns they think them ro be a thouſand : ſend alwayes ſome bold Soldier, ſome fellow
chat has not his heart in his Breeches, and lzc him venture his Carcaſs to bring yon a true
account 2 but if you will do better, go your ſelves ; I have alwayes done fo, and found
an advantage by ir. : | os ale nars |

So ſoon as I came to St. Foy I was advertis'd of the truth of the buſineſs, and ſent my

ſaid Lord the Monſieur an immediate account of it, very-anpry at the ſaid Sieur de Mont=
ferran, and being there was nothing ar preſent: to doz I (till continued at Se. Foy, to be
near my ſaid Lord the Monſieur, to the end that when he ſhotld pleaſe ro ſentl for me;
I mighc inewo or three dayes be with him. T have heard fince thac one of the principal
perſons about his Highneſs ſhould tell him, that he had done well to rid his hands of mes
tor chat T was croſs-grain'd and wilful, and would evermore command in all places where-
ever I came, His Highneſs himſelf cold me the ſtory at the Siege of Rochelle, I have never been
ſo obſtinare, bur chart T would alwayes ſubmir co reaſon ; bur to ſpeak che truth, I have
ever found my own coun(cl better than that of any other. Iris reaſonable then that thoſe
Monfteurs, who are only pretty fellows at running the Ring , ſhould learn of thoſe who
have ſtadied under the greateſt DoRors of Exrope : but they will ſtill be prating, no body
muſt controul them, and they will govern all.

Having nothing to do, bur lying idle at Se. Foy, I went thence to Ages, where Mon:
fieur ds CMontferran ſent me word, that the Sjeurde 14 RochesChalais, and Captain Chas-
texrac were in /a Roche, with a hundred or fix{core Hagonot Soldiers, that over-ran all
che Country, committing innumerable outrages, inſomnch thar' no one could paſs from
X zintonge to Bourdeaux, and that if I would go to la Roche, we ſhould be enow eo do the
work; he ſent me word likewiſe thac Monſieur de 1a Yaugnion was abpur Afontpont, and
Muſſiden with Monſieur de Sarlabus his Regiment, and three Companies of Gens-d*arms,
ro whom if I would ſend to invite him, he would willingly be of the parry. Upon this
intelligence I went immediately ro Bonrdeaux ; and by an expreſs Meſſenger a Gentleman
gave Monſieur de 1a Y anguyon private norice of the deligne, who preſently recurn'd me an-
{wer, chat he would willingly joyn in the Enterprize, and chat I ſhould therefore ſend him
word what day I would have him to march, and appoint him the Rendezvous, to which
he ſhould come. I therefore ſent to entreat him to be at Zibowre the chird day after (which
was upon a Saturday) in the morning, where Monſieur de Montferran and I would meer
him, co determine upon that we had to do, which he accordingly obſery'd, and I alſo,
The ſaid Sieur de fontferran ſtaid to rake order abour the Artillery, for we were to carry
ic by water as far as Coutyas, We werein diſpute which way to go to work, for Monſieur
de la Nojie was about St. Alvare, a Territory belonging to the Sieur de Jarnac, and lay 6... ics
berwixt the rwo Rivers with twelve Enfigns of Foot, and four or five hundred Horſe, who on of MoaGeus
being an old Soldier, and a valiant man as any that ever was in France, would never ſuf- de ls Ne#e,
fer /a Reche to be loſt, without artempring co relieve ir, co do which he had only the
River of St. gAlvere to paſs, which in many places was to be foarded by the Horſe, and
which the Foot alſo would boat over in four hours time ; and as to the River that was un-
der la Roche, they had the Bridge of Parcon in their own poſſeflion; Town and all, and
had a Garriſon in itz wherefore we muſt eicher reſolve to attaque bochthe one and che 0-
ther; or not ro make any attempt ar all, In the end we concluded to artaque 14 Roche,
and to fight Monſieur de [a Noe 1n caſe he ſhould offer to relieve ir, all of us who were
preſenc ar the deliberation raking an oath not to diſcover the defigne. Monfieur de Mont-
ferran chen ſtayed with Commiſlary Fredeville to ſce the ewo pieces of Canon embark'd,
and I departed che Saturday morning very early, and came to Libowrne, where I found
Monſieur de 12 augnyon, who wascome thither upon the Friday night,

Now whilſt we were bufie ar Bowrdeanx abour this Enterprize upon la Roche, 1 plotted
another of as great importance as that of la Roche, which waschis. A Hugonor Captain

had ſciz'd uponthe Caſtle of Levignac appertaining ro Monſiear la CMarguis de Trans,
Tr 2 and

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox VI,

and had three or fourſcore Soldiers within it, had there encloſed the Streets of che Boarg,
which is a large one, with Rampiers of earth, and in the night all retir'd into the Caſtle
which was the very place where Piles had ſurpriz'd Ia Mothe Monganzy the elder, kill'd
him, and defeated almoſt all his whole Company. Monſieur de CMadaillanhad come a.
long wich me to Beyrdeanx, my Company lying at Cleyrac and T honens, and was pre-
ſent at the deliberation about the Enterprize of /a Roche, whom I made to return in all
diligence, writing to Monſieur de Leberon, that they ewo ſhould joyn cogether with
four Companies of Foot, and make ſo long a march, chat in one nighc they ſhould ſhuc
them in, at what price {oever ſhould take the Caſtle, and pur them all to the ſword ,
and that from chence in one njght more they ſhould preſent themſelves before che Caſtle
of Bridotre, apperteing to Monſieur de 1a Mothe Gondrin, where there were fourſcore or
a hundred Hugonots more, commanded by one Labaume, which was the place into which
Gerffre that notorious Thief, who has committed ſo many villainies, uſed to retire him-
ſelt. By the things this Villain has done, he gave pooof of a great heart and conrage,
and manifeſted himſelf to bs a man of execution. I gave them charge chat they ſhould
begird and beſiege the Caſtle ſo cloſe, that nothing could eſcape away : for thac ſo ſoon
as Thad done at la Riche, T would turn wich the Canon ſuddenly co them, bur chat in
caſe Monſieur de la Nie ſhould come to fight us, they muſt then leave all, and march
day and night to come up to the Battel,

Theſe were the inſtructions I gave to Meſſheurs de Leberon, and de Madaillan , who
accordingly did carry the Caſtle. The place was ſtrong enough to reſiſt any force of hand,
ſo that they could that way do no good, and the Enemy defended themſelves very well,
as it ſtood them upon z for they knew they were to expe& no quarter, by reaſon of the
many inſolencies and great cruelties they had committed all about Levignac, Monſieur de
Lanznn therefore lent them a Culverine, with which they made a hole chorough the wall
wideenough for two men to paſs, which they had no ſooner done, bur they immediately

Levignt taken fell on to the Aſſault, and ſtorming at once by the breach, and giving a Scalado by Lad-

by aſlault,

dersat the ſame rime to the Baſſe-Comrt, they carried the place, There was bur three pri-
ſoners ſay*d, all che reſt were cut in pieces, and the night following thoſe who had ſeiz'd
the Caſtle of Taillecabat belonging to Monſieur de Hereville, Grand Seneſchal of Gwlrnne,
hearing how thoſe of Levignac had been handled, Role away in the dark, and our people
marcht before the Caſtle of Bridoire, where they found that thoſe fellows alſo were upon
the point of going to ſhift for themſelves, and clapt cloſe Siege to them. Bur by misfor-
tune, and by reaſon of the haſte they were in, our people having either forgot, or nor been
able to carry along proviſion wherewith to refreſh the Soldiers, the Foot began in the nighr
to diſperſe themſelves to go ſeek out for vicual, and the Horſe retir'd into a certain Vil-
lage to bair their horſes till midnight 3 ſo that few being left before the Caſtle, thoſe wicth-
in ſceing their opportunity made a deſperate Sally in the night, and got away. Our peo-
ple mounted to horſe to purſue them, but {o ſoon as ever they were out they ſeparated like
a Covey of flown Partridges, and by ſeveral paths reti*d every man to his own houſe.
The night was exceeding dark, which ſo much favour'd their flight, that not above chree
or four of them were ſlain. God knows when I heard ir whether I was not ready to tear
the hair off my head, and writ them word, chac they very well manifeſted they had nc:
retein'd what I had ſoofren caught them,

Enterprize of Now as toour Enterprize upon [a Roche-Chalaiſe, Monſieur de Montferran upon Sun-
{a Roghe-Cha= day night came with the Artillery to Comtras, and I came thither alſo. Monficur de 1a Van-

lais,

gayon was to take his way diretly to Parcon, where the Bridge was, to try if he could take
che Town upon his firſt arrival, and make himſelf Maſter of the Bridge, which if he ſhould
do, he was then to ſend over ſome Horſe, who were to ſcoure the Country, towards St.
Alvere, to enquire after Monſieur de la Noze, and to learn if he made any ſhew or pre-
paration of coming towards us. Now from 1a Reche to the ſaid Parcon it was no more
than two leagues, ſo that we made account once in two houts to meet rogether again, the
wayes betwixt them being very good. When Monſieur de V axguyon and I parted, upon
the ſame Saturday he went to make his people immediately advance, marching night and
day, and 1 came upon Sunday morning very early to Contras, where I found Monſieur
de Gironde the Governor of Fronſac, who was alſo of the Enterpriſe aud Council that I had
held abour it at Bowrdeawx. Having there made ready as many Carriages as we ſtood in
need of, Monſieur de Montferran being come up upon Sunday in the Evening, I lee him
reſt but three hours only, and ſent him away all night chart he might be bctore day at

. {a Roche to ſhur them up, which he accordingly did, and Monſieur de Gironde and Iftayed

to ſee the Cattle yok'd to the Artillery, which ſo ſoon as ever I had done, and made them
ſet forwards, I there left che ſaid Siear de Gironde with Fredeville, and about a haadred
Pioneers

Book VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. -— 217

Pioncers the ſaid Steur de Gironde had lent me to rake care for the reſt, In the mean rime,
and aboue midnight I depar:ed thence, and by break of day came within a quarter of a
leagne of /a Roche, where I found Monſieur de 1a Yaugayon, who was got thither by mid
nizhc, and had ſent fifccen or ſixteen of his Horſe before che Caſtle. Thoſe Horſe ſoon came
back to the place where we were, and told us that they had found the Enemies Horſe with-
ours and had charg'd chem, of which Chanteyrac refas'd to ſhut himſelf within che Caſtle,
buc going along the Wall of the Baſe-Court recover?d the Paſs at the Mill, where purting
himſelf inco a Boat, under favour of ten or twelve Soldicrs thar made good the Mill, he
paſled the River, making his horſes tollow by the Bridles. Monſieur de /a Roche did not
rake rhe ſame wayy bur with (ix or ſeven Horſe retarn*d into the Caſtle, when ſeeing thoſe
Avant Courrcurs of Monſieur de 1a augayon gone away, and that Chanteyrac had forſaken
him, he choughe to ſally out, and make hiseſcape; in order whereunto che moſt of them
were already come down into the Baſe-Courr, but Monſieur de Montferran came up juſt
in the nick, and charg'd them, forcing them to retire into the Caſtle. In doing which
he gai'd che Baſe-Court, and put a grear many men into it : which being done he went
to atraque the Mills, which made a very ſtout reſiſtance, bur in the end he cook them, and
pur all thoſe wichin ro che (word. He ſent me preſent word of all juſt acthe time when
Monſieur de la Yangayon and I were at Breakfaſt , whereupon the ſaid Sieur de Ia Vau-
giy0n mmcdiately went, and put himſelf in the head of his men ro march direRly to che
Town, heand I concludins together, that he ſhould ſend me. three Companies of Monſieur
de Sarlabowa lis Regiment co affiſt me at the aſſault of che Caſtle; and ſo he went to his
Enterprize of Prcou, and I march before 14 Roche, having already notice that the Artil-
lery was already within half a league of us, which could not however arrive at la Roche
till noon, by reaſon of cheill way they had mer withall. Monſieur dela V auguyon entred
the Town, tor the Enemy were all recir*d into the Mills upon the Bridg ; his men forc*d
and gain d the Bridg, and fo all was wonne, and in the night I made my approaches,
and planted my Canon in Battery, Art break of day Monſieur de 14 Reche defir'd to par-
ley with Monfiur de ontferran, who being he was his Kinſman, and a young Gentle-
man, would not let him go in again, but derein*d him, and the others when rhey ſaw the
Artillery ready to play began to cry out, that they would ſurrender, who ſeeing no one
give cartothem, they cried out again, that they world ſurrender to our diſcretion. The _ EL
Governor of Fronſac, and even the Hugonots themſelves who were of Contras, and were The Caſtle of
come along with us, cried out, that we ſhould by no means recieve them to mercy, for that fig wan oa :
they were Libertines, and men of no Religion, eſpecially one of them calP?d Bruſquin who had warn
kill'd above fourſcore men with his own hands, the moſt of them Labourers and (ountry-men. ;
Ic chen came to the queſtion of marching out, whereupon the ſaid Sieur de [a Roche en-
treated of me a certain Lacquay of his, his Valet de Chambre, and his Cook, which 1
granred him,and we culPd them our from the reſt, Monſieur de ontferran pur himſelf in.
co the Caſtle with ren or twelve men to preſerve it from being rifled, and the men that came
our of it I recommended to the Soldiers: diſpoſe, who were handled according to the life
they had lead, for not one of them eſcap'd, excepting thoſe I have mentioned before.

Thar very Br#{quinthe Hugonots ſo exclaim'd againſt to have him kill'd, caught hold
of my leg, for I was on horſe-back, having five or fix upon him, and held me in ſuch
ſorc, that I had enough co do to difingage my felt from him, and narrowly eſcap'd being _
hurt my ſelf, They found in his pocket a Liſt of a hundred and ſeventeen men that he Great and
had murchered, he having there writ them down, ſuch a one Prieſt, ſuch a one Labourer, bloody crucley
{ach a one Afonk, ſuch a one Merchant, ſerting down after that manner of what Trade o ys Hugonor
or calling every one was: which was no ſooner read, bur that che Soldiers return'd to ** po
bim, and gave him above two hundred cuts and chruſts, alchough he was already dead.
Monſieur de 1a Vazguyon came in juſt uponthe execution, where one of them endeayour-
ing to fly away gave him and his horſe {o rude a ſhock, as almoſt curn®d him our of the
way, bat he was ſo.cloſe purſued, that he went not far. I was enform'd that theſe people
were newly return*d from St. Aulaye, and that they had ſpoken with Monſieur de Farnac,
who had cold chem, char Monſieur de 1a No#e was retiring towards la Roche-Chalais :
which was the reaſon that we concluded Monhieur de la Yauguzon thould return to the
place from whence he came, and that Monlicar de ontferran and I would go carry the
Artillery directly to Bridojere : bur before we parted I cold chem, that although Monſieur
de la Roche did properly belong to me , and of right was my particular priſoner, I being
head of the Enterprize; I was nevertheleſs content that we ſhould all three ſhare in his
Ranſome, which we did, \o thac his Ranſome being {ct ar fix thouſand Crowns, che Divi-
dend came to two thouſand Crowns a pieces |

Being

to attaque

* —
tome emmannd.

318 The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize  Boox VI;

Being come to Liltouyne 1 ſent che Artillery up the River, which wenc day and night,
for we had a great many men to draw the rope of the Boat, which was no ſooner come to
Caſtillon , belonging. to the Marquis de YVillars, but that there came a Meſſenger ſenc
from Monſieur de Madaillan to tell me, that che Enemy of Bridvire were eſcap*d away,
and fled ; at which I was 2s much croubled as at any news almoſt could have been brovghc
m*, for my purpoſe was to have dealt no better with them, than I had done wich che reſt,
and fo we return'd the Artillery down the River direQly to Bourdeanx, and leaving Cap--
tain Mabrmn with three Companies to guard it, Monſieur de Montferran and I went be-
fore tothe Ciry, The next day after I came thither I went to the Palace to rake my leave
of the Court of Parliament, being reſolv'd ro return to my old Quarters, that I might be
nearer to the Monſieur, in caſe he ſhould be pleas'd to fend for me. There Monſieur 12
Preſident Roſſignac in a ſhort ſpeech return'd me thanks in the behalf of the whole Aſſem-
bly for the ſervice lhad done, foraſmuch as by this little war he ſaid we had ſo ſecur'd the
Rodes towards Xaintonge, that every one might now fafely come and go betwixe France
and Beurdeanx. Thar I had alſo ſecu1*d then on that fide towards the Dordogne, having
reduc'd the Caſtle of Bridoire, and on that fide towards the Garonne, by having caken Le-
vignac, Taillecabat, and Pardaillac, by reaſon that before neither proviſions nor men could
come by thoſe wayes to Bourdeanx, or by any other, ſaving our of Gaſcony.
Theſe were the ſucceſſes of theſe Enterprizes perform'd in five or ſix dayes, without puc-
ting the King to the expence of a Teſton, and the Parliament leſs 5 and had cheſe Mefſieurs
of the City of Bordeaux kept their words with me,I would have laid my. head, thacT had
turn'd Blay topſy-turvy : neither would I have askt any more than eight dayes cime to
do it in, provided I might have had the Baron de la Garde along with me to have at-
The Sieur de taqu'd them by ſea, and would have engag'd fo have paid them back the thirty thonſand
Montluc offers Prancs 1 demanded of them wherewith to pay the Foot, and to defray the charge of the

Artillery and Pioneers if I did not carry the place. Nay ſeeing they would not reliſh
that morion, I offer'd to lend them twelve thouſand Francs for a year without intereſt,
and Monſieur de Va'ence my Brother would lend them two chouſand more : in ſhort the
Court of Parliament was very hot wpon the Enterprize ; but when they ſaw it was requir*d
that every one ſhould lay to his helping hand there was no more talk of the buſineſs.
Theſe men of the Long Robe are a dry hide-bound fort of people, and fill oP us In the
mouch with cheir Priviledges. I will maintain, and that by rhe teſtimony of che beſt and
honeſteſt men of Bowrdeavx, that they were the cauſe this Enterprize was not executed 2
for when che Citizens ſaw they would part with no money, they would part with none
neither, ſaying that the Court of Parliament had as mach or more wealch than half che
City beſides, and twice they made me come to them, aſſuring me thac ſo foon as ever they
ſhould ſee my face all things ſhould be done ; but when I came I (till found chem pur me
off with ſo many delayes, rhat I was forc'd to return as wiſe as Icame. I think they had
a mind to have had me done it at my own expence, and that the advantage and the profic
ſhould only have accru*d to them; and in truth by the offers T made, any one mighc
plainly ſee I was willing to advance ſomething of my own ; for I defray'd all che Gentle-
men thar did me the honor to go along with me at my own charge, without purcing the
City to the expence of a Hen. This in truth was che reaſon why the Enterprize upon
Blay was not pur into execution. I am very ſure there was nothing in Gmlenxe could have
kindred me from effeRing my deſign. Ac the time when Des Rots befieg'd it I had ta-
ken an exact ſurvey of the place, and it 15 no ſuch choak-pear as they make ic. Beſidesar
thae time the Hugonots ſcarce (hew?d their heads, and Guienne was quiet enough : for all
thofe who were able to bear arms went into the main body ro the Admiral, who after the
The Admiral deach of the Prince of (onde caus'd himſelf to be declar'd Head of the FaRtion , the
dedia1'd Head Prince ſerving him only for a ſhadow. Ir was that nevertheleſs that ſo much upheld
of the Huge- theſaid Admiral and his Party, for a Prince of the Blood can do much, and the Son
nots, of the ſaid Prince of (onde, though he was very young, was a great ſupport co him

alſoz for withouc them and their authority he had never been able co have maincain'd che
War fo long.

Blaye.

The Bnd of the Sixth Book.

THE

THE
COMMENTARIES
OF
Meſoire Blaixe de Montluc,
MakrESCHAL of

FRANCE.

IEEE:

nt no
—_—

The Seventh Book.

D OTE Ecing I have taken in hand to [ave to poſterity an account of my life,
SH FNSAG and to give a true relation whether good or bad, of all thar ever
El ESYLSS I have done in ſo many years chat I have born arnfs for the Kings |
, JA) my Maſters; I am unwilling co omit any thing of ation how litcle Why rhe Aus
and inconſiderable ſoever z and alchough he laſt liccle ViRtories I thor writes
gave an account of were neither the Conqueſts of Naples, nor Mii- __ ——
lan; 1 have not however chought it fir to leave them wholly our, Ob:
for (inconſiderable as they are) ſuch may read chem, as they may
| be uſeful ro, and Captains and Soldiers may begin their Prentice-
age with ſuch liccle fears of arms as choſe ; ic being by ſuch chac chey firſt cake Leſſon :
and even thoſe who have the Government of Provinces commicted to their charge, may
by whar I have perform take exemple of whar was well, if chere be any ſuch ching, and
avoid cheevil.
I had ſo clipr the wings of che Hugonots that they were capable of doing no greatmat-
tersin G#ienne, nor of attempting any other than very ſlighe Enterprizes; neither conſe-
quently was I in any capacity of performing any notable exploirs 3 both becauſe chere was
not much of that nature in the Province lefe to do, and alſo by reaſon I had on the other
fide, ſent away moſt of the Forces tothe Monſicurs Army, and did reſerve all the money
for his uſe. I heve moreover another reaſon why I am thus particular in my wricins :
which is to the end, that if the King ſhall vouchſlafe the pains coread my Book (and
think he reads ſome worſc) his Majeſty may then ſee how much chey have ſpoken againſt
che truth, who have ſaid that I had now no other care, nor meditaced on any other thing
bur how to live quietly and ar calc in my own houſe, God knows theſe people under-
ſtood me very il. Had had the means I defir'd, and thac ſome might have {upply'd me
withall, and thacT might have had my own ſwing, withour being curb'd by thoſe pernt
cious Edidts, I (honld have prevented che Hugonors from reigning in Gaienne, and per-
haps have rooted our che whole Race. |
Biic to purſue the thread of my diſcourſe, and give a trace account of what has been
the ruine of this poor Province, I ſhall proceed co tell you, char ſome rime afcer che exe-
cucion of theſe Enterprizes, the Monſieur ſent me a Lercer containing theſe words. PE ION
Monſicur de Montlac, Monſieur the HMareſchal a Anville has been here, and 1s going into TN hon
his Government to put {ome aeſigns he has there into execution if therefore be ſhall ftand Sicur de Mont-
in need of any thing in your Government, let me entreat you to aſſiſt him the beſt Jou Can, luc. |
This letter was dehiver'd to me ar St. Foy, and with ic there came another to Monſieur de
Sainflorens , wherein he was commanded to come and bring his Company along with
him co the Army; which was becauſe his Highneſs had given Monſieur ds Fontenilles leave

co return home co refreth bymſelt, and to recruit his Company, his ſaid Highneſs ſend-
ing

\%

=
KYS
* X

320

| The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book VII,

ing me word nor long after, that T ſhould keep Monſicur de Fontenilles with me, withour

ſuffering them to ſtir our of the Country ; and that I ſhould have a ſpecial regard co Boarde-

The Mareſcha!
a Anville coms
ro proſecute the
War in Gaze.

F

Confiderarions
upon the com»
ing of the
Ceunt de
, Montgomme!y.

anx, aſſiſting Monſieur de Terride with whar I could in order to his Conqueſt of Bearn;
and that as to himſelf he was going down into Poiftow, This was heavy news ro me, al-
though I was very glad of the coming of che Mareſchal d' Anville, and may I periſh if I was
not really as glad of it, as if alm:ft the Monſieur himfelt had come, for I fancied that che

Hugonots in Languedoc and Gwienne would nor be able co ſtand rwo moneths before us.

The ſaid Mareſchal ſtaid ſome dayes by the way , and being arriv'd in Avergne, dil-
parchr a Courricr to me to give me notice he was come, and ro tell me that he was glad of
his Commiſſion to come to make war in thoſe parts, as well for the ſatisfaRion he ſhould
have in ſeeing me, as ont of the hopes he had we ſhould do ſomeching to the purpoſe in
theſe Countries of Langaedoc and Gnienne, and that he was going through Albigeois di-
reAly to Tholouze. 1 ent him back his Meſſenger in all haſte, defiring him by no means
to go that way, bur that he would come to Rhodes and into Q#trcy, and that I would
come to meet him ar Cahors; for the Count de Montgomery was arriv' d about Caſtres,
where he was drawing a Party together, ſo thac he could nor paſs that way bat he muſt be
in danger of falling into the midſt of che Enemy, I had no anſwer from him cill he
came to Tholouze , from whence he diſparchr a Courrier ro me to advertize me of
his arrival, ſending me word that he had paſt in the very beard of che Enemy
bur chat none of them had preſented themſelves co oppoſe his way. I was very glad. to
hear of h's ſafe arrival, and in his letter he entrea:ed me that we might meer and ſce one
another, to the end thar buing together we mighr cake a goo] reſolution to do the King
ſome ſignal piece of ſervice, and that he would do nothing without my advice, Thad ar
chat time a dcfluxion fall'n upon one of my paps, ſo that I wasconſtrain'd to have it launc'd
in two places, and to. put in two tents, which made my breaſt ſo ſoar that I was hardly
able to endure my ſhirt; bur the fury of che dolor being a little afſwag'd, and the Fever
occation'd by it a little over, I put my ſelf upon my way, though I was able to ride no
more than three leagues a day ar the moſt, and char wich incolerable pain.

Such as ſhall pleaſe ro read my life may rake notice with how many ſorrs of maladies
I have been aflited, and yet notwithſtanding I have never been idle or reſty ro the com-
mands of my Maſters, or negligent in my charge. *Tis unbecoming a Soldier to lye grunt-=
ing a Bed for a licle ſickneſs. Now you muſt know thar neither the King nor the Queen
had writ to me that I was co obey che Mareſchal, neither did he in his own Letter cake up-
on him to command me, neverthele(s our of reſpe& of the friendſhip I bore unto him,
and the afteftion that of my own voluntary inclination I had vow'd to him all the dayes
cf my life, I went of my own accord to- offer my obedience tohim, and to make him a
render of all the ſervice lay in my power 1n reference to his own particular perſon. I found
him in a little feveriſh d:ſtemper, and tar'd two diyes with him ac Tholouze,. and there
I was at thar time better accompanied than he ; for I had noleſschan threeſcore or three=
ſcore and ten Gentlemen in my Train. We concluded together that I ſhould recurn to
eAgen, theie to aſſemble the Eſtates of the Province to ſee how many men the Country
was able to furniſh our, and maintain for the proſecution of the War. I aflui?d him thar
Guienne would furniſh money to pay a thouſand or twelve hundred Harquebuzeersg
alwayes provided that when he ſhould have won a Town in Langmedoe, he would come
to atraque annother in Gaienne, which I alſo engaged to them in the Mareſchal's behalf
that he ſhould do ; bt I reckon'd without mine Hoſt. 1 immediately however {er afoor
the Companies of a thouſand Harquebuzeers, and made choice of the beſt Captains chac
were then in the Country to command chem. The Eſtates gave the charge of receiving
the money to de Naux, one of the Houſe of Nort of Agen, and we concluded to be ready
the firſt of Auguſt to take the field,

Two or three monerhs were paſſed over in theſe cranſaQtions, during which Monſieur de
Terride was ſtill at the Lezguer he had laid before Navarreins, and for my part I pave the
Town for taken ; for we had ſill news that no more proviſion was enter'd into it, and
thac they began to ſuffer. On the other ſide I confider'd, that all che Forces che
Count de gMont-gommery had brought with him were bur threeſcore and ten Horſe, and
that he had no other Forces but only choſe of che Vicompres, which I did nor much ap-
prehend, foraſmnch as with a very few men I had kepr them in ſuch aw, thac they had
not dar'd toſtir. In Qzercy Monficur dela Chappelle Lozieres made head againſt them,
in Rovergne Monſiear de Cornuſſon and his Sons, and Monſieur de St. Fenfa did the ſame,
as alſo Monſieur de Bellegarde on that fide rowards Tholonze ; in brief they were
held fo ſhort as nothing more. I then conſider?d that. we had ſeveral Companies of
Gens-d'srms in the Country 3 fo that Lnever 1magin'd Msntgommery could gather toge-

ther

————

—————

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. "= 20
ther a power {ufficient co relieve Navarreins ; for he muſt of neceſſity croſs the River at
Verdun, where in two dayes I (hould be upon che Paſs to oppoſe him : and I had ſo good
Spies, that I was very ſure tobe immediarely advertiz'd ſhould he come ro Afontauban,
or offer to paſs where he did, which was at $t. Gardens. 'I again confider'd that in thac
Quarter there were ſeven or eight Companies of Gens-d'arms, which were. thoſe of che
two Bellegardes, d\s Arne, de Gramont, de Sarlebons, that of the Count de Candalle, and of
Monſieur de Lanzwn, and the ten Companies of Monficur de Saviznac z ſo thar all che
Earch could never have made it fink into my head thac the Count de Montgomery ſhould
come to relieve Bearn, Thus do men Tometimes deceive themſeves wich reaſons ; for T
made account his coming inco thoſe parts had been only to defend thoſe places they pcf-
ſeſſed in the Provinces of Langnedoce and Griennez andalſo I heard the Vicompes refus'd
ro obey one another, which made me racher think he came to moderate char affair, than
for any thing of Bearn, andin truch chere was greater likelihood in it; but che Hugo-
nots have ever had char qualicy to conceal their deſigns better chan we, They are a people
that very rarely diſcover their counſels, and that's che reaſon why their Enterprizes (cl-
dom fai] of caking effet. The Count de Montgommery allo herein manifeſted himſelf
tobe a circamſpeR and prudent Captain. Ir was he who was the occaſion of the greac-
eſt miſhap char theſe five hundred years has befall*n this poor Kingdom , for he kill'd
King Henry my good Maſter in che flower of his age, running againſt him in Liſts ; and
this man was the ruine of Gaienne, by ferting the Hugonors again on foor, as ſhall be
declar'd in its due place. | |

You who are the Kings Licutenants upon whoſe care the whole Province does rely,
conſider the overſight that T have committed, and not I alohe, but ſome far bercet chan I,
upon this coming of the Count de Montgomery : look better about you when you ſhall
happen ro be in the like occaſion, and ever ſuſpect the worſt, that you ray provide better a-
gainſt \uch inconveniencies than we did. The Mareſchal d' Anville very well knows, thar
when we were together at T holowze, we were generally of opinion that the Count was
not come for the end that he afterwards diſcovered, We had very good arguraEnts co ex-
cuſe this error, eſpecially I, as the following diſcourſe will make appear co ſuch as have a
mind to be further ſacisfied in that particular 2: but this man, although a ſtranger, andin
a Country where he had never been before, made it ſeen that he had very good friends
chere, and perhaps amongſt us our ſelves; che Hugonors have ever been more cautelous
and ſubtile than we 5 I muſt confeſs that of all che overſights have ever been commicted
in all our wars, this was the greateſt ; I know ic hag been variouſly deſcanted upon, and
that the Queen of Navarre ſer people on to raiſe ſtrange reports : bur I know alſo that I
was notin faulc; and I am ſure Monſieur d* Anville is ſo good a ſervant to the Crown,
that he can ſay as much for himſelf as I, | |

Ac my deparcure from Tholoxze I had ſome private conference with two of che principal A faulc in the
Capitouls of che City, where I gave them many things in charge to deliver ro che body French Gen-
of their Corporation concerning the carrying on of the War. Theſe men were yery well ©:
diſpos'd, bur that 1s not all ; and I muſt here by the way inſert a thing char I have ever
ſaid, and ſhall do ſo long as I live, chac the Gentry are very much to blame ſo much to
diſdain City Employments, principally of Capital Ciries, ſuch as Tholowze and Bourde-
anx. Iam ſure when 1 wasa boy I have heard thac both Gentlemen and Lords of very
great birth and quality accepted of the charge of Capitouls ac Tholouze, and of Jurats ac |
Bourdeaux ; but eſpecially ar T holowze ; whereas now refuſing theſe offices, or ſuffering
them to be conferr'd upon ochers, the Cirizens have got the power into their hands, (0
that when we come we mult cap and cringe ro chem. Ir was ill adviſed of thoſe who
firſt were the cauſe, Would ro God chat (as they do.in S pain) we had made our con-
ſtant abode in the good Towns, we had then boch had more riches and more authority.
We have the keys of the Field, and they of che Towns, and in the mean time we muſt
paſs chorough their hands, and for che leaſt affair tror up and down wich greac trouble
from Ciry to City to beg their favour and eſteem; Bur to retutn to my two: Ca-
picouls, had chey been men who had rightly underſtood the inſtructions I gave them,
they might have given me ſcaſonable notice. Neither is ic in this thing only thac I have
obſcrv'd this "I at buc in ſeveral other things alſo , and if the Catholick Gentlemen
would incrodace thiscuſtoin of raking City Employmencs upon them, they would find
advencage by ir, and would in a ſhorc cime (ce all chings in a mnch becter poſture, Bac
lec us make an end of the buſineſs in hand. |

I had incelligence from that (ide towards Tholouzr, that the ſaid Count reinforc'd
k;mſelf both with Horſe and Foot and chat he made his Levies abour ( "ſtreſs, and ar
Gaillas, bur thar did nothing alter my former opinion of his deſign (I confeſs chac God

Uu depriv'd

_—

EE CO

322

The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Boox vi,

| 9
depriv'd us of our underſtanding) «ll char within eighc or ren dayes before he took the
Ficld. Monſicur de St. Germain coming to give mea vifit at Agen abour ſome private bu=
lineſs betwixt us, cold and afſur'd me, that che preparation Mſontgommery was making wag
to go over into Bearn, I diſputed the contrary with him, celling him thar the ſaid Afont-
g:mmery vel y well knew, that the Mareſchal 4anvilles Forces were almoſt ready, and that

. 1n eight or ten dayes time I ſhould alſo be ready ro march, hoping iu twelve dayes to be

Monſieur de
Terride deſpi-
{cs his Encwy,

The Count de
Montgommery
goes over into
Bearn.

with him, To which the ſaid Sieur de St. Germ.iin made anſwer, that let me never more
repute him a good Servant of the Kings, if the Count de CMontgommery did nor go over
into Bearn; and that he would croſs the River ar Verdun , or elſe higher towards the
Sourſe. The confident affurance he gave me made me think to advertize Monſieur de
Terride, which by an expreſs Cournier I did, and having well weigh'd and conſider'd
all chings with my ſelf, began to apprehend chere mighe be ſome apparence in the thing.
In the mean rime Ientreared the ſaid Steur de St. Germain to go to Tholouze to acquaint
the Mareſchal with jc; to which he return'd me anſwer, chac he could nor imagine bur
that the Mareſchal muſt nceds know of it, conſidering that Afontgommeries Levies were
making within ſeven or eight leagues of Tholowze : bur Þ was ſo importunate with him
cogo, thar in the end he conſeuted, though he was at that time very much troubled with
the ſtone, which yer continues with him ; which made me write to the Mareſchal (nor
naming the ſajd Sieur de St. Germain otherwiſe than that a Gentleman and a Knighr of
the Order, whom ke very well knew, and who was a very loyal Subje& of the Kings) was
coming towards him , ro acquainc him with ſomeching char concern'd his Majeſties ſcr-
vice, beſeeching him that he would pleaſe to give credit to whar hc had to deliver to him,
The ſaid Sicur de St. Germain was not come to T holowze when my Meſſenger came away,
for the Mareſchal wric me word back that the Knight of the Order who I ſaid was coming
to ſpeak With him, was not yer arriv'd, but that if he came he would give ear to what he
had to ſay, and would fgnifie his opinion to me concerning what he ſhould deliver to him,
Four or five dayes after Monſieur de Sz. Germain writ me word, that he had been with the
Mateſchal, whoir ſcem'd had intelligence from other hands then his, to which he conceiv'd
he gave greater credit then to him : but that I ſhould remember what he cold me, and
ſhould in a ſhort time ſee ic come to pals, I gave continnal notice of all to Monſieur de
St. Girous who was at 7Aas de Verdun, and Governor of the place, brother to the Sicur de
laGarde, and who at thistime is a Knight of the Order, and one of his Majeſtics Houſe-
hold, that he ſhould look well about him, and that in caſe the Enemy ſhould offer to paſs
the River, he ſhould ſend me preſent word, and ina day and a half I would not fail to
be with him. To which he recurn'd me anſwer, tharhe would give methree daics warn -
ing, and that thoſe of Grenade, and du Mas de Verdan had command to affiſt one another
to guard the Foards and Ferries, which corgmand had been given chem ar the ſaid Has de
Verdan at the time when the ſaid Mareſchal was there. Now I had deliver*d the charge of
the Country of Comenge, as far as the Pyrrhenean Mountains to Monſieur de Bellegarde, to
whom I had given as ample Commiſtion to Command in thoſe parrs as if I my ſelf was
there, he having ever behav'd himſelf gallantly and well, upon all occafions beaten and
repelPd che Enemy, with Monſieur de Savignac*s People, his own Company, and the
Gentlemen of Comenge, amongſt whom he had a very prear repucation, and was well ſery'd
by the Gentry, they knowing him to bea very brave Gentleman and an old Captain.

I receiv?d an anſwer from Monſieur de Terride, wherein he {cnt me word that he had
no great apprehenſion of the Count de Afon;gsmmery or of his Forces, and thar he was
able to fight him. The Meſſenger that I had ſent ro him was a Soldier, who rold me b
the by, that Monſieur de Terridg had not ſo many men as he thoughc he ſhould have had,
and moreover he heard the Captains and Solditrs ſay that the Enemy ſcarce ever made
a ſally but that our people were bcaten, And ic was not above three dayes at the moſt be-
fore I receiv'd a Letter from Monſieur de Fontenilles containing theſe words.

|| ſend you encloſed a Letter I receiv'd from my Lievtenant Monſieur de Noe, by which
you will ſee that the Count de Montgommery is already upon the Save, and that he takes
the way toward Sc. Gaudens, where he makes account with his Army to peſs the Garonne,

The ſaid Sieur de Noe's Letter was this :

Monſieur,

Give you nitice that the Count de Montgommery has poſt the Save, and the Riepe, and

dines to day at the houſe of the Vicount de Caumont my Brother-in- Law, In all theſe
parts nit a man preſents himſelf to diſpute with him his paſſage over the Garonne. 1 pray

give Monſieur de Montluc ſpeedy notice of it,

I

Boox VII, de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

I was never in my life ſo ſurpriz?d at any thing as at this unexpeRted news, and began
ro think wich my ſelf, that this was ſome miſadventure chat was deſtin?d againſt us,
knowing, asI did, the Mareſchal d' Anville, Meſſizurs de Foyeuſe and de Bellegarde, who
were hard by him, and ſeveral other Captains who wanted neither courage, experience, nor
affe&ion ; wherefore we were to conclude that God would lay a misfortune upon Monſieur
de Terride. 1 had the Company of Monſieur de Gondrin at Montſegnr en Bezadvis , the |
one half of my own at Nerac, and the other at Monflanguin, and that of Monſieur de
Fontenilles at Moiſſac ; which de Fontenilles ran in all haſte to the ſaid Moifſec, being very
certain that I would ſpeedily ſend for him. I immediatcly then writ four diſpatches, ;
one to Monſieur de Terride, wherein I entreated him to riſe from before Nawarreins, and es heron
to retire towards Orthez, and St. Sever, for that the Enemy was upon him, entreating him 7 ky de
in ſodoing to call to mind the diligence we had ſeveral cimes uſed when we were together Terride notice
in Piedmont ; that I feared the Mareſchal*s Forces were not yet ready ſuddenly to relieve #f bis coming.
him, and did alſo fear that the Enemy would be upon him before my Lertcer could come
tro hishands; that therefore he oughe not to engage himſelf to a precipicous Recreat, and
much leſs in a Battel, conſidering that his men were haraſs?d out with labour and watch-
ing, and thar the Enemy came fre and in good plight ro atraque him. 1 ſent another to
Monſieur de Fontenilles to bid him march,anocher to the Baron de Gondrin at Montſegar, and
another to my Lieutenant Monficur de 2adaillan, thar I was going betore towards 1ſſe en
Fordan, if the Eenemy had not yer paſſed the River; bur in caſe they ſhould already be
paſſed over, T would then take the way of Aire, and that he ſhould follow afcer me day
and night. Ir was almoſt night when [I received the news, and in the morning by break
of day, ſo ſoon as I had ſent away my Meſſengers I deparced and went to Lefowre ; from
whence I ſent another diſpatch ro Monſieur le Mareſchal to give him notice that. I was
coming dire&ly ro him with five Enſigns of Foot : bur that notwichſtanding ſhould che
Enemy already have paſſed the River, I was of opinion we were co follow after them, and
- charthen if T ſhould find they were marcht roward Bearn, I for my part would take my
way direRAly to Aire, beſeeching him not to ſtay for any one, for that ſo ſoon as ever he

{ſhould be out of che Gates of Tholonze every one would follow after him, fo well was I
acquainted with rhe nature of the Gentlemen of that Country, I had tried them ofc
enough, and am very confident it would have falPn out io : for many a time have [I ſec
out wich thirty men only, and the next day have had all che Gentlemen of the Country
about me. I ſtay?d but chat day at Lefonre, and as God ſhall help me, when I departed
from Agen, I had but one old Gentlmen with me call'd Monſieur de Lizac, and my own
Servants ; but the next morning I had above thirty came in to me, with whom I marchc
that night to Cauze, and the. next day went no further than to Nogarol to ſtay for che
Companies of Gens*d'arms and five Enfigns of Foot I had near unto me, and they were
commanded by Captain Caſtella, by reaſon that I had ſent my Nephew de Leberon to Li-
bourne ; the King having writ co me to pur my (elf into ir, his Majeſty having had intel-
ligence that the Enemy had a deſign upon that place. Which Command I receiv'd ar the
cime when I ſent the advertizement to Monſieur de Terride, and would not my (elf go
tothe (aid Libowrne, rhat I might be near the Mareſchal to go relieve the (aid Sicur de Ter-
ridez or fight Montgommery by the way. Being come to gAire we found that we were
above fixſcore Gentlemen, and the five Foot Companies came thither as ſoon as we. In
the morning my whole Company came in on the one fide, and by the way of the Landes
at the ſame time came the Baron de Gondrin, who the day before had marched nine leagues,
and my Company (even, and at night came Monſieur de Fontenilles. As I was mounting
to horſe to depart from Nogarol, the Meflenger I had ſent to the Mareſchal from Le&onre
return'd and brought me his anſwer , which was, that fince Montgomery was already
paſſed che Garonne, he conceiv'd it would be to no purpoſe to follow him, and that he had
given Monſieur de Terride notice from the time that the Count had firſt made cowards
the Rivers, to look to himſelf, for that the ſaid Iontgommery was coming co acraque him z
who had return'd him anſwer, that he was ſtrong enough to fight 2ſontgommery, and that
he would norleave the Siege, which was the ſame anſwer che ſaid Sicur de Terride had
ſent to me. The ſaid Mareſchal ſent me furcher word chat he was going co batcer a Caſtle
near unto Lavayr called Frigeac, rill the Foot who were coming out of Languedoc come»
manded by the Sieur de St» Geran de la Guiche ſhould come up to him.

' So ſoon as ever I alighted at Aire I diſpatcht away Captain awvſan (who had been
Quarter: maſt:r co Monficur Gramont's Company, and was lately come into mine) co the
ſaid Mareſchal by whom I beggd of him, thac ſerting all ocher Enterprizes aparc, he would
pleaſe to apply himſelf ro the grand Concern ; for having once fought ontgommery he
wonld have no more to do ether 1n Langnedoe or Gaienne, being thac all che Forces of two _—_

Un 2 Provinces

lr _——

\

324 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VIT,

ee ——————_—

Provinces were united with the ſaid Count , which being once defeated: there would nor
The Sieur de be any one left to make head againſt us. I had at my coming to Nogarol ſent away a diſ-
Montluc ſends patch to Monſieur de Terride, entreating him, that if he was not already retir'd he would
x4 yp For" ſpeedily retire , and difincumber himſelf of his Artillery; and if he faw himſelf hard
ws laid to, rather to throw them into the * Gave, than engage in a Bartel; for that I-had
* A River ſo (.-.to the Mareſchal from Le&owre, hoping he would ſuddenly come away ; and char
Fn though he ſhould loſe his Canon, ſo ſoon as we ſhould be drawn together we ſhould pre-
ſknily recover ir. In the meantime itran in my head, that although Aontgimmery had
a very conſiderable and ſprightly Army , he would hardly nocwithſtanding adventure
to arraque Monſieur de Terride, ſeeing we were coming up cowards him : bur T think he
had intelligence that neither the Mareſchal nor I would enter the Country , and thac we
were not ready to joyn, which made him purſue his determination. The ſame night that
I came to Aire after I had ſent away Captain anſan came Capiain Montant from Mon-
The Sicur de fieur de Terride, by whom he ſent me word that he was rerir*d to Orthez, entreacting me
Terride retires with all ſpeed to come up to him 3 whereupon I immediately fent back the ſaid Captain
to Orthez, Afontaut to tell him, that I would not ſtir from Aire, or at leaſt would advance no fur-
ther chan St. Sever, untill the Mareſchal ſhould firſt come, for I had but three Compa-
nies of Gens-d'arms, and five Enfigns of Foot ; and that Captain CMontant had told me,
tha in ejghteen Enſigns of Foot which he had with him there was nor eighteen hun-
dred men 3 and on the other ſide, ſhould I come to Orthez, and that we ſhould beforc?d
to fight, and ſhould loſe the Barrel, the King might juſtly cur off my head for nor ſtaying
for the Mareſchal , and the ſaid Mareſchal himſelf might juſtly ſay, thar I had pre-
cipitated the Batcel chathe might not be there, to engroſs ro my ſelf the reputation of a
ViRory ; that therefore I would be cautious of entring into ſuch a diſpute either wich his
 Majſty, or the Mareſchal : but char I entreated him to retire to Se. Sever, leaving a ſuf-
ficient Garriſon in Orthez, and till the Mareſchal ſhould come I would be drawing to-
wards lym, That heretofore Thad given him timely advercizement of the Connt's com-
ing, which he had diſpis'd, and chat now he would have me repair that ſo great an over-
fight at the hazard of my own honor, which Icould by no means dos The ſaid Captain
Meontant rid all night direaly to Orthez, telling him all that T had given him in charge,
ro which he rewrn'd me anſwer, that he could not ſtir from Orthez, and that ſhould he
go out of the Country of Bearn the Bearnois would take heart at it ; entrearing me there-
fore to come up tohim, with which meſſage he would again have return'd the ſaid Cap-
tain Montant, who would by no means accept of the Commiſſion, but frankly told him,
that he wasconfident ] would not enter into Bears; and had given him ſo many reaſons
for that reſolution, that not a man about me would offer to adviſe me to it, and accord-
ingly 1 ſent him word by his Meſſenger that I would do no other but what I had cold him
by Captain Montant.

TI communicated all the Letters I writ whether to the Mareſchal or Monſieur de T; erride,
to Monſieur d' Aire Brother to Monſieur de Candalle, and to all the Knights of the Order,
and evermore conſulted their advice; for the occafion requir'd it. The Lieutenant of
Caſtel-Sarrazin, who was with Monſieur de Terride, has fince told me, thar he kept all
the Letters I had writ to the ſaid Sieurde Terride, and that would he have been perſwaded
by any of his Captains, he had retir'd to St. Sever according to my advice : bur he choſe
rather to be govern'd by three or four Gentlemen of Bears he had about him, than any of
his own Officers and Servants, Monſieur de Bellegarde was within fix leagues of Aire to-
wards Bigorre , to whom I diſpatcht away a Meſſenger, entreating him to come the next
day to Prolan, a Houſe belonging to the Baron de (; ampagne, and to bring Captain Arne,
and the Baron de Arbow, Lieutenant to Monſieur de Gramont, along with him, I havin
earneſt buſineſs tocommunicate unto him, which accordingly they all three did. Hehad
with him four Companies of Gens-d*arms, namely his own, and thoſe of Meſſicurs de Gra-
wont, d* Arne, and de Sarlebow; and there I laid down - before them all that 1 writ to
Monſieur de Terride, with the anſwers he had retarn'd me back, and that he rempted me
ro come to Orthez, telling them withal the foregoing reaſons why I conceiv'd I ought nor
to doit ; which they all approv*d of, ſaying, that the Mareſchal would have juftcauſe co
rake it exceedingly 1ll if I hould nor ſtay for him ; although rhey well enough under-
ſtood by ſeveral Letters he had writ co them, that he had a mind to make war in Langue-
doc, and not in Guienne ; for all thoſe of his Council, and even they of Tholenze, (as they
had been enform'd) advis'd him fo to do, and that upon that condition they would ſup-
ply him with money for the expence of the war, perſwading him to expend jtin Langee-
doc, and not in Guienne ; which wasa thing eafie enough to be belieyd, for every one
ſtrives to draw the water to his own 14309, Monſicar de Bellegarde then cold us, that he

would

Book VIE. te Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

would write to the Mareſchal, and cell him chat he ought to march towards us, and after
the Enemy 2 but that nevertheleſs he believ?d he wonld not do it, for the forenamcd rea-
ſons, and alſo becauſe thoſe who were for his transferring the Scene of the war inco Lan:
guedoc, would be ſure to poſſeſs him, that the reaſon why we invited him to come to us,
was for the fear we were in of Tofing .our own Houſes. We conclud:d however that he
ſhould ſend a Gentleman to him to beſeech him co come, and 1 promis*d Monſieur de Bel-
legarde to acquaint him with what anſwer Captain CManſan thould bring me back 3 who
was but three dayes in going and coming, and afterwards went ro Monheur de Beleg rae,
carrying him the Mateſchal's anſwer ro my Letter ; which was to this effect.

325

Monſficur de Montluc,

Hive receiv'd yours, by which I perceive that Monſieur de Terride 3s retir'd ty Orthcy,
I who being now out of danger I ſhe'd do no preat feats in Bearn, and am wery unwilling
to ſquander away my time : for in theſe parts I am confilent I ſhall ſoon recover what is loft
of my Government ; at your inſt ance nevertheleſs 1 am content to come with my Army as far
as Ile de Jordan, there to tay ſome few dayes to ſee if any occaſion (hall offer it [*!f of fight-
ing Montgommery in the Field 5 which incaſe I fail of, I am reſold to purſus my begin-
ning, which is hopeful ; for I have taken Figeac where Captain Mauſan has found mt, and
80 morrow morning 1 will march direfly to the Iſle, where in two dayes I hope to arrive.

Theſe were thecontents of the Letter which pleas'd us all exceedingly well, and immedi-

ately upon the receipt thereof I went to St. Sever with all the horſe and foot I had ; and

from thence ſo ſoon as ever I came thither diſpatcht away Captain Montaut, who from Or-

thez, wa; but newly alighted there ( for from St. Sewty to the ſaid Orthez, is no more

than four leagues and a half only) back ro Monſieur de Terride, entreating him chat he

«would come in the morning to Apetman, thac we might conferre rogerher an hour co re-

« folve upon what we had to do. 1 made no manner of queſtion but he would come,

« which made me ſend to Monfieurde Gramont s people ro provide us ſomething for dinner,

« for Agetman 1s his in right of his Daughter-in-Law d'eAndois Counteſs of Guichen, and

« oave the Letrer the Mareſchal had ſent me by Captain MManſan to the ſaid Captain

*« Montant, to ſhew him. TI made this afſignation purpoſely to remonſtrate to him, char

&« the Mareſchal would hardly be drawn fo far as into Bearn, by reaſon he was im-

& portun*d by all the Eſtates of Languedoc, and all the Lords of that Countrey to make

© war in Langnedoe, and not in Gaienne, which he muſt in che end be necetficared co do, or

« they would give him no money ; that cherefore he ought to retire to St, Sevry, leaving

« 2 few men in che Caſtle of Orthez, and that when we ſhould be all rogecther we thoutd

« make up the body of an Army, entreating the Mareſchal co leave us Monſear de Belle-

&« garde with the four Companies of Gens-d*arms, which I hoped he would eafily grant

« ts, he having enow beſides to be Maſter of the Field, and that in five or fix dayes I

« doubted not bn. we ſhould have a thouſand Foot, or more to thoſe we already had :

& for Monſieur de Bellegarde had two Companies with him, and that Captain Aauſan

© ſhould go into Bigorre , from whence he hand his Brother would bring a conſiderable

« number of men, and that the Count de Labatut would do the fame, This was whar I

had premeditated to ſay to him, not doubting bur by choſe argaments to overcome his

Council thac hindred him from retiring ; and beſides I believ'd che Mareſchal would be

very gladof this reſolution, by which means he would be ar fuil liberty co purſue his own

defigns. Yet did I not do this of my own head only, but communicated all co the Knights

of rhe Order, and the Caprains who were with me, Now when Tin the morning expe-

Qed he ſhould come to Agetman (it being but two leagues only from Orthez,) to conclude

of ſuchthings as ſhould be moſt proper for his ſafery and honor, he ſent me word char he

could not come to eAgetmar, his Council not conceiving it fic for him to go our of his pifpyce be-

Government, becauſe Agetman was not in Bearn, but that T ſhould com? to him. See here rwixc the

the vanity of this world / a man weak, beaten, and upon the marter defeated, ſtands upon Sicurs de

his punRillio's, and moreover with a man who came only co ſave his lite, and whoin re He 904

gard to his own quality might challenge ſome reſpet; # Ns
For God's ſake (fellow Captains) leave this pride behind your Beds-head, when necc..

ty ſhall preſs upon you ; for it is to be devoyd of all ſenſe and underſtanding, ſecing chac a

man does miſerably and ridiculouſly loſe himſelf. Had he been of greacer quality than I, he

ought notwithſtanding to have accepted my invitationy and co have come (o far ro confer

and conſult wich me about an affair whereupon his own ſafery and that of his Army whol! y

depended. His evil Angel govern'd him, He neicher knew before nor afcer which way ro

g0

de teen et een en A. AL. A 4

———

The Commentaries of Meffire Blaize Boox VII?

Monſicur de
Teriide (ur-
priz'd,

CC———_—_——

go abour either to eſcape, or defend himſelf. Yer was it not thorough any defaulc of cou-
rage, for he had ever manifeſted himſelf co be biave enough 3 but God deprives us of our
judgments when he is diſpos'd to chaſtize us,

To return toour Embaſſies, 1 ſent him word roundly, © That T would nor buds a foot,
<« 2nd that I would not engage my (elf in a place where I ſhould be enfor?d ro fighr till
&« T ſhould firſt ſee his Forces and mine together, to know if they were ſufficient co match
« the Enemy : that I had ſeen too many caught in the Trap for that; that 7 would not
« buy a Pig in a Poaky but would ſee both without and within, that I was come hither co
&« relieve him withouc any command from any perſon living 3 that it ſeem'd he ſtood upon
<«his punQiillio's of honor, but that it was nor time to infiſt upon ſuch niceties3 and char
© he appear'd to me like a man whois in neceſſity, and yer thinks he does the perſon roo
*© much honor to borrow money of him of whom he defires it. All chis I wricco himin
my anger, when I ſaw I could not make him come to a place where I had a mind to cell
him by word of mouth what had been concluded, as well by Monfieur de Bellegarde and
the Captains near unto him, as by thoſe that I had with me : and when they ſaw char I
was reſoly'd not to go, they ſent to me Mefſieurs d' Andanux, and de Damaſan to perſwade
me to it,

The queſtion was not whether ought to carry the five Enfigns of Foot, and my three
Companies of Gens-d'arms into Orthez, for they not had 3 daies proviſion for themſelves :
but I muſt go as one neighbour goes ro anorhe1*s houſe when he makes a vifie. I do nor uſe
to go after that manner in a time of War, eſpecially when che Enemy 1s ſo near, The ſaid
Sjeurs d'eAndaux and de Damaſan ſpar'd for no arguments ro induce me tot, and I was not
to ſeek for reaſons (and ſuch as were mach more evident than theirs, as any child might.
diſcern) to excuſe my ſelf, In the end, ſeeing T would not go, they cold me, eicher thac
Monſieur de Gramont had a picque to ſome of cheir Council, or elſe that chey had a quar-
re] to him (I know not which it was, for I did nor commit it ro memory, toraſmuch as ic
was not their anjmoſities that had brought methither) and chat therefore aAgetman was
by no means a proper place for our meeting. Whereupon we concluded that the next day
about Noon we ſhould meer at a GeniIemans Houſe, which was notin Monſieur de Gra-
ont's Territories, though I cold them withal, That all animoſities ought to ceaſe where a
Lieutenant of the Kings is in place.

In the cloſe of the Evening then they all mounted to horſe to return to Orthez,, when
at their going away Monlieur de Madaillan entreated leave of me to go along with him,
and toſtay two dayes there to try if he could not in that time find an opportunity to do
ſomething with fourty Cuiraſſiers of my Company, whom I accordingly permitced to go,
and ſo they departed alcogether. About eleven of the clock at night as they were got
a little beyond Agetman, they met wich a Merchant of Orthez, of their acquaintance who
was running away, and told chem that they were all defeated, and that Monſieur de Ter-
ride and ſome Captains with him were eſcap'd into the Caſtle z which nevertheleſs they
did not believe ; for our people were eighteen Enhigns of Foor, and the Enemy were no
more than two and twenty 53 which made it ſeem impoſſible, conſidering that ours had
the advantage of the Town. For this therefore they did nor forbear co go forward, and a
quarter of a leagne further mer with Captain Fleardelis, who had alſo eſcap*d away, and
told them the ſame thing thar the Merchant had done before, Whereupon they made a
halc co rally ſach as ſhould be flying away from the defeat, The Merchant held on his
way, and coming to St. Sever, found me in bed, His news was {o unexpected, and (o
range, that I could by no means give any credit to ir, not being able co imagine thac
two and twenty Enfigns could rake eighteen in a Town that was none of the weakeſt ;
buc Captain Flexrdelis coming within a quarter of an hour after, and confirming the ſame,
I was conſtrain'd to believe it, nor without making above three t1mes the ſign of the Croſs.

I have thought fic to give anaccount ar large of the truth how all things paſſed in this
buſineſs, by reaſon char-all che Kingdom cried out, thar if Monſieur le Mareſchal d' Anville
and Montlac had perform?®d their duties Montgomery had been defeated, and the Princes
afcer the rout at Honcontowr would not have known which way toturn them, having no
other refuge but to throw chemſelves into the arms of the Count de CMontgommery, who
was freſh, victorious and full of Crowns (all which was laid in our dith) and Gaienne had
not then been in mourning asit now is. And yer I chink the Hugonots had nor paſſed
thorough Lizzo/in and Perigort : for we ſhould have gone out co meer them to bid them

 good-morrow 3 bur the account that I have truely ſer down will diſcover who was 1n faulc,

In the mean time they who ſhall follow after us may learn char an overſight in War is
irreparable, There are ſeveral perſons of honor yer living, who will teſtifie the cruch of
what I write, for I did not make any Diſpacches in ſecret, bur 1n the preſence of all the

Captains

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 227

Captains and Knights of rhe Order who were with me. I do not write to accuſe either
che Mareſchal or Munſicur de Terride, I ay nothing bur the truth, ro manifeſt my dili-

gence to ſuch as have ſaid, rhac if Iwould I might haye reliev'd Monſieur de Terride. The

few men I had, the daily advertiſements I gave him, and the reſolution raken amongſt

as, are all evidences whether 1 was 1n fault or no. I muſt needs ſay that had he retir'd,

chat had he ſooncr believ'd my intelligence, and would have hearkned to my advice, and

not have been fo overrul?,| by his own Council, that then in eight dayes time we ſhould

have been ſtrong enough to have feughe Aontgemmery, and cither to have driven him ouc

of Bearn, or have (hut him up in Navarreins, where they would nor have receiv?d him
neither, foraſmuch as there had not been proviſion to have nouriſht his Army four days ; by
which means he muſt have been necefficaced either to fight, or to turn back tothe place from
whence he came, which he would have found a macrter of great difficulty for him to do ;

for the very Peaſants woald have detsaced him, knowing us to bein his Rear, Monſieur

de Terride had yer all che other Towns, and had this Enterprize of his ſacceeded the Ma-
reſchal had not needed ro have been troubled with our war, bur had been lefc ac liberty

co purſne his own deſigns, provided he would have left us Monſiear de Bellegarde, and

the four Companics of Gens-d'armes, which I believe he would have done having himſelf

no need of them. Ir is then Monſieur de Terride*s Council that is to be blam'd, :and nor

I; and thacall che worl> may ſee how unlikely CAontgommery's deſign wasto take effet,

ic is moſt certain, chat he never ha1 at che moſt above five and twenty hundred Foot, and Montgomery's
berwixt five and ix hundred Horle, good and bad together 3 and when he went to meer Forces,
the Princes, he had not above a hundred Horſe, and bur very few Foot, by che teſtimony

of Monſieur de Terride's Enſigne and Guidon, and of Monſieur de St. Felix, Lieutenant

to Monſieur de Negrep*liſſe, and Caprain St. Projets Enſigne, who were priſoners, and

went every day at liberty upon their parole up and down their Camp ; and fince the
Peace I have talkt with above fifry of the Enemy who have all confirm'd the ſame; by
which any one may judge if there was any reaſon to apprehend the ſaid Count, or ſuſpect

the ſaid Monſicur de Terride (conſidering the Forces he had wich him) ſhould ſufter him-

ſelf to be ſurpriz'd, eſpecially he being himſelf a good Soldier, and having good Officers

abour him : bur they loſt cheir underſtanding in a time of the greateſt need.

This is the truth of the beginning and ſource of all the miſeries of Gaienne. Had nor
Monſieur le Mareſchal 4 Anville come into this Country, 1 am affur'd that moſt of che
Lords and Gentlemen who went in to him would have done me the honor to have come co
me, and I think we ſhould have play'd our Game a little betrer. Tr was but reaſon they
ſhould pay that great reſpe& to him, he being a great Lordy Son to a Conneſtable and Ma-
reſchal of France, and moreover a brave Cavalier in his own perſon, rather than to ime,
who am a poor Gentleman, old, a Cripple, and our of favour : bur notwithſtanding be-
lov'd both by the Gentry and the People.

You Licutenants of Provinces who (hall come after me , if peradventure my Memoires
ſhall fall inro your hands, make your advantage of chis overſight of Monſieur de Terride,
co the end that you may not occaſion the ruin of your Maſters affairs. I will nor blame
nor accuſe him etcher of cowardiſe or treachery , for he was an admirable good Field-
Officer : bur ocher qualities are requir'd in a Lieutenant of a Province ; upon your head-
piece, your pradenceand circumſpeCtion all the reſt depend. Had he credited the adver-
tiſemencs we gave him of the Count de Montgomery's coming to raiſe the Siege, he had
made an honorable Retreat, and had ſav'd his Canon, which had he nor had leſare ro
draw off, he migac have thrown them into the Gave, which 1sa River full of grear pre-
eipices, fo that ir would not have been in the power of ontgommery to retrieve them x
and we ſhould have been with them in che cime char ſuch a work would have requir'd.

Bur ferting thisaſide, having been rouced in his Siege, and afcer chat being reci1*d into a

Town ſufficiently ſtrong, he ought co have conſidered of the means, either of retreating
farcher, or of tortifying himſclf there and yer the laſt faulc was worſe than the firſt,

which was, that their fear depriv'd them of cheir judgment ; for he eſcap?d with a good

number of Genilemen into rhe Caſtle, which is a very ſtrong one, without having ever

thought of pucting proviſions into ic wherewith to ſuſtain him and in all theſe diſgraces The Gama
ro ſtand upon his punttillio's of honour, without deining to condeſcend fo tar as to come Monſicur de
three ſteps our of his Governmenc to confer with a friend who came meerly to do him Terride.
ſervice, and co prelerve him, was a moſt inexcuſeable folly. Leave, leave theſe punRillio's

in a time of necefſicy, I have never done ſo, bur oftentimes with ten Horſe only have puc

my {clf into rhe Field, I am confident chat had he come to {peak with me he had noc

fall'o inco che misfortune, which coſt him both his honor and his lite... For my part ſo of as

I have call'd this ation ro remembrance, I have ever look upon cas a meer Judgment of

God

OC rs ee A EE Re EE ens
a . ,

—_— .
IR

2 Ix
X26." oxen

328

th At.

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book Vin

The impor»
tance of Mont-
gommenry's vie
Kory,

The Mareſchal
a' Axville's ans
ſwer to the

Luc.

D——

God. For to raiſe a Siege againſt equal Forces, to conquer, and force a Town, and to take
the Kings Lieutenant in a ſufficient place in three dayes time, as it were in the fight of a
Mareſchal of Frayce, and a Lieutenant of the Kings, as I was, and in ſhort, in three dayes
ro conquer a whole Province ſeems ro be a Dream. Ic muſt needs be conteſt thac in all our
Wo2rrs there was never perform'd a more notable exploics Bur who (Fellow Captains) ob-
rein'd thisglory for the Count de Montgemmery? truly no other bur his own diligence,
which was ſach as ſcarce gave leiſure ro Monſieur de Terrideto look before him, and con-
fider what he had todo. Tris one of the beſt pieces in a Soldiers Harneſs. And what
loſt Monſieur de Terride? the little diligence he employ'd in his moſt prefſing concern.
For my part I did what lay in metodo; for to enter further into a Country, withour
firſt knowing from him in what poſture it ſtood, and to fight a viRtorious Enemy without
ſuſhcient Forces, and with a baflcd Army ; I wasnot ſo ill advis'd as to ſhuffle all things
inco confuſion only ro bear him company in his ruine, I had been too long poſſeſſed of
the honor of having never been defeated, to hazard my reputation for the reliefof a man
who would throw him{elf away in deſpite of all che world,

Let no one wonder that I inſiſt ſo long upon this ſubjeR ; for I believe that from this
one fark (which many ill enform'd bave indiſcreetly and unjuſtly laid ro my charge) the
ruine not only of Grjenne, bur moreover of the whole Kingdom fince has been deriv'd.
lam aflur'd that the affairs of the Hugonots had otherwiſe been'reduc'd ro ſuch an extre-
mity, that jt had been impoſſible ever to have repair'd chem again, For in the firſt place,
had the Mareſchal and I follow'd him, there is no doubt but Afontgommesy had been de-
feated, and conſequently all Bearn reduc'd, which had been no contemprtible thing, and
I think che King would then have been better advis'd, than to have ſurrendred jt upon the
accommodation, having enough beſides wherewich to recompence the Queen of Navarre
within the Kingdom, to keep her more in hisobedience. For a King ought alwayes to
covet that thoſe who are his SubjeQs, if they be great and powerful, ſhould be in the
heart, and not in the extremities of his Kingdom ; for then chey dare not ſhew their
horns : And beſides the King wanted no good title ro Bearn, for it is ſaid that the Sove-
raignty of right belongs to him. Tonceheard Monfieur de Lagebaſton the firſt Preſident of
Ponrdeaux lay open that ticle, who ſaid he had ſeen the Evidences thereof in the Conſta-
blery of Buurdeaux ;_ but I have nothing to do to revive that antiquared quarrel. He
rold us alſo that at the time when they began to fortific Nawvarreins, the Court of Parlia«
ment ſent ro King Francs to remonſtrate ro him, how much = imported his Crown to
hinder that Fortification : but the King fent them word, that he was nor offended ar it ;
which was ill advis'd of the King z for a Prince ought as much as in hm lies to hinder
neighbouring Fortrefles ; and had it not been for this all the whole Province had been his.
Bur 'tis done and paſt, and there is now no remedy 3 For to a done thing the (onncil «t
already taken. Beſides all this had Montgomery been defeated, the Admiral who in the
interim loſt the Battel of AZoncontour would have been ar his wits end, and 308 bave
known to what Saint to devote himſelf. 1 think he would have been wiſer chan o have
engag'd himſelf in Guiewne, where he would eafily have been defeated, the relicks of his
Army being in a very poor and forlorn condition, wtrhour B iggage, their horſes nnſhod,
and without a penny of money. And it was well for him that he came co throw him-
{elf into the armes of the Count de Montgemwmery, who ſer him up again, ſupplying him
with money that he had gain'd at the Sack of divers Cities, inſomuch that che ſaid Ad-
miral had the commodity of traverſing the whole Kingdom, whileſt the King amuz'd him-
{elf at the Siege of St. Jean in the heart of Winter, which was very unadviſedly done :
but God opens and ſhats our eyes when it pleaſes him. Lec us now return to our Subje&.
Peradventure there may be ſome who would have beenglad I ſhould have writ more ar
large after what manner Monſieur de Terride was defeated 5 which I would not do for I
have heard that Of ill fl:h a man can never make good Pottage. I leave that to thoſe who
were preſent at the buſinels, and who gave me relation of it, and to the Hiſtorians who talk
of all the world, and very ofcen anſcaſonably, and from che purpoſe, like ignorant fellows
in feats of Arms as they are.

Theſe poſtings to and fro berwixt Monſieur de Terride and mecontinued three whole
dayes, atcer which Jfontgommery came to attaque hum. Afcer his defeac I remain'd ar
Ste. Sever, until ſuch time as he was taken in che Caſtle of Orthez, and afterwards re-
tir'd to eAire, where I ſtaid nine dayes after the taking of the ſaid Sieur de Terride, ſend-
ing the Mareſchal an account of all that had paſſed,and again follicicing him withal rocome
up t0.us. To which by way of anſwer he demanded of me to what end he ſhould come,

Sicur de Mogt= Or what his coming would fignifie, Monſieur de Terride being defeated and taken. Which
' made me diſpatch away Monfieur de Leberon to remonſtrate co him, char in calc he ſhould

paſs

Boox. VII. ce Montluc, Mareſchal of France. b

paſs the River © wards Languedic, Montgommery would infallibly fall into the Kines
Country, ſeeing h:re was no body to make head againſt him z but that if he would pleaſe
yet for a few dayrs to deferre his expedition , one might then ſee what Mont g1mmery
would do; for being puft up with ſo glorious a Vitory y he would not there ſtop the
progreſs of his Arms. The Mareſchal was contented ſo to do, butſent me word withal,
that he world! loſe no more time than a months pay only, which the City of Thyloaze
had given his Army, but would employ the remainder in reducing the places in his Go-
vernmenr, Now to fay the truth from the time of Monfieur de Terride's defcat, affairs
were in ſo ſtrange a confuſion, that a' man had much ado ro divine what courſe was bet
to take, unleſs the Province of Lngaedoc would have been contented to have paid the
Mareſchal's Army for te ſervice of Gzienne, which however perhaps he would not have
done, neither indeed had he any reaſon to doir. During the nine dayes that Tſtayd ar
Aire, we madea new aypomtment to meet at a Village, che name whereof I have forgor,
and there all choſe who were at Projan acccrdingly mer, where we fell to debating of what
remedies might be found our (which was a matter of grear difficulty for the aforegoing
reaſons) for che preſent evil, and in che end concluded together, rhat I ſhould wrice nn-
rothe Mareſchal to te lhim, thar 1t he would be pleas'd to come fo far as Vigues, I would
there wai: upon him, to reſolve upon whar he ſhould think we were beſt to do for the de-
fence of Gnienne 1 accordingly writ, and in anſwer chereunto had word from him back
again, that upon a ctriain day, which he nam*d, he would not fail to be there, which
was two or three daycs after. I will here in the mean time give.an account of what I did
at Aire within five leagues © the Encmy, and in an open Town, having no more bur the
five Com nies cemmanded by Capiain Caftella, and one of Vicount de Labatat, who
was alſo © + *rhither 5 which becauſe it may beof uſe ro ſome one in time £o come I will
here ſet + rd peradventure ſome Apprentice in our Trade may learn ſomething out
of ir, thar licicaf cr may be of ſome advantage to him.

The three Companies of Gens-darms were in a Village on this fide the Do# towards
Gaſcony I chilcover'd my deſign to Meſtieurs de Gongrin, de Fontenilles, and qd: Madaillan,
tell-ng (hem char I would try my fortune, and fee jt I could order it fo as to fight Mont -
gemmery at my own advantage with thoſe few that we were z thar to this end I would ſend
away all thc Gentlemens Baggage thar we had with us to Negaarol, ſo that nothing ſhould
be Icft behind but our Horſes and Armsz I would chen chac every night they (thould
come an hour afcer midnight with the rhree Companies before Aire, on that fide the River
towards Gaſcony. I had, beſides thoſe, four Companies of Argoulers, which mn all mighc
be about three hundred Harquebuzeers , who in like manner were ro come at the ſame
time to Millasa Village on the brink of che River. Our fix Enfiens of Foot were quarter'd
at Mas d'eAire, which lies above Ajre on that ſide towards the Enemy, who were every
night at the ſame hour to preſent themſelves in Barralia upon che Banks of the River
without the Village, and in caſe of an Alarm withour Dram or Trumpet, were to retire
by Aire, and paſs over the Bride, at which time we who were quarte1*d at che ſaid Aire
were to foard ir over (for the River was foardable) and thar in the mean time twenry
Horſe ſhould every nighr go the Patronille upon the three Highwayes by which che Enemy
could only come to us, which Horſe thould have intelligence one with another, to give one
another notice if they came, that ſo they might all at once retire to Aire, without giving any
Alarm, and might come and tell our Foot, and conſecutively us; and thar the ſaid rwenry
Horſe ſhould advance a long league, or a league and a half upon thoſe Highwaycs , to
the end, that we might not be conſtrain*d to draw oft our men in diſorder, bur might
have time to have made half alcague towards our place of retreat, which was to Nogs are,
before the Enemy could be arriv'd at eAire. I thencalculared che length of the might, tor
I fear'd not their coming by day, by reaſon thatT kept a Gentleman call*d Captain B hrs
in ancncloſed Village, a league and a half diſtant from Aire towards eMorlas, who kepr
Scouts all the day upon all che wayes by which che Enemy could come to us, and had three
or fourſcore Soldiers with him, with twenty or five and twenty Argoulets, 1 allo repre-
ſented to them, that when the Enemy ſhould have marche five long leagnes of that Coun«
try, chiefly the Foot, and eſpecially in che night, che Foor muſt of necellicy ſtay ro eat and
drink ar Aire, to which place alfo they could not come rill almoſt day, when mea are che
moſt enclin'd to {leep, eſpecially Foor who have marcht all night, fo chat chey would ne-
ver be able to ger one Foot Soldier our of Town, and chat the moſt of the Harquebuzeers
on horſcback would ſtay with them, and chat then by the Rule of War the Horſe would
paſs on forwards after us, ſuppoſing that we retreated for fear, and thar I defign'd our En-
counter to be half a lcague trom Aire, which as I had computed the time, would happen
ro be betwixt break of day and ſunriſe ; that ſo ſoon as wh (hoald {ce chem approach us,

| X we

330 TE ; " The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize ; Book Vin:

we {hould cover all our Foor with our Cavalry, and give them a ſwinging Charge,Jand
that in ſo doing I made no doubt bur we ſhould defeat chem, They all approv'd of my
deſign, concluding with me that we ſhould defeat and break them, for our horſes would
be freſh, and theirs weary » and our Foot coming up a good round trot after us, ſeein
the victory ours, and that their Foot were yet in Aire flceping or eating; would allo fall in
upon them, who ſeeing their Cavalry defeared, and pur to rout, there Was no queſtion to
be made, but thar every one would ſhifc for himſelf the beſt he could, and endeayour co
eſcape without offering to fight, Thus are we to repreſent things to our ſelves when we
are to undertake an Enterprize, and to hear one anothers reaſons and opiniotis upon the
ſame.

We lay nine dayes at Aire in reference to this Stratagem, during which time we were
every night in Bartalia after this manner, expeRing when the Enemy ſhould fall into our
Quarters thinking co ſuſprize us, but I chink had we ſtayd till they had come we had been
chere till now. The tenth day having receiv'd an anſwer from the Mareſcha), thar he
would in three dayes be at Auch, we retin*d towards arſfiac, torally with Monfieur de
Bellegarde, to whom I gaveall the men Thad, and with twenty horſe only went away to
Aach, marching nine long leagues that day (which are as much as rwenty French leagnes})
the next morning being the time appointed by the Mareſchal for our meeting. In my life
I was never ſo weary for it was exceſſively hot, and I chere found Monſieur de Negrepe-
I-ſſe, who was come thither the day before, having heard chat che Mareſchal would be
there, as alſo to'rally what was left of his Company, which had been with Monſieur de
Terride, The next morning inſtead of coming himſelf che Mareſchal ſent thicher Monſieur
de Joyenſe, and we held the Conſultation at Monſieur de Negrepelice his houſe, he tcing
ill of che Gour. There Monſieur de Foyeuſe acquainted us with the MareſchaPs in:encion,
which was, that he was going to repaſs the Garonne, and to employ his time in his own
Government, conſidering the charge the Country was at of defraying the expence of che
War. Wecontroverted this determination of his, arguing that the Enemy were in Gag-
enne, and thar he having the charge of Dauphine, Provence, Langnedoc, and Gwienne, was
equally obliged co preſerve the one as well as the other ; that we were all the Kings Sub-
jets and Servants, and that the Country was the Kings, and that therefore he ought to
go there where the Enemy. was, and to endeavour to repair the great overſight we had com-
mitted. In anſwer whereunto Monſieur de Foyesſe laid before us, that the Country of
Languedoc would not pay the Mareſchal*s Army, unleſs they ſhould ſee that he employ'd
their money ja recovering the places of cheir own Province, and as I have already ſaid,
Contention 4 he had reaſon. But in the mean time we who were of Gienne expeed no other bur the
mong the total ruine of it, and conſequently of all our houſes ; for which conſiderations we ſhould
roy about haye been very glad that the Mareſchal would have reſolv*d npon the defence of Gaienne,
Gu: Dong o and not ro have return'd into Languedic, In concluſion he told us that he muſt begone,

: for he was to be that night with the Mareſchal at the Iſle, and that the next morning
the ſaid Sieur would croſs the Garonne towards Langnedoc ; at which we were very
much confounded, as knowing very well that Montgomery could nor long ſubfiſt in
Bearn, and would therefore fall into the Kings Conntry 5 whereupon I cold Monſieur de
Fojeuſe, thar ſeeing T had no Forces left for the defence of Gwienne, I had nothing left
co do bur toretire ro Libourne, where the King had commanded me to be, and fo return'd
to find our Monſieur de Bell:zgarde at Marſiac, who was as much confounded as I, he
being in no leſs fear of the ruine of his houſes than IT, and thereſt of us whoſe Eſtaces
lay in thoſe parts, I left che Vicount de Labatat with his two Companies in CMHarfac,
leaving it tohis own diſcretion ro do as he ſaw canſe, for Forces I had none to relieve
him. Monſieur de Bellegarde alſo retir'd a little further cowards Comange, cxpeting Or-
ders from the Mareſchal what he was to do, and the Baron de Gondrin went towards Exe,
there with his Company to do the beſt ſervice hecould, We were all like ſtrayed ſheep,

1 with my Foot Companies wene to paſs the River Garonpe, placing them at Port St. Mary
and at Agwillon, to fee if 1 could yer raiſe any more men, and iſſued out three or foar
Commiſſions to that effect, There only remain*d with me five and chirty Horſe of Mon-
fieur de Fontenilles his Company, and fourſcore of my own, for Monheur de Madaillen,
who was gone to bury his Wife, had taken one part along with him : Of choſe who were
his Neighbours, his Brother who carried my Enfign was alſo gone fick to his own houſe,
and had in like manner taken along with him ſome others chat liv'd there abonts, and my
Guidon was gone to Tholouze to a Tryal he had depending in that Courr, which was the
reaſon that I was thus left alone. Tr 1s true that I was aflur'd chey would be back with -
me again incight dayes. As for the Gentlemen of Armagnac they were all retir'd to their
own houles, to take oxder abou the removing of their Goods into Lefowre, thinking no

leſs

&

_—

Boox VII.
[cſs buc char the ſame ſcourge of God was amongſt us for every one thought of ſaving

his Goods, and not of detending himſelf, nor of making head againſt the Enemy, by
which you may ſce che fruits of our evil intclligence amoneſt our ſelves.

_ de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

Ws AA ut CO At” Ee AS Ce AI I IIS AUO 2 WOO OE IO I OO

I had nor bcen four dayes at Apgen before I was advertiz'd that Monſieur de Maycha- Succours Rong
to JOyn WIL
Montgommery«

feel (che ſame who at this preſent 15che Lord de Peyre) was come to Thonetns wich three
hundred Horſe, amongſt which there might be threeſcore that were very good, the reſt
were Harquebuzeers on norſeback 1ll mounted g with vvhich he vyas going over in-
to Bearn, to joyn vvith the Count de Montgrmmery ; vvhercupon I departed and
vvent to Aguillon. Of my five Foot Companies I had ſent tyvo to quarter at Yj/le-neafue
ro eaſe the Country 3 and in the other three that remain'd, and that lay at Port Se. Mary
and Agsillon, 1f there vvere a hundred men in a Company that vvas all ; for every one
vvas gone-to his ovvn houſe, as vvell as the Horſe, and even the Captains themſelves. I
had given two Commitſions ro Captain Plex, and Captain Pommies, rwo Gentlemen of
Condimmois, toraiſe cach of them a Foot Company, to whom I ſent that they ſhould ad-
vance towards Buz*t, for thac I would try to paſs the River Garonne, and in cafe they
ſhould hear that the Enemy ofter'd to hinder my paſſage, chey ſhould then give them
Alarms bchind. The ſaid Sieur de Peyre made no ſtay ar Thonens, bur croſt the River ad»
vancing towards CMo:hurt, Montlnc, and Damaſan. The ſame night that I arriv*d ar
eAgnuillon, T made thew as it I would paſs the River, whereupon they preſented them-
ſelves co oppoſe mez bur there was nothing done but ſome few Harquebuz ſhot fir'd a-
thwart the River. The next morning IT caus d ewo Boats to fall down towards Port Sr,
Mary, in the one whereof three horſes might paſs at once, andin the ocher two, and pre-
ſented my (elt attne paſſage of Port de Paſcan , ſending over five and ewenty Harquebu-
zecrs in the two Boats ; and when I expeted they ſhould come to defend the Paſs, chey
did quite contrary, for they quitted Damaſ.:;n, eMontlac, and Honhart, and retreated
rowards la Gyaere, and le 145-4 Agenois, leaving me the paſſage free ; ſo char I went to
quarter at Damaſan, where I found the Captains ds Plex and Pommies newly arriv*d,
having but fourſcore Foot only berwixt them 5 for they had not had cime co fill cheir Com
panies, and about fourſcore Harquebuzeers on horſeback came with them alſo. Captain
Laubaa Kinſman of mine, who might have about threeſcore Harquebuzeers on horſeback,
came chither likewiſe about four a clock in the afternoon, by which time we were all goc
over the River.

At my coming to Damaſan there mer me two men from Caſtel-gelonx, whom the Con-

ſuls and Inhabicants of the Cities had ſent to me to demand relief 3 for that Calonges

had bten before the Town ro ſummon it, to whom they had return'd anſwer, tha in caſe
they heard no newsof me by the nexr morning they would deliver up the Town. Ic was
a ſtrange thing that Cities, which were in no manner of danger of being forc'd, ſhould
ſo tremble for fear. They had condition'd that none but the Captains ſhould enter, in
conſideration of a certain ſum of money they were to give them ; but chat was bat a juggle,
for they were reſolv'd to make themſelves Maſters of the Town, and ts leave a Garriſon
there, the Caprains being very well affur*d, that being once wichin, they, wich the Hugo-
nots of the place ſhould be able co maſter the Catholicks, I immediacely hereupon order®d
Captain Nee, and Captain Benge the Lieurenant and Guidon of Monſieur de Fontenilles
his Company, that they fhould baic their horſes, and Captain Plex and Pommies to bair
their Harquebuzeers on horſeback ; and that in the cloſe of the Evening Monſieur de Noe
ſhon'!d depart with five Gens-d'arms, and the ſaid 4# Plex and Pommies with their Har-
quebuzeers on horſeback with him, taking one of the Meſſengers in cheir Party, and the
reſt of the Light-horſe , which might be about cen; and che fourteen of my Company
ſhould go with the ſaid Captain Bengze and Captain Lauba with him, and ſhould ſtay ar
a place appointed within a quarter of a league of the Town : where if Monſieur de Nee
could enter in, he ſhould give notice to Captain Bengwe, it not he ſhould retreat co him
and ] with fourteen or fifreen Genclemen who were with me, and ſome fourſcore Har-
quebuzeers on foor, would halr abour half a quarter of aleague ſhort of che ſaid Caprain
Bengae, at a Gentlemans houſe call'd Monficur de Ganet, where they were to ſead me 1n-
tefligence of all chat paſſed. I order'd it chus, to the end char incaſe the Enemy ſhould
come to hinder Captain Nee from entring the Town, Captain Bengrze and he might rally
togecher,and I alſo would ſhew my {elf in the field to amuze che Enemy, and to make them
think thac we were three Parties in the field, I knew very well that they would ſoon
have intelligence from thoſe who playd the good Subject, by ſtaying at home in their own

houſes, under the proreRion of the Kings Edit : and therefore caus'd all the chyce Par-

ties to go aWay by night, to defeat rhoſe Intelligencers of the knowledge of how few men
we were. Monſieur de Noe came an hour after midnight to the Gates of Caſtel: gelour,

X & 2 where

—

_ my coo WEFPGETS: rm Tree vr ea. Lo 2% "=

ns. acted ated —” "PIs -

332

—_— ” —_

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Boox VII,

where tha aroſe a great diſpute amongſt thoſe of the Town, wherher or no they ſhoald
let him in ; ſome ſaid I, and ſome ſaid yo, infomach thar chey made him wair rwo lon
hours before they could conclude, but in cheend the Carholicks ran to the Gate of che
Town,” and made themſclves Maſters of it, and offe1*d ir to him 5 who fo ſoon as he was
got in, advertiz'd Captain Bengue thereof, ſending him word to retreat to me, as it had
been order'd he ſhould , which he accordingly did , and by chis rime 1t was ſun-riſe,
About break of day ewo Hugonots, Towns: born Brats, came bctore Caſtel-geloux, to en-
quire if their xelicf was at hand, and whether they were derermin?*d co let the Captains
enter according to their Capitulation, telling chem char the ſaid Sieur de Pezre was wich
his forces within a quarter of a league of the Town, where he had made a hal:, and wait=
ed in expcRation of cheir return, When as ſome of choſe within held chem in diſcourſe,
ſme Horſe (allied out and took one of them, but the other made his eſcape, and carried
news to Monſieur de Peyre, that his Companion was taken, and that they that rook him
were Gens-d'arms in yellow Caffocks. Monhear de Pere then perceiv'd that I was got up
before him, and retreated to Mas, Monſieur de Fontenilles was come 1n the night ar che
preciſe time appointed to Byſet, a quarter of a league from Damaſan, to. which place I
was rciir'd after T had given order for them to march away by night, telling me by che
way as we went, that the Mareſchal was nor pal *d over che River Garonne, to go over into
Langnedoc, as Monſicur de Fojeuſe had afſur'd us he would, but was marching towards
Afuret to eaſe the Country ; ſorthar I receiv*d thar night two great ſatisfaRtions, rhe farſt
and the chicfeſt, that the Mareſchal had chought bercer wich himſelf, and was not croſs'd
the River, by which means I hop'd we ſhould be able ro do ſome good for the Kings ſer-
vice, and for the defence of the Country 3 and the other, thar Thad reliev'd Caftel-gelowr,
which was of fingular advantage tous, as well in Boardelois as in Bawadois., Which I
choughc fit rocommir to writing, to ſhew.that with the lictle power I had, I did all T
was able to do, withour lying idle at home, and ſuffering all things to go ac ran-
dom,

Captains, alchough theſe be no great Conqueſts, nor famous Battels, you may yer by
them, as well as in ocher places of my Book learn what a great diligencecan effe&, (I am
alwayes couching upon this ſtring, and I cannot too often repeat 1t) and char it is good to
run a hazard ſometimes in a caſe of necefſity, When I croſt che River ewenty men mighe
have hindred my paſſage, had they ſtayd in the Houſes of the Pore de Paſcas ; for I muſt
of neceſſity land berwixr the ewo great Houſes : and 1f I would have ſtood ro conſul as
bout the reaſon of my paſſage , nor a man with me would have been of opinion, that
I ought ro adventure to paſs. By which you may note that the neceffity of war will have
it ſo, that a man mnſt ſomer;mes venture when the affair is of great importance, and nor
alwayes go by the reaſon of war : but I muſt alfo tell you, thacif you are long in defign-
ing, and tedious in making preparation for the execution of your defign, you may then
loſe more in venturing, than you are likely ro win + for a man that is reſoly'd to hazard
muſt keep his deſign very cloſe, and his execution muſt be ſudden, that the Enemy may
have no inkling of whar you intend to do, till you come juſt co the puſh ; for if you give
him time to diſcover your intention, or to prevent your deſign, you mult imagine he has
underſtanding and judgment as you have, and will fo well provide for you, that inſtead
of ſurprizing him, you your ſelves will be ſurpriz'd, and defeated. Do not alwayes chooſe
the eaſieſt way, bur deceive your Enemy, making a ſhew to pur your {elves into one place,
ro get convenience of going into another. As to what concerns diligence, Monſieur de
Nee ſtay'd not two hours to bait at Damaſan, but the night was upon him ; neverthelcſs
he departed art the firſt word without making any diſpute of che buſinels.s How many
Captains are there who would have given their Horſe time to bair, and reſt char night, at
leaſt rill within an hour or two of day, conſidering that they had been all day on horſe-
back at the paſſage of the River in exceſſive heat > Which had I order'd it ſo here, Monſicur
de Nee would then have found the Enemy in the Town, as they did him, wherefore I
would alwayes adviſe you to remember the Motto of Alexander the Great, Leave not
that till to-morrow, which you may do to day. After a long march you ſhall repoſe at your
eaſe and acquire honor, You muſt oft-times make your horſes quail under cheir bur-
then; you will ger more horſes enowy but your honor once loſt is never to be regain'd.
'Tis a thing that js'nor to be found by the high-way, butto be acquir'd by valour, and for
which you wear your ſwords by your ſides. |

So ſoon as I return'd back to Damaſan I preſently retir'd to Buſet, a houſe belonging
tothe Signieur de Caumont my Kinſman, and thence immediately mounted to horſe, and

with abour thirty Gens-d'arms I hady and Captain Lamba's Argoulers, went dire&ly to

Peach, belonging in part to the Queen of Navarre, and wherein I had allo a propriety.
oy | The

- - FIR LENY IIIG a 0 REEF " 7 " > ES des ok "90 24 Lites © "
je MT Wn. Pe * > _ MEEES OS RE CWC DONT EOS SET Wl - :
ECTS TH EDT FE 76; 0 8. es EE I SS F s

U

Boox Vil. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 333 =

The Sicur de Peyre was with all his people retir'd into Mas, which is a good league from
Peuch, and when I came thither ir was three a clock in. the afcernoon., The news was car-
ried to him that I was marching direaly to Mas, which was the reaſon that he immedi-
ately departed thence, and marcht a'l nighr. Lax5a put himſelf in purſuit of him, and
had he overtaken him would have brought away either Fowl or Feathers, for he is an ad-
' yenturous Gentleman, and ſo were the rwo Captains who were with him; but he knew
nothing of de Peyr:'s retreat till the next morning at ſun-riſe, and would then have
follow*d the track, bur that the people told him he was alrcady as far as Mont de Marſan,
The next morning I drew off che Sieur de Noe and his Cavalry from the ſaid Caſtel-gelonx,
and left the Captains d# Plex and Pemmies in his room, who there perfeRed cheir Com-

anies, which were alwayes good, they having ordinarily fourſcore Harquebuzeers on horſe-
back at leaſt, keeping almoſt continually rogether, and ofc-times going our as far as Mont
de Marſan, where they had frequent skirmithes,

I then return*d back to eAgen, where the ſame day that I arriv'd a Courrier came to
me with letters from Monſieur le Mareſchal, wherein he writ me word, that he had heard
both by Monſicur de Jayesſe and others, thar T was reſoly'd to go and pur my (clf into
Libourne, in order co a Command the King had ſent me to thar effe& : bur thar ar the
time when the King writ to me to go thicher, his Majeſty did not underſtand that the af-
fairs of Geienne were in ſo ll a condicion 5 that therefore he entreated me to conſider well
of it ; for if T ſhould abandon the open Country in (o critical a time, neicher che King
nor the Monſieur would be ſacisfied with my doings, To which I wrichim anſwer back,
that whatever I might have ſaid, it had never been my intention to ſhut my ſelf up in Li-
boxrne , and that he might aflure himſelf I was not a Chapman to be taken at the firſt
word : but that T was exceeding glad that he would yer continue ſome longer time in Guij-
enne, to {ee what reſolution the Enemy would take, ( for ſo he had writ me word in his
letter) and char if it pleaſed him, whilſt his Army had nothing elſe to do, to march to-
wards Noguarol, and le Mont de Marſan, to try if the Enemy would take courage to
come out of Bears to fight us ; we might peradventure do ſome thing , and that it was
my opinion it would be of advantage to us, to the end chat if Ffontgommery ſhould dare
ro enter the King?s Territories, he might ſee char we were ready to fight him. He wrir
word back again that he was content, and that 1n five dayes he hould be at Ach, where
he deſir*d me to meer him, I would not ſuffer the five Enfigns commanded by my Ne-
phew Leberon to ſtir from Libourne and Ste Foy, though the two Companies thar quarcer'd c;69, in ex
at St. Foy were placed there upon no other account bur only to ſave the Proviſions of Lij- peRation ef a ,
bourne : bur in caſe of a Siege they had Orders, that immediately upon Monſieur de Le. Siege,
berons ſending for them they ſhould retire to Libourne , where the Chevalier Herloge com-
manded, who was caſting wp Trenches within, as if he daily expeRed a Siege. I took
the five Enfigns that Captain Caſtella commanded 1n the abſence of the Chevalier and
of my Nephew, my own Company, thoſe of Meſſieurs de Gondrin, and de Fontenilles, and
ſent Poſt ro Monſieur de /a Chappelle Lawzieres, ( who lay at Cabors, and was evermore in
readineſsto bring in the Gentlemen of Qzercy) that he ſhould march away in all d.1j-
gence, and that the Mareſchal was upon his march co go direfly inco Chaloſſe ; which he
ſaddenly did, and brought threeſcore and ten Gentlemen under his Corner. All thoſe
of Agengis went along with me, not a man being lefrar home, excepring Capcain Paulj.g
the elder, whom I made perforce to return back to Yille-nexfue, of which he was Gover-
nor, as well to preſerve che ſaid Ville-neufue, as to alliſt Libourne with whar he could, in
caſe the Enemy (ſhould come and fir down before it. Monſieur de Caſſanextl was Mare(-
chal de Camp to this party of ours, and lodg'd, according to his own Muſter-Roll, an
hundred thirty five Gentlemen under my Corner, and chreeſcore under that of Monſieur de
la Chappelle Lanzieres the forenamed Companies of Gens-d'arms, and fix Cornets of Har-
quebuzeers on horſe back ; this was the Parcy that I had, Under che Mareſchal's own
Cornet were near upon three hundred Gentlemen (as the Mareſchal himſelf cold me ar
Grenade in the preſence of his Mareſchal de Camp Monhkeur de 1a Croiſſette.)) what of Co.
menge and Languedoc. He had two and ewenty Enfignes of Foot commanded by Monſieur The Mareſchal
de St. Giron de la Guiche, and ten of Monheur de Savignac. His Companies of Geng- d' anville's
d'armes, and choſe of Meſſieurs le Compre d'Efferac, de Lanzun, de Terride, de Negrg. Forces.
pelice, thoſe of the two Bellegardes, the Farher and Sony de Gramont, thole of the M.irc(-
chal de la Foy, de Foyeuſe, d' Anbigeon, d' Arnt, de Sarlabowy which, with the three that 1
had, made up che number of fifreen Corners of Gens-d'armes, and his own which we rec-
kon*d for two, which in all made ſeventeen. We joyn'd with him at Auch, and marcke
thence to Nogwarol, where the ſaid Monſieur le Mareichal ſtay'd rwo dayes, The Enemy
had already paſſed the Do#, and quarter*d at ont de Marſan, Granade, and Cazerer. 1
commanded the vaunr-Guard, | The

Wt nm tr ves pn d en Ate, co rage 4. woceditte. ed. ned As AC red o_wdol©c
.
Xe

ma Mi. a tm,

F'Y as PY T4

i

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox VII,

- .JI®

The next day afcr the Camp came co Nog#.:rel che Mareſchal call'd a Council, where

I mov'd that we ſhould march away the ſame day, hoping that we might ſarprize thoſe
of (azecres and Grenade, bur che Mareſchal was by no means willing co 1t, it being objected
by ſome, thac {o ſoon as the Enemy ſhould hear of our coming, they would immediate-
ly paſsover the River Dc into Bearn, being ar that time very low and foardable in many
places, The Mareſchal then propounded in this Council, that ſeeing he had no great Ar-
tllery wherewith ro batter Towns (having four Field- pieces onely) he conceiv'd ir was ro
no purpoſe to go any further, bur to rerurn into his own Government, there ro fall in hand
with the work he had to do, and to recover the places the Enemy had there in their poſ-
{ſion 2 with ſeveral other Arguments he made uſe of to fortifie this determination. This
ſcarvey tune was alwayes ringing in our ears; and although che reaſons were good enough,
I could notwichſtanding by no means relliſh chem, foraſmuch as I evidencly foreſaw rhar
would happen in Gaienne, which atrerwards fcll our, as alſo did all the reſt who were
intereſted in the welfare of that Province, as I my felt wasz which made us grow ſo hoc
in diſpute, that at laſt 1 cou'd nor forbear to rell the Mareſchal, T hat ke was reſponſible tg
the King for Guicnne as well as for Languedoc, and that if he pleaſed to conſult his Patent,

he would find that he had tchen upon him the (ommand of the four Provinces, which were

Dauphire, Provence, and Guienne, «s well as Languedoc alone, though that was his parti-
cular Government, and that 1 entreated him to conſider of it. To which he rera111% 4 me
anſwer, That all the three Provinces had reſpefive Governors of their own, and thertf\r+ let
every one lcck to his own buſineſs, as he would do to his, IT very well knew by this brisk re-

ply, that he was nectled at what I had faid co him for theſe people expect chew W.1l
thould bea Law, and are impartient of being contrad:&ed ; and yer what I cold him was
true, for he had undertaken all thatz however ſceing the Mareſchal angry, and the Coun-

cil irreſolute, I withdrew, having fuſt entreared Mefſeurs de Joyenſe and de Bell-garde
to lay things home to him, fir 1 ſaw very well that I had diſpleas'd him, and therefore would
give him no more trouble, Which they having promiſed me to do, I lefr a Gencleman with
them to bring me an account of his determination, Preſently atter che ſaid Sieurs ſent me

word that he was reſoly'd ro go to Granade, of which I was infinitely glad, and fo were

all che reſt, and I chereupon immediarely went to him , to know if I ſhould go away in
che night before, ro try ro ſhut up thoſe who were in Granade, and trap them ; ro which

he recurn d me anſwer, That he fhould be well pleaſed with it, and that he had already ſent
away PEſtang de Cornuſſon with his four Cornets of Cavalry, to pat himſelf into Cazieres,
which four were, that of the ſaid PEſtang, and thoſe of St. Perrget, du Sendat, and Cle-

rac, T parted thenin the beginning of the night with the Gentlemen, and my own Com-

pany of Gens-d*arms, and had ir not' been for the rain tha fell upon us in the night (che

greateſt that T think I ever ſaw) I had ſnapt fourſcore or an hundred Horſe at Granade

chat were there, and who were my Nejghbours at Thonens and Cleyrac, which IT had ra-

ther have met withal than three hundred others, and I think I ſhould havehandled them

{s, that there would hardly have been any more fear of them ; for that is the very Den of
Rogues, Burt one miſchief ſeldome comes alone, for the rain bear me into Gante, belong-

ing to my Brother Monkieur de / alence, which continu'd above three long hours,. and yer

fad they not eſcap*d me, had it not been that ſo ſoon as ever Monſieur de FEftang came
£© Cazieres, he ſent away Captain Porget*s Enſign in the beginning of the night with cwclve

Gens- d*arms to ſcoure the Road as far as beyond Granade towards ont de Marſan, who

palling cloſe by Granade did not enter into ir, neither did he think char any of che Enemy

were there, and cherefore would nor diſcover himſelf, bur went on above a league further

towards Mont de HMarſan, and ſceing no fign of an Enemy, returr*d back the ſame way
he came, when being before the Gates of Granade, he ſent in his Guide to diſcover if

' there was any Body inthe Town, who coming to the Gate ſaw Horſe going towards the

Market-place, and up and down the ſtreets, and thereupon rerurn'd to the Enſign, telling
him what he had ſeen ; and that though the night was very dark, he thought they had
white Caflocks. The Enfign then alighted and went all alone to the Gare, and enter'd
into it alchough he very well ſaw the Horſe ; buc he had an opinion it was 1, becauſe he had
heard that I was to be there by break of day, as I had been and rwo hours before, if che
rain had not hindred me. He could not very well diſcover if they had white Caffocks
or no, and therefore ſtept four cr five paces into the Town, which as he was doing, thoſe
who quarter”d near unto the Gate came out to mount to horſe ; the Enſign who ſaw them
was ſo near, that he perceiv*d they had white Caffocks, and had then choughe to have
recover'd the Gate, but he was encloſed behind, and taken, where they made himctell chem
all he knew, and mounting him behind one of their Troopers, carried him away a good
round gallop, The Count de H4ontgommery who lay about ontant and Nwgron was ſoon

adver -

MW
y
x i
3
.
-
v1
_
.
_y
4
A
me
=
48
bx
FE
pe.
Ar
Ge
BE,
ye
a
ty
—
E
bs
”

” Dy DINE > Bs. - 2a FF OLE G 7 Y
"14: 4x EAI 222 candied i Sat RES obo 6 p E
OS EEE Ed, at a aa

_—

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.
advertiz'd of what the Enſign had told his people ; at which he rook ſuch an Alarm, chac
he immediately mounted co horſe, and never alipted cill he came to Orthez, leaving his
Artillery by the way, abandoned by all, ſaving ſome thirty who were bolder chan che reſt,
by the report of the honeſt people of the Country , and alſo by the confeſſion of choſe
who were taken priſoners. A little after ſunriſe the Mareſchal came to Granade 5 my
Quarter with the Vaunt-guard was at St. anrice, which appertains to Monſieur de Bary-
ſac of Quercy, and the Mareſchal would that Monſieur de Savignac thonld allo be of che
Vaunt guard, with the Companies of Mcſſienrs de Gramont, d* Arne, and Monſicur de [a
{ happelle Lauxieres, together with my three Companies of Gens-d'arms, and thus wecame
all to Granade within three leagues of Mont de Marſan. Two dayes after our arrival
the Mareſchal was again talking of returning back, for that was evermore the burthen of
his ſong, asking me whar 1 would that he ſhould doin Bearn, ſeeing that all the Garri-
ſons were {urrendred, and that the King had neither Towns nor Caſtles there ; char he
ſhould only loſe ſo much time ; that on the other fide proviſions would fail him, and char
already the Soldiers cried out of hunger, and beſides he had no Artillery to batter the
Towns. He had in truth reaſon on his fide for what concern'd Proviſions, by reaſon
that our Carriages were not yer come up 2 and yetT had taken ſuch care, that ſo ſoon as
ever he had ſenc me word he would march, 1 immediately ſent to tax Condommois, A4r-
magnac, Eſterac, Commenge, and Bigorre, {o that in two dayes we had as much victuals
as we could with. In the endI perceiv'd very well char his inclination would not be apt
ro continue him long in this ſervice, . neither were thoſe of his Council any better enclin'd Diviſion a-
than he; for my part I neyer was preſent at any conſulcation, but only that ar Nog#arol, Meng the
for I was never call'd, and I never offei'd my ſelf, becauſe I knew they had a prejudice Roar
againſt me, tor ſaying we cught to make war in Gnienne the Enemy being there 3 and I
knew alſo that all che conſultations that ſhould be call'd without me would never do
Guienne any gocd 3 ſo that we who were Gaſcons kept together by our (elves. |
Seeing this humour of returning to continue, I entreated che Mareſchal to give me leaye Tha Enterpriſe

to go attaque. Mont de Mrſan, hoping I ſhould carry the place; who thereuron demand- vt Mont de
ed of me how I could think to take a walled Town, a good one, and not only one, but Marſen.
chice, all encloſed with exceeding good walls, which was very true + to which nevercheleſs
I made anſwer, thar I had caken others thar had been Rtronger, and mann'd with much
berter Scldiers than that was, by ſarprize (for I remembred Pjance, which was another
kind of place than Afont de Mrſon, though that was ſtrong enough) I cold him more-
over that Monlienr de Terride had been ſnap't after the ſame manner ac Orthez; and that
therefore ſeeing our Encmies had done it, I doubred not bur to do the ſame, and perad-
venture pay them in their own kind. Atlaſt afcer much importunity he cold me he was
content I ſhould cry my fortunes whereupon I entreated him to ler me have Monſieur de
Savignac with his ten Enſigns along with me, which he alſo granted, IT could not go the
next day, which was the 13th, for it rain*d all daylong, and yer I would nocwithſtand-
ing go with forty or fifty Horſe to view the Town, but could go but half a league, where
in three or four houſes I found Captain Arne, and Monhieur de I Arbeus, Lieutenanc to
Monſieur de Grawont, who told me they had been there all night, (as alſo Moniieur de 1,
Chappelle Lanzieres ) where we diſcourſed a great while of che reſolution the Mareſchal
had raken to return, and how all thoſe who adher'd to his opinion of returning ro make
war in Langaedoc, and to abandon Giezne to the inroads of the Enemy , thought they
were likely ro meec with no great reſiſtance in executing their deſigns in Languedoc, confi-
dering that the Enemies Forces were in Bearn, from whence I believe they conceiv'd they
would hardly ſtir. But we of Geienne knew very well that Montgommery could nor long
ſubfit in Bearn, and that of neceſſity, alchough he ſhould have no mind to do it, he be
fall into the Kings Country, and upon our Houſes. I moreover very well knew, thac choſe
who followed the Mareſchal's opinion, thought thar in retaking the Towns of Langae-
docs they ſhould do the King ſo conſiderable a ſervice as would obtein great honor to themis
ſelves, and moreover pur their own houſes in ſafery. I was not angry char thoſe of Lan-

edoc (ſhould be of this opinion, and ſhould endeavour to draw the Mareſchal into Lan-

wedos for theſe conſiderations, for I have ever heard thac The Shirt is nearer than the
Rube, and that Charity begins at bone, whuch 1s ſufficient for their excule, ſecing there was
no diſhonour in the caſe, as there was not : bur I was angry at thoſe others who main-
tained che ſame opinion, and yer were of Gaienne, decauſe they only did itto curry fa-
vour with the Mareſchal, and heartily wiſhe the Enemy might burn their Houſes, becauſe
they ſtood (o ſtiffely for therelief of Languedoc where they had nothing co loſe, and ſeem'd
to endeayour the ruine of cheir own Houſes and Families. On the other fide I know ve-
ry well chat I was told ſome of thoſe of Gujenne (ſhould poſleſs che Mareſchal ; chat all

the

acts. £ Mk i ic  aa6.i _

—  . a
Ibo Am g—_—_ by ——

The Commentaries of Meffire Blaize Boox YII,

Jealonfie be-
twwixt the

Chicks,

Captain Fa-
Vas.

the imporcanity, and all the arguments I uſed ro perlwade him to make war 1n Gaienne,
was for no other end, but that in caſe the ſaid Mareſchal ſhould perform any brave action,
the glory thereof might redonnd to me, and the ſucceſs be wholly arrributed ro my va-
lour and conduct, as in theiime of the firſt troubles, when Monſieur de Byrie and I wae
rogether ; but if T ever enterteined any ſuch thought, may God never have mercy on my
ſoul, or other deſign or defire, but that he might do ſome great thing, and char I might
be with him to lay tro my helping hand in ſome brave Enterprize for his Majeſties ſervice,
that the King might eſteem and love him for ever, and chat the Mareſcoal might be fo
ſcy{ible of the ſervice I had dene him, as to rake my Children into his proteCtion, and to
alliſt them in the obteining ſome advantages from the King z for as tor my own part I
was relolv'd, it I ſhould 1.verto ſee an end of che War to retire to my own houſe, fceling
my {clf old and decay*d both in body and mind; and beſides I bleſs God I had acquir'd
honour enough, withour needing to deprive another : but 1t 18 1impot{1ole to eradicate ma»
lice out of the mindes of men, when it has once taken roor, They make us think what we
never thought, and ſay what we never ſaid : but I ſhall wave this diſcourle to recurn to
my Enterprize upon Mont de Marſan.

The fame night being returned ro St. Manrice, the Mareſchal ſent to remonſtrate ro
me, that I ought by no means to go to Mont de EMarſan; for ſhould I be baffled in the
Enterprize, it wouli be a great diſrepute to his Army, thatI could expe& to reap no 0-
ther fruit but diſgrace from the attempt, and thar alſo he was refolv'd within rwo dayes
to return, I was ready to burſt my hoops for ſpite when Theard chis language, Ichen
ſent ro him Meſſievrs le Vicompre de Labatat, the Chevalier de Romegas, Moniienr de Sa-
vienar, who was one of hisown Officers, d' Arblade, and 1a Mothe Gondrin to remonſtrate
to, and 1n my behalf to entrear him not to be angry, and co have patience yer a few days ;
for as tor provifions he ſaw he had more than they knew whar to do withal, and beſides
he needed bur to paſs over the Do to five Hugonots houſes that were within the Kings
Pale, where we ſhou!d find vituals (afficient to nouriſh his Camp a month about, both che
Hugonors and all che Catholicks of thoſe parts having carried all their proviſions in thi-
therz that therefore he w-uld onely be pleaſed ro permir me togo to Wont de Marſan,
and that in order to that Enterprize I would asx no more but two of his Field- pieces only,
v herewith to batter the Centry-houſes, and little Defences that ſerv'd the Enemy for
Flanckers, They return'd back, and cold me, that notwithſtanding any thing they could
ſay to him he was reſolate to recurn, bur that he was content to lend me the :wo pieces,
In the morning then ſo ſoon as every one had gor ſomething into his belly 5 we began to
march, Monſicur de Montaſtrae being come with the two Guns, whohad in Commiſſion
from the Mareſchal to tell me, that he ſhould be very glad I would alter my deſign, and
return back to the Army. I think he did it that incaſe I ſhould miſcarry in che buſineſs,
he might have that advantage of me, as to ſay, 7 told him as mach. Nevertheleſs we ſer
forward, I marching with che Cavalry, and a hundred or fixſcore Argoulets before, and
the five Enſigns after me , and after all Monhieur de Savignac. with the two Field- pieces.
I met two Letters by the way, writ to me by a Gentlewoman of the Town, in the fiſt
whereof ſhe defir'd me by no means to come, for that the Enemy had intelligence of my de-
fron, and that Captain Favas ( who is of St. Maurice ) was come thither with a handred or
ſixſcore Horſe, and anither (aptain with ſome Foot. The ſecond letter mer me within half
a quarter of a League of the Town, wherein ſhe ſent me word, That the Enemy had made
a review, and found themſelves to be five hundred fgghting men compleat, the Inhabitants of
the Town compriz/d, ſo that if 1 went I ſhould reap nothing bat certain diſgrace. All which
notwichſtanding, and that the Gentlewoman and her Husband were Catholicks, and my
very good friends 3 yet being they were not themſelvesin the City, I could not give credit
ro what they writ, but march'd on into the fight of the Town which is ſeated in a Bottom.
Being there I caus'd a hundred or fixſcore Argoulets to alight to go, and gain the houſes
that were near unto the Gate, bidding them withal to run on as faſt as they conld, thar
thy might prevent the Enemy from ſetting them on fire, which ocherwiſe they had done,
ſome of them being already ſallyed out to that intenr, and having already apply*d the
fire, bur being by onr Argoulets conſtrain'd co retire into the Town, they began co play
upon them from the Walls. In the mean time whilſt we ſtayed for the coming up of
our Foot and the Artillery, IT went to paſs che River wich a Troop of Horſe below Mont de
arſan, on that fide towards Dacgs, and within Harquebuz thor of che Wall, co go diſ-
cover the other fide of the Town, and to view the Dich co ſee if chere were any water in

ir, that I might paſs over che Sicur de Savignac's Enſigns, and give a Scalado on both
ſides at once. |

The

0. — ——
—_——

ms.

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of Frarice. 2 m

| The River was deep almoſt to the Sadle-skirts, and we paſſed over, when being on the yy te Mar:
farther fide, we perceiv*d four or five Horſe, who were coming to put themſelves into the ſan diſcover'd.
place ; bur they curn'd ſhort, without it being in our power to take them, Ithereupon
drew upall my Horſe into Battalia , which being done alighted z and cauſing Captain
Fienx who was of £Miradenx only to alight with me, went direaly up to the Ditch of
che Town. The hear was exceſſive, and my arms were exceeding heavy,'ſo thatT was con-
ſtrain'd co put my (elf into a little Dich being able to go no further by reaſon of the
weight of my Arms, and thar I was coclimb the Ditch, and therefore made Monfieur de >
Fieux togo on alone, who accordingly went all along by the Graffe of the Town, and in
going found a woman {quar down behind a little hedge cloſe by the Graffe , whom he
madeto riſe, {till going on, for they ſhort furiouſly at him, as chey did alſo at me ; for
trom ihe place where I was it was nor above ten paces to the Graffe. Ac laſt Caprain Fienx
return'd to me, bringing the Woman along with him , whotold us that there was water
in the Graftea Pike deep, as Caprain Fiewx alſo afſui?d me according to his judgment, by
what he had been able ro diſcover, and the Woman told us moreover that it was very deep
of mud. I then loſt all hope of doing any thing on that fide, and knew that we were to
fall on all ar one place, and leaving Meflicurs de Fontenilles and de Madaillan there, re-
curn'd with the Gentleman to repaſs the River 5 which as I was foarding over I chought I
ſaw ſome Enfigns in the Town, and very near the Bridg, which on a ſudden 1 loſt fighr
of, and thought 'they were the Enemy. I had army ſetting out from St, Manrice en-
treated Monſieur de Tiladet that he would go ſpeak to the Mareſchal about whac Mon-
fieur de Montaſtruc had told meirom him, and ro affure him that we had good hopesof
carrying the Town ; and withal to try if hecould perſwade him to conſent chat we ſhould
croſs the River, and to make him alter his reſolution of retarning. The ſaid Sicur de
Tilladet accordingly went, and immediately return'd to his own misfortune ; for atchis
return he found me already gone to pals the River,and ſaw me upon the paſſage,and on che
oiher fide ſaw our Argoulers who were alighted , ducking and playing at Bo- peep behind
che Houſes, which made lym come down full ſpeed co draw them from behind che Houſes,
which he did, bringing them out into open view, and making them ſhoot at the Bactle-
ments, which as he was doing, and gallopping along the fide of the Ditch to encourage
chem ro ſhoot ; as he was returning back by the ſame way he had goneby the edge of the
Graffe, the Encmy pour'd ſo violent a ſtorm of ſhot upon him, that in the end one of them
cook him 1n che belly, ſo thar his horſe falling at the ſame time he got away on foot, and
weunded as he was, above a hundred paces our of the reach of the Harquebuz ſhot. He
did not at firſt feel himſelf wounded, but was afterwards carried into a Houſe withour The Sieur de
the Town, where two dayes after he died of his wound. I had ſeen nothing of all chis, 7/Uadet mor-
for I was at that time viewing the other fide of the Town; in the mean time the Cap- tally wounded,
cains, eArne, the Baron d' Arbous, 'Eſtang, with the four Companies of Light-horſe, and
Monſieur de 1a Chappelle Lauzieret were on the right hand up the River, within a Harque-
buz thor of che Town. |

I muſt now give an account how the Town was taken. Captain Caftella with the five
Companies who march. after me, ſo ſoon as he came within fight of the Town, which is
within Harquebuz ihor, ſecing that our Argoulers did not behave themſelves very well,
(for they were evermere creeping behind che houſes) he made five or fix Ladders which [
bad cauſed to be brought ina Carc, tobe taken off che Carriage, and co be carried by the
Soldiers, when withour ſtaying tor me, Monſieur de Savignac, the Arrillery, or any 0-
cher Command, heran fuli drive directly up to the Wall ; where though che Enemy
plyed them very well with ſhot , they notwithſtanding never ſtopr nor ſtayd ill they
came vp to the very foot of ity whete being come they Immedutcly clapt to three Lad-
ders which were long enough to reach up to the top of the Wall, all the rcſt being coo
ſhore, upon which che Caprains without more ceremony, having Targets upon their arms,
preſently began co mounc, and what rattle of thor ſoever the Enemy pour'd upon chem
never defiſted mouncing ull chey were gor upon the ſaid Wall, and cher the Enemy fled,
Oar people purſued chem by che ſame way they endeavoured co retire, and ran down af-
cer them, when as they cthoughc ro have recover*d the Gate of che ochiex Town to ſhar iz
afrer chem, ours were in with them, and tell in pel- mel amongſt them. The Enem
then made direatly cowards the Bridg, all along a great ſtreet where they had made a
Barticado, which all of them could not recover, for a great many were cur off by the way,
Now as chey were making head ar the Barricado, Monficur de Savignac and his people
arriv'd, vvho ar the ſame inſtanc chac the laſt of ours vvere gor up by the Ladders, rau
up thicher mounting by the ſame Ladders firſt come firſt ferv/d, and (o ſoon as they vvere
got in, all ran directly rovvards the Bridgy vvhere upon his arriyal one of his Captains

Yy call's

Ae,

The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book VIT,

call'd Eſcafonrs vvas ſlain, vvho vvas one of the braveſt, men I ever knevv ; for I had
long been acquainted vvith him, In the end the Enemy abandoned the Barricado, and
put themſclves into the other Tovyun by the Wicker, my five Enfigns follovved them,
and fajl'd bur very lictle of entring pel-mel amongſt them : but the Enemy made ſhift
to clap to the Wicker, by vvhich means our five Enfigns vvere conſtrain*d to put them-
ſelves into a little houſe cloſe adjoyning to the Gate of the City, vvhere one of the five
Captains call'd Moſſaron vvas ſlain. The Enemy ſhot very faſt from the Tovver of the
Portal, and outs alſo from the little houſe threvv Fagots and Plancks before the Gate,
and there ir vvas that Captain JZoſſeron vvas ſlain, vvhere for all the infinite number of
ſtones, as well as Harquebuz ſhot that the Enemy ſhourec upon chem, they forbare nor to
ſet fire to the Gate of the ſaid Tovvn, 1 had (as T have ſaid) ſeen theſe Enfigns as I vvasre-
palſing the River z but I thought they had been the Enemy, vvhen vve vyere no ſooner got
over, butan Harquebuzcer on horſeback came full ſpeed to tell me, that our five Enfigns
vyere in the Tovvn, vvhereupon vvithourt ſtaying to ſee vvhat Monſieur de Savignac
vvould do, we ſct ſpurs to our horſes, and gallopt immediately up to the Gate : (for it was
not above four hundred paces.) I there found Monſieur de Savignac's people, fome vvith=
in, and ſome vvithout the Gate, vvho had already made a hole vvide enough to paſs one
by one underneath. We then all alighted and paſſed chorough this hole ; IT had broughr
with me ſome Peaſants of St, CManrice, who came along with the Artillery, and falling
co work upon the Gate, immediately torced it open, bur we were all got in before. Our
Camp- maſter Mon{icur de Caſtanenil did not enter with me, for I found him ar the
end of the Bridg, in a ſtreet on the right hand, where he told me that he had been to diſ-
cover a houſe or two that looked into the other Town. There was not a man that durſt
abide in the great {treet, for the Tower of the Gate commanded it, he carried me to the
two Houſes which were cloſe by the water fide, and where in one of them I gzounced
pair of ſtairs into a Chamber that looked upon the River, and there cauſed feftn or eight
holes to be ſuddenly made thorough the Wall, on the other fide of che Room thar looked
towards the Town, from whence che Enemy ſhot ſo faſt , which being done I deſcended
again into the Streer, and went into the other Houſe adjoyning to it, and of that into a
low Parlour, which had a door our of it, thorough which by five or fix ſteps there was a
paſſage down to the River, The Enemy (hot at this door with great fury, and thorough
the corner of alittle Window I perceiv?d that they were filling ſome Barrels they had
placed upon a Breach of the Wall. Monfieur de Savignac, Monſieur d' Andeſielle his Camp-
maſter, Captain St. Aubin, and another Caprain ot his (whoſename I have forgot) were
in the Parlour with me. Monſieur de Cafſanenil was entred into another Houſe, where
he found a Tanner a very tall man , .and brought him to me, who affur'd me that the
water was not above middle deep, I then offer'd this fellow ten Crowns, if he would
lead the Soldiers the way over the River, telling him moreover chat I would give him a
Target of proof for his defence, which he undertook tro do. I therefore deliver'd him a
Target, but the Raſcal preſently threw it down, telling me that ir was too heavy, and that
though he was big and ſtrong, he found himſelf encumbred with it, and therefore would
venture to paſs over withotit, Monſieur de Montaſtrac who was Maſter of the Ordnance
was alſo preſent with me» I ſaw we muſt make haſte to paſs over ; for ſhould the Ene-
my once have filled their Barrels, it would be a matter of great difficulty to enter by this
Breach ; which made me ſpeak ro Monſienr de Syvignac to call in three or four of his
Enfignes; whereupon Monſieur d'eAndofielle, St. Anbin, and the other Captain ran into
the Street, and fetchr in their Enfigns, for my five were in the lictle Houſe by the Gate,
and ſo ſcon as the three Enfigns were come into the Parlour, and a great many of their
Soldiers who crowded inafter them, I commanded the Enfigns boldly to follow thisman,
who would lead chem che way, telling them that they were by no means to ſtop till chey
came to the other fide of the River cloſe up to the breach, ſending ar che ſame rime to the
Harquebuzcers who were in the Chamber, thar chey ſhould ply their ſhot, to favour the
paſlage of our men 3 which being done, I ſuddenly chrew open the door, and pur out
this Tanner, together with a goud Soldier, who offered him(clf to go hand in hand with
him, and after theſe two the three Enſigns, and the three Caprains followed after. I pur
out five or fix Harquebuzeers after theſe, and my felt alſo, with all the Gentlemen who
were with me went our after them. We were to go down the formention'd fiveor fix ſteps,
and the Enemy ſhot with great fury on that fide, bur my Harquebuzeers in the Chamber
held them ſo thort, that they durſt not ſhew their heads, Still more Soldiers ran after
down the ſtairs, and I ſtood upon the brink of che River, making them believe I would
paſs over with them, when Monſieur de Hontaſtruc ſeeing me in that poſture, ran into
the Street, crying out , O Soldiers, Honſienr de Montlne himſelf is paſſing the River ; | in
whic

[1
i.

- "IE:

es rs

Boox VIl. Fo de Montluc, Mariſchal of "PEE 4

which cry the Soldiers who were buhic about their plunder, and thoſe who were in che The courage
Street left all, and entred ina crowd into the Parlour, where ſuch as could not come to of the Catho:
che ſtairs leapt down by the fides, and withour any manner of regard plang'd into the licks, ,
River, like as one forces ina flock of ſheep, inſomuch that the River was ſo cover'd over

with men from the one fide to che other, that there was no water tobe ſeen. I till ſtepe

in to the mid leg into the River, making a ſhew as if I meant to paſs it, as alſo did

Meftieurs de Brafſac, che Chevalier de Rowegas, and the reſt of che Gentlemen who were

with me. Monlicur de Savignac was there alſo, and it was no good wading for him, for

the talleſt Soldier was up to the armpits, and I believe had he gone in it would have taken

him upto thechin : forevery one knows that he was noxof the ſtature of a Giant : and

we were in danger to have leſt a grear many Soldiers who were little men s but I ill call*d

out to them to help one another, which they did 3 and I do verily believe, and have rea -

ſon to believe ſo, that had I nor unberhought me to makethoſe loop-holes in the Cham -

ber, and to have placed a good many Harquebuzeers there, as I had done, ſo tha their

ſhot continually rattled without intermiſſion, and that they had moreover open'd a win-

dow, through which two or three might fire ar once, we had loſt above a hundred men:

for from che Walls, and from the Barrels, from whence chey fir'd ar us, it was not a-

bove fx paces to the Bank of the River, vvhere our people landed. The Enfignsand Cap-

ra115 cncred che Barrels, which ſo ſoon as I perceiv'd, I immediately ſent to thoſe in che

Chamber to give over ſhootirg, by reaſon they might as well kill our own people as the

Encmy. To ſupply which our Harquebuzecrs who follovved the Enfigns ſhor at thoſe

vvichin, as vvell as they at rhem, and being c« me up to the Barrels, our Captains laid hold

on the brims of them, vyhich vvere nor half full of earth, the Enemy not having had

time to fill chem, and preſently I ſavy chem all crumbled dovvn on our fide, and che En-

Ggns and Caprains leapt into the Tovvn, vvhereupon the Enemy vvere ſuddenly pur to

reut, and fled dneGily to the Caſtle. Our people purſued and kill'd a great number of The Town ta-
them by the vvay, vvhen ſo foon as I ſavy them enter'd I return'd into the Screer , fo Ken.

vveary as in my lite I never tele my felt in ſuch a condition, by vyhich Ivery vvell favy

that I vvas no more to think of bearing arms, for I choughc above ren times that I thould

have fainted, and falln dovvn in the ſtreet. There is no remedy, vve cannor be tvvice.

The Chevalier de Remegas and Captain Fabian my Son ſupported me by che arms to Fon-

ca's Houſe, where I found his Wife, who preſently made me a Bed ready and pur me in-

roit, I found that had ſwear through my Bafte Collar, infomuch thac my very arms

were wet with it 3 we had brought no Baggage with us, bur had lefc ic at Sc. Manrice,

foraſmuch as I my ſelf had no very great hopes of bringing about my deſign, neither had

I any great reaſon to hope 1t ; wherefore my ſervants were fain to dry my Shirt thac I had

on, and all my other cloaths, which were almoſt in as bad a pickle, and ſo ſoon as the Che-

valier Remegas, my Son, and the other Gentleman had left me in the hands of my Ser-

'vants, they departed to go fall upon the Caſtle; when at their going away I ſaid to this

brave Chevalier, I have ſeen the time when for ſuch a dayes work as this I ſhould not have gc. Us
qnitted either Cask or Corſl:t, and had there been any appearance of danger, I might perh-ps Montluc's
have paſſed over the night in this Eſtate but there 5s no remedy , you young men muſt do words to the
what we 6'd men cannit. Having been in bed abourhalf an hour, and all my cloaths being Chevalier de
dry, Igor vp again, and fell co drefling my elf, which as I was doing there came in Romegas,
Monficur de $ :vignac, Captain Fabian, and ſome other Gentlemen with them) to tell me

thar thoſe of the Caſtle would ſurrender, and to know if I would conſent, that they ſhould

upon the Capiculation receive them to Quarter, Perceiving therefore that Monſieur de S -

vignac and Captain Falian had a great defire to ſave Favas, and to give him fair quarter,

becauſe he had the reputation of a good Soldier , and a gallant man; I told chem they

might grant them what condirions they ſhould think fi-, and that T would fign the Ca-

pitulation ; though inwardly I had a mind co make a diſpatch : which was che reaſon,

that ſo ſoon as they were gone from me, I ſent a Gentleman after to ſpeak ſecretly to the

Soldiers, and ſome of the Captains, that during the Parly they ſhould rake their opportu- The Sicur de
nity to enter in on one ſide or another, and_ to kill chem all : for thar we muſt revenge Montluc cauſes
the death of the Gentlemen who had been ſo barbarouſly maſiacred ar Navarreins, being bm to be all
- that contrary to Arcicle, and che publick faith they had ſab'd the Sicur de St. Colombe, pm

and ſeven or eight others, who had ſurrendred upon condirions of Quarter at Orthez, ar

the time when Monſieur de Terride was taken. The Encmy did this execution under pre-

rexc, thar they were the Queen of Nawvarre's SubjeRs z bur if the King offer to rouch an

one of her Subjects, they preſently ſay he cannor do it. allchings muſt be allowed co theſe

people, and nothing to us 3 bur I hope the time will come when che Dice ſhall turn, that

we may pay them in their own Coin.

> ——_——_At
_—

Y-y-A | [

——_—_ ww

140 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Book VII.

- th.
_——

I could not have commirced this execurion to a better hind chan to this Gentleman, he
being Coufin- German tothe Baron de Pordeac, who was one of thoſe that were maſlacred ;
and he had no ſooner ſpoken to two or three of the Captains, and co the Soldiers, bur
that they preſencly ran to ſeek out for Ladders, which clapping to a Canton of the Baſe
Court on thelefthand by the Galleries, whilſt the others were capitulacing ar the Gate,

Captain Favas they there entred and kill'd all chey found within, Captain Favas who was making con-

ſaved, ditions for them only :xceted, whom Monſicur de Savignac and my Son Fabian, fo ſoon
as they ſaw the diſorder pulled ro them, which was well for him, who had otherwiſe 1n-
fallibly gon to pot with the reſt. Our Horſe likewiſe who were on the right hand per-
ceiving that our people were within the Town, gallopped a litcle up the River, where they
found a Foard, which though it was very deep they notwithſtanding paſſed over, and
ran direQly to the Caſtle, on that ſide by the Religieux, where coming up juſt ac che time
when five and twenty or thirty threw themſelves out at the Windows, they ſav'd choſe
alſo, otherwiſe there had hardly been any one left to carry che news, bue Capcain Favas
only. And thus the Town was taken ; of which I immediately ſent an account to the
Mareſchal, and in the morning went my ſelf to vvait upon him, vvhere he promiſed me
co come upthe next day vvith all the Army, and I preſently recurn'd back to Mont de
eMarſan.

Accordingly in the morning the Mareſchal came art the time when I was taking the beſt
order I could to preſerve the Town from being further ſackt, bur I could do little good in

it s and asI wasgoing ont at one Gate to meet him, he cnterd by the other ; for T had
much ado to get our, by reaſon all his Army were got into the Streets, eſpecially che Horſe,
by whom I was told that he was gone directly to the place where onr people had encred,
where having ſeenall, and heard how all things had paſſed , he ſaid, Here was more of
fortune than reaſon. Many there were alſo who made a ſhew of rejoycing ar our ſucceſs,
that jn their hearts would have been glad I had recei\?d a baiz. Ar laſt with much a-
do 1 wasno ſooner got out, but that I was told he was already entred in; which made
mereturn, where I wasagain above half an hour ſo encloſed amongſt the Carriages, that T
could nor poſſibly ger out, but in the end I made ſhift to ger ro his lodging. His Mareſ-
chal de Camp quarter'd all the Cavalry in the Villages without the Town beyond the
River, the Infantry in the Suburbs, and che Gentlemen in the Town. I thought
Monfieur this ſncceſs would perſwade both him, and his Council alſo, to paſs the River, and
d' Anville's re= enter into Bearn, which we had infallibly carried , and compell'd the Count either to
ſolution to r&- fight , or to ſhut himſelf up in MNavarreins; bur he poſitively cold me, © That
OY &« he would return to look after his own buſineſs, in his own Government , and that he
« would not go to cugage himſelf before Towns in Bearn, having no Artillery to batter
&« withal ; and that he would not thar either che King or any other ſhould reproach him,
<« that he had ſpent his time in other Enterprizes than his own : that he had told che
The Sieur de © King at his departure what he intended to do, which he would alſo pur in execution,
Montluc's ad- ©& confidering that here he was cnly to fight with the Walls of che Towns of Bearn. I
vice ro the then remonſtrated co him, that che Count would infallibly take one of theſe wayes, either
Mareſchal, | hazard a Battely which 1 chought he would never dare to do, or to leave the Countr
ſo ſoon as he ſhould hear of our coming, or elſe would ſhut up himſelf in his Fortreſs
che laſt of which courſes I conceiv'd he would nor willingly take, but would rather chooſe
ro retire 2 andthat alſo we might eaſily have Canon from Dacqsand Tholowze, and thac
this being done, the Province of Guienne would be ar peace, that of Bearn reduc'd, and
all choſe in Languedoc would tremble at the report of our arms 3 thar if on the other ſide,
ſhould we follow in the ſaid Montgomery's Rear, we ſhould certainly trap him in one
place or another, in caſe we ſhould determine to purſue him where ever he ſhould go to
chat effet, All this I repreſented to the ſaid Mareſchal : but ke, half angry, and im-
portun*d by thoſe Gentlemen about him, objeRed difficulcy upon difficulty, and would
by no means give car to my advice» Now he had ſent the Baron de Þ Arbows towards A-
getman to enquire news of the Enemy, which Baron ſent him word by a Gentleman call'd
 Repegre of Monſieur de Gramont's Company, of the diſorder in which the Count de Mont-
gormmery had retreated into Bearn, and how his Artillery had for almoſt two dayes roge-
gether been abandoned upon the road co Orthez 3 and the Mareſchal himſelf was the fiſt
from whom ll heard it, and afterwards from others, as I (aid before,

The day before he intended to depart in order to his return, I had notice given me
chat he had diſpatched away the Sieur de Lyſſan towards the King, without ſaying a word
ro mes which Luſſan was my Enemy, becauſe I would nor ſuffer him co be Governour
of Leftoure, 1 thought it very ſtrange that he would ſay nothing come of it, and pre-
ſently apprehended that he had not made choice of this perſon to report avy good of me

for

m—
Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

for I knew he was not very well ſatisfied with me, foraſmuch as he alwayes held his
Conſulcations apart, calling no one to his Counſels but Monſieur de Jojenſe, Mecſſieurs
de Bellegarde, che Father and rhe Son, and Monſieur de 14 Croiſſette his Mareſchal de Camp.

Ic 1s not therefore to be wondred at if I cook it very ill that I was not admitted to the
Council, and that nothing was communicated to me, conſidering that I commanded the
Vaunt-guard, and was the i«cnd perſon in the Army, But it was ſo carried, and
T had reaſon to be highly offended at ir, very well diſcerning char theſe Conſultations were
held at our expence.

When I ſaw then that the reſolution was taken to return, I wentin the Evening to the
Mareſchal's Lodging, where I gave him to underſtand in the gentleſt cerms I could, (for
after that manner I was to proceed) © Thar I would ſend my Son to ſurrender up the The Sicuc de *
« Government to the King ; for that ſeeing he went away I very well ſaw, that all che fa- Montluc offers
& ry of the War would fall upon me, and that I had not forces to refiſt and hinder the ©2 1*y down his
« Enemy from doing what he pleaſed in the King's Territories, by which means all the pr py raning
<« honor and reputation I had acquit*d in the precedent croubles, in preſerving the Pro- |
« vince of Gxjenne, would be loſt and forfeited in this: that therefore I had much ra-
« ther another ſhould bear che blame than I, who never had other deſign than to end my
&« dayes with honour, and nothing more. To which he recurn*d me anſwer, © That [
<« ought not crodo it, neither ought I either to ſtomack any thing from the King, or to
6 be angry with my ſelf ; and that T knew very well, that alchough che King had con-
<« ferr'd upon him the Command of Gnienne, as well as the other Provinces, he did not
& nevertheleſs meddle wirh icar all, bur permitted me to govern as before, and ſhould be
« yery unwilling co aſurp upon my Authority, TI made anſwer, That this was an efte&
&« of hisown generoſity, and good nature, bur that his Parent. was ſo large, as did mani-
<« feſtly derrogate from mine, and thar whenever he would he might command as pleaſed
&« him, without leaving me the leaſt power ar all, no more than che pooreſt Cadet in Gaf-
&« cony, To which he replyed, That ir was true, bur chat my valour and experience were
&« ſo conſiderable, as would ever make me ſought after and courted. From thus lighc ftoun-
dation it aroſe, that I quitred my Government becauſe I would not obey him ; and afcer
chis manner it was reported to the King by che fore-named Captain Lyſſan, or another The Kiing diſ+
chat was ſent ro Court preſently after him : and this was it that made the King fo angry _ _
with me for quirting my Government, they having poſleſt him, chat it was only upon yooDorigg :
this account , which. I no more thought of than of cutting my own throat : buc I was |
born under a Planet co be evermore ſubje& rocalumny. I gave the Mareſchal an account
to the contrary, when, as ſick as I was, I went to him co Tholonze, fo ſoon as Þ heard he
was come thicher, to make him a voluntary and free tender of all obedience, and char wich-
out any letter or command from che King, the Queen, or the Monkeur.

By his it is eafie to judg whether the difference that grew betwixt usaroſe from thence,
So it was that I ſuſpeRed ſome foul play, foraſmnch as a certain perſon had ſenc ro Mon-
fieur de Noe Lieucenant ro Monſieur de Fontenilles, to come and ſpeak with him abour an The Sicur de |
affair that concern*d my life, Whereupon the (aid Sieur des Ne departed from Panjas, 9 gas
or elſe from Nogsarol, poſting away in all haſt, wichouc telling any one bur Monſieur de gy
Fontenilles onely ; and at his return finding us in Mont de Marſan, told Moniieur de Fon-
tenifles and me, that a man who never ſtir'd ont of the Mareſchal's Chamber, and might
hear all that was ſpoken, had ſaid co a friend of his theſe words3 44ontlac dreg nothing
bat eternally vex and importune the Mareſchal, bnt he will one day be laid dead npon the floor
with a ſtab. Tmmcdiately hereupon chis perſon came ro the Houſe of him who ſent for
Monfieur de Nee, and told ic him, that he might acquaint me vvith it, vvhich vvas che
occaſion that Monſieur de Nee had been ſent unto to go vyhere he did. Monſieur de Va-
lence my Brocher was ar this rime at Ganre, a place of his own within three leagues of
ont de EMarſan, to whom I ſent twice to beg of him with joynzd hands that he would
come to me ; burhe would by no means beentreated to it, what excuſes he made I have
now forgot, My deſign was to have had him diſcourſe chis affair wich the Mareſchal 1n
private berwixr them ewo only, where I intended to have dealc fo candidly with him, as
ro have nam*d che man who had ſpoke it, and chat was one of his own people : burir reſted
there, for I would nor intruſt che ſecret to any other : and although I cook no notice of ir,
yer it ſtuck damnably in my ſtomack, and TI have ſince wondred how I could command my
ſelf, by which I learnt to know, that Age deprives a man of his heat : for in my younger Fexr rhe cors
days the greateſt Prince upon earth could not have made me ſwallow ſuch a pill, The older to meroig wg
wegrow, the more our blood ſteals from our heart, and ic appears chat the nearer we ap- "
proach co dearh, che more we fear ic. Ir may be notwithſtanding that chis perſon might
make this ſtory of his own head, and that che Mareſchal never thought of any ſuch thing.

The

© 342 The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boos VII,

CR I TEE

The 1icxr morning I attended him ar his rifing, I had before day heard che Drums
beat in rhe fields, by break of day they began ro march, and ſo ſoon as the ſun was up I
went and knokt ar his Chamber door, . where a Valer de Chambre came our and cold me
he was not yet awake, though I had been told below, that Meſſicurs de Joxeaſe, the youn-
ger Bellegarde, and la Croiſette were all gone jn before, Neverthclels 1 walted half an
hour or more at the door, and in that time knockt three or four times, but no body would
ſpeak, though the Valer de Chambre, who cane out to me, was gone in againy and that
I] had intreaced him if the Mareſchal was awake to tell h.m that T was there. Ac laſt
being aſhamed to wait ſo long at his door, which never a Prince in Chriſtendom would
have ſuffercd me todo, I was conſtrain'd to go walk in a little Garden of the Houſe, nor
ſo ſlenderly atrended however, bat that I had wich me two hundred Gentlemen or more
of the beſt Familics of the Country, who were as ſenſible of che aftront, or more than 1,
and ſaid a great many paſſionace things to mez which though I knew very well co be
ſpoken our of the affc&tion and reſpeR they bore to me, yer asI was the oldcſt, I conceiv'&
] ought to be the moſt diſcreer, and to conſider that I ſhould put many things 1n hazard,
ſhould I come to an abſolute rupture with him. I waited above a long hour, what ar
his Chamber door, and in the Garden, and in the end came Monſieur de Bellegarde, who
' ſeeing the Gentlemen asked them where I was : They told him I was in the Garden
thorough which he was to go toenter into the Hall ; he then came to me, and asked me
why I did not go into the Mareſchal's Chamber , to which I made anſwer, That { had
been there, and had knocked ſeveral timer, but that no body wou'd ſpeak, He then told me,
that Monſieur de Fojeuſe, his Son, and Captain Croiſette had been there above an hour ;
whereupon I told him, That 1 did not underſtand why the Mareſchal ſhon!d make me dance
attendance at his Chamber door , that I had never given him occaſion to nſe me after that
manner, end that I had the honur from the King, the Queen, and the Monſieur all the while
they ſtayed in Guienne, that their Cham'er doors were never refuſed me, that I was not of a
condition to be ſo treated, but that ſinc? their Izcjeſties ſervice was intereſted in it I would make
no breach. He was very much troubled ar it, for he and I had been good companions and
friends, and there had never been the leaſt diviſion berwixc us till death made the ſepara-
tion. He then went and knocked at the Chamber door, which was immediately open*d
ro him, and as ſuddenly clapt to again upon me, at which all the Gentlemen adviſed
me to return to my Lodging, and to come up no more 3 but I wasreſolved co have pati-
ence, for which I have fince a- hundred times wondred at my ſelf, The ſaid Mareſchal
ſtayed yer above aquarter of an hour before he came out, after Monficur de Befegarde went
in, and atlaſt he came, where I forced my ſelf ro give him the good-morrow, and attend-
ed him to Maſs, where by the way I intreated him to leave me one of the Companies of
Monficur de Savignsc's Regiment, or two hundred Harquebuzeers, ll ſuch time as 1
had remov'd the grain that was inthe Town, that the Enemy might not make their ad-
vantage of ir, therewith to vitual Navarreins, there being by computation of Monſieur de
Cumies, and of thoſe he had employed to examine it, twelve hundred Wagon loads of all
| ſorts of grain inthe Town, as alſo by the account of the Providores, who had been joyn'd
with his Officers to look into that affair. For this City ſerves as a Granary to all che
Landes, and the Baſques Country, from whence, to the detriment of France, they cranſ-
port their grain into Spain, and it 15 ſaid to be one of the beſt Corn- Markets in the King-
Mont de May. dom. He then mounted to horſe, and I went to wait upon him ont of Town, and in fo
ſan rhe Gra- doing found my {elf alone, not one of the Gentlemen that were with me once offering to
nary of Gaſco- mount, to paſs that Complement upon him ; bur whether they did ir becauſe cheir Horſes
vl were not ready, or that they had nogrcat mind to go, I know not, and ſo he departed.
Immediately after his departure I diſpatcht away Captain Fabian my Son with letters co
the King, to ſurrender the Government into his Majeſties hands, bur when he came to
Bourg de Dieu, he was taken by the Enemy, and there loft his Letters , which was che
cauſc that he could not deliver his Majeſty the reaſons that mov'd me to quit my Govern -
ment, which made his Majcſty exceedingly offended with me, thinking it was becauſe I
would nor obey the Mareſchal 4 Anville, as Captain L»ſſan had given him to underſtand.
A thing that never centred into my chought ; bur I foreſaw the Tempeſt, and would
therefore retire to give others leave to do better.
| The thing was evident enough by the report of ſeveral as well of the one as the other
A diſcourſe ups Religion, that had che Mareſchal paſſed the River the Count de Montgommery had infal-
on rhe rerreat. [jbly retarn'd from whence he came ; for to have put his Army into Navarreins he could
ef rhe Marel= 1 doit, by reaſon there was no proviſion, and inthe other places of Bearn yer much
chal @ Azville. le £ ps Tn” Y
| leſs, For which reaſon it would neceſlarily have followed, that neceffiry and famine would
haye compell'd him to return headlong to the place frem whence he came, and to aban-

don

Book VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

don the Country co us ; when it would have been a thing of no manner of difficulry for
us to have defearced him either in front or rear, nay the very Peaſants would have diſor-
der'd him, who would have taken heart ſceing us ſo near, and never have ſuffer 'd him to
paſs che Rivers, And it he himſclt will confeſs the truth, as others who were wich him
have done, he ever gave himſelf for loſt, cill he heard chat che Mareſchal retir'd : and
to think of fighting a Battel he could never do it, conſidering the odds of Forces we had
againſt him. He alwayes ſaid, that he had two great Maſtifs at his breech, and that there-

fore it would Le ſtrange he (hunld eſcape , but that he would ſell his chin as dear as he could,

On the other fide, char I ſhould imagine the Mareſchal retreated out of cowardize, no
man living can ſay that ; for to this hour that was never reported of him ; he is of two
brave a Race, and has ever given proof to the contrary, and TI eſteem him a great Captain,
who 1s able to do a great deal of good, and a great deal of harm whenever he pleaſes, and
alchough ſome have cenſur'd and aſperſt him, becauſe he was ſo near the Admiral, I, for
my part, had never any iuch opinjon of him. I know not what he may do hereafcer, I
never knew hum other chan a faithful ſervant of che Kings ; bur he ought not to have us
{ed me after this manner. T had ſeen too much boyl'd and roſt in my time, Ir was nor
then fear char made him to retire, for his Forces were ſo much greater than thoſe of che
Enemy) that we had defeared che Count de Montgummery with our Cavalry alone, and
our Argonlers, winch we would have diſmounted, without ever engaging our Foot in the
buſineſs. For ar the Battel of Yer Monfieur de Daras had thrice as many Foot as che
Count de /Aontgommery, and a great many more Horſe, better men, and better Officers,
and we were not ſo many Horſe by cwo thirds as we were here, and yet we defeated them
and won the Barrel, Ir cannot therefore be ſaid char he did ic our of fear of being beaten,

.-.. conſidering he had folictle reaſon + bur it was our misfortune chat ic was fixt in the Ma-

reſchal's favcy, and more in that of his Council, chat he ſhould ruine himſelf before the
Towns of Bern, and do no good, not knowing rhe ſteriliry of che Country, as we did,
and that Monſieur de Terride had ſo devour'd all the proviſions of choſe parts, that there
could be none lefc fax the Count de Iſontgommery had he ſtayed there. Had it pleaſed
God that che Mareſchg#had not been ſo bent upon returning into Langzedoc, to purſue
his own defigns in choſeWgarts, or that his Council had been of an opinion contrary to him,
and chat he had WOE the River, it had been a happy thing, and of infinite ad-
vantage to us : and on the Gntrary turn'd very much toour prejudice; for he went and
engag'd himſclt before MMazeres, where heloſt a great number of che beſt Soldiers hehad,
and almoſt rvin*d his Armyg without being able to make any other attempt. By which
means there was nothing ah of any moment cither in Langmedoc or Guienne, bur utterly
undoing the pzople, our own Forces having in all parts done as much miſchief, as the Ene-
my themſelves, Neither was it poſſhble ro be avoided, by reaſon of the great number of
Gens arms, Light-horle, Argoulers, and Foot that we had , who muſt all of neceffity
live vpon free quarter. Thus did all che MareſchaPs Forces, which were ſufficient both to
defear Mentoommery, and afterwards to make head againſt the Admiral, moulder away
and vaniſh without performing any thing worthy co berepeared..

I have ever obfery'd, that when Almighty God is not pleated that matters ſhall ſucceed
as men deſire, he infatuates their Councels, and turns che will of the Chicf, and of his
Counſellors quite contrary to what they oughc to do. His name be praiſed for all, fince i
was his Divine pleaſure to have things go as they did. There is no one, afcer the people, thar
{marrs for it but 1, becauſe I incurr'd che Mareſchal's disfavour by ſpeaking the truth.
He ought in reaſon to have lov*d me more than choſe char counſell'd him to do contrar
co what I advisd him ; but iis the Law of Bearn, The beaten muſt bear the blame; for
the King has approv'd, and ratified all char the Mareſchal did , and diſallowed and con-
demned all my doings, and indeed I declin'd towards my ſetting, and was no more a-
dor'd like a riſing Sun, and yet Lam as innocent and unblameable of chat faulc (if fault
there was) as I had never been born into che world, of which I deſire no other ceſtimo=
ny chan the three Eſtates of Guienne, and Languedic which 1s neighbour to it, who know
how all chings paſſed, and have ſmarted for che miſeries of Gaienne, and dare moreover
ſtand to the depoſitions of all the Captains, three or four excepred , who were of the
Council, for thoſe were the cauſe of the evil, I am not the firſt who tor well doing have
been paid with chis Coin, of which I have given Exemples enow 1n this Book, and find
ir a good marcer to be a grear Lord ; for a little Companion as I am mult alvvayes bear che
burthen, and 1s evermore {ubje& to the forementioned Lavv of Bearn. The (aid Mareſ=
chal had rcaſon, I confeſs, to have a mind co employ his men and his money in Langue-
dog, and 1 had alſo reaſon to defire him in Gaienne. If he vvas noc able to undercake for
them both , vvhy did he cauſe Gzienne to be inſerted in his Patent ? Thar vvhich vve

might

The Siepe of
Maxer CSe

Law of Bear;

F

344

The Commentaries of Meffire Blaize Book VII
might have done in fifteen dayes, to wit, the defeating or driving away CMontgommery
would have been of 5reater advanrage, than che taking of three or four paltry Towns in
Languedsc. Bur I have (aid eno1gh of this diſpute, which rum'd che Kings affairs in thoſe
parts ; I ſhall therefore purſue my diſconrſe ro tell you what hapned after,

The departure of che ſaid Marcſchal pur our affairs into very great diſorder, aucl ver
much encourag?d our Enemies. As for my own part, in five Companies that I had there was
not left two hundred men, by reaſon they wzre ſtoln away, with what booty chey had gor,

The inconve- every man to his own houſe. This is the inconvenience of making war with che people of
mr ot m2= the Country. They mnſt go ſee Wife, they muſt go carry home their Baggage, and be-
OT 4 has a Couſin, a Broth Friend wich che E hom he h
Soldiers, Na- fides every one has a Couſin, a Brother, or a Friend with che Enemy, to whom he has a
tives of the regard, and of whom he has care. And-as to the Cavalry we had, they could nor ſub-
ſ2me Country fiſt in leſs than five or fix leagues of the Town, by reaſon the Enemy had devout'd one

where the parc of the proviſions of the Country, and our own people the other, and the Country

—_ of War of ir {elf was barren. However I ſtayed four or five dayes after che Mareſchals departare,

caufing three or four hundred Waggon loads of grain to be remov'd from thence, which
I carried to Exſe, and other adjacent places, that che Enemy might nor therewith vi=
Qual their Towns in Bearn : bur I muſt have carried away fitceen hundred load or more
ro have rcemov*dit all 5 and had my five Enfigns been complear, as ar my coming thicher,
I would have engag'd my (elf in ir, chough I was cercain not to be reliev d, tor I have
committed as greac follies in my life as that, and hitherto (blefled be God) never mer
wich any miſadventure ; nor did his Majeſties affairs ever ſuffer by thoſe hazards, I chen
retir*d rowards Apenois, leaving the S;cur de CManteſpan, Son to the Baron de Gondrin,
with his Father's Company of Gens-d'arms in Exſe, together with another new Com-
pany of Foot, rhat was then raiſing in thoſe parts, not to endure a Siege, for the Town
was naught z bur only a litcle co favour the Country, and that we might not ſeem total -
ly to abandon it, though we knew very well that his ſtaying there would fignihie lircle
Monfieur 'de ©r nothing. 1 ſent Monſicur de Fontexilles alſo into the Country of Bigorre, to ſee if he
Monteſpan in could do any thing on that fide to amuze the Enemy, bur all this was no remedy for fo
Euſe. ercat a diſcaſe. I ſhall nor here take upon me to give a particular account of the defeat
of Captain Arne, and che Baron de / Arbows, for as much as I did not place thern there,
where they were defeated 5 bur fo it was, chat I ſent however to Captain Arne to tell
him, That he wag a Soldier, and mnſ# needs know that in the place where be was he could
expett nothing but diſaſter, and that therefore [ conceiv/d he would do well to retire to Auch,
Captain Arne Thich was an encloſed Town, bat he ſent me word, that he was placed there, and was there-
flaing fore reſolved rather to dye than to ſtir a foot from thence. It was not above four dayes af-
ter I had given him this advice that news was brought me of his defezr, and ewo dayes
after that of his death, which was a great damage to the Kings ſervice, and a great loſs to
his Country ; for he was a fine Gentleman, and a valiant man, and one of whom we had as
great an eſteem, as of any Captain whatever of Guienne. |
Now ſoon afcer the Mareſchal being about Aazeres, and I in eApenits, the Count de
Montgommery did like the Wolves whom hunger forces'our of the Woods, and came inco
Armagnac, by little and liccle moving cowards Condemmors. He had cauſed three pieces
of Canon ro be brought, and ewo Culverines to batter Eaſe, knowing very well that there
was no body 1n it bur Monſieur de fonteſpan with his Father's Company of Gens-Iarms,
and the new-raiv?4 Company of Foot that I had ſent him. So ſoon therefore as the Ar-
tillery was come co Nogwarol, that he had ſent to diſcover the Enemy, and that the Hu-
gonot Kindred and Friends he had, had given him notice of che preparacion againſt him,
he ſent me word of it. I had no body to ſend to reinforce him, and leſs power of my
ſelf to relieve him, neither was there any reliet to be expeted ; for the Mareſchal was
either lying before 2azeres, or elle retir'd ro Tholswzr, I therefore ſent him word,
That 1 would not he ſhould follow the exemple of Captain Arne, and that it was enough ne
had loſt one brave and valiant (aptain, and one Conspany of Gens-T arms, without loſing two ;
that therefore he ſhsuld retire and take along with him all the Prieſts and Religious people of
the Town, together with all the rich Catholick Merchants, and eſcape to Letoure. which
he accordingly did ; for alchough I had ſenc co ſurrender my Goverment, I did not for
all chat forbear to do all that lay in my power for the ſervice of my King and Country,
bur raiſed five or fix Companies about Yille-nexufze and Florence, leaving one old and rwo
new Companies at the ſaid Florence, and four (with that of che Governnor Monſieur de
Panjas ) at Leftoure, which were enow, by reaſon that all che Gentry of Armagnac with
cherr Bamilics were recir'd into that place, which made the Town ſo full tha no more
could lodg there : and theſe things being done I came to Agen, where I heartned the
Inhabitants the beſt I could, and ſtayed there for ſome dayes, The Count de Montgomery

then

po nt DEE EL Iact teas a We :

Boox VII. &de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. : 2 45 |

then came to Enxſe, where (o ſoon as he was arriv*d che Hugonots of Candow (who had
liv'd at home under protection of the Kings EdiQ, having evermore hypocritically profeſt

not totake arms, relying npon his Maj(ſties Royal word, and had been uſed with greater

humanity than the Carholicks themſelyes) berook themſelves to arms , and went to ſeek

outthe Count de Montgomery at Enſe, who durſt advance no further, nor had not done,
had I had bur four Companies onely to put into Condow. But they all aſlur*d him thac I The Count de
had no men, nor means to raiſe any to make head againſt him, and chat therefore he might rang. =
ſecurely come, and fo chey allar'd him to Condoms. Theſe were the fine fruics of the fine ren
Bdi& they perſwaded the King to make , that provided the Hngonots ſtirr'd not from

their Houſes, no one thould demind any thing of them. I have ſpoken of chis ſuffici-

enfly elſewhere; though, if I would, I have a great deal more to ſay, and of greater im-

portance, bur it would do no good, for the King would rake no order in it, fince thoſe a-

beat him will have it as 1c 18,

A few daycs afrer we heard news of the Viſtory God had given the King, thorough the The Viftry of
valour and condu&t of the Monſieur, Brother to the King, and the Captains he had a- Moncontow?.
bout him, and that the Princes and the Admiral, with the remains of the Battail of one
contoxr were moving towards Limoſfia ; every one that came; telling us thar they marchc
direQly to la Charite, which was the reaſon that I ſent for Monſieur de Leberon ar £:1-
bexrne, to come with four Companies he had there and ar St, Foy, to port St, Aaries
and eAgvillm. He had before ſent me one, which I had lefe at St. Sever, before it was
loſt under Captain Eſpiemont d* Avila, and I had allo ſent another to Dacqs under Cap-
rain Teyſſander de Florance', and the ſaid Eſpiemont was conſtrain'd to retire to Dacgs,
afcer the fine piece of work the Captain of the Caſtle had made, who would have dif-
charg'd himſelf upon Caprain Montant, and was upheld by ſome abour the Mareſchal,
who wererclaced to him. Bur I referre it to the truch, which thoſe of the Town did no
wayes conceal, and never after receive him, The Ciry of Apen and the Clergy there, had
ſera foot a Company of two hundred Strangers attheir own charge, commanded by one
Captain Rephael an Italian, who was married in the Town,

The ſaid Count de Montgomery remained fix or ſeven weeks at Condom, wherein he
commited an error z for had he followed his blow he had pur a great many to their
cumps : bur who 1s 1t that is never miſtaken? The Mareſchal's Camp was at Tholoaze,

Granade, and thereaboutsz they had no great fancy to bite one another, for they never

ſo much as gave one another an Alarm, The Mareſchal had put out Monſieur de Fonte-

nifes from the place to which I had ſent him, and taken from him the Command I had

given him 1n choſe parts, and order'd me to be about Beaumont de Lomagne, openly u-

ſarping upon my Government, according to his Patent, He ſent likewiſe to the Baron

de Gondrin, Signicur de Monteſpan (whoſe Father lay fick ar Lefogre) to come to him,

giving orders every where that none ſhould obey me in the leaſt y for that I was no miore

che Kings Lieutenant, bur that he was the man. He writ twice alſo to Monſieur de Ma-

daillan, thar he ſhould nor fail to brivrg his Company to him, who both cimes recurned

him anſwer, 7 hat the Company was mine, and none of hls, and that it was nt in his power

20 bring it to him and al] the affronts he could pur upon me, he did, This nothing con-

cern'd me in my own particular, for what I did was in order to his Maj:ſties ſervice, and

for the conſervation of the Country, Behold how particular animofities occaſion a gene-

ral ruine! notwithſtanding I did nor for all this forbear ro aR, as it T had ſtill been che

King's Lieutenant ; and it was requiſite for the poor Country's intereſt, that I ſhould

not regard the injuries he put upon me 3 for my deſpite might have done a great dealof

miſchief. Being che Son of a Conſtable of France, and himſelf a Mareſchal, I did by

no means diſdain to be commanded by him, had he been pleaſed ro command me, and char

he would have done his duty. Bur ſo ic was, chat heas much as in him lay craverſt all p;4Gon bez
my defigns for che conſervation of Gxienne, which ſtood in much greater need than Lan» rwixr the Mas |

guedoc, In the mean time news was brought us, that the Princes and the Admiral were reſchal d'an-

in Perigord, and took the way of Qwercy to retire to Montanban, by which 1 very well mou oa ine.
anderſtood, thar chey came to take Montgomery along with them, to reinforce them- | oy Te.
{elves with his power, wichout which it would be a matter of very great difficulty for chem The Princes
ro march thorough ſo many leagues of the Country. I have fince a hundred and a hun- move towards
dred times wondred, that ſo many great and prudent Leaders, as were in the Monſieurs Mongommery.
Army ſhould pitch upon ſoill a reſolation, as co fall to the beſieging of places, in ſtead of
purſuing the Princes, who were routcd, and reduc*d to that extremity, that they had no
pollible means to {er themſelves up again, infomuch char had the people had Forces to pur-

ſue chem, they had with grear facility been all cur to pieces, *Tis {aid that we our (elves Soldiers

| uſe to
who bear arms, ſpin our wars 1n length, and ſtretch the thons to the urmoſt, as men of ſpin our a wars
7. »

the

346

The Commentaries of Meſhre Blaize Book VII,

the long Rube do 'Suits 1n Law at the Palace, Let the Devil rake all ſuch. I for my parc

The Commens
dation of the
Chevyalicr de
Romegass

had never any ſuch in:ention, and can ſay with truth, that never a Kings Lieutenant in
Fr arce has made more Hugonots paſs the Knife and the Halter than 1 have done : which
was not the way to prolong the var.

Bur to return to my ſubjcR, having heard which way the Princes took, without de-
claring my intention to any one, being in Monſieur de Gondrin's Lodging ar L:Oure, 1
{cnt for Mcnſicur de Panjas, the Chevalier de Rimzegas, and the Chevalier my Son, Mon-
[icur de Gondrin wzs fick, and there told them That 1 was old, and nit able to nndergo the
labour, incaſe w? ſhin!d be befiea'ds that therefore to eaſe my ſelf, I would remit the care to
govern the Town , as 16 the Civil Regiment thereof, to Monſieur de Panjas, and as to what
concern'd the defence of it, and what ſhould be neceſſary thereunto, I would transfer the
Charge thereof to the ſid (hevalier de Romegas, and the Chevalier my Son, who had both
Leen engag'd inthe Sicge of Malta, the miſt furirus Sirge that ever was ſince Artillery was
fir ſt known in the wirld 5 by which they muſt needs better know what belong'd to defence, and
nhat was fit to bedont, than I my ſeif ; and being (Companions and Brothers of the Order of
St, John's of Hieruſalemy world alſo agree ſo much the better together. That herein the Che
walier wy Son ſh04'd bey that of Romegas, both in regard he was the elder, and alſo byreaſon
he had commanded at ſea, in three or four Naval Engagements, where my Son had been with
him (in truth he was a man of as much conrage and bravery as any I ever knew) and that
in the mean time 1 would go to Agen , to take the beſt Order I could for the defence of that
City. They all approv'd of my determination, and the ewo Qhevaliers would not make
the Quarters but hand in hand together, beginning from the very inſtant co redouble che
work of the Fortification, and Monſieur de Panjas as Governor provided them all things

_ rhey requir'd. The nexc morning I went to Agen, Monfieur de Valence my Brother being

The City of
gen in feat,

The Gentle-

men of Gaſcony
ſend an Envoy
io the Marc{-
chal C4 Anville.

retir dinto L:F#oure, ] had a day ortwo before fent my Wife and my two Daughters co
Bordeaux, and when I came to Agen Monſieur de Caſſanenil to whom I had committed
the Charge of Y1ille-nexfue and the adjacent Country, (although I had confer1?d the Go-
vernment of it upon Captain Pa#ulhac the elder, yer they agreed very well together ) ſent
me word joyntly with Captain Pawlhzc, that the Princes were come to Montanban, and
were reloly'd imm&diarely to fall upon Yile-neafue, Whereupon I immediately ſent les
Feroax his Company and another, to two new Companies they had already within the
place, with abonc a hundred Haquebuzeers belonging ro the ſaid Captain Paulhac the
Governor, and ſome chirty or fourty Gentlemen of thoſe parts, who were retir'd with
them into the Town. I then return'd to Leftoare, where I did not ſtay above three or
four dayes ; for neither my age, nor my indiſpoſition would permit me to ſtay long in a
place z where news was brought me, char the City of Agen was entred into a ſudden fear,
and that every one began to truſs np their Baggage to be gene, ſo that the Town was in
danger to be wholly abandoned, This news was drought me overnight, which Icommn-
nicared to all the Gentlemen in the Town, telling them thar T would go in the morning,
which they were all contented I ſhould, provided IT would return back to the faid Le-
Honre ; for to engage my (elf in Agen would, they ſaid, be the greateſt folly that was ever
commurted by man, it being plainly to be diſcern®d by every one, that the rwo Armies of
the Enemy would infallibly atraque that place. T chen aſlui*d them, chat I would not
cngage my (elf chere : whereupon they asked me, if I thought it convenient that they
ſhould write a Lecter to the Mareſchal in the behalf of all the Gentry of Armagnac, to ens
creat him to come with his whole Army to fight Montgommery ar Condom, betore the Ar-
mies ſhould joyn, afluring him that the ſaid Montgomery would never engage himſelf
in the Town, which was not tenable, and co be entred in ſeveral places at pleaſure, and
to make him an offer every man to die with him for his Majeſties ſervice, and che
reſecclement of every one in his own houſe, To which Ireturn*d them anſwer, thar I
did highly approve of it, and that they could do noleſs, than to ſend a Gentleman to him
co implore his aſſiſtance ; who therefore made choice of Monſieur de 1a Mothe Gendrin
for theix Envoy, 1 would bait in the morning before I went, becauſe ic was five long
lezgues from thence to Agen, and the worlt way in Winter in che world, Being we were

' ar this time in fear, I had writ to Monſieur de Montferran of Agen, who liv'd our of

Monſicur de
Montferran's
offer,

Town, that he muſt needs make all the means he poſſibly could, ro bring us four or five
hundred Harquebuzeers 3 to which he return'd me anſwer that in eighc dayes he would
bring a thouſand before eAgen; which made me, though I knew very well, that the Mareſ-
chal took no delight in my Letters, however co write ro him (for a man mult waye a par-
ticular ina great concern) ſending Monſieur de ontferrar?s Letter encloſed within mine,

and aſſuring him upon my honor to bring another thouſand to bruſh Montgomery, for T
had a very good mind to be at him.

During

—

Boox Vit. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. my

During theſe poſtings to and tro, the Princes ſojourn'd ar Afontawban and the adjoyn= The Princes ac
ing Country, as they had good need to do for they had not a horſe that was able to ſet Montayban.
one foot before another, as ſeycral who were with them have confeſſed to te fince, having
been conſtrain'd to leave above four hundred by che wayes as they came, by reaſon they
had no meansto ger them ſhud. And juſt as I had din'd there came another Meſſenger
to me from Agen, who had ſet out from therice at midnight, to give me notice that che
Merchants began to calk of gerring their wares ont of Town, bur that the Sieur de Lande
and the Conſuls would keep them from doing ir, till ſuch time as chey ſhould receive
an anſwer to the Lectcr they had ſent me, and as I wastaking horſe, ſome body, I cannot
cell. who, came and read me rhe Letter che Gentlemen had writ to the Mareſchal, which
I did not much mind, my thoughts being wholly caken up with the concern of Agen : buc
I cold them, That I thought it was well, Int that nevertheleſs they ſhould ſhew it to Monſieur
de Valence, toſce if there was nothing in it that might give the Mareſchal offence ; and ſo
got on horſcback, ma'.1ng all re haſte I could ro Agen. Being come thicher I found
every one in che greareſt trar imaginable; che Church men, the Counſellors, all the Pre-
fidial Court, and one M:rchan's bufie, packing up to be gone. I was no ſooner alighted
bur that 1unmediately the Sieurs dela Lande, de Nert, their Sons, and ſeveral othcrs came
and told me thar all che whole City were at their wits end. Ichereupon bad chem torth-
wich to repair to che Town: Hall, and to call chither all che Chief men of the City, the
Clergy, and Magiſtracy, and cogive me notice ſo ſoon asever they were met together, for
I would go ſpeak with them. They accordingly did ſo, neither did they need to uſe
many entreaties, for rich and poor, every oneran to ſee me, and to hear whac I would ad-
viſe them ro do. When (o ſoon as I came into the Hall (which was ſo full chat five or
fix Genclemen I had brought along with me had much ado: to crowd in) I plac'd my

{elf iv the middeſt of them, to rhe end that every one might hear me, and ſpake co them
ro this effect. |

CR —————..

——

Gentlemen, | | Fo. | |
« 7 Oa have twice in one day advertiz'd me, that the greateſt part of che Inhabicants pe wg of
" Yo chis Ciry are upon the point co forſake it, and to retire themſelves to Bordeaux, bs hoſe
« Tholouze, andother places of ſafety ; and in ſhort, thac your whole Cicy was in fears of "qgep,
« T ſee very well thac this apprehenſion has ſceiz'd you upon a conceit you have taken that
« T would abandon you mn ſuch a neccfhhty, and that I had retir'd my ſelf to LeGonre,
&« becauſe itisa good place : which I have reaſon to take very unkindly at your hands,
&« foraſmuch as you have nevet heard that either in /taly, or in any other place T have ever
« done at which ought to render me ſuſpeRed, that fear ever made me berake my (elf
© to ſtrong places; but, on the contrary, have ever engag'd my perſon in the weakeſt and
« [eaſt renable co make head againſt the Enemy. My renown is not o little in the
« World, nor confin'd ro Guienne alone I am reputed for ſuch throughout all 1taly;
&« and chrough all France. And now that Iam going down into the Grave , can you
« imagine my good friends) that I would at one clap loſe what Thave with ſo much ſwear
© and blood been one and fifty years, that I have born arme, in gaining? You muſt re-
«reſolve upen three things ; Fuſt, co throw away all apprehenſion that may have ſurpriz*d
« you, and tread ic under foot, that it may never riſe again 3 Secondly, to agree amongſt
« your ſelves to be all of one mind and will, | and nor to ſpare your Eſtates in what I ſhall
« dire you, ſpeedily and diligently to provide all char ſhall be neceſſary for the defence
« of your City : and thirdly, to pay an abſolute obedience co fix or eight of your Corpo=-
« ration whom I ſhall chooſe for you, or that you ſhall.make choice of your ſelves, to take
& care as well for the fortifying, as furniſhing proviſions, and all things neceſſary for your
&« defence, Which chree things, 1f you ſhall think fic co grant me, I do ſwear to you by
« Almighty God, holding up my hand, That I will live and die wich you; and moreover
« do engage (luch is the hope and confidence I have inhis Divine aid) thatI will ſecure
« your Town from che Two Armies of the Enemy * for in my life, thorough Gods afli-
® ſtance, 1 have done greater miracles than this. As therefore you ſee my Countenance
« fyll of reſolacion to defend you ; 1 defire alſo to (ce the fame in yours) that I may know
« you will accompliſh cheſe three ihings 1 requeſt ar you hands. I know there will be
«{ome who will grumble at che chatge and expence they muſt neceſſarily be ac ; bac ler
« (ach confider what will become ot chem it the Enemy make themſelves maſters of the
«Town, as doubtleſs chey will if you pur-not-to you urmoſt force and endeavour to Pre=
« yent them, Whar will chen become ot your Goods, your Eſtates, your Houſes, and your
« Wives and Children, if they falonce into their hands, who rnineall thar they ſabdue?
4 All things will be curn'd cophics.urvy 3 *cis for wy you fight, and alſo and principally
7 2 \ for

nds th, Ges

The Commarits of Meſlire Blaize Book VII,

The Inhabi-
rants of Agen
take heait,

&« for the honour of God , and the conſervation of your Churches,, which in the firſt
© Troubles were ſcratch only by theſe people your Enemies 3 bur if they enter now, will
& be raz*d and levell'd with the foundations, as you ſee they have done at Condoms. Since
& ] am with you, believe me Gentlemen, they will think on?c thrice before they will come
« to atraque us; and if they come, though this City be none of the ſtrongeſt, I will make
« them know, that I know both how to aſſault, and co defend. Grant me then chis
©« chat I requeſt of you, which is in your power to do, and believe thac I will lay down
« my life for your preſervation, If you are nor reſolv?d ro employ the wet and the dry, thac
© js to ſay, to do what good Citizens ought to do, never engage your {elves and me too,
© but rather ler ſuch as are afraid retire in good time, and ler me deal ic with the reſt who *
© are ready and willing ro die for their Country,

The Sjeurs de Blgzimond, then, and de 1a Lande ſpeaking for all the Clergy, told me in
few words, That all the Clergy will lay down their lives and fortunes in the common defence,
would ſerve me in what ever 1 would demand of thems, and cutry one take arms and be asready
fur aftion as the Soldiers themſelver. The Lawyers promis'd the ſame after whom the
good old man de Nort ſpake in the behalf of the whole Ciry, thar they would do the ſame
that che Clergy, and thoſe of the Long Robe had engag*d to doz nay more (for it was nor
fic for them to be at continual labour) bur that all choſe of the Ciry, boch Rich and Poor,
Women and Children, without exempring any one, ſhould puc their hands co the work,
Now before I would ſuffer Meſſieurs de Blazimond, and de la Lande to ſpeak, I entreated
them, thar all thoſe who ſhould anſwer, would ſpeak ſo loud that every one might hear
them ; which they alſo did, and when all che chree Orders had made an end of ſpeaking,
I ſtrain'd my voice, and faid, Have you all heard what theſe Gentlemen have propos d who
have ſpoken in the behalf ef the whote City 2 to which they cried our that they had ;
whereupon as I had held up my hand, I made them hold up theirs, and take the ſame
Oath I had taken ; which being done, 1 defir'd them every one to withdraw to provide
all ſorts of Inſtruments, and chat I would retire co my Lodging with the principal men
of the City, to make election of the eight who were to govern over them : bar being ir
was already almoſt night they entreated me , that ſeeing they were all rogether, I would _
give them leave to make eleftion of the eighr, that I would pleaſe in the mean time, to
xetireto warm my ſelf, and ro get my Boots offyand that the nexc morning they would brin
mea Liſt of their Burgers names, of them to make ele&ion which eight I ſhould think
fir. And fo I withdrew to my Lodging, where after ſupper there came to me Meſſiears
de Blazimond and dela Lande, the good man de Nort and his Sons, with ſo great joy, as
more could not be expreſt ; telling me that the Merchants who had pack'd up their Mer-
chandize, and a good many of them already loaded them in Waggons had unloaded all,
and that they thought never City was overjoy'd as theirs was, and that ſo much as to the
very Women and Children there was no other talk but of fighting, knowing the reſolu-
tion that I had taken to tarry amongſt them.

Companions, you who ſhall rake the pains to read my life, you may take fair exem-
ples by me. This people, who were all cheir wits end, and ready to over-run the City,
immediately at my word only reaſſum'd ſuch courage, that I will be bold to ſay with
truch, no manever after diſcover*d the leaſt apprehenſion in them z chough to ſay the cructh
they had no great reaſon to be ſo ſecure, rhe Town being of two great a circuit well to be
defended, commanded moreover by a Mountain , and too Armies ready to fall upon us
ar once, Belieye me, Companions, when I tell you, rhat upon your reſolution depends
thac of all the people, who take courage, as they ſee you do. And how great a good
ſhall you do, beſides the honour you acquire to your (elves, to ſave a poor City from the
Sack? ſo many Families ſtand eternally oblig d to you, and nor only the City it felf, bur
the whole Country alſo : for the taking of che Capital City of a Province ordinarily
draws after it the loſs of a whole Seneſchalfie. I, but you will ſay, a man muſt then ſhuc
himſclf up in a place where he can acquire honour : and where will you have chat co be,
in a Caſtle of Millan ? it cannot be there; for there it is the ſtrength of che walls thacr
defends you ; but ic muſt be in a place that you ſee to be of publick concern, ler it be
never ſo weak. A good heart ts a good Fortreſs. I could have ſtayd at Lefonre, and have
hearkned how the ſquares went. I had nothing to loſe at Agen, and could juſtly have
laid all the blame upon the Mareſchal , who had ſhoulders broad enough to bear it, bur
this good City being taken, I ſaw all the Country was loſt, In a time of need and dan-
ger therefore thew that you have a heart to drive fear out of others, and in ſo doing you
will alwayes appear to be what you are; and aſſure your ſelves that the Enemy ſeeing
ſuch a man engag'd in a place, will think on't thrice before he will once come to

attaque

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

atraque you. I have (as you may have obſerv'd before) ever had char good fortune, the
Spaniards, Italians, Germans, and French Hugonots have been afraid eicher to abide, or
co attaque me, Ger then this p1iviledge over you Enemy , as you will do in doing well,

and giving teſtimony of a good heart, and an undaunted courage.

7

»
-
*

Three or four dayes after I writ ro the Gentlemen who had thecharge of Le&onre, and
principally to the Chevalier de Romegas, and the Chevalier my Son, exhorting them to
employ all they had learnt ar the Siege of Malta, and todo as well as they had done there;
for that their honour would be withour compariſon much greater in ſerving their own
Prince and Coantry, than in a forreign Soyl. I alſo conjur'd every one to obey them, con-
fidering thac there was not a man in the Town that had ever been in a Siege bur they ewo :
for as for my part I w 15 reſolv'd not toſtir from Agen, but would dis in the defence thereof.
They were very much aftonitht when they read my I etter, which they communicated co
one another, and immediately return'd me another back, ſabſcrib*d by the Sieurs de Gondrin,
de Pangas, de la Mothe Gondrin, de Romegas, de Maigr as, and the Chevalier my Son, where-
in they wric me word, * Thar they did all very much wonder that I would fo far forget my
< (elf, as ro engage my perſon in ſo weax a Town as Aper, and {0 commanded by Moun-
* cains as it was. That for certain the Artillery was ſet out from Navarreins,and chat the five
« pieces which wereat Nogaarol had not {tiri*d from thence, bur had Rtayd for the coming
& of che reſt; that therefore chey did beg of me to come ro Lefonre, and that the Che-
« valier de Romegas and my Son would go pur themſelves into Agen, who being young
& and reſolute, it they ſhould miſcarry, the loſs would not be ſo great 3 and that on the
© other fide, ſhould I abandon the field, all the reſt of the Country would be ruin'd and
«loft. Ireturn'd them anſwer, Thar I gave them many thanks for the admonitions they
<« had given me, which though I did acknowledge to be rarional and true; yer I knew ve- . |
& ry well alſo that they gave them our of compaſſion and fear I ſhould loſz my ſelf ; bur Reſolution ©
« that I did aſſure chem, before they ſhould hear I was loſt, the Enemy ſhould have pay the Sicuc de
« very dear for thetaking of «gen. That if the Mareſchal would come to fight them, 9f93#uc.
« he would have 2 good match of ity that I was determin'd not to budg from thence,
&« bur let them do their duty in caſe the Enemy ſhould fic down before them, for as for my
&« part I was reſoluce to do mine, and never to let the Enemy enter but over my belly.
Art the ſame time there arrived Monſieur de 1a Braille, Steward of the Mareſchal d' 4n=
ville's Hon(chold, whom the ſaid Mareſchal ſent to me co know if Monheur de Montfer-
ran was come with the thoufand Harquebuzeers, as I had ſent him word, and alſo with
what Forces I on my part could afhiſt him. I then reckon'd co him, that what from Ville-
nufue, Leftoure, eAgen, and Florence, I could make a thouſand Harquebuzeers, and the
thouſand of Monſicur de ontferran, ſhewing him the Letters that the ſaid Steur de Mfont®
ferran had ſent me from St. Macaire. He could not find inhis heart to loſe ſo much time
as to bait his horſes, before he return'd to carry back this news to the Mareſchal, when
being juſt abour to take horſe to recurn, chere came a letter from Monſieur de Montferran, |
dared from CHarmande, conteining theſe words. © Monſieur, At this inſtant 1 ams ſet- The Sicur de
ting out with my Troops, which are a thouſand Herquebuzcers, and. threeſcore Light-horſe, Montferran
and ſhall this day paſs part of my men over the River at Aguillon, the reſt muſt ſtay till to <2me withSue-
merrow mrring, but to morrow night they ſhall all be at Port St, Marie. WO
The ſaid de /a Brwille rook a Copy of the Letter, ſaying to me theſe words, I am golup
to carry the CMareſchal the beſt news can poſſibly be brought him, and aſſure your ſelf apon
my life and honor , that ſo ſoen as ever I ſhall be return'd he will begin to march ; and ſoran
to his horſe. Ar the end of three dayes, che Troops being at Port St. Marie and Agaillon,
] had word ſent me from Lefoxre, that the Mareſchal was return'd from Grenade to Tho-
loaze, out of deſpite ar the Leccer the Gentlemen of Armagnac had written to him, which
I have made mention of before, and that for one clauſe chat was in it, which ran chys ;
That in caſe he ſhould uot pleaſe to march to come to help to re-eſtabliſh them in thelr houſes,
they (honld be conſtrain'd to go apply themſelves tothe King in their own perſons , hambly to
beg aſſiſt ance from him, This was the ground of all his diſcontent, and he diſcharg'd his
anger upon me acculing me thar I had cauſed the ſaid Letter co be writ : I will not den
bac chat che fuſt draught was read to me as I was mounting to hoxſe ; bur, fo God help
me, I could not have repeated fix words of it, for my affe&tion hurried me away to Apen,
co take care that the Town ſhould not be forſaken , and took horſe thar very minnee ir
was read to me, as | have ſaid before, However I leave it to any man of underſtanding to
judg if cheſe words were of ſuch importance, that the ſaid Mareſchal ought reaſonably to
have taken ſuch offence at them. Ir was at the King that he cook offence, and nor ar us.
He is the Kings SubjeR as well as we. O! would I have taken per after this manner, how ma-
ny times have I had occaſion given me co quit all! ] have perhaps been bur roo paſſicnare,

not

ba ——

> 2

' The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox VII-

I

not as ro what concer1,*d my (elf, bur for the Country and che People, who have miſſed me
ſince Iquicted my Government, Now when Monſienr de eMontferran, who ſtaid wich
methree dayes at Apgen, his men in the mean time lying at Port St. Afarie, heard that
the Mareſchal was rewrn'd in diſcontent to Tholouzr, and thar he weuld hardly be pre-
vail'd upon to come , he told me that he would return to Boardeauxr, toralmuch as he did

not know but: that the Princes might turn their defigns that way , hearing there was no

body jn it. Which he accordingly did, as there was good reaſon, by which means I was
left naked, without hope of being reliev'd by any perſon whatſoever, Thus for c! e mi(-
conſtiuRion of a word, for one inſignificant picque, the whole Country ran a dangerous
forrune. £

You Princes, Mareſchals, and Lieutenants of Provinces, who command Armies, never
ſacrifice the publick inrereſt to a privare diſtaſte. The Mareſchal cughc to have confider'd,
that theſe were Gaſcons exil'd, from their own houſes, who writ in paſhon ; he oughr nei-
ther to have been offended art me, nor them 3 bur to have excus'd their ſenſibilicy, and not

* Wholoſes his for ſuch a trifle to have abandoned the Country. Our Proverb ſays, * Q»s perd le fien,

ſubſtance loſes
his underſtand»
inp.

perd le ſens. 1 have cfcen askt advice of , and been my (clf aſſiſting ro thoſe char 1 knew
had no great kindneſs for me. Never ſuffer your private picques, and particular animoſj-
ics to endanger the publick concern. I have ofcen obſerv'd ſome, and thole no little ones,
who could have eatcn one another, agree \ery well for their Maſter's ſervice, calk and
coulfer together like Brothers, and after ſome handſome ſervice, or good ſucceſs, open their
hearts to cone another, and become good friends. I have lince been told by ſome who had

the good fortune to be there, that moſt of the Chiefs who were at the great Batcel char |

was obtajn*d over the Turk , were mortal encmies, but that they agreed our of reſpe& ro
the common intereſt, and after the Bartel became perfe& friends. Would to God the
Mareſchal would have left the animoſity he had againſt me at T hoſouze to have come and
claw'd away entgommery, he had acquir'd honour, and che Country a ſingular adyan«

rage by it, whereas his peeviſhneſs ruin'd all. 'T thought I had been the moſt cholerick

fcliow in the world, but he has made it appear that he js more paſſionate than I. Never-
theleſs had he been pleaſed ro come, I would have ſerv'd him as freely as the meaneſt
Gentleman in the Army, |

Having undeſtood his reſolution I fent twice to Monſieur de Fontenilles to bring his
Cc mpany, and come put himſelf incothe Town with me z bur he could very hardly ob-
tein leave to come, though he came at laſt. T had the four Companies my Nephew de
Lebern had bronght me from Libourn, three at Port St. Afarle, and another ar Agaillon,
which immediately upon the departure of Monſieur de Montferran by my order came in
thither : and before Monfieur de Fontenilles arriv'd at Agen, a Gentleman called Monſieur
de Montazet , came to entreat me to call away the Company that was at Agsillon, and
that he would undertake to defend the Town with the Inhabitants only. A promiſe thar
although I knew he was not able to make good, and that he only did it to ſpare the pro-
viſions of the Town. 1 nevertheleſs granted his requeſt, fearing he would write co Mon=
fieur le Marquis de V;illars, that I had made him to conſume the fruirs of his Eſtate, and
{cnt the Company to Ville-nenfue. Wherein I commucred a very great error, for this place
had kept the Rivers of Lot and Garonne : but theſe bawling fellows, who will ſpare their
Maſters Houſes and Eſtates, to appear good Stewards , oftentimes loſe very conſiderable
places, Therefore you, who have the honour to command, {top your ears againſt all
complaints in ſuch caſes, and fo preſſing neceſſities, I had donea great deal better, if upon
this occaſion I had praQtis'd the Leſſon that I now teach you.

Now you muſt know I drave on an Enterprize with Monſieur de Leberon, to go give a
Scalado to the Captains AManciet and Chaſſaudy, two errant Rogues who lay at onbenrt,
The ſaid Sieur de Leberon was with eight or ten Harquebuzeers only at Agaillon, that he
mighe the better conceal his deſign. Yiard, Muſter-Maſter to the Mareſchals Camp, came
at this time to gFger, who was going to Court from the Mareſchal, and chough I knew
very well chat the ſaid Mareſchal was very much our with me, yer did I not forbear co fa-
vour and pay all reſpe& to all that came from him, being it was for his Majeſties ſervice,
I therefore writ to Monſieur de Leberon, that he ſhould ſend a Convoy with him ill he
was paſt Toneins , whom he found at aAgsillon, in order to the Enterprize they were the
next day at night to put into execution ; for I was ſending him five or fix Boats full of
Soldiers from Agen, and the three Companies thar were at the Port were alſo to joyn in
the buſineſs. Bur, as the fortune of war 1s ſometimes very odd and extravagant, ſhe well
appear'd to be ſo the day chac the Mufter-Maſter Viard paſſed that way ; forthe ſaid Sieur
de Leberon giving him a certain numberot Harquebuzeers for his Convoy , and making
account that inthree hours time they would be back again 5 whilſt he waited in expecta-

tion

-» , Al

ne

ans an do

-— a. Ss Sod pul gs 89A

—_—

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 1,

ration of cheir recurn there arrived Mefſicurs de 1a Caze, de Ia Lowe, de Gaytinieres, de Mo-
neins, and other Captains, with 7 or 8 Cornets of Horſe, who were come from Lanſerthe,
which is nine long leagues, and had nor baited above an hour at Hante=faye ;: to be ſhore
they had made a Cavalcade with the diligence of old Soldiers, and environ'd Apnillon.
Monſieur de Leberon ſeeing him{elt chus crapt alone with but very few Soldiers, and the In-
habicants of the Town, was 1n a little perplexity what co do in his defence, when Monſieur
de Montazet preſently came and told him, that he was not able to defend che Town, and
thac he wonld not pur it ro the hazard of being ruin'd and fackr 5 and accordingly wich-
out any more ado made {ome condicions, which was well for the ſaid Leferon, for he fell Aguillon raken;
into the hands of cheſe four, who were all of them my very good friends, by reaſon thar
in former times I had done ſomething for them. I was the firſt Caprain thar ever ſhewed
Captain Moneins any ſervice, and made him a Soldier ; and the reſt were every one wil-
ling to acknowledge the ſeveral obligations they had ro me and ſo ler him go. Theſe
are Civilities amongſt Soldiers : bur my ſaid Nephew play'd chere the part of a Novice,
not to reſerye to himſclt men enow for a time of need : he thought the Enemy was to9
tar off to trouble him. Captains, my Companions, this was a ridiculons ſecurity of his,
he ought to have conſider'd the importance of the place, ficuated upon two Rivers, and
that che Enemy could not but covet ſo ſweer a morſel, the vicinity of Cleirac and Toneing
conſider'd, Bur I play'd the fool as well as he, in drawing out the Garriſon, for fear of
offending the Marquis. |
So ſoou asever heard of his being taken, I drew my three Companies that were atthe
Port into Agen. Two dayes after the Princes Army came and encampt themſelves, cheir
quarters exrending from Apgzilon, as far as wichin half a league of YVille-neufue, and up to
che great Road, which leads to the ſaid Ville-nenfue, all along che valleys which are in thar
place, where there are very good Villages. Now, as Thave already ſaid, I had divided
rhe City into cizhc parts, and over every diviſion had ſer two good Chiefs of the Town.
Ic was a delighiful ching to fee the men and women all work , who came co it conſtantly
by break of day, and never gave over till che night cook them off « they were never longer
than an hour at dinner, and all che head Burgers of che City were eternally ſollicicing them
ro ply their labour, from which no one was exempt, not even che Religious women. One
night a man came to tell me, that a Troop of Reiters were come up within a quarter of a
League of us, to a Village cloſe by Jfowbran, which is a Caſtle belonging to the Biſhop of
Agen. In che morning therefore I mounted to horſe with my Company, and went cloſe
up to the Village, where, becauſe two Country fellows told mey that three other Cornets
of Reiters were quarter'd very near unto the firſt, I made the Argoulers that came out with
me ſt:y behind, affuring my (elf chat the Reicers would relieve their fellows, being fo
near, and that conſequently we ſhould be pur to retreat in haſte, where I ſhould be in
danger of lofing the ſaid Argoulets, by reaſon they were not very well mounted, and be.
fide there was dirt up to the Horſe Cambrils. Neyercheles ſome of the beſt mounted of
them went along with Monſieur de Madaillan, whom I commanded to charge deſ-
perately quite through the Bourg. He did ſo, and ſome few were kill'd in che Streets
as they paſſed, wherenpon the Reiters pur themſelves into two or three houſes
where their Officers were quarter'd. The other three Cornets who werequarter'd cloſe by,
apon the Alarm were immediately on horſe back, ſo thar all we could do was to carry away
fix and chirty of their horſes, and I believe had I ſuffer'd all the Argoulets to go they had
not left them one : buc Monſieur de Madaillan, (ceing the three Corners coming upon the
Gallop to relieve thetr Companions, retreated to me ; bur they did not much purſue him,
and fo weretir'd into the Town.
Now #iard was ſoon back from Court, for he had both the Kings Paſs and the Princes,
and wenc to find our the Mareſchal, The next morning after we had taken the Horſes
Monſieur de Fontenilles arriv'd, by which means I had two Companies of Gens d'armes
inche City, and three of Foot, Ihad from my firſt coming placed Monſieur de Laugnac Monficur de
ar Peymirol with two Foot Companies, which were thoſe of the Garriſon of Port. St. Ma- Lauguac art
rieand CMalves, who made very brave s&irmiſhes, and though Monſieur de Langnac was Fm.
then ſick of the diſeaſe that ſo long has held him, he nevertheleſs kept the Soldiers night
and day abroad, and was evermore making ſome attempt upon the Enemy. Our Horſe
went out very oft:n, but they till found che Reiters ſo barricado'd and bolred up inthe
Villages, that nothing was to be got of them but blows, and chey were alwayes mounted Commandacts
in atrice. In truth thoſe people encamp chemſelves like crue men of war, ir is very hard on of che Rei.
co ſurprize them : they are more careful than we, eſpecially of their horſes and arms, and ters. f
are beſides more terrible gn war, for a man can ſee nothing bur fire and fteel ; and nota
Groom in their Troops/but accourers and trains himlelf up to rhe fight, and ſoin crime

become

_—
A
OP I IPO I —_ -
.

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Book VII:

The Princes
ſummon V1le-

nenfur.

Ville-nenfur.

ens.

become good Soldiers. I could nor relieve our Cavalry with foor, by reaſon of the in-
colerable foulnels of the wayes, and alſo fearing a miſchance, having ſo few men as I had
if te City 3 which ſhould any finiſter accidenc have fall'n ont, mighe have ſtruck ſuch
a terror into the Town, as might have drawn after it the loſsof the place. I was only on
the defenſive part, and yer I kept them in awe, giving them to underſtand that I did nor
much fear them. The Princes and the Admiral lay five weeks or more where I have ſaid,
and Monſieur de Montgrmmery three or above at Condom, his quarters extending as far as
la Plame des Brailles. We did nothing on either fide, foraſmuch as TI had no men to at-
temper any thing withall, and they lay quier, eating and drinking their fill, and making
pood cheer ; for they had ſo ſuffer'd ever fince the defeat of Iontontonr, as nothing could
politely be more z ſo that I think they had more mind to reſt than to meddle with me.
As for my part I night and day intended my Forrification. Being upon theſe terms, and
in this poſture on both ſides, pne night arriv*d Monſieur de [s V alette, who came from the
Monfeurs Camp) .and by fortune happen'd to be at Ville-nexfue, ar the time when the
Princes ſenta Trumpet to Monfieur de Caſſanexil ro ſummon the Town. The ſaid Sieur
de la Valette himſelf order'd the anſwer, which was, That the Town was the Kings, and
nene of theirs 3 that therefore if either Trumpet or Drum ſhould again come on ſuch an errand
they would kill him, and thas there were tdo many men of honour in the T own ta deliver it np,
The ſaid Sieur de 1a Yalette hazarded himſelf inthe night to paſs the Enemies Camp in
exceeding great danger, and came to me abour nine of the clock. He found mein bed
for I was very much reliev'd by Meſticurs de Fontenilles, de Madaillan, de Leberon, and the
other Captains, by which. means I ſtept at my eaſe ; all things in the mean time going on
in marvailons good order, as well by night as by day, Old age muſt be excus'd. The ſaid
Szeur de la Valette rold me that I muſt preſently ſend away a Chief to command over all
thoſe who were in Ville nexfue, or that otherwiſe the Town was abour to be loſt; yer
would by ns means tell me the reaſon , but only that I muſt make haſte immediately to
ſend away a Chief, alwayes telling me, that if I was not ſudden I ſhould be the firſt would
repent ic, for that it was a place of importance, and a neat Town of War. Bur he ſaid
enough to make me get out of bed, for I would nor flight the advice of ſo good a head-
piece as his ; and therefore inſtantly diſpatch't away rwo men to the Chevalier my Son at
Leftoare, that immediately upon the reading my letter he ſhould mount to horſe, and come a-
way to me to Agen ; thence ts put himſelf into Ville-neufue, and that by the haſte he ſhould
make 1 (honld know if he were my Son. I writ alſo tothe Chevalier de Rowegag, entreating
him to perform alone what they two had joyntly undertaken before, Tr was day before
the two Meſſengers got to Leforye, whereupon the Chevalier my Son immediately took
leave of all the Gentlemen that were there, and about three in the afternoon come to Agen.
Four or five dayes before this Monſieur de Montgommery with all his Camp, both Horſe
and Foot came to give a Camilado to Captain Codreils, Lieutenant ro my Son Captain
Fabian's Troop of Light-horſe, which Thad pur into Mojrax, with five and twenty Laun-
ces, and five and twenty Harquebuzzers. Now CMoyrax 15 a little Village encloled with
walls, the higheſt part whereof might be mounted with a Ladder of twelve ſtaves, and
without Flankers, where he arriv'd an hour before day. Of this defign news was broughc
me to egen, ata time when I had newly taken a Gliſter, which I had yer in my belly ;
whereupon without any more ado I put on my arms, mounted to horſe, and went to paſs
the River. The Gentlemen of my rwo Companies paſt after one another as faſt as rhey
@uld. Monſieur de Fontenilles came not till the next day, and thoſe that came in the nighr
follow'd after ſuch a manncr., that I found my ſelf with no more bur four horſe only on
the other fide of the River towards Gaſcony, where 2493rax is ſituated, and near unto E-
ſtillac, which is mine, With theſe four horſes I galloped full-drive direRly ro Xfojrar, it
being a League berwixt that and the River : ſo that in truth had Monſieur de Montgoms
mery ſent out ten or twelve horſe only upon the Road from Agen, to Moran, I had cer-
eainly been kild or taken : bur a man muſt ſometimes play che Soldier, and cempr for-
tune. Your Enemy knows not what you do. And thusI arriv*'d at Ifoyrax,where I found
thar the ſaid Montgomery was departed abour half an hour before, and had left his lad-
ders at the foot of the wall 5 where, though they had ſtayd two long hours, they never
had the courage to ſer them up, which made me, though I had before no great opinion
of cheir Foot, to think much worſe of chem now 3 and fo I recurn*d back ro Agen
where at my return che Phyſicians were fain to give me another Gliſter to bring away the
firſt, which by the pains I had raken was hindred from working, and made me ſoill, that
I two dayes kept my bed. - So ſoon as the Chevalier my Son was come, I preſently ſent for
Caprain Cadreils, ſending five and twenty Harquebuzeers in his room, to che end chat he
might go with my ſaid Son to Vjlie-nenfae. Archis time Monſicur de St. Giron, brother

fo

4 @—
—————__

Book VIL. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.
to Monſieur de [a Gniche, Coloncl of two and twenty Enfigns under che Mareſchal d' An-
gulen, had cauſed himſelt co bevrought lick ro Agen, having been wounded ar the Aſſaulc
of eMaxzeres, either ina leg or in athigh; and would retire himſelf to his own houſe for
his cure. Ar one of the clock in the night I pur. our my Son , his Camrades, and two
Guides,bidding them be ſure to be the next morning by break of day art Ville-nenfae, Every The Chevalier
one was exceeding glad of his coming, and 1 believe cheir diſpute was char they would not de Montluc ac
obcy one another, I would have ſent my young Son Captain Fabian thicher, bur that we 7#e-1e#ſie-
gave him over for a dead man, after his return from the Camp ; and at chis time had no
manner of hope of his recovcrys wh |

Now I had hourly intelligence, thar the Admiral was making a Bridg of Boats at Port A Bridge of
St. Marie, and to that end had gather'd rogecher all che Boars upon the Lot, and the Boars mace by
Garonne, as far as Marmanda. Thad alſo hourly intelligence that che Enemy had fenr for NE Oral,
great Arilery into Bearn., All which made me haſten the Trenches and Fortifications
I was making ac Agen, belicving, as there was very good reaſon, thar all chis preparation
was intended againſt me ; tor eAgen was no {mall prize, as well for the Riches, as in re-
ſpe& ro che defeating of ſo many men of condicion, who had ſhuc themſelves up 1a it for
my ſake. I chen call'd a Council in my Lodging, and in alitdle Cabinet there, where we
were no more bur cight or nine perions to conſult, and contrive which way we might break
this Bridg. Now there was a Free Maſon of Tholoyze in the Town, who had made the
Marquis de Villars ſome Mills ac Agailion, and this tcllow upon ſome diſcourſe with ſome
one or another had ſaid, chac it we turn'd one of thoſe Water-mills, which lay an-
chored before che Town afloar, it would break the Bridg : for the River of Garonne was
great, and very much out, and cvery day (till rifing, becauſe it almoſt continually rain'd.
There was not any one man of his opimon, that a Mill could break the Bridg , foral-
much as we had been afſſur'd, that the Admiral had cauſed Cables as thick as a mans leg
to be made at Theneinsz and others of the like fize to be brought from 1Lontanban allo, to-
gether with very great Chains; which was very true, for beſides the great Cables, the Bridg
was lock'c faſt rogerher with great and ponderous Chains, To make ſhort of my ſtory,
not one of us was of the Maſons opinion but Captain Thodeas our Engineer only , who
ſaid, that in caſe the Mill was loaded with greac ſtones he chonght ic mighr do the buſt-
neſsz but not withour being loaden ; and fo we concluded nothing. Two dayes after I
had word ſent me from Tholoaze, that the Mareſchal d* Anville was equipping three Boats,
which were to be conduted by Captain St. Projet, mann'd with chreeſcore men, which
in eight dayes would be ready, and that the ſaid St. Projet within that time was to bring
them down by night to break the Bridg. Concerning our delign we had debated, thar
we could ncr load this Mill, buc chat the Admiral would have intelligence of ic by thoſe
of the Religion who l1v'd in e gen under the prote&ion of that accurſed Edit, (for ſo I
may, and ever ſhall caimit) fo that (I know not how) we remain'd diſtrated in our
defign, without hope of any other remedy, but only in bravely defending our ſelves.

In che mean time Muſtcr- Maſter Yard came again to Agen, being ſent a ſecond time. _
from the Mareſchal co the King, and bringing along wich him a Trumper of che ſaid Ma- The Mareſchal
refcal's, arriv'd on Wedneſday betwjxt nine and ten aclock in the morning ; where he ac- 4 Anville's de=
quainted me in private with the Mareſchal*s Enterprize to break the Bridg : bur that he gp wo ves
was afraid the Admiral had intelligence of his deſign - for which reaſon he had brought © *E8:
one of the Mareſchals Trumpets to go with him as far as Port St. Marie, where if he
ſhould, when he came thicher, find that the Enemy had any inkling of ic, he would ſend
back the Trumpet to lect me know {o much, char I might ſtop che ſaid Se. Projet from
20ing any furcher ; to which end, and thar he might not flip by, I was to keep concinual
watch upon the River day and nighe, And fo he toox his leave of me, and arriv'd a-
bouc twoin the afternoon at Port St, Marie, where he ſaw three Cornets of Reiters pals
over the Bridg, to come quaiter on that fide of the River towards Gaſcony, The Trum-
pet had very good leiſure to view che Bridg, and to obſerve how ſtrongly ic was faſtned ;
to be ſure chole of (/airac and Thoneins had ſpar*d for no coſt nor labour, thoſe good peo-
ple thinking noching coo dear that was laid out to annoy and miſchief cheir Neighbours,
and againſt che King. About nine at night che Trumpec retarn'd, by whom Yiard ſenc
me word, that I ſhould havea care St. Projet proceeded no turcher co execute his deſign
for the Enemy had notice of 1r, aud had pianted ſeven or eight ſmall pieces of Artillery ar
that end of che Bridg towards Gaſcony, and chat the ocher end was gnarded by a thouland
or twelve hundred Harquebuzeers : 1n ſhort, that I muſt by no means ſuffer him co go, for -
not 2 man of thoſe that went could pollioly eſcape. So ſoon as the Trumper had deliver'd
his Mcſlage he rectir'd to lis Lodging , and I, wicthoue making any more noiſe, ſenc pri-
vaicly for rhiee perſons of the Town to whom I had already Giſcovei'd my 1mtention,

Aaa which

—_— Ce En V—C——PIILo—_—_ > A wo 1 OT 46S ed

%

'Þ
+
; 4
+
q1
I

1%
F
1 F

a
ti p——_

_ 354

" The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Boox VII,

ken.

which was to {ct adritt the Mill belonging to Preſident Sevin, by reaſon the ſaid Preſident
had abandoned the Town. I will not here name the three men, becauſe the Preſident
would ſue them, and the Commiſſioners, who are now in thoſe parts, would eafily give
him what damages he would deſire, as they do others againſt the Cacholicks. Afﬀer, ha-
ving a while conferred together, we concluded that they ſhould ſend our fix Soldiers who
were Mariners, who ſhould go, and under colour of watching upon the Bank of the Ri-
ver, that Caprain St. Prjet did nor paſs by, unlooſe the Mill. Thus chen chey all chree
departed from rne, and were not ſlow in ſending our the Soldiers, neither were they idle
tounlooſe the Mill ; one whereof was drown'd in loofing che Chain , falling from che
lictle Boar, as the ſtake vroke to which the Chain was faltned. This mighe be abour cleaven
of the clock at night, and 1 have been told fince by ſome of the Enemy, the Mill came to
the Bridge about one. Now the Enemy had placed Cenrtinels more than half a league
up che River, that they might give chem the Alarm when Captain Ss. Projet ſhould paſs
by, who no ſooner heard the noiſe of the Mill, but that they immediately gave the Al-
arm, and the Mill immediatcly after arriv*d at the Port, Every one upon the Alarm ran
ro the two ends of the Bridge, and began to ler fly great volleys of Harpuebuze ſhot ar che
poor Mill, that {aid not a word, bur gave ſuch a ſhock thar it carried away all the Bridg,

The Bridg bro- Cables, Chains, and Boats, in ſuch ſort, that there was onely one remaining that was

chain'd co the Wall of the Prince of Navarre's Lodgings, Two of the Boats went down
as far as St. CMacaire, and Ihave been told, chat chere were ſome carried down as far as
Bonrdeaux. This brave Mill of the Preſidents ſtopt not here, bur went ſtill on to break
another Hugonot Mill below Thoneins, and at the laſt tay'd ar the Iſles abour CMarmanda.
The firſt who brought us any news of the Bridg being broken, were certain poor people
who had been to buy falr at che end of the ſaid Bridg of the Hugonot Soldiers, who had
taken ſeven or cighc Boats laden with it 3 and che Enemy had killPd ſeveral of thoſe poor
people, accufing them for the cauſe that the Bridg was broken. Some of their Soldiers
who had leapt upon the Bridg upon the Alarm were carried away by the Current ; bur
it was not till berwixt ſpring of day , and ſun-riſe, that the Guards ſentme word there
were ſeven or eight of the people arriv'd, who were wont to carry Salr, and ſaid that
the Bridg was broken. I then preſently wenr out to talk with thoſe people who had been
at the Bridg with thoſe the Enemy had kill*d, and eſcap*c thorough the fields under fa-
vour of the night, whotold me the whole ſtory, as alſo did others who came fromwards
the Port, and ſtill one or other was coming 1n who confirmed the news. 1 then ſent our
ren or a dozen Light-horſe on that ſide rowards Gaſcony, who went as far as under $4-
wignac, where they took two priſoners, who gave me yet a more perfe& account than thoſe
poor people had done, In the mean time I preſently cauſed a lictle Boat with cight Oars
co be made ready, and gave the Maſter of her 25 Crawns to go carry the news to Bor=
deaux : by whom] writa Letter to Meſſicurs de Lanſacy the Baron de la Garde, and the
Biſhop of Yalence my Brother, wherein I gave them a Narrative how all things had paſſed,
entreating them to communicate ic tothe Court of Parliament, and the Jurars, that the
might all ſhare in the good news. And good news it was ; for this very much brake the Ene-
mies defigns, whom we might ſhrewdly have incommodated, raking them thus ſeparated
as they were by the breaking of this Bridg, would the Mareſchal have been pleaſed to have
laid his angerafide. The faid Mareſchal*s Trumpet before he went away was witneſs to
the joy the whole Town was in for this ſucceſs, and ſo departed in all diligence to carry ©
the news to his Maſter, This was executed upon Wedneſday about midnight, and upon
Thurſday 1n the beginning of the night the Mariners ſer our from eApen, who when they
come to Port St, Marie, near unto the place where the Bridg had been, they let the Boar
glide down at the diſcretion of the Current, themſelves being all ſquar down in the Boats
The Enemy began to call out , but no body anſwered, which made them think it was
ſome Boat that had accidentally broken looſe, and was adrift; bur they were no ſooner
got paſt them a Crosbow ſhot, when they all ſtart up and fell a rowing, and then began
to rate and call them after their eloquent manner , plying their Oars ſo well, chat they
were the next morning, which was Friday, by ſun-riſe at Bordeaux, where the joy was
was ſuch, that I think never Mariners that came from new-found-lands brought news
that inviced ſo great a Crowd, And yer it feem'd fo incredible a thing, rhar almoſt all
che Gentlemen doubted the intelligence, and every one ran to Monfieur de Lanſac's Lodg-
ings, and to thoſe of che Baron de 1a Garde, and Monſieur de Valence, to be ſatisfied of
the truch, Monkieur-de Valence immediately diſpatched away his Secretary called Channy
ro their Majeſties to carry the news, which was quite contrary to what Commiſſary Viard
had brought them. The ſaid YViard, as I was told, arrived inthe morning, and very much
troubled cheir Majeſties, and the Monſieur, at the account of the Bridges being brought

Oo

, —_——

Boox VIE. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 255

ro perfe&tion, wich che deſcription of its ſtruture and ſtrength, being ſuch as greac Artil-

lery might paſs over art pleaſure, and the Horſe three a-breaſt, as it was true, and the man

did not lye to them in a tice ; and his Majeſty had good reaſon to be concern*d, for the The impor-
commodicy of this Bridg would have given the- Enemy leiſure to have taken all before tance 8 he *
chem, and to have paſſed over their Canon at pleaſure. Ar night Charney arrivid, who _—_
brought news that che Bridg was broken ; ſo that if the one brought vexation, the other

brought joy, aud for a few dayes I was the beſt man in the world, and a great Soldier :

buc that good opinion laſted nor long, for the Enemies I had ac Court diſguiſed all things

to the King, who was at that time at Sr, Jean; ſochat in the end, letmy deſerts be whar

chey would, I neither did, nor had ever done any thing worth taking notice of, and the

King believ'd it, or 1 think feem'd co believe (o rather, co ſatisfie their humour. Thus 1s

the ſtory of che breaking of the Bridg, and the whole and exaR cruth of ir, FEY OL.

I am now to tell you of what advancage the breaking of this Bridg was to us, and what The Admirals

the Admiral had determin'd in cafe che Bridg had ſtood. Ir was reſolv'd and concluded Dchgn.
apon in their Council, that they would paſs over that part of Winter till harveſt in che

Quarters where their Camp then lay, and would cauſe great Artillery ro be brought from
Navarreins, wherewith to take all the Towns upon the River Garonne, to the very Gates of

Bordeasx, that they would atraque Agen, but that they would leave that work for chelaſt,

becauſe they would firſt rake Caſtle-geloux, Bazas, and all the other places on this fide the

Garonne, as far as Bordeaux, by wiuch means, and by the communication of this Bridg,

both the one Country and the ocher, which are of the richeſt of France, would be wholly

at their convenience and command. And all this they made account to. have taken in leſs

than fif.ceen dayes, as they woald really have done, for they were abſolute Maſters of che

field, They intended alſo to atraque Libeurne, aſſuring themſelves thac in all che Cines

they ſhould find great ſtore of proviſions, by which means nothing could be convey*d in-

to Boardeanx, neither by the Garonne, nor much leſs from the Landes, . making account

that ſo the City of Bordeaux would in three moneths be reduc't to the laſt extremes. And |

for my par: 1 do noc think it would have held our ſo long ; for already Corn was there The firuxcion
at ten Livers che Sack, and by ſea nothing could ger in by reaſon of Blaze, The City is ® Bordeaux.
good) and rich, and a ſtrong Town of War, bur ficuate in a barren Country ; ſo that who=

ever ſhould deprive it of the Garonne, and che Dordogne, it would preſently bereduced to

famine, the Tnhabicants concinually living from hand to mouth.

They had.morcover determin*d to bring their Ships up the River to Blaye, which chey

had in their hands, to keep the Gallies eicher from coming our, or going in. The Vicomtes

alſo had promiſed the Admiral to cauſe chreeſcore thouſand Sacks of Corn co be broughc

him upon the River Garonne, which they meant to rake out of (omenge and Loumaigne,

the moſt fertile Countries of all Gxjenze 5 and where the greateſt ſtore of grain is, there

being no leſs chan five hundred Merchants, and as many Gentlemen, who keep three or A_ Country |
four years ſtore alwayes by chem in expeRation of a dear year, when their Corn may go 3 in Corn,
off at greater rates; ſo that they might with great eaſe have kepr their word with the Ad-

miral ; and by char means were certain to bring the King to their own bow, and tomake

ſuch conditions as themſelves thonld think fic : and had chey once got Bourdeanx into

their clutches, I: know not bur chat they might bave kept ir as well as Rochelle 3, ar leaſt

having Rechelle and Bordearx both in cheir poſſeſſion, they might have boaſted chac they

had rhe beſt and ſtrongeſt Angle of che Kingdom, both by Land and Sea, commanding

five navigable Rivers, comprizing the Charante. And they had once ſerrled berwixt the

Rivers of /le, Dirdogne, Lot, and Garonne, the King muſt have had four Armics at leaſt

to have compeli*d chem to fight; and I will be bold co ſay, they had the beſt Country,

and two of che beſt and moſt capacious Havens of the Kingdom, which are thoſe of Bro#-

age and Bordeaux, EE

I wonder any one ſhould be {o indifcrcer, as to adviſe the King, that ic would be his The impor-

beſt way, to coop up the Hxgonets in Gauienn?, Tis a dangerous piece to be depriv'd of, ova Babs
and ſhould the King oncelole ic, it would bea great while in recovering. © But theſe good "=
Counſellors do it for their own ends, and to remove the War far enough from their own

doors; and yet we ſhall {ell ic chem very dear before chey have ir, In truth che King

ought co make more reckoning of this Province, to hinder the Enemy from getting foors

ins there, and nor ſo co abandon the Country, ſuffering others ro make merry at our miſc-
rie, to thar degree, asto ask, if we yet have beds to lit in. 1 cannot believe this word could

come our of che Queens mouth, for ſhe has ever had , and yer hasa great mauy very good

Servants there ; and choſe Meſſicurs of France, thar jecr at our misforcunes, may have cheir

ſhare in time. The evil is not alwayes at onedoor. Now this was the reſule of the Ene-

mies Council; and ir was very well defign*d. My Brother Monficur de Falenee will bear
| t Aaa 2 wicncſs

————

: op , po L424 a8
-  — -*ou——_ —

6 ee tionenced _ -
—— T——_ ge Oren n

— —
" gre

-_
EO - ks 2 urn ra a
L Lo Eg x TOY R, <; yy Rr Sg . wn 1s ApS _—_ Ta
a. . FH CIOS > l W—_ pr 1 IM
_—_— : : ?

Ke Le

ISI I»
_— ag

DOTS
BR D

* ute v
m_

by "X p - =p s
I g I bf page's 7
” _—_ :

es Eb —"-
” _—
- au. a Woe] xn, PEE. oe Bei or ot entrees ae I nn
AT

CII—_

——_.c.. es... AM i.

356

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaizxe Boox VII,

” rs

The Impore

witnels, that a certiin verſon who was aſſiſting ac their Counzils (when he thought fic)
pave u$an account of the aforeſaid dehberation, which wasgrearz and I believe char had
they taken a reſolution to drive out all the Catholicks, and co have call*d in all the Hu-
gonots out of France into this Pfovince, which was ſo much deſpis'd when they had once
made ir-their own, they would have had poſſeſlions enow to have enriche them all; and
moreover all the Gentry of thoſe parts would have been conſtrain'd co rurn Hugonors, and
rotate uparms for them ; by which means the King would afterwards have had much a-=
do to reduce, and more to reclaim them : for to have made them turn again to our Reli-
gion, would have Leennocafie task ; foraſmuch as after a man 1s once accuſtomed ro a
thing, be ir good, or bad, he is very unwilling to leave it : but God would not ſuffer ſo
orcat a miſchief, both for the King and us, who are his Catholick SubjeQs.

This was the advantage thar accru'd by the breaking of the Bride) in the judgment of

ance of break» all boch Friends and Enemies : and I will be bold to ſay , that of all the ſervices I ever
ing the Bridg, did for Gwienne this was the moſt remarxable exploit , which proceeded from no other

ching, bur my refolution co go put my ſelf into Agen ; for otherwiſe rhe Town had been
quirted, and che Admiral had come direaly chicher, and not to Port St. Harle ; nor to
Agenillon as he was conſtrain'd to do, For a conſultation being held at Lauſerte, ic was
there concluded, that ar their departure from thence, rhey ſhould go to quarcerat Caſtel=
Sagrat, CMontjoy, St. Manrin, and Fernſſac, and rhe next Gay ar Agen, making full ac-
count they ſhould- meer wich no refiſtance, Which had it fo falln our, the Admiral
would have had el>ow-room enough 3 and betwixt ewo great Rivers, not only have re-
freſht his Army at great eaſe, and in grcat ſecurity ; bur moreover have made the whole
Country ſure ro him. I know very well that it was told the Admiral by ewo or three
perſons in his Army, that incaſe it was true thar I was in Agen, they conld never get me
out bur by bits, and char in my life I had commitred greacer fcllies than that. And there
were who ſaid that they had ſeen me engage my ſelf in three or four places, the ſtrongeſt
of which was nor half {o renable as Agen, and had (till come off with honour. Theſe who

The Admiral's ſaid this, might well affirm ic with truth, as having been with me in thoſe places. Bax

OPINzON,

the Admiral (till maintain'd, that he was confident I had nor pur my ſelf into eAgen with
any mention to ſtay there, but that my determination was, ſo ſoon asI ſhould hear of his
coming to pals the Garonye, and go put my {clf into Lefonre, ſaying, he is too old a beaten
Soldier to engage himſelf in ſo ill a place. The others till afirm*d that they would pawn
their lives I would not budg from thence ; which made the Admiral in the end to adhere
to cher opinion, and to alter hiscourſe directly ro Agnillon, extending his Quarters as far
as Port. St. Marie, where if they ſhould ſee, thar upon their approach I abandoned che
Town, and retreated towards Leftorre, as they believ'd I would, they would then ad-
vance to gen, He found in the end that they who maintain'd I would nor ſtir from
thence were better acquainted with my temper, than either he or they, who told him I
would retire to Le&oare ; and being it was caſt in my diſh, that for three years I had done
nothing to purpoſe, let cvery one judg by what I perform'd in theſe three years, withour
money, or either Horſe or Foot ; had I been ſupply'd wich money onely to pay the Sol-
dir, gr had theKing reliev'd me with the Foot, and Gens-d'armes I defir'd, whether or
no I had not done my work. I think I ſhould have kepr the Admiral from watering
his horſes ac the Garonne, , and his Reiters from drinking our Bordeaux wine : for the

Count de Montgomery would never havehad leiſure to have call'd them in ; and I chink
I ſhould have dealc pretty well with him.

The Bridg being broken the Admiral was four or five dayes in ſuſpence, not knowing
which way to turn him, nor what courſe to take : for befides the Count de Montgommery's
Camp, he had moreover the Corners of Reiters engag'd on that fide the River towards
Gaſcony, which were thoſe that had paſſed the River, and were quartered at Labardac, and
which he could noc imagine which way to draw off from ther.ce, by reaſon the Rivolet
that runs by Paravis, a Monaſtery of Religious women, was ſwell'd fo high » thar nor a
man Either on foot or horſeback durſt attempt to paſsit ; and che Count de Montgomery
was yetat Condoms, and about Nerac, and Brach. The Admiral then cauſed a lirtle Bridg
upon two Boats wo be made, upon which five or fix horſes could only paſs ar one time, the
Boats being to be hal'd by a rope after the Italian manner, S$o ſoon therefore asthe warer
of the Riyoler began to abate, the Reiters began to paſs over a ſtone Bridg there is 1n that
place, and drew near to the paſſage of the Port, where they began to ferry over upon this
Bridg of Boats by fixand fix, or ſeven and ſeven at a time at moſt. Which they found (o
troubleſome, that with all che diligence the Paſſengers conld uſe, the Boat was alwaies an
hour and an half in going to and again, with which great pains and difficulty theſe chree
Cornets paſſed, and were two dayes in paſſing over, The Count de Candalle,and Monſieur

de

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. © 4qp

de Ila V alette lay ar chis time with eight or cen Corners of Horſe at Staffort, co the firſt of
which, ſo ſoon as the Count de CMontgrmmery began to move from Condom, ro draw
near the River, I wric a Letter, That if his reſolution was to fight Montgommery at the Paſt,
I, with my two Companies of Gens-d'armes, and five hundred Harquebuzeers, would not fail
to be at the fight, not to command, but to obey him as much as the mcaneſt Soldier there, He
return*d me many thanks, ſending me anſwer back, That if it came to that, both he, and
all under his Command won'd obey me + but nevertheleſs ſaid nothing of my coming to joyn

with them : I underſtood well enough howeyer by che Letcer, char they would have been
all glad co have had me with chem : but [a Croiſette who was there, play*d che Dominus
fac totum, and govern*d all, I therefore ſent again ro tell them, That in caſe they had
no mind to hav? me come in perſon, 1 would however, if they pleaſed, ſend over the two Cerm-

panies, and the five hundred Flarquebuzeeers to joyn with them. By which any one muſt [
diſcern, thac I had not left che Mareſchal becauſe I would not obey him, fince I offer'd { |
ro obey the Count, and Monfieur de la YValette, and even Caprain Croiſette himſclf, who 8

was in the greateſt authority amongſt them.

I ſhall not heretake upon me to give an account of what they did upon this occafion, by ſi |
- | 1 | 5

reaſon I was not there, neither have I mach enquir*d into ir, ſaving that I was cold chey

charg*d ſome they mer with at their marching our of Brach, and bear them in again, and '* i

I have fince heard char the Count de Montgommery was himſelf chen in the Town, How
rrue it was I am not able to ay, bur I believe they did all that lay in their power to do
for they are ſufficiencly known, and reputed all for very brave Gentlemen. The Counc
de Montgommery paſſed over firſt his Horſe, and then lis Foot, one after the other. I ſenc |
chreeſcore Light-horſe pickt out of my own Company, and that of Monfieur de Fontenilles, Wil;
over the River, with chree hundred Harquebuzeers, to make good their retreat, who |

ſixteen men, and took twelve or thirteen Horſes, giving them ſo hot an Alarm, char I was

|
marcht up toa lit:le Village near unto che Ferry call'd 14 Rozjey where they kill'd fifteen or | x

fince rold, had our Horſe putht on to che Paſs it (elf, they had cauſed three or four han-

. - . n } | Þ
on the Admural's fide he could no way relieve them, for they could not repaſs above fix or tl
ſeven horſe ara time upon che Bridg of Boats, which made chem five or {1x dayes 1n fer- | !

|

lf

dred to be drown'd, for five or fix drown'd themſelves upon this Alarm for haſte. And 0 [
4,

rying over. This was the plunge and quandary the Admiral was 1n, to draw off the Count
de eMontgommery, and three Cornets of Reiters, is |.
Monſieur de 1a Chappelle Vice-Seneſchal, and Monſieur de Bouzet had ſent me word, Bil.)
char if I would grant a Paſs to a certain Hugonot, to whom at their entreaty I had given | nt
aſſurance to hve quietly in his own houſe, he offer'd co goto Port St. Marie, and enquire -- gl
out, and diſcover what way the Admiral intended to take, after the Count de Montgom- 4
z2ery (ſhould be paſſed over the River, or whether or no he had any thoughts of making
anorher Bridg ; which Paſs] accordingly ſent, and the ſame day that the Count made an

end of ferrying over, this man return'd back to their houſe, telling and aſſuring them, i :
|

char at the Enemies departure from Port St. Marie, which would be within two or three d1.
dayes afcer the Army thould be gor over the River, they would -march cowards Tholouze, Ft
and go to paſs at Montauban, with a reſolution to burn all the houſes wichin four leagues The Adwiral's i |
round of Tholoaze, and eſpecially thoſe of the Preſidents and Councellors ; and moreo- 9lign againſt C: |
ver told them thac he had learnt from a Captain of Horſe , they had particulary given = Tholour2 | Weg
to the ſaid Captain of Horſe in charge near unto T holowze call'd  Epine, toburn ir. To ; i
which the forenamed perſon making anſwer, that it was one of the moſt beauritul piles 'Þ
in all that Country, the Captain reply'd, That if the Maſter of that Houſe had no other Wl!
he would be honſeleſs, The ſaid Sicur de Bonzet himſelf rold me all that this perſon had |
{aid ro them; of which I immediately advertiz'd the premier Prefident, for to have ac- |
quainted the Mareſchal with it had been to no purpoſe, and I was very certain he would |
have given no credit to any information of mine, which made me rather chooſe to advertiſe | | Þ)

Fi

|

yo
Sf
EY

the Preſident, ſending him word that he onght to call in Monficur de /a Yalette, who
was already return'd cowards Tholouze, and Mcſſteurs de Negrepelice and de Sarlabow ; th
and that they could not have too many good men in the City ; for the Enemy talkr ſtrange W
things, which nevertheleſs I would nor repeat, by reaſon it was but the diſcourſe of the TY
Rabble of cheir Camp, to which no credit was to be given. _ | [0

Theſe were the contents of my Letter, I am confident the Prefident has not loſt it, FRE
and chus all che Enzmies Forces departed from Port St, Marie, and paſſed by in che fighc The Rerreac i |
of che Caſtle of Bajaumont, in which was Monheur de Darfort, Brother to the Sieur de of the Army of i
Bajaumont that now is. I (allied out with my ewo Companies of Gens-d'armes, and faw * Princes. BE
them all march by within leſs chan a Harquebuze-ſhot of me, I having no more chan eighr |
or ten Horſe in my Party, for I had letc che Cavalry a little behind, but could not place

them

=
:
:

,

:

F
#
|

- The Sicur de

 Monlluc ſends

che Kiog intel-
ligence.

—_— FP PY

——
—— —_—

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book VII.

them ſo covertly, but that the Enemy (aw chem very plain 3 yernot ſo mach as a man came
ou: to diſcover what we were, bur held on their march, and went to quarter that night about
Pont de C:ſſe, and d1awing towards St. Afanrin, quarter'd themſelves abour. the ſaid Sf.
Al.urin, and the adjacent Villages, where they ſtay'd rwo or three dayes. Now being the
ſaid Sicur de Darfort had ſcen all their Army, both Horſe and Foot paſs by, and had had
leiſure ar his caſe ro number them upon their march, I entreated him to take Poſt, and co
go acquaint his Majcſty with the number of their Camp, who amongſt other chings told me
he had diſcover*d a Troop of five or fix handred Horſe, who pafled by ata linle furcher
diſtance than the reſt 5 the moſt of which had no Boots, and could therefore be no other
than Grooms and Footmen they had mounted only ro make a ſhew, I did nothing char
I did not firſt communicate to the Biſhop of Ygen, in whom I did ar that rime confide as
much, or more, than in my own Brother, eſteeming him for one of the beſt friends, and
a man of as much integriry and virtue, as any Prelate in France, He1s deſcended from
the Houſe of Fregsſa of Genoa, I gave inſtrutions to the ſaid Sieur de Darfort, and a
Letter of Credence, which conſiſted of theſe heads, That 1 had ſent to his Majeſty the
Sieuy de Durfort, »ho had had the conveniency exaftly to numer the eArmy of the Princes,
to deliver a perfett account of all that he had uumbred and ſeen. After which I acquainted his
Majeſty with the courſe they Recr'd, and the reſolution they went withal, to burn all
before them ; of which I had alſogiven notice co the priemier Preſident of Tholouze, to
acquaint therewith all thoſe who had Houſes near unto the City, that they might with-
draw their goods, and that they would do well to call in Monſieur de Neprepelice, if he
was not already there, together wich Meſſteurs de 1a Valette, and de 1a Sarlabous, In an-
other clauſe of my Letter to the King I ſent word, that the perſon (I do not here name)
of the Religion, who had been in the Enemies Camp, had brought news to the Sieurs de
la Cheppelle and de Bouzet, that the Captain of Horſe with whom he had conferr'd, had
cold him that they had deſigns upon Montpelier, and Pont St, Eſprit, which were ſureto
rake cftec, relling his Majeſty thac I was very well acquainted with che Governor of ont-
pelier, Monſieur de Caftetnan, for whom I would be reſponſible wich my life, bur that I
knew not him of Pont St. Eſprit : but that if his Majeſty would pleaſe to give a caution

ro the ſaid Governors to have an eye to thoſe places, it would be a means to awake their *

diligence, and to make them provide berter for rheir ſafery and defence. 1 likewiſe gave
his Majeſty to underſtand, thar the Biſhop of gen, who was lately come from an Abbey
of hisin Languedoc, near unto Narbonne, had told me that all the lower Langnedee, from
AMeontpelier to Avignon, were in very great anxiety, having no one in thoſe parts to com-
mand them ; and had ſent to the Mareſchal to entreat him to ſend them Monſieur ge
Fojeuſe ; for provided they had-a Chief to head them, they ſhould be enow co defend
the Country ; and that therefore, if his Majeſty chought fic, he might do well to ſend to
che Mareſchal, to let Menſieur de Foyesſe go into the lower Languedoc, he having enow
other great Captains about him ; for as much as the ſaid Steur de Joyeuſe would be there
better accepted chan any other, as the ſaid Biſhop had aſſur'd me. I moreover acquainted
his Majcſty in my faid Letter, that if he would pleaſe ro command che Monſieur to march
with che one half of his Army only, we ſhould beable to fight with greater Forces than
thoſe of the Princes; and ler his Majeſty look upon me as the baſcſt fellow that ever bore
arms, incaſe the Monſicur would come but with the one half of his Army, provided he
brought his Reiters along wich him, if he did nor defeat the Princes, and pur an end to the
War : thatincaſe his Majeſty ſhould nor think fir the Monſieur ſhould come, Iet him
then command the Prince Dolphin to march with the Army towards the Country of Row-
vergue, with whom I would joyn, and we would find means char the Mareſchal d' Anville
ſhould alſo joyn with us, and that then about Tholoxze, or which way ſoever they ſhould
move, we would find an opportunity to fight them at our beſt advantage.

Theſe were all the heads of my inſtrutions ; and to fay the ernch nor a man of them
had everreturn'd inco France, unleſs they had hid their heads in their ſtrong holds , and

we had preſery?d the Country. Had chey once been broken, or ſeparated, they would

have had much ado ever ro have rally'd and piec'd again. This good Biſhop of Apen had
rold me, that he gave Narbonze for loſt, and that Monſieur de Rienx che Governor was
a Hugonot, that he had driven one of che principal Catholicks, to whom all che reſt of the
Catholicks ever addreſs'd themſelves our of the City z ar which the Inhabicancs were al-
moſt in deſpair, inſomuch that che Catholick Citizens had writ to the Mareſchal, to be-
ieech himco wrice to Monfiear de Riewx to permit him to recurn into the Town 3 which
ſaid Sieur de Rjeax had ſent back many excaſes, and that he could not doirz whereupon
ſeeing the Mareſchal cold in cheir behalf, and char he did not enough intereſt himſelf in
their concern, to cauſe the Gentleman to be readmutred, the Catholicks had apply*d chem-

{clves

ELLLGY.CGS as. end ew cok RT _ x

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. |

ſelves to the Parliament , thar the Parlameng had thereupon remonſtrated che Citizens
grievance to the Mateſchal, who again ac their inſtance had wrir to che ſaid Sicur de Rienx ;

bur ſtill co no effe, which had madeche people to give themſelves abſolutely for loſt. 1

old all chjs co the Sicur de Darfort 3 nor that Thad included it in my inſtruRions, and

much leſs that I gave him in Commiſſion ro tell itco the King , becauſe perhaps ir mighc

nor be true, bur telling him, thac to be more certain, he would do well to ask the Biſhop *

of it, and if he would give him l:ave from him to tell jt to the King. He therefore accord-

ingly enquir'd of the Biſhop touching thar affair, who thereupon told him the whole ſtory

after the very ſame manncr he had related ir ro me, and moreover told him, chat he would

himſelf write to the King, which he accordingly did ; bur the ſaid Sicur de Darfort re-

tusd to receive the I ecter cill firſt he had ſeen the Contents , which he cherefore ſhew'd

him, and chen the ſaid Steur took ir, relling me that he had ſeen what the Biſhop had

writ to the King , which was word for word as he had related it ro me before. This

was all that was compriz*d in my inſtructions ; for as to any letcer of Credence, the ſaid

Durfort carry'd no other from me bur onely whar was contain'd in thoſe inſtruRions, he

celling me freely and plainly, thathe would nevercarry other Letter of Credit, but only |
Inſtrudions fign'd and ſeal'd. And upon this foundation ic was, that the Mareſchal Moenſicur de _
a Amville writ that defamatory Lertcr againſt me, and had I not been withheld by the Pwfort ſen to
reſpe& to thoſe to whom he appertains, and the Rank he held inthe Kingdom, I ſhould ®* Kings
have tried to have taugit him how he gave the Lye, withouc being firſt well enform'd

of the truth. I might juſtly have given it him, foraſmuch as the teſtimony of the King

himſelf, and che Inſtructions themſclves, would have manifeſted the truth 2: bur ir is ſaf-

ficient thar the King and che Queen knew the contrary ro what he had coucht in his Lec-

ter, and that my conſcience is abſolutely clear, We ſhall ſee hereafcer whether he or I

ſhall do our Maſter the beſt ſervice. He is indeed two advantages over me, he isa great

Lord and young, and I am poor and old I am nevertheleſs a Gencleman, and a Caya-

lier, who have never yer ſuffer*d an injury, nor ever will do whilſt I wear a (word. - I

am willing to believe, chat the forenamed Biſhop at that time knew nothing of the deſign
complorted againſt me ; bur his wicxed Brother came and ſtayd with him four or five

days, and during that time wrought upon him to conſent co this virtuous Conſpiracy ; of

which I ſhall ſay no more, for God has begun to ſhew his miraculous arm in my revenge,

and I have that confidence in him, that I hope he will not ſtay it there. =

Now the Princes went the ſame way that T had advertiz'd the Preſident they intended
to march, and executed the reſolution of burning all the way they wenr. I could wiſh
from my heart that my intelligence had not proov'd true ; for I have been aſſur'd by ſeve-
ral of very good credit of Tholonze, that the Army of the Princes endammag'd them above
a million of Livers. I ſhall not here undertake to give an account of what they did in
Languedoc, for I do not precend to meddle with other mens aRions; neither how well
che Mareſchal perform'd his duty ; bur ſhall return to a Letter fent me by the King, that I
muſt go forthwith into Bearn,

His Majeſty ſent me a command, that I ſhould gather together all the Forces I was able
to make, and that with all poſſible expedition ; which being done, that I muſt take Ar-
rillery from Tholouze, Bayonne, and Bordeaux, and elſewhere where it was to be had, and
0 to invade the Couniry of Bearn, He writ alſo to the Capitonls of Tholouee, to fur=
niſh me with Artillery and Ammunition ; but not a ſyllable of any money, eicher to pay
the Soldier, or to defray the Equipage of the Canon; and God knows whether in ſuch
Enterprizes any thing ought to be wanting. An Army reſembles a Clock, if the leaſt
wheel or ſpring be wancing, all thereſt goes very falſe, or ſtands ſtill. I therefore ſent E/-
palangues a Bearnois to Court, with ample inſtruRions of all chat was wanting, and that
would be neceflary for me to have before I could begin co march, IT was conſtrain*d to
do this, by reaſon that the Lecters his Majeſty had ſent me abour this Expedition were ſo
cold, that ic ſeem's he thar contriv'd them, muſt either have no great mind to have me
go thither, or ar leaſt if I wenc, ſhould be able ro do nothing to purpoſe, or that he was
an abſolute /gnoramns. However I took no notice of any thing art all to his Majeſty, buc
onely defit*a him to write an Expreſs, and a preſſing Letter, and Command to the Capi-
rouls ro lend me two pieces of Canon, and one great Culyerine, with requifice Ammu-
nition, for which I would be reſponſible to them for the Artillery and Ammunirion are
properly their own. They had already ſent me word, that they had no Artillery ready,
and much leſs Ammunition, by reaſon chat Monſieur de Bellegarde had ſpent moſt of their
ſtock ar Carla, and at Paylaurens, and that the Mareſchal d* Anville had the reſt ar Maze-
res, I writ alſoto his Majeſty, that he would pleaſe co command Monſieur de Valence to
cauſe a lictle money to be deliver'd ro me for one Muſter, or ar leaſt for half a one tor che

| Foot

EN

Sar Es fil. Ge At SST
. n
,

> 4 0 —_— - OO —

360 The Commeitaries of Meſtte Blaize

Boox VII.

—_—

Foot to buy powder, tor thac of wo years this War had iaſted, all the Foor thar I had
rais'd jn thoſe parts had had bur rwo Muſt»ts payd them, and che moſt of them hut one -
and alſo char he would fend ro Monficur de Falence ro ſend a Treafurcr along with me to
defray the Ariullery, and whil{t I waited in expeetiion of Eſpalargzes return, T would

take ſog00d and [peedy order for the reſt, thar at his coming back Ke ſhould find me ready
* to match, |

.

Theſe were ail the demands I maderto the Kino, His anſwer was, that he did very much
wonder [I ſhould {ſo long deferre this Expedition, that he had thonghe I had been already
Lhe BO »Þ mm the Country ; that if I would proceed no otherwiſe than hitherto I had done in this af-
roy os fair, he would appoint ſoine other co uncercake it, and that for three years paſt I had
Monttuc: done nothing to purpoſe. Thele Letters were ready to break my heaxr, and wichal pur
me into ſuch a palſton, that I was once refolv*d not to g2, bur ro write to the King to
jend ſome other, that had formerly ſerv'd him better than T, and char mighe do his bu-
fineſs, as Monhear de Terride had done. Nevertheleſs I ac laſt chought vbecter on'r, and
derermin'd nottodo ity, knowing very well that thete Letters proceeded not from his Maje-
ſties nacure, neither from the Queens, nor the Monſiears, for they had all three writ co
me in the ſame ſtile : 1 knew very well chat this came frem the counſet of my Enemies at
Court, and that nenher the King, the Qocen, nor the Monlleur cver writ fo cart Lercers
as thoſe were, tothe greateſt Encmies they had. 1 ſhewed them to none but Monſieur
de Valence my Brother, for tear Iſt by my Exemple every one thould be frighted from
their duty; for all of chem gencrally, of what condition ſocver, very well knew the con-
tray of whac was laid to my charge; and that Thad done very well wita the liccle money
I had lefe me. And then ir was chat I evidently petceiv d they intended to lay all the
miſcarriages that had happen'd in choſe parts ac my doors having no friendsat Court to
take my part, or defend me.

I now ſee chat the greateſt Error I committed in my whole hife, was that I would have
no dependance upcn any otker, after the deceaſe of my old Maſter, bur the King and
the Qucenz and find that a man 3a command is much more ſecure 1n depending upon a
Monficur, a Madam, a Cardinal, or a Marcſchal of France, than cither upon the King,
che Qucen, cr che Monſieur 3 for they will* evermore diſguiſe aftairs to their Majeſties, as
they chemielves are enclin'd, or think fits and ſhall certainly be bclicv'd by them all ;
for they only hear and ſce with others cars and eyes, *Tis an1ll thing, but it is jmpoſhible
to help it, and he chat has dcne beſt (hall by this means be lefr behind : for which rea-
ſon it I could return to my former Ape, I would never care to depend upon the King or
the Queen, but upon thoſe who are in greateſt favour with them : for thongh I ſhould
behave my iclt as 1ll asa man could do, they would cover and conceal my faults, ſeeing
that I onely depended upon them, for *cis their chiefeſt good, and principal honour, to
have ſervants about them whom they may call their Creatures. It che King would hun-
ſelf only diſtribate his benefirs, ke wonld pair their nails : bur whoever has a mind to
be taken notice of , and rewarded, lec him addreſs himſelf co Monſieur or Madam, for
the King givcs them all, and knows not others but by their report, I am forry I cannor
rceurn to my vigorous age, for I ſhould better know how to govern my ſelf than I have
hitherto done, and ſhould no more. ſo much build my hopes upon the King, as others
chat are about him. Bur I am now grown old, and cannoc be young again, and muſt
therefore be content to follow my old humour ; for ſhould I now go abour to take up
another, -] ihould be ro ſeck at which end to begin. ?Tis too late for me ro mend) it may
ſerve others thongh, that I leave behind me ; bur if che King would be cruly a King, and
confer no'benefics but at theerecommendation of his own judgement, oh, how many would

be dor'd in clicir defigns, and fruſtrated in their cxpeRtacion ! :
I alſo committed another overſight, in not having one of my Sons alwayes about the
King; they were wellenough born co be receiv'd, and well enough qualified co win their
Majeſties eſteem, Bur God took from me my Mark Anthony too ſoon, and fince Cap-
tain Montluc, who was ſlain at the Aaderes, either of which would quickly have ſtope the
mouths of thoſe that duiſt havecenſur'd or calumniated my Actions, Thear Iyes ſo far
off could do me noharms but were we wichin a Pikes length one of another, old as I
The Sicur de am, I would make their hearts quake in their bellies. Neither did I keep my Sonsabonr
MontJuc's Sons» me to be idle, bur to learn my trade ; for che firſt follow'd arms, wherein he bravely
Genaliz'd himſelf, and follow*d me in all my Voyages and Expedirions ; the ſecond had
acquir'd ſo great a reputarion in Gmienne, that it was noc my 1ntercſt to part with him du-
ring the War che third, fince his return from falta, has tollow*d me in cheſe late
Wars, and che youngeſt alſo. Bur I ſhall leave this diſcomſe, which puts mie into paſ-
fion, to recurn to the Expedition of Bearn, Mouſicur de Valence chen went to Boydeanx,

ro

awe Warr

—_—____w_

Book \ VII. | de Montluc, Mareſehal of France. on 261

Um Anemia pas or

to ſee if chere was any money to be got our the Treaſury there z from wence he ſent me _.
word, that nor ſo mich asa ſingle * Liard was to be had from thence 5, that nevertheleſs * A Liard is a
he had prevaild fo far as to take up fourteen thouſand Livers, which he payd into a cer- _ qrwng |

rain Commiſſary that was appointed to attend me, -and thar in ten dayes time he would nies » to
' procure as much more, bur chat I was nor in any wiſe to expect a penny more ; and that fourth part. of
the Receiver had bcen fain to borrow this. Monſieur de Fortenilles went alſo to Tholouz? a Sol,

with my Letter of Attorney, to bind us both to reſtore, and pay back the Ammunitions

in caſe che King ſhould retaſe to do it; and upon theſe rerms they lent me a Canon, a

Culverine, and ſome Ammunition, I then difpatcht away Meſſieurs de Honteſpan, and

de Madaillan with a hundred Horſe cull'd out of my own Company of Gens-d'armes,

and that of Monſicur de Gondrin, direQly to Bayonne, to Convoy the Artillery char the

Vicount d'Orth: was to ſend me from thence; and ſent Monſieur de Gondrin to Noguarol to

begin to form che Army, and with him Monkieur de Sainforens, to whom I had given the

Command of Mareſchal de Camp : and I my fclf tayd four or five dayes behind co fer

forwards the Foot and Horſe, and to give time to the Commiſſaries of proviſions to go

thorough the Provinces to execute the Orders I had given them, for che advance of vitual

for the Army, to which 'end I dcelay*d the time bur fix dayes only, after which I wencin
two dayes to Nagaarel,

So ſoon as I came chicher we immediately fell ro Counſel to deliverate with what places A Conſultacior.
we ſhould firſt begin. In which Conſultation ſome were of advice, that ir would be beſt — gr IM
to begin with St. Scver, others {aid it would be the beſt courſe to march direRly to Pau: ** * ac
but I was of opinion that I ought in the firſt place to fall upon Rabaſteins , and for theſe
reaſons, Fuft, becauſe that beginning with chat, T ſhould leave the beſt Country of
Gaſcony open and free behind me, from thence to be ſupply'd with victual for the Army ;
and (econcily, chat Rabaſteins being the ſtrongeſt Caſtle, the Queen of Navarre had in
her poſlefſiony if I ſhould take it by force (which T foreſaw T muſt do, as being confidenc
they would not cafily ſurrender) I would pur all ro the (word ; aſſuring my ſelf, thac that
proceeding would ſtrike fo great a terror into all che Inhabitants of Bearn, that no place
afterwards would dare to abidea Siege, Navarreins only excepred. And on the other fide,
chat thoſe of 7 holowze hearing of this good beginning, wculd nor ſpare to farniſh me
with any thing I ſhould ſtand in need of, when they ſhould ſee that things ſucceeded
well with meg whereas on the contrary, ſhould IT begin with St, Sever, I ſhould engage
my ſelf inthe Lands, a Country only fruitful in finds, where my men would periſh for
want of bread, and could have no relief from Bordeaux, though I ſhould take the place.
Thac therefore it was much better to begin with theſtrongelt firſt, and chere ſuddenly to
employ my Forces, than with. the weakeſt, and daily to conſume my men, and waſte
my time to little or no effet, This was what I propog'd, which in the end took placein
the Counal, and was approv'd by all. Bur I told them, that above all chings, to ſtrike
a terror into the Enemy , we mult kill all before us which made any oppoſition, which
would make the Capitouls of Tholouze to furniſh and ſupply us with all chings neceſlary,
ſceing that it was Good hand, good hire. Ge.

This Council was held immediately upon my coming thither , and the next morning
before day I took 2.5 or 30 Horſe, and went in all diligence to Dacqs. Monſieur de
Gondrin had {hew*d me a Letter, chathis Son Monſieur de Honteſpan had ſent him from
Bayonne, wherein he ſent him word, that the Artillery was not ſo ready as we believ'd,
bur that the Vicount d'Orthe was exceedingly diligent co equip, and make them fit ;
wherefore ſo ſoon 2s I came to Dacgs I diſpatcht away two Gentlemen to Monſieur de
Monteſpan, one in the heels of another, to quicken his haſte 3 and writ to the Vicount to
entreat him to adyance a day or two before, and to try if he could bring Mefſieurs de Laxe
and de Dam:z2an allvg with him, that we might conſult together of what we were beſt
ro do : which he accordingly did, bringing the ſaid Steur de Damazan only in company
with him, it being impoſſible for Monfieur de Laxe to return ſo ſoon to Dacgs ; where I
layd before the ſaid Sieur de Damezan what had been debared amongſt us in the Council
at Nogiaro!, and my opinion, which was there alſo allowed by all to be the beſt, and par-
ticularly by Monſieur de Damezan ; who told me, that ſhould we march direQly to Sz.
Sever, it would be impoſſible ro ger one Baſque out of the Province, by reaſon they would
be necefficated to paſs the waters in the Enemies Conntrey : bur if I went co begin there
where I intended, I ſhould no ſooner be arriv*d ar Nay, bur all che Country of the

Baſques, and the Valleys of Sawlt and Daſpe would infallibly come in to me. I was very The Siege of

glad ro find him of my opinion , but I was conftrain'd to ſtay three dayes at Dacgs before Rabeſtcins cons
the Artillery came up co me, At my departure thence l lefr ewo pieces of Canon with the cluded,
Vicount d'Orthe, with Ammunition proportzonable, with which he was co march direaly

*
:
$')

”_ eo

T7.
$
' RE
»
bh.
95S
w
4
LS 7
©)
ay!
"T
MEFs:
4x
: 8 -
" x
; MW
$S3 (<)
, "IEG
:
A
|!
{ a
"84
}
.

A
4 2
”'}
*:
. 9 :
«2
; =
" F 1
*759% >=
T35
$ 0
41137
g '*.
i
J- Y;
"RN.
Þs, 4
«2,0
(4
f
OF
oe
[3 $ A
> 38”.
159
S415 it
LEES of
« 1 M4
a. a”
me
w .
"F--
, $2
'
*"
"
_ :
8,
= 3
C5
> 519
oy
7
_y *
>
_ 2
pea bY
£ | -
4
+ 3 3
- > 1 al}
EF}
kp> :
*r4 |
>
{
j *

-F: #4

h 3%

> IF:

RATS

13768 5
_ 'Y
4} '
391 Y'

2 |
5 Þ
$7
9 I
a
TY
£78
»

_ S

1,

F
#-.v
3

} :
:
; :
4 $5
"EY - $
' 8 |
122 0E
1-5
$4 7
ib

ASP! b
By ht

+ 43

wilt
x
5;
i:
LF
{+ |
Gy
£
vo
**
%
{xs
i

j >
Ee ES

-
p —m_ ou
_
. ” —_——————
ww . " — lawalh,
. GE cnt Cre ai
LARS II; PEPE Mann ay mance ellen
- — > 6.4 - - Petr GE cons Eee” See
bk *; = GER F< TILE hon = -
- - fa a Py - - ES On gany
: i pate $7" I: — " the or = 5
na; RE TIC WY SE” = - - =
- * ar> - " : Y _ «hs N
A Nee Ronin pr orsr rere oo es -— 2 "TR ' Ons / «

o6)

”
» ”
4 £3 ” " Pn y , is 4
man any ot pal A FO IO rot an eg ern” CUPr LR 7 T
2
< anno 4
_— +
_ ang _ 4 3D

- a ett Ther «Lhe ws. £: 2 eb a

362 :

—_—

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox VII,

" FUE" SE

to Par, ſo ſoon as ever he could hear I had taken Rabaſteins, it being farther concluded,
chat at the ſame time I ſhould begin to march, I ſhould ſend rwo Companies of Gens-
d*arms to meet him with two others of Foot that were at ont de EMarſan, to joyn with
a thouſand he had alrcady wich him, what of hisown Tenants, and chole of Labour. I
I:fr him alſo Monſicur d' Amor to be affiſting to him, with ſome other Gentlemen of
the Country abqut Dacqs, which being done, I fer forward, marching with che Artillery
day and night,

Monficur de Montamat, the Queen of Navarre's Lieutenant in that Country, was put
tro a very great Dilemma at this preparation, and could not poſſibly divine which way I
would cake, whether direRly to Pan, or to Rabaſteins ; tor as for St. Sever, he perceiv'd
very well by my motion, that Thad no thoughes of going that way : butexpeRed I ſhould
march cither dire&tly to rhe ſaid Rabs/teins, or elſe to Pa#. I made ſo good haſte, that
in two dayes and two nights, with four vieces of Canon, a great Culyerine, and two
Baſtards I arriv'd at Nogaaro!; where Meſſicurs de Gondrin and de Sainftorens joyning with
me, we marche direQly to Rabaſteins, and in three dayes with the greateſt part of our
Horſe and Foor came before the Town. Tr continually rain'd, inſomuch thar all the Ri-
vers were full, which was the reaſon that the Artillery could not come before Rabaſteins
ſo toon as the Army ; but immediately upon my arrival I took Commiſſary Fredeville
and the Sjeur de Leberyon, who in the morning before day had been to diſcover the
place, as Captain St. Colombe, Monficur de Baſilas, and other Gentlemen of the Country
had allo done , whom I found of contrary opinions, and in great diſpute, rouching the
manner of the Siege, ſome of them ſaying that we muſt firſt rake the Town, and from
within to batter the Caſtle z the others, and eſpecially all thoſe of Bearn maintain'd, thac
I ought to attaque the Caſtle from without, and Fredeville himſelf was of that opinion :
bur 1 would ſee it my (cl; for in ſuch matters I would never truſt to any one, and a good
befieger of places ought to proceed after that manner z and to that end, raking onely the

The Sieur de before-named Fredeville and de Leberon along with me, went my felt to diſcover the place,
Montluc goes 10 where though they ply'd me luſtily with their ſhor, they did nor- hinder me nevercheleſs

diſcover Raha-
fems,

from viewing every part at my own leiſure, till at laſt I withdrew my ſelf our of the ſtorm
of Harquebuze- ſhot into a little thatcht houſe cloſe by the Caſtle; and there 1 made de Fre-
deville confeſs, that we were fiſt ro attaque the Town, and from within, the Caſtle ;
afrer which we return'd one after another running, for it was hot ſtanding ſtill, and wenc
ro conclude with Meſſteurs de Gondrin, de Baſillac, de Savignac, de Sainftorens, de Monte-
{pan, de Haidaillan, and Captain Pancillac Colonel of the Infantry, to atraque the Town.
The remainder of the day I employ'd in caufing Gabions and Bavins ro be made, and
by breaks of day the next morning had the Artillery planted in Battery before the Town,
which ina very few volleys made a Breach, The Enemy had no intention to keep the
Town, for they had filled all che houſes with ſtraw and faggots, which fo ſoon as chey
ſaw our people coming on to the Aſſault, they gave fire to in an inſtant, and ran away
men, women, and children to put themſelves into the Caſtle. Our men did what they
could to ſave the Town from being burnt, bur they ſhot ſo furiouſly from the Caſtle, thac
it was impoſſible to hinder the greateſt part of it from being conſum'd to aſhes. The nighe
following I brought the Artillery into the Town, and began to barter ſome Lodgings on
the left hand, at the end of which was a Turret that cover'd the Draw-bridg and the Gate
of the Caſtle ; and by Evening the ſaid Buildings were opened, and the Tarrer beaten
down to the Ground, | In the morning by break of day we began to batter the great Tower
where the Clock was, which whilſt we were doing our Soldiers gain'd rhe Gate of the
Town, which was within ten paces or leſs of that of the Caſtle, and thar lookr a liccle into
cheir falſe-Brayes ; but there was a great Terraſs a Pike height, and as much in thickneſs,
made of Bavins afcer the manner of a Rampire that cover*d cheir Draw-bridg, ſo chat our
people could not do them ſo much harm as they did us; ro remedy which inconvenience
we made a Blind of ſome barrels and planks in that place, which ſomething ſecur'd our
men that lay before the ſaid Portal. All day long our Artillery batter'd the face of che
Tower, and in the end the ſaid Tower was opened, after which I made them ſhoot from
the other Battery, which play'd into the Caſtle, till che next day, which was the chird,
at noon, but could ſee no 1ffue of the buſineſs. Ar this time Monſieur de Fontenilles and
Captain Meoret came with the piece of Canon, and the great Culverine from Tholowze 3
bur they did us no ſerviceat all, for the Culyerine burſt in an hundred pieces, and the Ca-
non was crackt.

I then cauſed two pieces of Canon to be remov?d to the left hand cloſe by the Wall of

the Town that pointed upon the other Face of the Caſtle upon the left 5 wherein my in-

tention was, af I could, ro make the Tower fall on our fide, which if I could effect, it
would

ee. —_———C_@_ dt Ave. I A<AAt YY ——— => nt Tg nn ne mee

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 36 3

would choak up the Ditch that was full of water, and fill the falſe-Brayes on that fide,
by which means we might go on to che Aſſault over the ruine, which I made account
would infallibly fill the Grafte, for the Tower was very high. All che fourth day I bat-
rer*d the face of this Tower wich theſe rwo pieces of Canon, and in the end beat it down,
ſo that nothing remain d ſtanding, but the right fide, and the corners. TI then cauſed
chem to ſhoor ac the firſt Corner which lookt cowards che Artillery T had firſt planted on
the left hand, and with two pieces that I was all night removing, ar the other Corner that
look't towards the Town. In ten or twelve ſhots the Coins was broken, and the Tower
fall'n on our fide, exattly in the place where I would have ic + but bow high, or how
thick ſoeyer the Tower was , it did not ſo wholly fill the Graffe, but that we were to de-
ſcend a great way into its» Ir is true, that theruines had drunk up the water, and fill'd a
good parr of the Ditch, bur noc ſo that we were not yer to go very low. The fifth day
ar night the Sieur de Baſ#llac, and the Baron de St. Lary, brought me fifty or threeſcore
Pioneers, forali mine were ſtoln away, and fled ; and they had raiſed theſe amongſt their
own Tenants, upon their own Eſtates which lay hard by. I gave theſe fellows ro Mon-
fiear de Leberon, and Captain Montant his Brother-in-law, with thirty or fonrty Sol-
diers that che Captains I Artigne and Solles made to rake upon them the office of Pioneers,
their Captains themſelves affiſting them at the work. The ſervice they were employ'd about
was to take away the Terraſs, that the Artillery might look into the Draw-bridg, and batter
the ſide of it, and that the Ball might paſs all along by the Flank, and into the Courtine a-
long the Breach wichin, The Encmy had alſo made a Barricado in the Chambers above, ſo
that aman could not poſſidly ſee any thing on one of che two ſides. I gave the charge of
removing che two. pieces of Canon to the place where Monſieur de Leber on drew away the
Terraſs to the Vicount d*z4, and my felf went to take a little repoſe , for this was the fifth
night that T had nothad a whole hour of ſleep, By break of day I heard the two Canons
play, but could not believe it poſſible that in that one night all the Terraſs could be remov'd,
at leaſt all that was in our way. Our Artillery began to play its feats all along this Blank,
and it coſt nsa great many ſhot to break this Barricado, which did us infinite miſchief, for
they ſhot deſperately inco our Canon. I chen made the Vicount 4'Vzs, Monſieur de Lebe-
70n, and Captain Montaut to gotoreſt, and leftr Monheur de Baſillac to afliſt the Artillery.
After chis we cauſed a hole co be made in the Wall of the Town cloſe by our Artillery, that
we might come to it in ſecurity from without, for trom within ic was impoſſible with-
our being kill'd or wounded. The fourth day of our Siege I had given to Captain Bah
the charge of cauſing Gabions to be made, who had accordingly taken great pains, and
been very diligent in the execution of his Command ; bur he had cauſed them to be made
{o little, char che wind of the Canon had preſently ſhaked them all to pieces, anerror thac
a man muſt take care to avoid,

Our Cavalry all this while was quarter'd in Villages a league and a half from the Lea-
guer, where there was accommodation of Hay and Oats for the Horſes, with inſtruction
and command to be every night all night long in the field, to prevent any relief from get-
tingin - for the very day that we came to Rabaſteins, we had taken a great Packet of Lec-
rers ſent by Monſieur de JMontamat, to the Vicount de Canmont, Monſieur d' Andax, and Monſieur de
ſeveral other Gentlemen to the number of thirty or fourty Letters ; wherein he ſolliciced Montamat's -
them if ever they defir'd to do an opportune and ſignal ſervice for the Queen of Navarre, -*515 raken.
and the Prince, to come ſuccour the Country of Bearn ; for that they were nor ſtrong e-
nough to defend che Country if they did not come in to their relief : that he had already
writ to them twice or thrice, but had received no anſwer, that therefore he ſhould ſend
him word when they ſhould be ready, and he would in one night make. ſo long a march
as to come and joyn with them, immediacely to march altogether into Bearn ; or that 0-
therwiſe he muſt be conſtrain'd to abandon the open Country, wanting Forces ro make
head againſt us ; and chat he ſaw he had not now to do with Monſieur de Terride, The
reading of which Letters made us to pitch upon the following reſolution.

Firſt, To ſend co the Baron de Larboxs, that he ſhould bring Monſieur de Grawont*s
Company. of Gens-Marms from the higher Comenge, to come and joyn with ns, that in
ſo doing, he ſhould make a halc thereabours where che relicf was of neceſſity co paſs, and
thar njghr and day he ſhould keep his Horſe upon the Avenues, to give us continual advers
tiſement of the Enemies morion 3 and that he thould not offer to hinder their paſſage, but a rude king cf
let chem paſs by, and only put himſelf in cheir Rear. I then diſpatche away Captain Alamgivento
Manſſan, a Gentleman of my own Company, to go to the Valleysby which che Enemy 3 whole Coun-
was to paſs, giving him order with the * Bat-ſain co raiſc all the people, of the Valleys and *?? by ringing
Villages, and joyn himſelf to the Baron de Larbows to fall into their Rear. Thus much oily >» JF
for the Recruits we expeRted to come 1n to us; now gn on (ide, our Cavalry was every and 'F: aurged

Bbb 2 alght

E-.
- 8.”
A n - a - - . .
Fo: a . i 2
ENS - —_  — _
TTY P.—- wane —_ Bt = 2 E _ ” : 5 > ” 2 a . gg. ew gn Was — _ - = - hg _ _— _ = . bs - _ ata 6
_y_— pond... — po = F EE Es, A wm oa - —_ - re OT woe __ w- 1mm ts ec 9 ag”. ers py te; ay —_Y % : m_ = -— FTE -., Se Rn —_— - C La _ = -_ =
_ _ - = __ ; h hd S ———_ = 0 . wo En OR one OT” er”. 4 , Te” IT Ry, - ; : n __ —_— . © _
> progeny © _— i ya — Pn : 2; 2A: Pm I. Ny Sc £ " - 8 : . _ q & 5 , = ra : go rm — w—_
a PR - - . "a - _ : = — _ ” - K -
— ws. wn mart oooomas bn Lott Eo >. 2 ' 4 REREG nr Der lee» foes - $2 —_—_ — & por Ne ; » > —_— Fn 5 _— ou __
- - hc pa Sm—_—_— 4; p - o "= 2 - - -— n 4 "y is, -— p -.-_ 4.1 hover no —_
: : : ” P I £8” = 444" IT - ; 23 IRA - A. — 1 On mn Je dl ek on ; CE © LS _—_ =—- a 6 , hs _ = 6 p , .
"s" <= > 0 wa : —— S " ws . Gs Earn <a - CITI - TS” _ bs : x Ry > has _— pn 4” ho —_— — . The | W-- _ OE _— 7 Ow "+ -  — my." ——_— oO he e's - £ , PPT.
wwe - 75% . ; 3 S MROLe —_ + ” = z "2 —_— 0 SCN $2 7 by p - >. 0%.5 6 >. $4 CRE” - ——_ _ wy age En AE -1 - ©” 2 £ L  _ L : . * We & - - _ ” 2 : : Fre . -
+ "4 a " "IIa T. 2 IC ors Be #: EI IE IS oat” oh ag NE: IE PE COST yo > Pa IE ne oe ed - FT = = Iv TE tors IR "Jo BED: 1 - ed”, 5 "Lac " _ —_ — _ --+m ©, O22 G - . : " —* Fa, & S% : - - _—_ : a . ? . 6 . © / = _
D ; 5 EAT Y _ $- PETE 'S I, RR * MEE pF ST is I ih = > LE A Q _ - , -—— os. a; * CS al Re 4 [4 _ of; - bs A . . P A. "a - _ - < _
4 2 be " A ame - hay 32355 6-S cara- --ad 7% ne ns * EZ - : - by c LS _—_— coy -— A - err > nn nk a . - ” - , 2 . _ 4 ent wn p—_ —_— "RR : : . '
re hgr=Le EROS Lag xt IS Wn nn me 4 3h ors ni tn - . 7 G a EB" CICEE.. . - EP , rn Fog rt IE ies 4 en ta ISO Ie ar re ts ——_— - » 9 0 net rr ny xtra of . > Bee of : , F 7 X $ _ Tag ahi 4
- - - - - mY b - n I Ps £ £ \ : . 4 = _
- Y a Og - en nayes; an ee ptr ITN - « w_—Fy yr k No = e od : , £ _ T6 : 4 ; 9s p RES ITE D. x E 3, I « 54-3 ov
4 a OT EE fl " mttoteeapal Mm i : I | F EIN ; YIELD, D : : 4 - Sy VER 2 __ F ; EGS . Mg, "Rs . TREO 4 - - . ke . OY PEE, %

Sare—r——
Peet X
- -
Do 12 Vane Lab

i

Sn tin ner cacao He.

j 5
j Cad ate _ ——
-

164 The Commentaries of Meſſre Blaize Book VII.

night on horteback, and we had Scouts out continualiy as far as Nay, for Monſieur de
Montamat was of neceſſity to paſs over the Bridg of the ſaid Nay co go meet his relief, and
Order to hin- in caſe we had not taken the Caſtte before the ſaid MMontamat and his Succours ſhould u-
der the relief of gjce, Monficur de Gondria with twenty Light- horſe, and four Enfigns of Foor, was to ſtay
Rabaſtins, with che Artillery, and I with the reſt of che Camp, when the news of cheir approach was
brought to us, was to march day and night cogo and fight them, This was che Ocder
Ke had concluded on, had any Forces come to relieve them, making account that in caſe
we detearcd cheir Succours, the whole Country of Bear was our own. Which I have
here ſer down , and entorm®d my reader withal , that others may take exemple by it,
when they ſhall be cagaged upon the like occaſion ; the young Captains I mean , for the
old Soldiers know well enough they are to proceed after this manner. My deliberation
moreover was, the Caſtle being taken, to diſpatch away a Gentleman who ſhould poſt ic
day and night to the King, to carry his Majeſty news of the ſucceſs, to the end that he
nught ſend ſome Gencleman to the Marcſchal d' Anville, who was about Aontpelier, fol-
lowing the trace of che Enemy, (where I have not heard of any great harm he did) to
bid him write to thoſe of Tholonze to ſend me eight pieces of Canon, of twelve of Nar-
Deſign for the bonne, that wete yer at the {aid Tholouze, and order him to dire his Letters to the Parha-
Conqueſt of ment and the Capitouls, to move them forthwith to defray the charge of conveying the
Bearn, ſaid pieces of Canon to me, Which whilſt it was in doing we would go atraque another
Caſtle within two little Leagues of Rabaſteins, which vvas not very ſtrong, and trom thence
would go to paſs the Gave at a Foard above Nay, very well known to the Bearnois Gentle=
men in our Camp, and take Nay, there to eſtabliſh our Magazine of victual, and to re-
ceive Mefficurs de Luxe, and de Damaz1n, the Vicount de (hanx, and d' Almabarix, wuh
the Baſques they were to bring in to us, and ſo ro march before Pax, where the Vicount
d*Orthe was to come with the two pieces of Canon, and the Culverine had been left in his
hands at Dacgs; being confident that all the Country, ſome for good will, and the reſt
for fear of their lives and eſtates, would immediately ſurrender tous. That having taken
Pan, and the eight piects of Canon being come to us from Thologze, we would then march
before Navarrcins, and whoever would have put me to my Oach, whether I ſhould have
taken it or no, I ſhould rather have ſworn I ſhould than I ſhould not, for we had with us
Gentlemen of Bea#n and Bigorre, and principally Monſieur de Bafi/lac, who had command-
ed at the Siege of Navarreins for Monſieur de Terride, who both then ſaid, and have fince
affirm*d, that had we affanlced Navarreing as briskly as we did Rabaſteins, we ſhould have
carried that with leſs difficulty than the other ; every one thar knew chem both concluding
chat Rabaſteins was by much rhe ſtronger place.
Bur as men deſign, and God diſpoſeth as ſeemeth beſt to him the Events of things, he
was pleaſed to order it very much contrary to what we propoſed to our ſelves : for the
1562, fifch day of the Siege, the 23, of Jaly, in the year 1562. upon a Sunday abour two of the
clock in the afternoon, I reſolved to give an aſſault, the Order whereof was after the man-
Order for che ner following. That Monficur de Sanftorens Mareſchal de Camp ſhould lead the Com-
Alaulc. panies one after the other up tothe Breach , which char he might the better do withour
confuſion, I otder'd all the Companies to be drawn by four and four together out of the
Town, which upon pain of death were not to ſtir from their places till Monſieur de Sain-
ftorens (hould come to fetch them, who was to ſtay three quarters of an hour betwixc every
leading up, and'in that manner to condu all rhe Companies one afrer another ; and ir
was alſo order'd, that the two Captains who were upon the Guard by che Breach, which
The Canoh a- were } Artigues, and Sales of Bearn ſhould go on firſt ro the Aﬀſaulc. As I was ſetting
bandoned. An this Order one came in haſte totell me, that the two Canons that batter'd rhe Flanck,
and that had been remov'd in the night, were forſaken, and nota man durſt ſhew him-
ſelf upon the Battery, by reaſon the Arrillery it felf had ruin'd all the Gabions, I there-
fore left it to Meſſicurs de Gondrin and de Sainflorens to conclude the Order of the Fight,
thatis to ſay, that the Companies ſhould go on ſucceſſively one after another, which was
to be ſec down in writing, and my {elf ran on the outfide to the whole of the wall, where
I found only ten or twelve Pioneers ſquat with their bellies cloſe ro the ground ; for Tibau-
ville the Commiſſary of the Artillery, who had the charge of thoſe rwo pieces of Canon,
had been conſtrain'd to quit them, and even Monſieur de Baſillac himſelf, Sceing then
this diſorder, I unbethought my ſelf of a great number of Bavins I had che day before
cauſed co be brought into the Town, and ſaid to the Gentlemen who were with methelſe

The words of y,ord; : 7 have heard, and alwayes obſerv'd, that there is no labour , nor danger , that

the Sicur de

Montluc play Gentlemen will ever refuſe ; follow me therefore I beſeech you, and do as you ſhall ſee me do ?
ing whe Pio- They did not ſtay to be entreated, and ſo we went in great haſte direAly ro the Bavins

neer, char were within the Town, and lay inthe middle of a Streer there where not a man durſt
abide,

Book VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

abide, and there I cook a Bavin and laid it upon my ſhoulder, as alſo every Gentleman
rook one, and there werea great many who carried two a- piece ; after which manner we
return'd out of the Town by clie ſame way we entred in, and thus I marchc before chem
till we came to the hole. By che way as we were going I had given order, chat they
ſhould bring me four or five Halbardeers, which ac my return I found already arriv'd at
the hole, and made them enter intojt. Wetchrew chem the Bavins into the hole, which
they took with rhe points of their Halberts, and ran ro throw chem npon the Gabions to
raiſe them. I dare be bold to affirm with truch that we were not above a quarter of an
hour about this work, and {o ſoon as ever the Canon was cover'd, Tibanville and the other
Canoneers return'd into the Battery , where they began to ſhoot with greater fury than
of all the dayes before, every clap almoſt overtaking another, every one afliſting them wich
great cheerfulneſls, If, Captains, you ſhall do the ſame, and your ſelves firſt pur your
hands co the work, you will make every one follow your exemple, very ſhame will puſh
and force chem on : and when the ſervice 1s hot in any place, if che Chief do not go in
perſon, or ac leaſt ſome eminent man, the reſt will go very lamely on, and murmur when
a man ſends them to ſlaughter. And if you cover honor, you muſt ſomecimes cempr
danger as much as the meaneſt Soldier under your Command.

I will deprive no man of his due honor; for I chink I have aſſiſted at 85 many Bat-
teriesas any man this day alive, and muſt needs ſay this, that I never ſaw Commiſſaries
of the Artillery more diligenc and adventurous than both Fredeville and Tibanville ſhew'd
themſelves during the whole five dayes that the Battery continued, in my whole lifez for
they rhemſelves both levell'd, and fir'd, though they had as good Canoneers as ever I ſaw
handle Linſtock in my dayes ; and I dare be bold to ſay, that of a thouſand Canon ſhor
we made againſt this pl:ce not ren fail'd of their effe&, or were ſpent in vain. |

In che morning I ſent for Monſieur de Gohas, who was at Vic-Bigorre, and the Captains
who were ſetto have an eye to Montamat, and the Succours expeted by hum, wricing
to him to come away thar he might be with me at the Aſſault, by reaſon that Captain

Panliac Colonel of the Infantry was fo dangerouſly wounded, that we had no hopes of Caprain Paul=

his life, He receiv'd his ſhot ar the time when I went over-night to carry Meſlicurs de !iac thor,

Leberon and de Montaut tocut off the-great Counterſcarp, which ſhot went quite through
his Body. My Son Fabian was alſo ſhot in the chin, and two Soldiers cloſe by my fide,
I chere commicred a very great error, for I went in the evening before it was dark, and
I believe they were aware that we intended to cut the Counterſcarp, for all their Harque-
bazeers were run together to that place z and che reaſon why I commicted this error was,
that having compured wich my ſelf how many hours the night was long, I found rhacir
was not aboye ſeven hours or thereabouts 3 and on the other ſide I ſaw that in half an
hour I ſhould loſe all char I had done, if the Counterſcarp was not pulled down by break of
day,and in thart caſe I ſhould think fic to give an aſſaulc char day, they would be foſtrong-
ly rampir'd and fortified, that with as many more Canon ſhot as I had made againſt
the place, ic would be a matter of very great difficulty ro enter. This was the reaſon why
'T made ſo much haſte to go aud begin the work, that I might have it perfeRed by break
of day ; where I recommended the care of it to Meſſieurs de Leberon and de Montaxt, and
the two Caprains upon the Guard, by telling them that in cheir diligence our victory
wholly confiſted. And in truth they ſlept nor, as I have already ſaid, for by break of day
the Arcallery began to play, and che Counterſcarp was wholly pulled down.

O Camrades, you who ſhall go to beliege places, you cannot bur confeſs, that both here
and in ſeyeral other places,my Enterprizes and ViRories have ſucceeded more from my vi-
eilancy and prompt execucion than my valour, and I on my part am willing to confeſs,
thac there was in the Camp braver men than I. Bur noone can be a Coward that has
theſe chree things ; for fromcheſe chree all che Combars and ViRories proceed, and all va-
liant men chooſe to follow Captains char are provided with theſe three qualities, And
on the other fide he cannot be call'd hardy, ler his heart be never fo good, if he be car-
dy, backward, and flow in execution : for before he has fixt his reſolution, he has been
{o long deliberating abour it, that the Enemy 1s advertiz'd of what he intends ro do,
and conſequently is provided to prevent his delign : bur if he be quick he ſhall even ſur-
prize himſelf, So chatchere is no great confidence to be repos'd in a Chiet that1s nor en-
du'd with theſe chree qualicies, vigilancy, prompricude, and valour. If a man examine
all the great Warriours that have ever been, he will find thac they had all choſequalicies.
Alexander did not in vain bear the Device I have mentioned betore, Examine Ceſar's
Commentarics, and all che Authors thar have writ of him, you will find that in his life
he fought rwo and fifty Batrels wichour ever lofing any, ſaving thac of Dirachium; bur
within thirty dayes he had a ſufficient revenge againſt Pompey, tor he won a great Sorel,

ang

Fabian ae.
Montluc ſhots

—— 77 rms ae peer ec

266 = The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize - Book VII:

and defeated him. You will not find that in theſe two and fifty Barrels he ever fought
three times in his own perſon, that 15, with his own hand, chough he was alwayes pre=
ſent there ; by which you will underſtand, that all his Victories were the effe&ts of his
conduR, for being diligent, vigilant, and a prompt execnter of his deſigns. But for all
chis, theſe qualities are rarely found, and I bclieve we Gaſcons are better provided of them
than any other people of France, or perhaps of Emrope, and many good and great Cap-
tains have gone out of it within theſe fifty years. I thall nor compare my {elf ro them,
but this I will ſay of my (elf , becauſe it 1s true, that my Maſter never loſt any thing by
my floth or remiſsneſs, The Enemy thought me a league off when I came to beat up his
Quarters. And if diligence be requir'd in all exploits of war, it is mach more in a Siege,
for a very little thing will ſerve to overthrow a great deſign. It you preſs your Enem
you redouble his fears he will not know where he is, nor have leiſure to recolle& himſelf.
Be (ure to wake winlſt others ſleep , and never leave your Enemy without ſomeching
to do.

I ſhall now return to the Aſſault 5 our Order being ſet down, I went and placed my
{elf at the Gace of the Town near unto the Breach, where I had all the Gentlemen with
me, of which there might be fix or ſeven ſcore, and {till more came up tous, for Monſieur
de la Chappelle Lauzieres , whocame from Oxercy, brought a great Troop of Gentlemen
along with him. I ſhall here relate one thing of my own preſage , which ts perfeQly
true, That it was impoſſible for all the friends I had to diſpoſſeſs me of an opinion I had,
that I ſhould in this Aſſault be kill'd or wounded by a ſhot in ſome part of my head ;
and out of that conceipr was once half in a mind not togoto the Aﬀault, knowing very
well char my death would ar this time be of ill conſequence, if not to the Enterprize in
hand, yer co the general deſign upon that Country ; this fancy therefore {Ull running in
my head the morning before the Aſſault was to be given, I faid ro Monſieur de Las the
Kings Advocate at gen, who was of our Council, theſe words. CMeonſienr de Las, there
are ſome who have exclaim'd, and do yet cry out that 1am very rich ; you know of all the mc-=
ney 1 have to a Denier, for by my Will, to which you are a witneſs, you are ſufficiently enform'd
of my Eſtate. But ſeeing the world are not otherwiſe tobe perſwaded but I have a great deal
of money, and that conſequently, if by accident I ſhould die in this Aſſault, they would demand
of my Wife four times as much as I am worth, I have here brought a particular of all the
money 1 have at this day in the whole world, as well abroad at Intereſ?, as at home in the cu=
ftody of my Wife. The account is of my Steward Barat's drawing, and ſign d by my onn
hand. You are my friend, 1 beſeech you therefoee if I dye, that you and the (ouncellor Mon-
ſieur de Nort wll transfer your love and friendſhip to my Wife and my two Danghters, and that
Jon will have a care of them, eſpecially Charlotte Catherine, who had the honor to be Chriſtned
by the King and the Queen his Mother. Which having ſaid, I deliver*d the Scrowl into
his hands, and very well perceiv'd that he had much ado to refrain weeping. By this
you may judge if Thad not the misfortune that befel me before my eyes, ' Thave no tami-
liar (piric, bur few misfortunes have befall'n me in the whole courſe of my life that my
mind hasnor firſt preſag?d. I till endeavour'd to pur it out of my fancy, reſigning all
things tothe good will of God, who diſpoſes of us as ſeems beſt to his own wiſdom, nei«
ther did I ever do otherwiſe, what ever the Hugonots my Enemies have ſaid or written to
the contrary againſt me.

|. Soſoon as two of the clock, the hour prefixt for the aſſault, was come, I cauſed eight
or ten Bottles of wine, that Madam de Panjas had ſent me, to be brought out, which I gave

Monficur de the Gentlemen, ſaying, Let us drink Camrades : for it muſt now ſoon be ſeen which of ua has
Montluc's been nurſt with the beſt milk, God grant that anothey diy we may drink together ; but if our
_ laſt hour be come, we cannot fruſtrate the decrees of Fate. So ſoon as they had all drunk,
;ng on to the 2nd encourag'd one another, I made them a ſhort Remonſtrance an theſe words, ſaying,
Afſaulr, Friends and Companions, we are now ready ts fall on toth! «Aſſault, and every man 1 to ſhew
the beſt hecan ds. The men who are in this place, are of thoſe who with the Count de Mont=-

gommery deſtroyed your Charches , and rained your houſes ; You muſt make them diſgorge

what the) have ſwallowed of your Eſtates. If we Carr) the place, and put them all to the

ſword, you will have a good bargain of the reſt of Bearn. Believe me they will never dare

The fault, to ſtand againſt youw. Goonthen in the name of God, and I will immediately follow. Which
being ſaid I cauſed the Aſſault to be ſounded, and the two Captains immediately fell on ;

whereſome of their Soldicrs and Enfiens did not behave themſelves very well. Secing then
that thoſe were nor likely to enter, Monſieur de Sainftorens marcht up with four Enfigns
more, and brought them up to the Breach, vvhich did no berter chan the former, for they
ſtopt tour or five paces ſhore of the Counterſcarp, by vvhich means our Canon vyasnothing
hindred from playing into the Breach, vvhich made choſe vvichin duck dovvn behind ir,

I

Book VI. "de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

36G

tt. cs mas. |

I then preſently perceiv'd, char ſome body elſe, and other kind of men than the Foot muſt
pur their hands to the work ; which made me preſently forget the conceit I had of being
kill'd or wounded, and ſaid to the Gentlemen theſe words. Carrader, no body knows how
to fight but the Nobleſs, and we are to expeft no vittory but by ony own hands, let us go then, [
will lead you the way, and let you ſee that" a good horſe will never be refty. Follow boldly, and go
on without fear, for we cannot wiſh for a more honourable death. We deferre the time to0 long,
let wa fall on. I then took Monſieur de Gohas by the hand, to whom I ſaid, Xonſrenr de
Gohas, 1 will that you and I fight together, 1 pray therefore let ws nat part ; and if T be kill'd
or wounded, never take notice of me, bat leave me there, and puſh forward, that the Villory
however may remain to the King : and ſo we went on as cheerfully as ever I ſaw men go on
to an Aſlaultin my life, and looking twice behind me, ſaw that the Gentlemen almoſt
rouchr one another, they came up ſo cloſe. There was a large Plain of an hundred and fifty
paces over, or more, all open , over which we were to march to come up to the Breach,
which as we paſſed over, the Enemy fir'd with great fury upon us all the way, and I had fix
Gentlemen ſhotcloſe by me. One of which was the Sieur de Beſoles ; his ſhor was in his
arm, and ſo great a one, that he had like to have died of his wound; the Vicount de La-
batut was another, and his was in his leg : I cannot tell the names of the reſt, becauſe I
did nat know them, Monſieur de Gohas had brought ſeven or eight along with him, and
amongſt the reſt Captain Savaillas the elder, of which three were lain, and the ſad Cap-
rain $availlan wounded wuh a Harquebuze ſhot quite chrough the face. There were alſo
hurt one Caprain dx Plex, another Captain /a Baſtide, both Kinſmen of mine about Yilte-
neafue, who had alwayes ſerv'd under Monſieur ge Briſſac, one Captain Rantoy of Da-
maſan,and Captain Sales of Bearn, who had before been wounded with the thruſt of a Pike
in che Eye. There were two little Chambers about a Pike height or more from the ground,
which Chambers the Enemy ſo defended both above and below, that not a man of ours
could put up his head wichour being ſeen; however our people began to afſaule them
with a great ſhower of ſtones, which they pour'd in upon them, and they alſo ſhot ar us,
but ours chrowing downwards had the advantage of this kind of fight, Now I had cau-
{ed three or four Ladders to be brought to the edge of the Graffe, and I as turn*d abour co
call for two of them to be broughc ro me, a Harquebuze-ſhor clapt into my face, from che The $Sjcur gs ;
corner of a Barricado joyning to the Tower y where I do not think there could be four Montluc (hor, ©
Harquebuzeers , for all che reſt of the Barricado had been beaten down by our two Ca-
non that playd upon the Flanck. I was immediately all over blood, for « guſht our ac
my mouth, noſe, and eyes 3 whereupon Monkieur de Gohas would have caught me in his
arms, thinking I wonld fall, bur I ſaid, Let ze alone, I ſhall not fall, follow your point. Upon
this ſhor of mine almoſt all the Soldiers and che Gentlemen began to loſe courage, and to
retire, which made me cry our ro them, though I could ſcarce ſpeak, by reaſon of the
corrent of blood that paſht our at my mouth and noſe ; Whither will you go? Gertlemen,
whither will ye go ? will ye be terrified for me ? do not flinch nor forſake the fight, for 1 have no
hurt, and let every one return to his place; in the mean time hiding che blood in the beſt
manner I conld ; and ro Monſieur de Gohas I iaid, ſouftenr de Gohas, take care 1 beſeech
you that the Soldiers be not diſcouraged, and renew the Aſſault, I could no longer ſtay there,
for I began to faint, and therefore ſaid tothe Gentlemen, 7 will goget my ſelf dreſt, but
if you love me, let no one follow, bat revenge me : Which having ſaid I rook a Gentleman
by the hand, I cannocrell his namez for I could ſcarce ſee him, and return'd by the ſame
way I came, where by the way I found a little Horſe of a Soldiers, upon which by che
Gentlemans aſſiſtance I mounted as well as I could, and after chac manner was conducted
to my Lodging ; where I found a Chirurgeon of Monkeur de Gohav, called Maiſtre $i-
201 , who dreſt me, and with his fingers (fo wide were the Orifices of the wound) pull'd
our the bones from my two Cheeks, and cut away a great deal of fleſh from my face,
which was all bruis'd and torn.

Monſieur de Gramand was npon a little Eminence hard by, looking on at his eaſe, who
being of thisnew Religion, though he had never born arms againſt the Kings had no mind
ro meddle amongſt us, He was aware how upon my hurc all the Soldiers were diſhearten'd,
and ſaid co thoſe who were with him , There is ſome eminent perſon ſlain, ſee how the Sol-
diers are diſcourag*d, 1 am afraid it # Monſieur de Montluc, and therefore {aid ro one of
his Gentlemen call'd Monſieur de Sart, Go run and ſee who it ts, and if it be he, and that
he is not dead, tell him that 1 entreat him ts give me leave to come and ſee him. The ſaid
Sicur de Sart is a Catholick, who accordingly came, and at his encring into the Town he
heard char ic was I chat was hurt, and coming to my Lodging found my people weeping
for me, and me tumbled upon a Paller upon che ground 3 where he told me char Mon-

ficur de Gramont begg'd leave that he might come to ſee me, To which 1 made anſwer,
That

_

The Commentaries of Meſfite Blaixze & —Boox VII!

Rahaſteias ta +
ken by ſtorm.

The Fortreſs of
RabaFteins,

That there was no unkindneſs betwixt Monſieur de Gramont and me, and that if he FR
to come, he wonld-find that he had at many friends in our Camp, and peradventure more than
in that of their Religion. He was no ſooner gone from me, but Monſieur de CMadaillan
my Lieutenant, who had march on theone hand of me when I went on to the Aflaule,
as Monſieur de Gohas did on the other, came to ſee if I was dead , and ſaid tome ; Sir,
Cheer up your ſpirits, andrejuyce, we have entred the Caſtle, and the Soldiers are laying a-
bout them, who put all to the ſword ; and aſſure your ſelf we will revenge your wound, I chen
ſaid to him, Praiſed be God that I ſee the Viftory ours before I dye. Inow care not for death.
I beſeech you return back, and as you have ever been my friend, ſo now do me that aft of friendſhip
not to ſuffer ſo much as one man toeſcape with life, Whereupon he immediately return'd,
and all my ſervants went along with him, ſo that T had no body left with me but ewo Pa»
ges, Monſieur de Las, and the Chirurgeon. They would fain have ſav'd the Miniſter,
and the Governor , whoſe name was Captain Ladon, to have hang'd them before my
Lodging, but the Soldiers took them from thoſe who had them in their cuſtody , whom
they had alſo like to have kill'd for offring to ſave them, and cut them in a thouſand pie-
ces. They made alſo fifty or threeſcore to leap from the high Tower into the Moat, which
were thereall drown*d. There were two only faved who were hid, and ſuch chere were
who offer*d four thouſand Crowns to ſave their lives, but not a man of ours would heark-
en toany Ranſom ; and moſt of the women were killd , who alſo did us a great deal of
miſchief with throwing ſtones. There was found within a Spaniſh Merchant whom the
Enemy had kepr priſoner there, and another Catholick Merchant alſo, who were both ſa-
ved; and theſe were all that were lefc aliveof che men that we found in the place, namely
the two that ſome one help* away, and the two Catholick Merchants, Do not chink,
you who ſhall read this Book, that I cauſed this ſlaughter ro be made ſo much out of re-
venge for the wound I had receiv'd, as to ſtrike terror into the Country, thac they might
not dare to make head againſt our Army. And in my opinion all Souldiers in che be-
ginning of a Conqueſt ought to proceed after that manner, with ſuch as are ſo impudent
as toabide Canons he muſt bar his earsto all Capiculation and Compoſition, if he do not
ſee grear difficulties in his Enterprize, and chat his Enemy have put him to great trouble
in making a Breach. And as ſeverity (call it cruelty if you pleaſe) is requiſite 1n caſe of a
reſolute oppoſition, fo on the other fide mercy is very commendable, and fir, it you ſee
that they in good time ſurrender to your diſcretion.

Monſieur de Gramond then came to viſic me, and found me in a very ill condition, for
I had much adoto ſpeak to him, by reaſon of the great quantity of blood thar iflued
from my mouth 5 Monſieur de Gohas alſo immediately after him came back from the fighc
to ſee mie; ſaying, Take comfort Monſieur, and cheer up, upon my word we have ſufficiently
reveng'd you, for there ts not one man left alive. He thereupon knew Monhieur de Gramond,
and ſaluted him, who after they had embraced, entreated him to carry him co the Caſtle,
which he did, where Monſieur de Gramond found the taking of it exceeding ſtrange, ſay-
ing he could never have belicv'd this place had been near ſo ſtrong, and that had I arraqu'd
Navarreint it would have been more cafily taken. He would chen nceds ee all the re-
moves TI had made of the Canon, which having ſcen, he ſaid, it had not been requiſite that
we ſhould have omitted any thing of che Battery. Abour an hour after he recurn'd, where
he offer'd me a Houſe of his hard by, and all other things in his power, and has ſince told
me, that ar that time, and in the condition he then ſaw me, he never thought I could
have liv'd till the next day, and believed he had taken his leave of me for ever. All char
day, and all that night I bled continually, and the next morning ſent to entreat all the Cap -

rains to come and ſee me, which they did, where having recover'd a lictle hearty and being

Monficur de
Montluc's Ha-
rangue to his
Officers after
his being hurt,

able to ſpeak with greater eaſe than before, I made them the following ſhort Oration.

« Gentlemen, my Companions and Friends, I am not ſo much concern'd at my own

© misfortune, nor the pain I endure, as I am to ſee the King*s affairs diſorder'd by this
« accident, and my ſelf conſtrain'd to leave you. I did not conceal from you the defign
{« I hadin this Execution, you all of you heard it. I beſeech you therefore that for me you |
« ſtop notthe Career of your victory, bur puſh your fortune ſtill on, for the execution we
&« haye done upon theſe people will ſtrike a terror into all the Country of Bears : and I am
&« confident you will meet with no refiſtance but at Navarreins. Loſe not then this op-
« portunity that God has given you ; for if you do, all the world will ay, that your Cou-
© rages only depended upon mine, and that you can do nothing without me , which
* though it would be a ſingular commendation for me, yer I would be very ſorry to haveir
& ſaid, out of the honour and friendſhip I bear to you, which makes meas jealous of your
6 reputation as my own, Make then I beſeech you no more account of me than if I was
« already

—

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

already dead. At which word I obſerv'd moſt of the Company with tears in their eyes ;
and having paus'd a lictle to rake breath, purſu?d my diſcourſe in theſe words. © You
& arc here a great many Captains as able to command as I, and yon have good and valianc
« men, who will now redouble cheir conrages to revenge their Chief. I aſſure my (elf
« there is none of you buc will give place to Monſieur de Gondrin, as well out of deference
« to his Birth, asalſo in regard he 1s the clIdeſt Captain amongſt you. And ſeeing he is a
« little infirm, I entreat yon Monſieur de Sainftirens, and you Meſſicurs de Goas and de
« eMadaillan to be continually about him, char che Condu& of this Expedicion may be
« order'd by your diſcretion ; for he you ſee 1s old, and therefore you who are young mult
&« take the pains. And ſince you are all men of courage, andall aim ar one common end,
&« which is his Majeſtics ſervice , and the advancement of his affairs, maintain, I beſeech
« you a ſtrit and inviolable triendſhip with one another. My wound, if you perform
& hraye exploits, will be che occaſion of your acquiring honor for your ſelves; and for God's
& ſake my beloved Friends, do not give over this Enterprize in the beginning, and ar a
* cime when you ought moſt to purſue it. Follow your blow in this aſtonithment of the
« Enemy, and make it manifeſt that it was not Ialone, bur every one of you alſo, who
&« have an hononrable ſhare in the vitory. Are you not content with the Election I have
© made for you of Monſieur d? Gondrin? and are you not willing to accept him for your
& Chief? ro which they all made anſwer that chey were, and that it wasall the reaſon
in the world he ſhould command. Which having all declar'd, I entreated them to ſee
me no more, that they might not encreaſe my Fever, but all retire themſelves to him) and
ſo they ſorrowfully departed from me,

One thing ( Lieucenants of Provinces) I can ſay, and that without bragging or lying,
ghac never any manin my Command was better belov*d of the Nobleſs than I, and though
I] was of a peeviſh cholerick nature, yet ſo it was that they bore with my imperfeions,
knowing that I did nothing out of malice, O *cis an excellent quality that in a Chief !
and believe me whar great Lord ſoever you are, if you do not win the love of the Nobleſs,
the Officers and Soldiers, you will never do any thing to purpoſe. And if your paſſhon
 ſomecimes make you ſay, or do any thing yon ſhould nor do, (for we are all men) you

muſt repair ic. I would fain ſee any of thoſe Mefſieurs of France who cenſure our actions
in governing the Nobleſs of Gaſcony, undertake the Government, to ſee if chey could fo
eafily, and ar all curns manage thoſe Gentlemen as they pretend, There was yet another
ching that has evermore preſerv*d me the friendſhip not of the Gentlemen only, bur of

all thoſe who ſerv'd under my command, which was that I never thought any thing too.

dear for my Caprains and Soldiers. I have ofcen when I was but Caprain my ſelf given Liverality a
away my arms and my cloaths when I ſaw any one in need. Por a Pike, a Halbert, a quality neceſ-
gray Har and a Feather , I have gain'd the hearts of ſome to that degree that they would fary in a Chief,

have run into the fire for me z neicher was my Purſe ever ty'd up in my Companions ne-
celfity, and yer they ſay I am coverous! He thar ſayes {o of me is nothing acquainted
with my narure 3 and ir 1s the vice, of all others, that I have the leaſt been polluted with-
all. I dare fay chat in this laſt War onely I have given toche Lords and Gentlemen yn-
der my Command cleven Spaniſh Horſes, and cwo Courſerss Which that no one may
think co bea lye, I ſhall name the perſons to whom I gave them; not to reproach them
with it nevertheleſs; for they did mehonor in accepting them,

Firſt, 1 gave a Courſer to Monhieur de Braſſac, who follow'd me in all theſe Wars at
his own charge ( a Gentleman of ten thouſand Livers a year, but the Enemy ever kepr
from him all che Eſtate he had in Xaintonge and Chaloſſe) for which Conrſer he would
not now take 400 Crowns. I gave another Courſer to Captain Cofſeil, who bare arms
with me twenty years, and was Captain Charry*s I ieutenant, after he had firſt been m
Enſign. I gave co Monſicur de £Madaillan, who was my Lieutenant, a Spaniſh Horſe he
would not part with for 400 Crowns, and another to his Brother he would not now ſell
for five, I preſented the Chevalier de Romegas with a Spaniſh Horſe that coſt me two
hundred threeſcore and fifreen Crowns. 1 gave alſo to Mongaieral Sicur de Cazelles
200 Crowns to buy him a Horſe, becauſe his own had been hurcar St. Foy. He is a poor
Gentleman, bur very valiant, as Monſieur de Sanſac will witneſs, who is one of the oldeſt,
braveſt, and moſt pradenc Capcains of this Kingdom. And becauſe he had another Horſe
char unluckily died , I gave him a Spaniſh Horſe, a tall and ſtrong one to carry Barbs,
which after the Peace he ſold for 1600 Crowns, Caprain de 1a Bſtide had another Spa»
"iſh Horſe of me, and the younger Beanville my Brocther-in-law another , by reaſon his

hd been kill'd under him in a Sally he had made upon che Enemy. I gave another ro Caps

tain Manzan, a Gentleman of my own Company) by reaſon thar in a Rencounter he had
near unto Regwefort, his had becn kild berwixt his legs, and himſelt, his Brocher, and

C 5c Brother»

- os 49 p — - ———_ 6
ASS -- __ > a MD - _- by A
S - - *
gh > COTE i a ws 4

w_ a i
4

i.

The Commentirits of Meſſire Blaize Boox VII,

| Brocher-in-law all wounded. I gave another to Caprain Rowain a man at Armsof my
Company , a p-or Gentleman, bur a man of extraordinary valour. I gave another to
Captain Fabian, he having loſt his horſe in his recurn from Court, for which I had often
refus'd 500 Crowns. And yer another to Captain Eons my Gwidon, a poor Gentle-
man who had layn a whole year in priſon at Montauban, which horſe coſt me three hundred
and five and forty Crowns, Being ſick in bed, and diſmiſſing my Nephew de Balagny,
who I hope will not ſhame the Family from whence he 1s deſcended, I gave him che
Spaniſh Horſe that 1 had ever kept for my own Saddle. Several others I haveloſt, and three
in this laſt War, particularly one that I deſign'd for the King , who being ſwelted,
founder'd under me as I was going to relieve Mont de Marſan, which I chought Mon-
fieur de Montamat had been going to befiegez and could I reckon all che horſes I have
given in my life, I think it would exceed my Eſftare. It you do the ſame, you Lords who
are the Kings Lieutenants, you ſhall alwayes be well follow'd, for the Soldier abhorres
nothing {ſo mach as an avaricious Captain.
To return to my Subjedt all theſe brave Gentlemen took their leaves of me, and the
next morning, which was the third day after my hure, my Nephew de Leberon cauſed me
The Stare of £0 be carried to Marſac, which is two leagues from Rabaſteins. T was no ſooner departed
Monſieur de from the Carnp, but that the affe&ion all che Soldiers bore unto me did too ſoon appear,
Montluc's Ar= fox all the Gentlemen Volunciers retir'd , and moſt of the Foot, for which I was exceed-
+. Ag his ingly ſorry, and could have been rather content with all my heart they ſhould have corally
ry forgot me. How much (my Companions) did you there prejudice your King and Coun-
try? and how great a wrong did you to your own honor? Had you united and main-
tain'd a good intelligence one with another, as you promis'd me you would , all Bearn
had been your own. *Tis an untoward thing this Amulation to command. The ſame day
that I made the Remonſtrance to the Nobleſs, they diſpatchr away Captain Montant to
The Sicur de the King, © whom T entreated to preſent my moſt humble ſervice to his Majeſty, and in
Mentluc layes © my behalf to beſeech him, that he would pleaſe co provide for my Goverment, whether
pre his G9- « ] ſhould live or die, for that he was to expect no more ſervice from me 3 that Thad al-
Ten” Gxeady done enough, and muſt now make room for others, and that I would now for
« the time to come ſeek what I had ever avoided before, which was the privacy and re-
&« poſe of my own Houſe. He found at his arrival at Court, that the King had already -
diſpos'd of my Government above a month before, which till this time never any King
of France before had ever done 3 but I ought not to lay the blame upon him. When I
heard the news I did not much concern my ſelf at it, though ir did a little crouble me
I confeſs, to have ſuch a trick put upon me; for though I had not been ſhot, I ſhould
The Marquis never more have exerciſed that Command 3 and I think he that now hasit, which is the
de Villars the Marquis de Villars, would as little care to be diſmiſt from it as I ; for it is not a Benefice
Kings Lieute- 5; bout a Cure, to have to do with the Queen of Navarre, and the Prince her Son, who
= = 074, already grown up to a man, the principal Governor, and an Enemy to our Religion
The Prince of Who being what he is cannot want courage, credit, or means, not onely in G#ienxe, bur
Navarre. even in the King?s Cabiner, Our of which conſideration I had before quitred the Govern-
ment, had it not been that I would not the King ſhould reproach me, thar I had
abandon'd his ſervice in a time of War, and the greateſt neceſſity of his affairs.
That I may return to ſpeak of my wound, which I do but roo well remember, you
that are Generals of Armies, and Lieutenants of Provinces, may here obſerve how much
it imports you to preſerve your own perſons, and not to expoſe chem to hazard, as I did
mine1n playing the Common Soldier, and che Pioneer. For this unlucky ſhot of mine
was the cauſe that the Army under my Command moulder'd away to nothing, I do nor
however intcnd to ſay, that you ought to be Cowards , and to hide your ſelves behind
che Gabions, whilſt others lie open to the Harquebuze ſhor, bur only that you may learn co
be wiſe by my exemple, and go diſcreetly into danger : for upon your loſs all che reſt de-
pends 5 as you know it befell that brave Gaſton de Foiv ar the Bartel of Ravennae I know
very well that a good heart, ſceing his men miſdemean themſelves, cannot forbear leading
them the way, and expoſing himſelf ro danger, as I did, ſeeing my Foot go ſo untoward-
ly ro work. Which made me call to the Gentlemen, for I ever found by experience,
thar fifty Gentlemen will do more than two hundred Common Soldiers. We retein ſome-
thing of honor, -which our Fathers have acquired for us, and which gives us a Title to
that fair Epicher of Noble, | ws
By the whole account of my life hitherto you have been able co judg whether or no the
King had any reaſon to uſe me ill, conſidering that 1 never ſpar'd my life (which certainly is
che thing moſt dear to us in this world nexc to our honors) for his ſervice 3 and not only my
own, bur the lives of my Sons alſo ; for of four that I had I have (cen three fall in Battel

in

Boox Vil. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 371

in his Majeſtics ſervice che fourch only remains, which is che Chevalier , whom chough I
had delign'd for the Church, and che Biſhoprick of Condoms, yet did I alwaies command
him to ſhew himſelf a Aontluc 3 and he had the honour to be enticled Chevalier by che
late King Henry my good Maſter, who ſent him co Malta, where he ſerv'd his Apprentice-
age in arms under the Chevalier de Rowegas ; and from whence the Grand Maſter writ
me word, that immediately upon his arrival he had put him to the teſt, to try if he was of
2) race or no, and h:tfound him right, He was afterward in the Siege the Grand Signi-
or laid before Malta, which was the braveſt that ever was fince Artillerie was firſt founded.
Bac do not you who ſcrve the King deſpair of honor and reward by my exemple, and be-
cauſe I was not fo well us'd, as perhaps I deſerv'd to have been ; for this does not pro-
ceed from the Kings own natures You may perhaps be more fortunate, and may not have
ſo many Enemies as I, who for diſdaining co be any ones creature, had no Patron to de-
tend me ; and on the other hide have bcen perhaps too liberal of my tongue, in ſpeaking
freely what I thought, *'Tis dangerous ſometimes to ſpeak truch, and I could never lie
nor difſemble, Yer (hall I nor be ſo ingrate as not to acknowledg my ſelf highly oblig?d
to the Kings my Maſters for the benefirs and honours they have conferr'd upon me, who
from the condition of a private Gentleman, have rais'd me to the greateſt Employments
in che Kingdom : bur I can alſo ſay that I purchaſed choſe honours at the price of my
bloods. Now you muſt know that having recover'd a little, and finding my (elf ſome-

thing better of my wound, I writ a Letter to the King, which I haye thought fic to inſert |
in this place, of which cheſe were the Contents,

SI Ry

\ F Have thus long deferr'd to prefer my Complaints, both by reaſon of the great indiſpo= The Sieur de
ſition upon me, and alſo becauſe my friends were long before they would let me know Hontiue LON”

of your Majeſties unkindneſs in taking from me the Government of Gxienne, Had your rd WI

Majeſty pleaſed ro have had but two months patience only, you would have found thar ſo a, apgirat of

ſoon as I had ſertled the Country in peace, I was reſolvy?d moſt humbly to beſeech your his whole life.

Majeſty co provide for that Government , by reaſon of my age, and the great wound I

have receiv*d, and then withour difgracing me, your Majeſty had had ſufficient argument

to have depured another in my place. But by the manner of doing ic, your Majeſty

has evidently maniteſted co all che world, char you have ſtcipr me of ic for ſome forfeicare

of mine, either as to macter of arms, or for ſome foul play I have praRtiſed upon your

Majeſties Treaſure, by which means my honour is like to be brought into diſpute chrough-

out the whole Kingdomy which I cannot think I have deſery?d, and therefore am very

much ata ſtand, as many others will be, to gueſs from whence the great diſtaſte your

Majeſtic declares to have taken againſt me ſhould proceed ; unleſs (our of the litile hopes

I had co be for the furnre ſerviceable ro you) for having ofren imporcun'd your Majeſtic

ro make choice of {ome other in my ſtead ; and asto that, your Majeſtic has ſince com

manded me to reaflume my former Authority, and to continue my adminiſtration. Nei-

ther can it beupon any jcaloufie your Majeſtie can have entertein'd, that I have embezellPd

your Majcſtics Treaſure; for you would never have puniſht me for a crime whereof you

could not as yet be afſur'd that I was guilty 5 and I have that confidence in your Majeſtic*s

bounty and wiſdom, that you would not eafily have given credit to reports {o remote

from all probability ; for in the time that I have been your Majcſtics Lieutenant in theſe

parts, ſeveral Commiſſioners in Extraordinary, and ſeveral of your Receivers General, with

orher Officers of your Majeſtics Exchequer, have made their Accounts, and had I been

found in any of their Papers, I haye friends at Court that would not have fail'd ro have

ſer a mark upon ſuch places, where my name was any way concern'd. Bur hirherto I

have not been pur to any diſtreſs in proving their accounts, foraſmuch as it cannot be

found, chac I haveever caken vpon me to couch one penny of your Majeſties money, not

only in chis your own Province, bur alſo at Sienna, and in Txſcany, where 1had much

greater conveniency of doing it than I could have here. And your Majeſtie may parti-

cularly pleaſe ro remember, that having done me the honor for three years laſt paſt, ro

order the penſion of fix thouſand Livers a year I pay to the Cardinal of Gziſe, ſhould

be diſcharg'd our of the Exchequer, T was ſo far from meddling with your Majeſties mo-

ney without your leave, that I would never make ufc of thac affignment, And of all

this your Majeſty may be fully ſacisfied ac the 1ecuin of the Commuilſioners you have ſent

into theſe parts, who I am very certain will not bring back my name 1n any of their ac.

counts, or if they ſhould, there would yer be nothing prov*d againſt me, and therefore

ir cannot be imagin*d thac your Majeſtic ſhould be diflarished with me upon char ac-

count,

Cee'5 If

Inn IS OEMS -V A
0 ae ere hat

172 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VII,

It peradventure your Majeſtics diſpleaſure ſhould proceed from a beliet chart I have
commi:ted ſome faulc in point of arms, this opinion would allo be very contrary to that
your Majeſty had of me, at the time when you were pleaſed chree or four times to write

The King tiles me word, that I was the Reſtorer of Gujennez and I aflure my ſelf your Majeſty has nor
che S;cur de forgot the reaſons why you were pleaſed to grace me with that honorable Title buc will,
Moa'lue the 7 hope pleaſe ro remember, that ic was becauſe in the firſt Commorions at Theloaze, the
ge ny Cicy having been diſputed for three dayes together, and in that diſpute rwo Thirds of che
ct G.utiine. x : Men p
City won by che Rebels was at my coming deliver*d, the Aflailants at the fight of meonly
put to rout, and many of them taken and puniſhe according to their deſert, inſomuch thac
© this day, the Inhabitants of che ſaid City look upon me as the Conſervator of their
livesand eſtates, and the honor of their Wives. With like diligence and good fortune the
City of Bord'anx, to which I went in two dayes and two nights from Tholoyze, and
where by the way I fought with, and routed the Forces that were eather'd together tohin-
der my paſſage, was by me immediately reliev'd, Having reſcued Bordeaux from the ſame
danger thar Thad before Tholouze, withour ſtaying longer than two dayes there, I croſk
the River with fixſcore Horſe, believing that Monſieur de Bayie would come up to me) as
indeed hedid, but it was four hours after the fighr, where he found rhar I had defeated
{ix Enfigns of Poor, and ſeven Cornets of Horſe, commanded by Monſieur de Daras. And
after this viRtory the ſaid Sjeur de Barie and I went to befiege Mont-ſegar, which was bat-
ter'd, and taken by aſlaulr, as was alſo Penne of eAzenricrs LT after thisin two dates took
Lefture, by reaſon thar the late Captain Aontlauc had ſarpriz'd four hundred men of the
Garriſon of the ſaid City, whoin he had pur all of chem co the (word ; and immediately
The Baiel of withouc reſting day or night 1 purſued Monſieur de Daras ſo cloſe, that I compelPd him
Ver, to fight, bctore our Foor conld come up to us3 nay, I ſcarcely gave leifure ro Monſieur de
Burie to come tim? enough to be preſent at the Engagement, where we ſucceeded ſo well,
that a handful of men defcated three and twenty Enſigns of Foot, and thirteen Corners of
Horſe, After which 1 ſent your Majeſty ren Companies of Spaniſh Foot, of which we
had made very little nſe; bur that did good ſervice at the Battel of Drexx, as alfo did
cen Companics of Gaſcons, which I ſent your Majeſty by Captain Chayry, and your Pro-
vince of Gzienre remain'd quiet, and clear from all croubles, not a man daring ro lifr up
his head bur for your Majcſties ſervice ; ſo that with good and juſt cauſe your Majcſtie
conferr'd upon methe Title of Conſervator of Gaienne,

As to the ſecond Troubles, I had long before ſufficiently advertiz'd your Majeſty, and
the Queen your Royal Mother , of whar you afterwards ſaw come to paſs, and thongh
by your command I had twice or thrice lecters ſent me, that I was very ill enform'd -
I did not for all char ſlack my vigilance , nor negle& to ſtand upon my Gaard, that I
might not be ſurpriz'd 3 bur the ſame day that the InſurreQzon hapned at Pars, withour
other intelligence than my own, and upon Michaelmas Eve, T put my {clt into Lefoxre, the
moſt important Ciry of all Gaſcony, in ſo opportune a ſeaſon, that I fruſtrated che defign
of fix hundred men, which were co have been let 1n at the Poſtern, and after having pre-
ſcry'd the Town in your Majeſtics obedience, knowing you ſtood in need of relief, as
your Majeſty afterwards ſent me word, I made ſo good haſte in raiſing of men, that in

Relief ſent co 29 dayes afcer the ſaid Michaelmas day I ſent your Majeſty twelve hundred Horſe, and

the King, thirty Enfigns of Foot, which were conduQted by me as far as Limoges, and from thence
by the Sieurs de Terride, de Gondrin, and de Monſales; when though ic ſeem'd ro many,
that Gaienne would be lefc a prey to the Vicompts, who had very great Forces ; neverthe-
leſs army return I found them {o much work co do, that they gain'd nothing either upon
me, or upon the Province : and with the few Forces I was able to gather together, I
went afterwards into Xaintonge, where at my arrival thoſe who had taken arms at Marennes
were defeated by Madaillan, and the Seneſchal of Bazadoir, who after meeting with Mon-
fieur de Pons, took Marennes, with the Ifles of Oleron and Alvert, With the like dili-

Taking of the gence was the Iſle of Rhe recover'd by my Nephew de Leberon, whom I ſent thither, and

Iſles. had.your Majeſty becn pleaſed ro have furniſht me with what you promiſed of money,
Artillery, and other Ammunitions of War, I had put fair to have reduced Rochelle ic ſelf
to your Majeſtics obedience, before the Peace that was at that time concluded,

As to what concerns the laſt Troubles, ic 1strue, that they broke out at a time when I
was ſick, and ſcarce recovering from the danger of death, yer I did not nevertheleſs for-
bear to pur my ſelf into the field , and to ger rogerher all the Horſe and Foor I poffibly
could, and hearing thar the Forces of Langaedoc, Provence, and Dauphene were coming to
fall into our Country, I went out accompanied with Monſieur de Ia Valette and © Eſcarts,
and ſome other Officers, to meer and fighe chem, and in fo doing approacht them fo near,
thac had not their Camp: maſter Captain Adoreas been fortunately taken by us, we had

all

Boox VI. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

373_

all been cur off, :n | defcated 3 for beſides tha the Encounter had been in a place where
the Horſe could not pofſioly hayz come to fight, they had moreover fought us at the ad-
vantage of ſix toone, we being no more than five and ewenty hundred, and they above
ewenty thouſand men; a!l which will be made good by the teſtimony of che ſaid Sieurs
de la Valette, Þ Eſcarts, and other Caprains, who were all of opinion, that the beſt wecould
do was to retire ; and when we wereall reſolv'd to coaſt the Enemy, to keep them a little
in, and to try to gct ſome advantage over them, the younger onſales brought letters
trom your Majcſtic to all che Captains ro march towards Monſieur de CHontpenſier, and
ro me that I muſt recurn , which I accordingly did, both our of regard co my own fick-
neſs, and alſo to preſerve the Country , as I have done fo long as the Forces were in my
hands. Being afterwards at Cahoys, ro which place T went with an intent to fight the
Vicounts, I was advertiz'd that Pilles was about Agenois with a great number of Horle,
whom thinking to ſarprize, T marched day and night to fight him, which had alſo fo
taln ont, had it nor been that Monfienr de Fontenslles, and Captain IMontluc with ſome
Light-horſe mer with five or fix Cornets of the ſaid Pilles his Cavalty, whom they charg'd
with ſo great fury thar they put chem to rout, which made the ſaid Pilles che ſame
night paſs che River Dordogne, and retreat towards the Body of their Army,

As to the coming of the Count de Montgomery, *%as very well known, thatat my de-
parture from 7ont de Marſan, which in two hours time I had beſfieg'd, aflaulced, and
raken, Monficur d Anville carried away all the Forces in order to ſome defignshe had in
Languedoc, leaving me no more bur my own Company, with thoſe of Meſſteurs de Fon-
tenilles and de Gundrin, and five Enfigns of Poor, with which I was fain to make ſhitt
_ for the defence of Lefoure, Florence, Ville-nenfar, and Agen; and alchough the ſaid Ma-
reſchal afterward; call'd from me the forenam*d two Companies, and that I was left alone
with my own, yer did I not for all chat forbear ro pur my ſelf into Agen, when the Army of
the Princes drew near, withoat being reliev'd by any bur che Sicur de Fontenilles onely, who
indced came and brought his Company to my aſſiſtance. From which Town of eAven the
Princes Army were very much incommodated; and whereas they had thrown a Bridg of
Boats over the Garonne with a deſign to paſs into the Country, and of Condomamnis and Age=
noir, to makeas it were a City 3 I broxe their Bridg, and ſo ſhatter'd it to pieces, thac they
could never recover any more than two of che Boats, wich which they repaſſed the River, buc
ſo leiſurely withal, that had your Majeſty been pleaſed to have ſent me never ſo few Forces,
I could have kept them well enough from ever unicing again. And whereas during the time
of the ſaid Princes being in theſe parts, they had poſſeſſed themſelves of certain Caſtles in the
Country of Agenols, I retook them, and reduced them all ro your Majeſties obedience.

Your Majeſtic has ſince commanded mae to go make War in the Country of Bears:
wherein I ſo promptly obeyed your Command, that though ic was very hard to raiſe
men, by reaſon that every one took the Peace for concluded, notwirhſtanding in leſs
then fifteen dayes I ſer on foot five and fourry Enfigns of Infantry, and fix hundred Light-
horſe, with which I reſoly?d to invade the Country, either to force Montamat toa Bartel,
or to ſuffer his Towns and Caſtles to be taken one afcer another beforc his face, as any one
may judg ic muſt of neceflity have fall'n ouc. For having begun with Rabaſteins, as ic
was neceſſary I ſhould , for the reaſons I have before laid down, though it was one of
the ſtrongeſt places of all Gajenre, I carried it in eight dayes timey playing ar once in my

wn perſon the parts of Pionecr, Canoneer, Soldicr, and Captain. Where in making my
approaches I was like to have loſt my youngeſt Son, who was ſhot cloſe by my fide, as
alſo was Captain Paullac ; and whenir came to an Aflaulc, ſeeing the two firſt Compa-
nies did not go on as I deſir?d they ſhould have done, I went my (elf to the Breach, ac-
companicd with che Signicurs de Geas, and the Vicounc d'Vzz, and followed by abour
a handred or fix{core Gentlemen, of which cwo and fourty were hvirt, I my ſelf being
one of the number of thoſe that were wounded, and in lach a parc that I ſhall carry che
marks of it to my Grave. And alchough this action joyn?d to others of the like nature, char
I have perform'd during the Reigns ot the Kings your Father and Grandfather, make me
hope for no other advantages than what was before inthe prof pect of my ambition, name-
ly a gracious accepration » and an honourable acknowledgment of my ſervice from che
ſaid Kings my Maſtersz I had realon however co believe rhat your Majeltie wonld have
my pertormances in ſome little eſteem. Morcover I repreſented in my perſon before your
eyes an old Soldicr of threeſcore and ten years of age, your Majeſtics Lieucenant General
in theſe parts, and one who onely 11 giving the word of Command to others, withour en*
eaging inhis own perſon, mighr have ſuſticiencly pertorm*d che duty of his charge ; buc
who nevertheleſs our of the zcal he had to render your Majeſtie Victorious in all your
Enterprizes, pur himſclf inco the rank of che meanelt Foor-Soldiers, and im the greacclt

danger

DC I ron as
© ne er er——_—__ mm <—_ gy D. +22.-
_ =: "ads nn

ch oth Pn pany Ar———_— a>
po ty” 5s MH & - bi
_ -— Is A 2
Pe 4 theo hd 5 .

———
——_———

Ice Oe:

| The Commentaries of Meſſe Blaize Boox VII.

danger of death, where ſeveral Gentlemen alſo ran the ſame fortune , eſteeming it a great
honor and happineſs to tollow one of the oldeſt Soldiers, not to ſay Captains of Francte
I alſo though: your Majeſty might have confider'd, thar as in the firſt Tumults, che firſt
ViRories your Majeſtie obtein'd were by my hand, I had likewiſe in theſe Iaſt Commo-
tions rendreg you vitorious in the laſt Enterprize of War that was perform'd 1n the King»
dom: Bur when I expected a Letter acleaſt, ſuch as your Majeſty is accuſtomed to write
to the meancſt Caprain in your Kingdom, all the fruits of my grear Jabour, and long ex-
pectationys was only to hear that you had depriv'd me of my Government, and (which
was worſe) withour ſending me ſo much as one ſyllable ro Ggnifie your Royal intention,
inſomuch that ] ſaw the man already come who was to ſucceed me, before I had any inti-
mation of my being caſhier'd from my Command. Nay, at the very ſame time, that by
an univerſal Law throughout che whole Kingdom your Majcſty has reſt1*d to their Ee
ſtates and Employments all ſuch as have been deprivd of them, I may ay that by a par-
ticular Law made for me alone, I am degraded from an Employment wherein I have fo
long maintain'd my ſelf with my ſword in my hand. Bur though I had been ſtripe to
my Doubler, I ſhould yer remain clothed with a Robe of Honor, to wit, the Reputation
of having born arms frem my Childhood for the ſervice of your Crown, with all the fi-
delity chac the Kings my Maſters could themſclves delire. I am ſure every one will frankly
confeſs that I have been in as many Combars, Bacccls, R:znconnters, Enterprizes both by
day and night, Aflaulrs, Takings, and Defences of Towns, as any man this day alive in
Exrope z and for ſuch am known in Forreign Nations as well as at home, and yet Tcan
ſay with truth (for which che Glory be atcrjbured ro God, and the honor to the Kings
my Maſters, who were pleaſed to employ me) that whether it were through my ood for-
rane the influence of their Majeſties arms, or any other accidents conducing to it , 1 was
never defcated in any place, where I had the honor to command in Chief, nor never at-
raqu'd my Enemy bur 1 beat him. Several perſons of honor yer living will alſo bear wit-
nels of my bchaviour ac the Barcels of Pavie, the Bicoque, and Serizolles, where T had the
Command of all the Harquebuzeers, and alſo in whac eſteem the late Steur de Lantrec had
me, for having ſcen me in his own preſence fight betrwixt B ;yonne and Fontarable ; as allo
tor having ſerv'd under him in a Command of Foot in his Expedition into Lombardy, and
the Kingdom of Naples, in which ſervices I rcc:ived no leſs chan four Harquebuze ſhots.
There are alſo ſeveral men of honor yet alive, who very well remember how I carried my
ſelf at the taking of the County of Oye, in the quality of Camp- Maſter to all the French
Foor ; and others are able to teſtifie in what eſteem I was with the Prince of Xſalphe,
and the lace Mateſchal de Briſſac, for having ſeen me in Pjedmont, at all hours, and upon
all occaſions both night and day venture my life for the ſervice of this Crown , as others
can witneſs, that ar the time when the diſgrace befel our people in the Lower Bu/len, I
alone with a very ſmall number of men maintain'd rhe fight, and at the time when your
Majſties Royal Father, my good Maſter of bleſſed memory, gave me for loſt, I came our
in deſpite of che Engliſh, and brought off with me two and twenty Colours of ours, that
had been taken y inlomuch that one only remain'd in the handsct the Enemy, If Mon-
fieur de Gwiſe were now alive, he would not conceal what he ſaw me do ar the taking of
Thionville, no more than will Monficur le Mareſchal de Ville- neufue, who can witnels if ir
was not I who took the Tower, from whence enſued the loſs of the Town. All the Cap-
rains of [taly, Spain, and Germany will for ever honor me for what I did art the Siege of
Sienna, where 1 was the late King your Father's Lieutenant, as I was afterwards in Tuſ-
cany, where 1 loſt nothing, but remain'd viRorious over the Enemy, and had my fervi-
ces ſo highly accepted by your Royal Father, thar befides thar ar my return from
Sienna, he conferr'd upon me the Order, which in thoſe dayes was a mark of great and
extraordinary fervice, he morcover gave me the County of Gayre for term of life, which
ſince, and atter the death of my ſaid Royal Maſter at the calling in of your Majeſties
Demeaſns was taken from me, without the leaſt murmur or ſhew of diſcontent on my parc
at my being ſo depriv'd.

All cheſe things, Sir, I have thought fit to repreſent unto you, foraſmuch as your Ma-
jcſty may peradventure not have heard of them) and chat in ſpeaking of me 1n your Ma-
jcſties preſence I may by ſome have been otherwiſe repreſented, and have had other Cha-
racters given of me than I deſerve. I know that ſometimes they have made as if I were a
Thief, and chat otherwhiles, and for the moſt part have ralkc as if for three years laſt paſt I
had done nothing of any moment, Wherein, Sir,chey have abuſed your Majeſty more than
they did me; for all theill rongues in the world cannot deprive me of the honor I have
acquir'd, whereas by their importunity they may have induced you to do a thing that I
fear may be of ill exemple ro men of my Trade ; toraſmuch as choſe who have of late been

call?d

374

"— —— , . -  — w--—— wx  NX_ < ec 4a +

—_—__ ——

%

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

call*d to Offices and Commands, and who deſire to advance rhemſclves by the exerciſe of
arms, will be apt by my exemple to aoprehend, that long ſervices, and the glory by thoſe
ſervices acquir'd throughour che world will nor ſtand chem in ſo much Read as the evil
rongues of their Maligners, and ſuch a3 would pur a bar to their preferment, may do
them harm, wy VER

Ic remains, S:r, that for the concluſion of my long and tedious Letter I muſt humbly
beſeech your Majeſty to excuſe me, if afcer ſuch a blow of fortune I have been conſtrain'd
to addreſs my .Complaint, and to figh out my grievance to you, and you alone; and
have been oblig'd to do ir, as well to make my ſelf better known to your Majeſty, than I
have been in times paſt, as alſo moſt humbly to beſcech you, that for the time to come,
when your Majcſty ſhail be imporcun'd ro utc eicher me, or any other of your good and
faichful ſervants {o unkindly, you will pleaſe to reſerve evermore one car for the accuſed,
before you reſolve upon doing any ching that may wound or diſhonor them. As for
what concerns my ſelf, ont of the defire I have ever had to ſee your Majeſty proſper, I
am very glad if in theſe laſt troubles you have been ſo well, and ſo ſucceſsfally ſerved in
all parts of your Kingdom by all choſe your Majcſtic has employed as by me, who on
this fide have preſerv'd your Cities, and the Country committed ro my charge, have bear-
en your Enemies as oft as I conld ger opportunity to fight them, and taken Towns by
aflaule, with the extreameſt peril of my life. And though it has been ſaid, that I have
done nothing conſiderable, yer I beſeech your Majeſtic to believe that no man has ſurpaſl*d
me in good intention, and a hearty dclire to ſerve you. After which (fince ſuch is your
royal pleaſure) I am willing to retire without other mark of all my labours, and the ſcr-
vices of ſs many years, bur che ſorrow for the loſs of my Children facrific'd ro your Crown,
2nd ſeven Harquebuze ſhots, which will ſerve continually co put me jn mind of the hum-
ble and affectionate devotion I have ever had to perform the beſt and moſt obedicnr ſer--
vice to your glorious Predeceſſors z which alſo I (hall ever retein fox your Sacred Majcſhie,
to whom I pray Almighty God togive all proſperity, health, and happineſs, 8c.

This was my Letter, which more perplexed the Monſieurs, who at that t:me govern'd
che Court, to comment upon, than it did me to write it. And that unknown to me was
afterwards printed and publiſhc ; for my friends, and ſuch asbeſt knew what I had done for
the conſervation of G#jenne, were as much, or more offended, than I, And I would have
it known, that boch then and ſince, had I as difloyal a heart as they have, who after the
firſt Commortions repreſented me to the Queen for a Spaniard, I had yet means, and
intereſt enough to have done a great deal of miſchief ; Bur I neither am, nor ever will
be other than a good Frenchman, and a true Servant cothe Crown, TI alſo know very
well that none of theſe doings proceeded from the King, who never wichdrew his favour
from me. Bur a young Prince involv?d in {0 many affairs has much ado to pleaſe all
the world; to which may be added, that ſeveral who could hure me no way but with
their tongues, had a very great influence, not over his Majeſtic (who neverlov'd the Hu-
gonots, what ever he might pretend for his own repoſe) but wirh the Council. O chat
Kings and Princes ought to be very tender of diſgracing a man, who has ever been
loyal and fairhful rothem, and who 1s a man of fpiric 2 for ir might light upon ſuch an
one, as may pur their affairs into a very ill poſture, of which within cheſe ffty years we
have ſeen too many exemples, ro che great loſs and detriment of the King of France, as
I have ſaid before, when (peaking of che traverſes and ill offices that ſeveral great Captains
have receiv'd ar Court, How many are there, that had they been uſed after this manner,
would nor only have quitted all, but perhaps have done a great deal worſe : for a man
thar does his duty, and finds himſelf ill rewarded, it goes to his heart. T have heard

thar eicher King Francis, or Lewzs (I know not which of chem it was ) one day asking a A G«ſcoz
Gentleman, a Gaſcon, as I am, What would debauch him from his ſervice ? Nothing Sir, &-nuleman's

reply'd the other; #nleſs it be a deſpite. And it 1s alſo an old ſaying, chat Ont of ſpite a m41
would turn Turk, Notwuhſtanding, all this unkindneſs could never make me ciher Spa-
niard or Hugonot. I have ever lov'd my honor too well for thar, and will go down to
my Grave with that fair white Robe, withour ſuffering theleaſt ugly ſpot upon che name
of Montiac ; and every one that has any regard to his honor ought ro do the ſame. If his
King and Maſter will nor make uſe of his fervice he may fic ac home, and look on to ſee
how others behave themſelves. If he be a man of valour, fortune thar caſt him down, will
raiſe him up again ; ſhe 1s nor alwayes angry. How many grear Lords and valiant Cap.
cains have we ſeen cultivating cheir Gardens ac home in a cime of ation, whom che King
has been conſtrain'd to recall into his ſervice, and could have wiſhed he hid never re-
mov'd them from him ?

,

an{wer ro rhe
Ki,

375

b ,
'
2
4
$ 7
I
*E
6 ,
1 det
"
£N =
WP
.
4

=

Thc Comments of Meſs Blaize Book Vil

The miſerable | have fcen a great many in my time, borh on che King's ſide, and alſo on che Emperor's,
condition of who have turn'd their Caſſocks, and ſome very lightly, and upon very ſlender occafion x

{uch 35s revolt
trom their
Princes,

The Army dil-
banded,

bur they obrein*d no great advancement by it, and being amongſt us, were looke upon
for ſuch as they were, I believe our Enemies did the ſame. Every one loves the Treaſon
well enough, but they hate the Traitor. When that brave Prince Chay/es de Bourbon was
conſtrain'd ro fide with the Emperor, and to give himſelf co che Devil, becanſe God
would have nothing to: do with him (for doubtleſs he was compelPFd and neceſficated to
ir) we Were told that even the Spaniards themſelves lookt askew upon him ; and the poor
Prince after he had done a great deal of miſchief leſt his life, When after he was ſlain ar
Reme, ir was a common diſpute, whether the Pope, the King of France, or the Emperor
uas moſt glad of his death; the firſt, becauſe he held hin belieg®d 3 the King, in that he
was deliver*d from a capital Enemy ; or the Emperor, for being rid of a baniſhr and ne-
ceſſicous Prince, that lay upon his hands, and was a burthen to him ; though he had
only nouriſht him with promiſes, and nothing elſe. Thee ſcurvie deſpites proceed too far ;
am ſure mine never did, nor ever ſhall make medo any thing contrary to my duty, or to
the prejudice of my honor, If 1 was young, and that the King would nor make uſe of
my ſervice, the world is wideenough, I would ſeek my fortune elſewhere ; bur never
at the expence of my Prince, nor at the price of my own honor. The King having receiv'd
my Letter, ſent me in anſwer a great many good words, for they coſt them nothing ; the
end will ſhew whether che Province will be betcer govern'd, and his Majeſtie better ſerv'd,
and whether they who have ſucceeded me (though they arc great perſons, and great Cap-
tains) have done, or ſhall do hereafter beiter than I.

But to 1eturn to the place where Ilefr off; my Wife came to fetch me from Marſac,
from whence ſhe carried me in her Litter to Cſſaigne near unto Condom, where to refreſh
me I was for three weeks together ſo crucified with the Cholick, that ic had like to have
cur'd me of all other diſeaſes, In this condition I had the cemfort of Monſieur de Valence
my Brother, who never left me till he ſaw me out of danger of death; and ſeveral Lords
alſo both Catholick and Hugonor caine to ſee me. Before Caprain Aontant arriv'd at
Court the Queen diſpatcher away Monſicur de Beazmont, Steward of the Prince of Na-
zarre's Honſhold, by whem ſhe ſent me word, char in caſe I was in the Terricories of the
Queen of Navarre, I ſhould forthwith retire, and put my men into Garriſon. See what
a iudden change was here ! I askt himif there was a Peace concluded, to which he made
anſwer, no; but that it was hoped there ſuddenly would. Why then ſhould the King, (aid
I, pit his Army into Garriſon ? 1s not the Country already ſufficiently ruin'd and deſtroy d ?
If 1 do this when the Peace ſhall come, and that we are to disband our Horſe and Foot, not one
of them but will plunder his Hoft for a farenel, ſeeing themſelves diſmiſſed without money.
Seeing then it is ſo, that they are order'd tobe put into Garriſons, 1 will even diband them

for all together, and ſend them every man to his own houſe. To thisend thenT defir'd Mon=

fieur de Valence to write, and ſign a Lecter (I being in no condition to do 1t) to Monſieur
de Gondrin forthwith to diſmiſs che Army, both Horſe and Foor, and that every one in
{our dayes ſhould be retir'd to his own home 5 which was accordingly performn?®d. Mon-
fieur de Beanmont himſelf carried che Letter to Monſieur de Gondrin, and five weeks after
the Queen ſenr to me to disband the Army, which I had done before, and by ſo doing had
ſav*d the people above 500000 Livers, as the Country it {elf will witneſs. I had ſav'd the
pitifu] 4000 Francks that I had from the King uncoucht, ſaving a hundred Crowns, thar

rook our to give Caprain Xontant to defray his Journey to Court, And thus it was
that I robb'd the Exchequer, and poll'd the People. Such about his Majeſtie as favour
the Hugonors, do not care how deeply they charge me with Calumnies ; bur I would have
the world to know, and do here declare, that in ſo many years that I have commanded,
and in all the great Employments wherein I have been I conld never enrich my {elf 20000
Francks, and yet they ſtick not to affirm, that I have pill'd and poll'd 300600 Crowns,
I could wiſh it was true, provided it had been from the Hugonots our Enemies. God be
praiſed for all. Theſe {landerers ſhall never have that advantage over me as to make me
hang down my head , bur I will walk with my face ere&, likea man of honor. The
Treaſurers and Receivers are yer living : ler his Majeſty enform himſelf of them : ler him
examine their accounts, where if he find any one fingle Lyard converted to my profic, his
Majeſty does nor do well if he do not bring me co my Trial, Iris no wonder his Majeſty
1s {o 11 ſerv'd, as *cis reported he 1s, conſidering he makes no exemplez he is then to blame
himſelf, and nor thoſe that doic. And as to Impoſitions and Taxes upon the People to
enrich my ſelf, and co fill my own Coffters, his Majeſty in this caſe ought yer to be more
{eyere againſt me than in the other, by how much che people axe more to be pitried chan
the King ; who if he want money knows how to make his people find it, 'Tis apriviledge

Our

eg
—_— — — — —_ _

Book VIL. A Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

CO CIT

our Kings have ſo {von as they come one of their Page-thip , as one ſaid of Lewts the Ele-
vench 3 which makes m2 conclude, tha: the King ought co inflict a more ſevere puniſh=
mer.t upon thoſe who flea his people, chan if they purloin'd from his own Exchequer.
The Commiſltoners have given an account of all ſorcs of men who have rais'd money, lec
them look if chey can find me 1n their Papers, and if any be come into my purſe. 'I con-
fcſs I have diſpos'd of fome Hugonors Eſtates, who pretended to fir ſtill ac home, bur were
worſe than the others who were in arms « neither was ic reaſonable, that they ſhould be
better uſed then the poor Catholicks, who were gnawn to the very bones ; and had I not
doneit, the Gentry would have taken icoll, and che common Soldier would have revolt-
ed : for where there is nothing co be got bur blows men will hardly go volunteer co the
Wars. Moreover they would have ſaid I had held intelligence with the Enemy, by which
cans I ſhonld nor have had a man to follow me; and I had rather have died than to
have had ſach a rcpuce. Had the King's Olhcers ſeized of cheſe mens Eſtaces, they would
have extracted no lefs than a million of Francks : bur chere was juggling amongſt them,
and they held intel!;gence with one another. I have had my ſhare ; bur ic has ever been
fair prize, and onely taken from ſuch as carried Proviſions and Merchandize to the Enemy ;
and yet I do believe all I made bold with being pur ali rogerher, would not amounc co above
3000 Crowns. Would co God that all che Chitfs of France had gone as roundly co work
for che ſervice of the King and Kingdom as I, and that by war they had deſir'd to eſta-
bliſh peace z wh:ch it they had, not a man in che Kingdom would have dar'd to have pro-
feſled himſelf a Hugonot. Bar I (hall Icave this unpleafing diſcourſe,

A litile while afier che Peace was publiſhed, the articles of which were very much to

the Enemies advantage. We had beaten, aa bearen chem over, and over again ; bur nor- The Peace
withſtanding chev had cvermore ſuch an intereſt in the King's Council, that all the Edits Publiſhed, ,

continually ran ve:y high in their favour. We got the better by arms, but they alwayes
over-reached us in choſe confounded writings. Ah), poor Prince, how wofully arc you
ſexrv'd, how ruinouſly ate you adviz'd! If your majeſty take not heed , your Kingdom
from the moſt flouriſhing, will be made the moſt miſerable char ever was ; which chough
it was 1n the Reigns of your Grandfather and Royal Father, aſſaulced with many and po-
cent Encmies, and continually engag'd in war, wherein I have ever fairhfully ſerv'd, yer
matters {ti}] went on in excellent good order, and Commands were not prophan*d, as in
theſe dayes. IL paſs by the injury your Majeſty does your (elf, in giving your Enemies
{o great advantages'by theſe fine Edits. I ſhall not meddle with the corruption of your
Courts of Judiczture, nor the abuſes in your Treaſure , I only beg leave to ſay ſomerhing
concerning the ordcring of your Militia ; for ſhould I plunge my ſelf furcher into whac

has cauſed che ruine of your Kingdom, I ſhould be forced to ſpeak co9 loud, and thac of
no liccle ones.

I know, Sir, very well, chat your Majcſty will not do me the honor to read my Book ;

you have o.her employment, and your tune is too precious to be lavithe in reading the life
of a Soldicry bur perhaps ſome one who thall have read it, in diſcourſe may give your Ma -
jeſty ſome account of what ic contains. For which reaſon I have aflum'd che boldneſs to
dire& chis ſhort diſcourſe I am abour to make to your Majeſties obſervation, and I beſeech
you take a litile notice of it, foraſmuch as therein are laid open the cauſes of choſe
diſaſters T have ſecn happen in our Kingdom within theſe fifty years 3 in che beginning of
which 1 firſt cook up arms 1n the Reign of your Grandfather, King Franc#s of bleſſed mec=
mory, during whoſe Reign a Cuſtom was intreduced, which I conceive to be very preju-
 dicial co your Stace. Your Majeſty may alcer ic, and info doing do a greac right co your
{elf and your Kingdom, as to the concern of arms. A young Prince, as you are, for birth
che grcaceſt and che firſt of Chriſtendom ought evermore to learn of old Captains. Your
Majeſty is naturally martial, and have a generous hcart, and therefore will nor, I hope difſ-
dain the advice of an old Soldier, your SubjeR, and Servant, I remember che cime when
your Majeſty took a delight co talks with me in private, then when you went your 'Ex-
pedition tO Bayonne, and then very well pet ceiv'd that your diſcourſe exceeded the capacity
of your age, end to ſuch a degree, that I dare be bold ro ſay, might your Majeſty have
had your own way, all chings had ſucceeded a great deal berrer : for though you had
done nothing but only thewed your ſelf, and have lec your people ſee, that you was in
perſon in your Army, you had ar leaſt gain'd the hearts of many, and aſtoniſhe the reſt,
and conſequently had, without diſpuce be2n much beccer ſerv'd in chis your Majeſties ma-
curer Age, 1] do believe ir was one of che greateſt errors rhey made you commic (for it
was not your Majcſtics fault thac you was thur up when your Armies marchr.) The peo-
ple of your Kingdom ate a good and an aftcCtionate people, and rejoyce to ſee their King,
ſo thar your preſence would have inſpi'd a griat many, and perocularly of our Country of

Dad Gaienys

3h

” os 18
fe 5 F
+ ;

|

Sl

[

}

. y #

:

4

nn

182 :< Il Commentaries of Meſkire Blaize Boox VIls

Guienne wich wiſer and more loyal Councils than ſome of them have fince embrac'c. Bute
I proceed to my diſcourſe, ;

Sir, when your Majeſtie conferres the place of a Prefident, a Chancellor, a Lieutenant
Criminal, or any other Office of Judicature upon any one, it 1s evermore with this re-
ſcrvatjony that they ſhall not execute any of theſe Charges cill firſt they (ſhall be examin'd
by your Parliaments, which are full of wiſe and learned men : and oftentimes your Ma-
jc{tic gives order, that they ſhall fiſt be examin*d by your Chancellor, before chey pre-
ſent themſelves before the Parliaments, which are to determine of their Capacicies, and whe-
ther or no they be ſufficiently read in the Law, nor to be in danger of erring in the Arreſts
and Judgments they are to make in their Adminiſtrations, that ſo right may be done to
thoſe of your SubjeRts tro whem it (all duly appertein. This, Sir, 1s a good and an equi-
table way of proceeding, for you owe us Juſtice impartial, and according to the weigh
of the Ballance. *Tis a right to which we are born, and the chief thing you owe indif-
ferently to all; and therefore it is admirably well done, to make them paſs thoſe ri
and ſcvere Inquifitions that are requir'd in the Chambersof your Parliaments aſſembled.
Yet can ic not be ordered ſo, that Juſtice inall chings is alwajes duly exccuted.

\ You ought, Sir, to dothe ſame in all other Offices and Commands you confer in your
Diſorders in Kingdom and yer I ſee that the firſt thar makes ſuir co your Majeſtic for the Govern-
the Kingdom ent of a place, a Company of Gens-d'arms, or of Foot, or the Office of a Camp-maſter,
s: = 4 * ihe without conſidering what loſs or detriment may thereby enſue, either to your own per-
TefeE of incx.. on, Or your Kingdom, you calily grant ir, perhaps ar che recommendation of the firſt
perienced Offi. Lady that ſpeaks for it, and that perhaps your Majeſty has danced with over night at a
Cer5, Ball ; for whatſoever affairs are on foor, che Ball muſt crot. Sir, theſe Ladies have too
much credit in your Court. O how many miſchiefs have, and do daily ariſe, from having
ſo lightly conferr'd theſe Commands! And although your Majeſties proceeding be pru-
dent, and juſt in expoſing your Officers of the long Robe to the utmoſt teſt, ir is nor how=
ever of ſo great importance to your State. For whar loſs can you ſuſtain if they be igno-
rant ? it falls not upon you 3 for he that gains the Tryal though contrary tro Law and
right, pays you che ſame ducies that he did who is nonſuired in his cauſe - by which means
you loſe nothing of your Revenue, it is ſtill in the Kingdom ; and what impores it to you
whether John or Peter be Lord of ſuch, or ſuch a Mannor fo long as you haye your Fee-
farm rents (till duly paid you ? We are all your Subje& : Bur the error and ignorance of
Governors and Captains who obtein Places and Commands with great eaſe, at the firſt
word of the firſt that asks, 1s infinitely prejudicial ro your Kingdom, and herein I am
very confident all the great Captains and men of honor that are zealous for your ſervice will
be of my opinion.

If your Majeſty give the Government of a Place to a man of no experience, and who
has never been in ſach a Command before, ſee what will follow, Firſt ic isan old ſaying,
that When the eye ſees what before it never ſaw, the heart thinks that which before it never
thought, It therefore a Siege be clapt down before him, how is ic to be expeRed rhac he
ſhould diſengage himſelf ? how 1s it poſſible he ſhould underſtand and diſcover the de-
figns of the Enemy, on what part they can or will affaulc him? which chere is a way to do
without a Spy, as I have made it to appear by what I did at Sienna, How ſhould he
know how to fortifie and ſecure himſelf, and in ſhore do a thouſand , and a thouſand
ehings that will be neceſſary to be done, if he have never before been engag'd in ſuch af-
fairs? Such as have been ten times beſieg?d are apr enough to be ſtartled ar it, and ofren-
times ſo aſtoniſht thar they know not where they are. Now when your Majeſty hears
chat your place is going to be beleaguer'd, you will preſently fall co raiſing an Armie, as
you have good reaſon to do, not daring to rely upon the ſmall experience of this young
Governor, and perhaps ſhall be conſtrain'd to goin haſte in your own perſon, or ar leaſt
ro ſend one of my Lords your Brothers ; where either the Town muſt be loſt, or you muſt
hazard a Bartel, where your ſelf, or one of your Brothers who ſhall command your Armie
maybe ſlainy rogecher with ſeveral Princesof you blood, and a great number of your beſt
Captains. Conſider then, I beſeech you Sir, the mighty loſs and miſadyenture that de-
pends upon your eafie conferring ſuch a Command upon a man, without firſt know-
ing what he is ableto do. For if he1sa man of experience, and that he has manifeſted
himſelfin all places where he has been under good Leaders, ro be a man of courage and
underſtanding ; ſo ſoon as he ſhall enter into the place, he willpreſently fall ro confider-
ing -of the ſtrength, and weakneſs of it , recolleAing what he has ſeen done elſewhere,

The dilivence where he has been engag*d under another, and what hehas ſeen ſuch and ſuch a Captain
requie'd To a doupon the like occaſion ; and thereupon will ſuddenly cake order for the defeRs of che
Chief, place, and begin to fortifie. He will alſo demand of you an Engineer, will enform you

of

rd
5 0 099 ana

——_—c_ _CT@G@@.

Boox VII: de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

of the Ammunition both of ViRual, Arms, and Artillerie chat he has found there, and
will never ceaſe (olliciting till you have ſupplied him with all things neceſſarie, knowing
very well what an inconvenience the lols of the place would bring upon you, When (0
ſoon as your Majeſtic ſhall have furnitht him with all he deſires, and that by his fore-
fight he {hall have provided againſt all the defeRs of the place, he may then know whit
he hasto cruſt co, and ſhall have leiſure to conſider what fe has'to doy without precipt-
tation, which I have ever obſerv'd to be very dangerous in war, unleſs it be in an affair
that requires extreme haſt and diligence, Fen

And hcicin two things preſent themſelves to your Majeſties conſideration 3 the fult,
that when your Enemy ſhall have heard of the valour of your Governor, and his great
experience, togerher with the great foreſight and diligence wherewith he has been careful
to remedie the cdetefts of his place, and the good diſcipline he there maintains ; is it to be
ſuppoled, thac he will venture to attacque a man qualified with che forenamed virtaes?
I do belicve there is no Aſſailant in the world bur would think, of it twice before he would

once reſolve to do it, and if he call a Council about it, he will find that hardly one old i

Captain will adviſe him to go on to his own ruine ; and if the Chief be acircumſpeR and
experienced man, the counſel of the young hot-headed fellows muſt not be preferr'd co

Thar the va©
our of a Ga-«
ernor with=-
holds an Ene-

my: from com-
that of the old Soldiers, for they better underſtand che buſineſs of the world than the 0 ing te arracque

thers do: and are unwilling to hazard the honor they have got z foraſmuch as men look on- him.

ly upon the laſt of our ations, without much regarding what they have perform'd be-
fore, $5 much concerning che firſt. Now the ſecond thing that preſents it ſelf ro your
Majeſtics conſideration, is, that your Majeſtie refleting upon the valour of the perſon
you have entruſted with defence of your places his diligence, and experience, will be at
quiet within your ſelf, knowing very well that ſuch a man will do no unhandſome things,
buc will be render of his own honor, as well as careful of his truſt : by which means you
{hall have crme to raiſe your Armie at leiſure, and ſhall come to encamp your ſelf in an
advantagious place, where if your Enemie come to aſſaulc you, he ſhall be defeated z and
on the other ſide, 1f he offer ro aflaulc the Town, you lyeſo cloſe in his Rear, thatler the
Breach be never {0 wide, he dares notgo to theaſſault, foraſmuch as whether he enter or
no he is certain to be defeated, for you ſurprize him in diſorder ; which will make him
very warie of accempring any thing, where his ruine is{o manifeſt before him ; and ei-
ther force him to raiſe his Siege, and betake himſelf ro ſome other Enterprize, or elſe come
coafſaulc you in your Fort ; which alſo he will have a care of doing, as was the Emperor
Charles at the Camp in Provence, at the time when your Majeſties Grandfather was for-
tified in the plain field, and chat the Enemje made a ſhew of attacquing Marſeilles. You
are eyermore to take heed of committing errors in the beginning of a War for if your
affairs have once a diſrepuce upon them in the beginning, your Majeſtic may be aſſured,
that your Soldiers wall loſe courage,» and every one will (cek an opportunity to run away
inſomuch thac you are never to hope your Army ſhall do any thing to purpoſe after. Of
which I ſhall give your Majcſtie ſome Exemples , that you may ſee of how great impor-
ranceit 15 to have a good Governorin a Town of War, Of theſe Exemples, the firſt (hall

be Charles Duke of Burgundy, who after having loſt ewo Battels againſt the Swiſs ar 340- The Duke of

Burgundy de-
feared before

rat, came with his bafled Army to fit down before Nancy, which he thought to ſurprize,
Rene King of Sicily, and Duke of Lorr ain never dreaming that he would cometo beliege
char placez by which means ic was tocally wnprovided, both of Vicuals; Ammunition,
and Men, King Rexe had with him five or fix Gaſcon Gentlemen (for theſe Princes of
Lorrain have ever had a great kindneſs for our Nation) namely Captain Gratian Da-
guerre, a poor Gentleman of this Country call'd Pons, another call'd Gatan, and another
whoſe name was Roquepines ; the others were ſlain during the Siege , where theſe brave
Gaſcons did lo valiantly behave themſelves, that wich ſome of the Country people that
put chemlelyes inco the Town, and ſome Gentlemen of the ſaid Country, they defended
the Town, and endur'd the laſt extremity of famine, by that means giving King Revd
[ciſure to go himlelt inco Switzerland to ferch his relief. King Lewis the Eleventh of
France would nor openly affiſt him, by reaſon of the League he had contracted wich the
Duke ; but (as you Princes ordinarily do) he favour'd him underhand, and disbanded
four hundred men ar arms, that were advanc'd as far as Pont St. Vincent, within two
leagues of Nancy 3 fo that when che Duke ſaw the Swiſs coming upon him, he raiſed
the Siege, and there [oft both the Battel and his life. Had John d* Albert King of Na-

varre, when he {aw the Forces of Ferdinand coming to fall upon him, pur one or two good The los of
Caprains into Pampelona, he had nor fo poorly loft his Kingdom, as he did y for there Pampelona.

wanted ouly a good man to have ſtopt the Career of the Spaniard, the place was gooll e-
nough. Bur he loſt the Kingdom borh for himſelf and his Poſteriry 5; for ic is in coo good

Ddd 2 a hand

Nai).

062 Pu ii*\ Hades: ——_

"--
T5
J
+
i
+
3 =>
'T
E
* x
1 4
© =
F of
;
-

—_ M—_

—_

LY ett. Ae

ww

_3b4

+ EDCTEEETT

h_

| The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book VIls

a hand ever to retrieve it, Theſe are two Exemples of Auciquity that I havereceiv*d from
the old Captains of that Agez and | have heard others related, which I conld here ſer
down ; bur I leave choſe to the Hiſtorians, who are able to give a berter accounc of them
than I, and will now preſent your Majelty with ſome of my own.

King Frances your Granfather laid Siege to Pavie, where I was; he found within ir

Antoaio de Les Antonio de LevaaSpaniard, anda man chat by a long praRtice 1n arms had gain'd as greac
va a great experience as any other Caprain that has been theſe hundred years. He had within bur
Caprain, three Enfigns of Tralians, and three thouſand German Foot. His Majeſty held him a-
bove ſeven months befieg'd, in which time he had given ſeveral aſlaul:s, chough rhe place
was not very ſtrong, but this Captain by his induſtrie and valour ſupply*d all other de-
feas, and defended it fo long, that he gave Monſieur de Bowrbon time to go ferch relief
our of Germany, and come and fighc a Baccel with the King, which he won, and took the
King priſoncr ; and had the faid Sienr de Bowrbon in the heat of this victory turn'd his
Forces towards France, I know not how matters would have gone; and all chefe ſuc-
ceſſes befel the Emperor for hayins made choice of this old Warriour, who pur a ſtop co
The D.ke of gy Kines forrune. Of recent memory the valians Duke of Gaifſe put a ſhameful baffle
Guije ar Meth pon the Emperor Charles at Metz, whom he conſtrain*d ignominiouſly to raiſe his Siege,
whereupon his great Army vaniſhr into nothing, through che ſole vircue of che Chief
His Con a. that oppos'd him. And again in theſe late Commorions his Son, the Duke of Gaiſe
Poiftiercs, that now is, has preſer\?d Poiftieres, a great City without a Fortreſs, which had ir
been taken by the Admiral, he had commanded all Psifau and Xaintonge to the very
Gates of Bordeaux, wherein the virtue of this young Prince very much rehiev'd your Ma-
jeſties affairs, and was fignally ſerviceable ro the whole Kingdom. In like manner your
Captain Pilles Majelties Victory at CHoncontonr was demurr'd by the choice your Enemies made of Cap-
ar St, Jean, tain Pilles left in St. Jean, where the yalour of this Chief, who very well underſtood how
tro defend his Poſt, ter the Hugonor affairs again on foor, who by that means had leiſure
to ſteal away, and to come to fall upon us in Guienne. I have been rold, that he was
well afliſted by a Captain, a very brave Soldier, call'd 1s Mote Pmiolsz but had they ler
me alone at che Bartel of Yer, I had caken order with him for ever making war againſt
you moic; for I had my ſword at his throatyz when ſome body, I know nor who, pulPd
him away from me, and {av'd him. If the Admiral was upon his confeſſion, he would
nor deny but that my ſole perſon hindred him from attacquing Agen, which 1s no tena-
ble place ; doubt not then Sir, but chat the yalour of one ſingle man 1s ableco givea ſtop
to a torrent of ſucceſs,

Your Kingdom is the beſt peopled of any Kingdom in the world, and you are rich in
great and faithful Captains, it you pleaſe to employ them, and nor rake in ſuch as are in-
capable of command. Charles the Emperor, as 1 have oft been told, made his boaits char
he had better Commanders than the lare King Frantzs ; and in truth he had very good
ones, bur ours were nothing inferior to them. You have choice enongh, Sir, to pur into

Frauget ar Your Frontier places. Do but confider of how great moment was the loſs of Fontarabie,
Fontarabies through the little experience of Captain Franget, and how dear the loſs of Bullen coſt your
es gu > 4 Facher chrough the litcle experience of the Sicur de Vervins, who wasGovernor there, And
oo” 1: onthe contrary, you may, Sir, pleaſe ro remember (for I amcertain you have heard ir) whac
Sanſac at Mi honour and advantage accrn'd from the eleQion your Royal Pather, my good Maſter,
randa, and made of chat old Cavalicr Monſicur de S-nſac, who ſo long ſuſtein'd rhe Stege at CMj-
Montluic at yanda; and the choice he was pleaſed ro make of my poor perſon for the defence of Stennay
"_ which was honourable co the French name. The ſecurity of a place, Sir, depends upon
the Chief, who may make every one to fight, ſo much as the very Children, which will
make an Enemy very unwilling co attacque him. Bchold chen, Sir, how much ic imports
your State, your People, and your own Honour : for it will evermore be ſaid, and re-
corded co poſterity, thar ic was Charles the Ninth who loſt ſuch and ſuch a place z from
which Fame God defend you, Ir ſhall live in hiſtory for ever, and all the good and evil that
befals you in your Reign (hall be recorded, and the evil rather than the good. Be then, Siry
circumipeR, and conſider of it thrice before you deliver to any one the gefence of a place,
and do not think it ſufficient that the man is valiant, he muſt alſo be a man of experience.
Of Caprainsof As to what concerns a Captain of Gens-d'arms, you make no more of creating him at
Gens d'arms. the requeſt of the firſt that recommends him to you, chan you would do of a Searje-
ant of the Chaſtelet of Parts, who afterwards coming to be preſent ar a Barcely you ſhall
give him ſach a Poſt to make good, where the poor man nor knowing how to take his ad-
vantage, either through want of courage or conduR, ſhall make you loſe this Poſt, and by
that means not only encourage the Enemy to ſave the day, bur ſhall moreover diſcourage
your own people 3 for four running Cowards are ſufficient to draw all che reſt afcer chem,

eVERN

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

even the Leaders themſclves. And although they be brave enough 1n cheir own perſons,
and would make head ; yer, if they know not how to command, nor underſtand which
way to play the beſt of their Game, all will run into confuſion for that it at chat mo-
ment depends wholly upon him, and not upon the General, who cannot have his eye in
all places at once z and 1n the noiſe and confulion of a Bartel, it is impoſſible he ſhould
provide for all things. He then who has the Charge of a Poſt, or the Command of a Wing,
if he want experience, and have never before been engaz'd in ſuch affairs, how is jt poſ-
fible ro be expected thar he ſhould eicher command, or execure > And here*sa Bartel loſt,
and your own perſon, if you are there, either kjIl'd or taken ; for I have never heard of
any King cf Fraxce that cver ran away, Neither js any bctcer to be expeted in any other
Emterprize that (hall be commicted to the execution of ſuch a man. Take heed then, Sir,
ro whom you give your Companies of Gens-MParms ; *as fir thar the young ones ſhould be
Apprentices, and learn of che old. I know very well chat Princes are to be excepted from

this Rule , who have ordinarily brave Lieatenants, who in effe& are the Chiefs, for che
| faid young Princes intheir own perſons are not uſually there. |

Your Mijeſtie has alſo Marcſchaux de Camp, and Camp-Maſters both of Horſe and Of Mareſchaux
Foot, both of them employmencs of great importance, for they are to diſcover all chings, and Camp- .,

and incaſe the Armies lye neac chey are to raake their diſcovery together, for the one can Maſters. ,

do nothing without che oth<r, and together muſt bring you back an account of whar

15 co be done for the ordering of che Battel , boch Horſe and Foot, after having viewed

the ſituarion of the place, and the Grownd where the Horſe is to be drawn up, and the
Foot allo; and being agreed together, are ro bring you back a report ofallz whereupon
yon ſhall in your Council conclude what you have to do : but you are of necelſicy co
ground your reſolution upon their intelligence, which if chey be not men of experience,
O Sir, how many Errors will chey cauſe you to commir ! Ir is therefore very neceſſary
thac the men who diſcharge theſe Offices ſhould have chree qualities z of which che firſt
15a long experience ; for if they be men long beaten to the practice of Arms, and that
they have been eye-witneſles of ſome miſcarriages in the Armies wherein they have lerv'd,
provided chey rerein ic; chat very obſervation will make them circumſpe& and carctal
of falling inco the like error. The ſecond- qualicy requir'd in men that are encruſted
with theſe Othces, is, that they be bold and adventurons (for your Mareſchaux and Mai-
ſters de Carnp, of all others muſt nor be Cowards) or at leaſt if they are not more vali-
anc than ordinary, (for I do not deſire they ſhould be Rowlands ) they muſt nor be afraid
of blows; for if cheſe men be timerous, you are not to expe that your Army ſhould do
any thing fo purpoſe ; by reaſon that chey will evermorequarter your Army 1n fear and ap-
prehenſion, and conſcquently alwaies encamp at a diſadvantage 3 by which means it your
Adverlary General be a man of Judgment, and praRis'd in ſuch affairs, he wall, calily
diſcern your Armie to bein fear, as I my {elf have often judeg'd in exerciſing this Com-
mand, by che meer obſervation of the Enemies manner of encamping , and have feldom
been deceiv'd. Which is a thing of all others of the greateſt danger, foraſmuch as nothing
ſo much encourages both the Officers and the Soldiers of an Armie, as to know thac cheir
Enemie marches and encamps in fear. The laſt qualicie requir'd in this ſozt of Officers,
is, that chey be circamſpe and diligent ; which three qualities will render them perfect
and comple:e, They muſt not be men char love to ſleep a 1a Francoiſe, nor {low dream-
ing people, that arelong and tedious 1n reſolving, they muſt have their feer, hands, and
underſtandings prompc and quick, and their eye evermore at watch 3 for upon their vi-
gilancie and providence depends the ſatery of che whole Armie.

It is moreover neceſſary, chat in the Ele&ion your Majeſty or your Lieutenant ſhall
make of {uch perſons, you narrowly pry and examine thart there be no unkindneſs, or diſ-
ſimulation Letwixc them 3 for where there is Enmity, there 1s evermore envy, and chat
being berwixt them , the one will never approve what the other ſhall do, and they
will be eternally in diſpute, from whence noching bur miſchief can enſne, There 1s no
Trade fo full of jealoutie and Juggling as this of ours, and berwixt men that do not love
one another there is nothing bue contradiction 3 whereas on the contrary, if they be good
friends, the one will evermore {apply the defects of the other, and they will argae what
is ficreſt co be done, amicably, and withour doing one another the leaſt zIl Office : for
they are by theRule of Dilciphne, wherher in quarcering che Army, or in diſcovering che
Enemy, to be alwaics cogecher. They are alſo before che Kings Lieucenanc co diſpute a=
bour che Quarters, and co ſhew their reaſons why they take chem up 1n chat place, and
are likewiſe co appoint to what Poſt che Cavalrie 1s to retire 1n cale of a Charge, whether

ro the Avant-Guard, or co the Bactel, though ic ought more properly to be to che Avance

Guard, by reaſon thac the Cavalrie is a member belonging to it. Ir 1s alſo neceflary thac
rey

va Or 99D | I ag _”

The Commentaries of Meſkire Blaize Boox VIt.

Caprains of
Foor

chey jutg well of the Enemies Avenues, and accordingly where to planc the Artillery,
where to encamp the Battrel, and where the General ſhall cake his place; and in caſe of
an Alarm, where to plant the Guard, and where to place the Centinels ; in ſhort, all
things paſs through their care and cohduR.

When theſe, together with him that commands the Army ſhall be perfe& in all this, -
and ſhall have crder'd all chings as they ought to be, they can never be ſurpriz'd : fora(-
much as they ſhall ſo well have provided for all things neceſſary; chat not a man in the
whole Army but will know what he has to do ; which being granted, every one will confeſs
thar Army catinot poſſibly fall into any diſorder : for all the loſſes that ſuch bodies uſually
ſuſtein proceed only from negligence and ſupineneſs. This good order in quartering ought
evermore to be obſerv?d , whiether far off, or near to the Enemy, and alſo upon a March,
which being done, the Army can never encounter any accident or novelty that can diſcom.
poſe it, when the Enemy ſhall be near at hand : bur if they ſhall deferre to do it till ne-
cefſiry requires, they will not find the Soldiers either ſo ready, or ſo well diſpos'd ; and
beſides it ſometimes falls our, that they think the Enemy at a great diſtance, when he ſhall
riſe earlier than they, and come to beat up their Quarters. Moreover they ought in ſuch
a caſe to maintain a betcer intelligence berwixr themſelves than upon a march, and then the
Maſter of the Ordnance is to be joyn'd with them, and indeed upon theſe three perſons
next to the General rhe lofs or gain of a Battel depends. Jndg you then) Sir, whether theſe
Employments are to be diſpos'd of with fo great facility, fince the loſs and overthrow of
your Armies proceed from their inſufficiency or negligence, When ever your Majeſty or
your Lieutenants ſhall make EleRion of ſuch perſons, your hearts ought to tremble with
fear at ſo unadviſed a choice. And you ought to conſider of it more than once.

You have, Sir, next your Captains of Foot, to whom you give Commiſſions at the fancie
of a Monſieur or a Madam, who recommend them our of a defire they have to preferre

_ their own Relations and Creatures, and to oblige others. From theſe Commands 11! be-

ſtow'd, almoſt as many miſchicfs may proceed as from the former ; whether ir be at che
defence of a Breach, or in leading a Foor Company in a day of Battel, or in any other
Enterprize of importance to your affairs : for ifhe who takes upon him ſuch a Command,
3s nor ſuch as he ought co be, he will be defeated through his own fault, and all the men
loſt that are under his Command, where the damage and diſhonor will be yours, and the
boldneſs and courage of your Enemie will every day encreaſe. Of which your Majeſtie
both las ſeen, and do now ſee the Experience, Ar the time when I firſt entred into arms,
the Title of a Captain was a Title of honor, and Gentlemen of good Families were proud
of it : But now-a-daies every Plow-boy and Carter that has commanded but in the qua-
litic of a Corporal takes upon him that Title, You will ſay, Sir, perhaps, thac we who
ate ycur Majeſties Lieutenants are in fault for this, but you muſt pardon us if you pleaſe :
for ir proceeds principally from you , who have begun to conferre theſe Commandls upon
lictle people, ſo that now the Gentlemen diſdain them. In your Grandfathers rirme che
Foot Companies conſiſted of a thonſand men, which was a noble Command, anc] that
was no ſmall eaſe to your Treaſure, there being not near ſo many foor Officers requir'd
as I have ſaid elſewhere : but now it is a very great diſorder, and for which your 1Maje-
ſtie would do well to find'out ſome remedy, that ſo many Captainers may return to be
common Soldiers. And the ſame medly is at this day obſerv'd amongſt your Knights of
the Order, which is a very great confuſion.

Now, Sir, what does all chis mean ? bur that to determine of differences and Snit's in
Law your Majeſty makes all your Judges to paſs a ſtri& Examination, though you your
ſelf can loſe nothing by the ſentence, ler it go which way it will ; whereas where it imrne-
diately concerns your own life, and che lives of my Lords your Brothers, and of all >the
Princes and great Captains of your Armie, and conſequently the ruine of your Kingdom,
your Majeſtie without any manner of difficulty, or confideration, conferres Commatads
and Governments upon the firſt that make ſuit for them. Sir, there is an old ſaying |

&

$1 le Fol un conſeil te donne,
N'en fay refns ponr la perſonne.
If the Fool good advice deliver,

Slight nor che counſel for the Giver.

)
Which I bring in here to excuſe the advice I intend humbly to offer to your Majcſtie, aznd
which you ought to take in good part from me, who am at this day the oldeft Captain lin
your Kingdom z and who from the paſſages I have ſeen in my time, ought in reaſon to
have gain*d ſome experience for the time ro come. The Counſel that 1will preſume rto

g VIE

Boox VIl. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

give you, is, that your Majeſtic would rake exemple by the Examination whereby the bo+
dies of your Parliaments are compos'd , where the ſeveral members are firſt co preſent
themſelves before your Chancellor, your Preſident and Counſellors, to be examin'd of
cheir ſufficiencie, who if chey thereupon be found incapable, they are ſent back to ſtudie
till they be wiſer, and have rendred themſelves worthy of the Employments co which
they pretend. | Ts 1p
Before then, Sir, you diſpoſe of any Command, upon which ſo many inconveniercies
vifibly depend, never conferre it at the importunity of any man alive, ll firſt you have
put the perſon upon his Examination, remanding him before your Doctors, which are the
old Captains who have gain'd experience by a long praQtice in Arms. You may have
{ome old ones, who have not much ſtirr'd from their own Houſes, I do nor take ſuch for
old Captains, but worſe than thoſe the Chancellor ſends back to ſtudie : for ic is a ſaying,
Too old to mend : but I mean chat you thould call co be affiſting at your inquifition ſuch
as have ever follow'd che wars, and that are markt for ſuch with a great many Para-
graphs, that is to ſay, with Harquebuze ſhots, or cuts, and flaſhes with the (word upon
his face and bodie ; which are ſigns that he has not alwaies ſate idle by the fire ſide, To
chis end, Sir, *cis fic you ſhould have a Chancelor; and Sir, it is moſt reaſonable that
that Chancellor be che Monſieur your Brother , alchough he be yer very young; for in
three or four years that he has born Arms he has won two memorable Bartels, fo thar
with the good underſtanding and jadgment he 1s Maſter of, and being deſcended of fo
good a Race, it is impofſible bur he muſt have retein*d a great deal : for he has heard
great Doors in our Faculty diſpute before him, Your Majeſtic muſt therefore haye no
other Chancellor of Arms buc him you ſhall ſtill, Sir,be ſuperior, for no one can take thar
from you, and *cis you onely that can confer honor npon others. As God has made you to
be born a Prince ro command ſo many millions of people, he has alſo diſtinguiſhe you by
ſome particular Endowments from the reſt of men, When then any one ſhall make ſuic
co you for any of che foremention*d Commands, your Majeſtie would do well to aflembie
your Chancellor and your DoQors ; and if you be there preſent in perſon,it would be better
if your Majeſtic would cake the pains your ſelf ro interrogate them if they know the per=
ſon in queſtion, where he has ſerv*d his Apprentiſhip, and under whom, (for ofcentimes
Like Maſter, like Man) and what ac of honor he has perform'd ? I donbr not but cheſe
old Cavaliers will frankly tell your Majeſtie the truth, as knowing very well of whac
importance it 15 to have a Captain a Fool, a Coward, or a Novice ; and according to their
charaers and opinion you may conferre upon him the Command he prerends to 3 for

he has then paſſed the inquifition. And chat your Majeſtic may be deliver'd from imporcu= a 6k ſane No
nities, do, Sir, as I did onceat Albain Piedmont, Every day my horſes were borrowed ry of. the Sicur
of me (for we had a little kind of a Truce) This vext me, and I knew not how to a+ de Montlac.

void it : butar laſt I commanded my Trumpet to go and make proclamation throughouc
the Town from the Governor, (which was my {elf ) char I had made an Oath never any
more to lend my horſes, 8nd that therefore I had cauſed it to be thus proclaimed, that no
one might be ignorant of my vow. After which 1 was no moreimportun'd. Doyou,
Sir, theſame; ſome day in a great Company declare openly before all the Lords and La-
dies of your Court, that you have taken an Oath never to diſpoſe of any Command or
Government, but by che advice of your old Cavaliers and Captains, Thus will preſently
be ſpread abroad ; for whar you Kings and Princes ſay and do diſperſes ir felf wich mar-
velous {wiftneſs; and this will alſo produce another great effet, which is, that fuch as
are freſhmen in Arms, knowing they cannot per in at the Window, will endeavour to
fignalize and make chemſelves known to ſuch as are to open them the door, and every
one will: contend who ſhall do beſt.

O if your Majeſtic will but pleaſe ro do this, how many brave Captains will you have
in alictle ſpace ! you will have more valiant Leaders then are again to be found 1n all the
Kingdoms of Earope. And this alſo will produce two things, which of all others you
ought moſt to defire in your Militia ; of which the fiſt is, that when chis Governor or
Caprain ſhall hare been preferr'd by the ceſtimony of your old Cavaliers, given cicher co
your Majcſtie, or to che Monhieur your Brother, he will look upon 1tfor ſo great an ho-
nor, that he will determine within himſelf, if he have never ſo liccle courage, rather to
loſe a thouſand lives, than be guilcy of che leaſt cowardize, or commir the leaſt offence :
for he wall evermore chink, char ſhould he misbehave himſelf, he ſhould do an injury co
choſe who nam'd him for the Employment he has obcein'd, and thac your Majeſtie mighc
juſtly reproach chem with their overſight in thac nomination : by which means chey will
endeavour to do the belt chey can that rhey may obtein honor, and thar your Majeſtic
may preferre them co a betrer Command z knowing that they muſt again paſs the inqui-

fition

_— proonmctenngdt TN — DI=uEREEmCr Erng—— > —_—— er

The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Boox VIL.

fition to arrive at it, and the examination of your old Captains, where if they ſhall have
bchav'd themſelves amiſs, they will evermore make a true report, and will be aſham'd co
adviſe your Majeſtic to create ſnch a one Maiſtre, or Mareſchal de Camp, whom they
have {cen"miſdemean himſelf in the quality of a imple Captain.

The fecond advantage that will derive it ſelf from this (trit way of examination, 1s,
that you will her:by ſtop the mouths of thoſe importunate Lords and Ladies, who upon
ſo light foundations make ſuit to you for Commands, upon which ſo many miſchiefs de-
pend , being aſſur'd before hand , that your Majeſtie will not grant them wichour the
partics being well examin'd before your Chancellor and DoRors, bur will refuſe them, as
you would do him that ſhould ask of you the Office of a Councellor of the Parliament
cf Parts before he has pailed the Teſt ; for the Court would nor admit him. I have
heard char formerly your Father hearing thar they had refu{*d to admit one, who by ſome
Lady was recommended to them, ſhould ſay, that one Aſs mipht wery well paſs among ſ#
ſo many Spaniſh hirſes : but they would not believe him. Sir, pur choſe by whom you
defiie to be ſerv?d ro the Teſt. I once ſaw a Gentleman (as I remember he wasa Pro-
vengal) whoſe cuſtom it was when any ſervant came to make him a cender of his ſervice,
he would preſen ly puc him to trial, and pucting a (word into his hand, would com-
mand him. to defend himſelf , wichour permiccing- him nevertheleſs co chruſt at him)
v. here if he ſound him a man firm, and refoluce, he would preſcncly encertein him; if
otheiwiſe, he would till him he was nor for his turn, By which means he had evermore
brave and reſolute men about him, fer every one knew his cuſtom, and no one would
offer himſclf bur he was ſtont and hardy; for he was a rude Gameſter, This was an
Examination praRiv'd by a SubjeR of yours, and a Law he eſtabliſht wichin himſelf, for
every man isa King in his own Houſe; as your Grandfather was anſwer'd by the Collier,
Eſtabliſhing this ſevere Inquiſition of the meri:s of men, +il Exrope would preſently know
ir, and ſo many importunate Suicors will be aſtoniſhr ar ſuch a Law, and will think of
nothing but how to learn, inſtead of courting Monſieur or Madam, and you will be rid
of theſe impertinents whom you ſend abour their buſineſs, and the ocher may go render
themſclves worthy before they offer co pretend ro Employments roo big tor them , and
thac till they have given a better accounc of chemſclves, they cannot honcllly prerend co,
becauſe they do not deſcrye them.

There will alſo another conveniency ariſe from this way of proceeding, which 1s, char
thoſe you chooſe and honor with theſe Charges and Commands will hold them immedi-

The Chars&er ately trom your {clf, or your Doors, and not from the I adies and the little Monfiears

of a little

Monficur of

the Court.

of your Court, who better underſtand how to ſer the finger of cheir Watches to rhe hour
of the day, than to level a piece of Canon againſt a Tower, or ſo much as to diſcharge
a Musker, and yer by their haughty carriage, and ſtarely motion, a man would think
char all ſhould tremble before them. I once heard one of thele precty fellows talk at ſuch a
rate, as if he had almoſt himſclt alone carried away the honor of the Bartel of Monfiear de
Biron, and that Monſieur de Tavinnes, nor even the Monſieur your Brother had done no-
thing comparable tro him, Now, as I was ſaying, theſe Gentlemen who ſhall have the
honor to hold their Commands immediately from your ſelf sfrer this manner, will think
themſclves much more highly honour'd 3 wherefore, Sir, in truth theſe are chings you
onght more to defire to ſee regulated, and to have a more eſpecial regard unto, than all
the reſt char concerns military diſcipline, by how much all che Events of War, whether
good or evil , under God, depends upon the choice you ſhall make of men 'of Com-
mand,

I ſhall nor here ſpeak of Generals of Horſe, nor Colonels of Foot, by reaſon choſe are
two Employments that are only to be conferr'd upon Princes, or men of very extraordi-
nary quality, who though they be young and of little experience, it imports not much,
provided che Camp- Maſter be an experimented man, And purſuing this method, your
Majeſty will ſoon fee the confuſion char is crepe into your Armies vaniſht and gone ;
and the ancient ſplendor and beauty of your Companies of Gens-d'arms reſtor*'d. One
thing I perceive, that we very much loſe the uſe of our Launces, either for want of good
horſes, of which methinks the Race viſibly decayes , or becauſe we are nor ſo dextrous in
that kind of fight as our Predeceſſors were ; for I ſee we quit them for the German p1-
ſtols, and indeed fighting in groſs Battalions, theſe are much more ready than Launces
are; for if they be not fought in file the Launceers are apr to encumber one another ; and
alſo that open kind of fight is not ſo ſafe and certain as in cloſe Bodies.

To return to my diſcourſe 3 you may pleaſe ro take norice, Sir, that all ſuch as deſire ro
adyance themſelves by Arms, will cover ro be brought upon the Chequer of Examination.
And jn my opinion it would be well and pradently done of your Majeſtie ro keep a Liſt

| | of

1 1 0 AAA AO ee PS -
—__—. In eg mamas

H—
akon tn M9 4. a dt toc dh.

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

of all the brave and qualified men you have in your ſeveral Provinces, to the end, thar a
vacancy of any Command falling, you may think of thoſe perſons, and worthily ſupply
it : by whiciz means ſuch as know themſelves to be in your Liſt will be highly en-
couraged, and endeavour with all the power they have to do you ſome notable piece of
ſervice 2 and ſuch as are not in, will expoſe themſelves to a hanfand dangers to be put 1n=
to it, This Book you ſhould call the Book of Honor, and when you hear any one highly
applauded, after having examin'd the particularicies of his Exploits , your Majeſtie would
do well to give publick Order to have his name entred into your Liſt, I remember I have
heard when I was very young, that Lews the Twelfth did after this manner, efpecially
by thoſe of che long Rove, and that the Office of Chief Juſtice of eAgenois (a place of
great profit and henor) being vacant, he remembred himſelf of a good Lawyer, who had
made him a very eloquent Oration at O-leans, whoſe name he had ſer down in his Liſt,
and in pure Gift gave him the place, He likewiſe did the ſame in all Employmeats ;
and I have ſecn the ſame way practiſed by that great Odet de Foix, under whom I ſerv d
in the beginning of my Arms : he knew the names of all the Captains and remarkable
_ and when any one had perform'd any ſignal Exploir, he preſently booke him
own. TO
Bur, Sir, withal you mwſt oft turn over this Book, and not content your ſelf with
taking the names of ſuch perſons only, but employ and advance-them according.to their
quality and deſcrr, and encourage them by ſome gracious expreſſions in their favour z or
if he be a poor Gentleman give him money , which if you pleaſe to do with your own
hand, five lnundred Crowns will be better taken than cwo thuuſand from the hands of
a Treaſurer 3 for fomeching will evermore ſtick to their fingers. One time King Henry
your Royal Father, and my good Maſter (whom God abſolve ) had order*'d me two
thouſand Crowns, and hethat was to pay ir, w3s not aſham'd to detein five hundred :
bur he mer with a Gaſcon that was not wont to be ſo ſerv?d, nor to pay ſuch large Fees.
He knew I would complain of him co the King , and was more overjoyed that he could
perſwade me to receive it, than I was of the receipr, If your Majeſtic would give with your
own hand, theſe tricks would not be pur upon men of deſert. It was faid in your
Grandfathers time , that his Predeceffor alwaies did ſo, and had a Cheſt full of Baggs
tufe with Crowns, in ſome more, in ſome leſs, which he himſelf diſtributed according

co the quality of che perſon, or of the ſervice he had perform'd. I know ſome will cell -.

you thar this is roo much below a King ; but Sir, do nor believe chem, for rheſe are che
people that would have che moulding of all the Paſte, and would char your liberalicy ſhould
paſs thorough their hands, to the end that they might nim from your bounty, Oaly
one thing give me leave to tell your Majeſtie you ſhould not give all ro one, nor to a few
perſons I beſcech you, Sir, pardon my plainneſs, you have given one Gentleman of Gaj-
enne enough to have ſatisfied fifry pretenders. I will not ſay but that the man was
brave and valiant, but chere were who deſerv'd it as well, or better than hez and who
notwichſtanding had nothing at all. Your Majeſtic may pleaſe to rake whar I ſay in
good part: 1 have one footin the Grave, and 'tis the affeion I bear to your Crown, char
prompts me to ſay whar 1 do. I am Neighbour to the Spaniard, buc he never had other
chan Flowrs-de- Lis from me. I could fay a great deal more, if I durſt, for in truth chere
is but too much to lay, and but too many things to be reform'd, I muſt now ſpeak a
liccle with your Majeſties permiſſion to che Monſieur your Brother, your new Chancel»
lor in arms.

'Tis to you then (my Lord) that I addreſs my elf, and I ſhould be ſorry this Book
ſhould go our of my hands without ſome honorable teſtimonie of your Grandeur. You
are deſcended from the greateſt Family in the world ; there is ro Record, bur that theſe
ten laſt deſcents have Ever been hardie and warlike ; and bur very few from the firſt
Chriſtian King have been otherwiſe, alchough Races have gone our, and chart others have
ſeiz'd upon the Crown, which is exceedingly admirable; for of four Generations of

Gentlemen you ſhall hardly find cwo Deſcents together val.ant : Which ought ro make.
us believe, that God has a particular providence over this Kingdom, ſecing he has given -

ſo great Gifrsand Graces to thoſe who are his Vicegerents, as ro the Kings your Grand-
father and Father. And although you are no King, you nevertheleſs ſhare in the bleſſing
thac God has fo liberally conferred upon your Royal Family. O (my Lord) you have
great reaſon to think, and to aſlure your ſelf, thac Almighty God has defign'd you for
great ends, 'as is already difcern?d by the viRtories he has given you in your younger years,
which are {ach as therein his Almighty arm has been manifeſtly ſeen, and chart you have
obrein'd them more thorough his Divine Will, chan any power of man. Every one
mult cherefore of neceſſitie confeſs that chis Kingdom is the Care of Heaven, chat che'

Eece King'

—— —I -—_— —_ aa

The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaixe Boox VII,

King your Brother is God's Lieutenant, and that You are his. Behold whar fair
and honourable Titles! _- |

1 muſt now take the boldneſs to talk a little to you. You are (my Lord) the prop
upon whom he repoſes and relies; you are he who are to command the Arms which are
co carry him into all hazards, perils, and fortunes, You are the Trumper which is co
give us the lignal what we are todo. You are our refuge and our hope, by whoſe teſti-
monie we are to expect from the King the recompence of all our ſervices. *Tis you who
are torecommend us to his Majeſties knowledg, and who as a true Chancellor of the Sword
are to make him a true Report of what we have done for his ſervice; and who when we
are dead and gone ought to preſent our Children to him, it we have behay'd our ſelyes as
men of honor oughc ro do. Finally you have all the eyes of France upon you, upon you
(my Lord ) who command Armies, and who have fo ofcen bang'd and bang'd again the
Rebellious Hugonots. All Chriſtendom knows that it is you, for the King is conſtrain'd,
fince his Council will have ir ſo, to make war in his Cabinet, Since then you hold fo
high a place, upon which all other Offices and Commands that concern Arms depend,
and that we are all ro ſtand or fall by you for the Kings ſervice, and your own, your
Highneſs ought to repoſe your entire confidence, and to lay our your whole care upon us
who follow Arms: for all other conditions of men parcicipate nothing with yours, for«
aſmuch as all the reſt depend upon men of che long Robe. Of ſuch there are a grear
many in the Kings Council : you have nothing to do with theſe people, nexcher indeed
is it proper you ſhould 5 for too many trons in the fire never do well, and its an old ſaying,
All covet, all loſe.

If your Highneſs will pleaſe a little to refle& upon whar I take the boldneſs to repre-
ſent before you, you will find that it will be neceſſary, ſeeing you are in ſo high a Station,
to weigh and conſider what it is chat may help to maintain and ſupport you 1n ſo greac
and ſo honorable a Command , than which nothing can be greater. Shall it be from
theſe young Captains that you are to expe&it? nocertainly ; for in theſe kind of people
there 15 no manner of experience, but rather levity and folly. Shall ic be from men of
the long Robe? You are yet leſs toexpeR ir from them than from the ocher. They wall
talk like freſh-water Soldiers ; they meddle but too much that way, and upon the
Green-Cloth will be prating of Arms, that they no more underſtand chan che Carpet
they prate upon. From whom then ? Ir is from the old Captains who have beca exer=
ciſed 1n Arms, and have paſſed the rude trial of Battels , Combats, Skirmiſhes, Sieges,
and Aſſaults. They will have cauſe toremember what they have ſeen, and will no doubr
be mindful enough of the loffes they have ſaſtein'd, as alſo by what error and default the
misforcune befell them, If they have been well beaten they will have cauſe to remember,
and if they have been viRorious they will hardly forger it, If you take advice of ſuch
men you cannot fail of keeping up your greatneſs, and of encreaſing your reputation and
renown : for of ſuch you will learn to know how rightly to command, and ſhall reein
from them what thcy ſhall repreſent before you, when giving an account of what they
have ſeen. You cannot employ your time better than to learn prudence to ſuch a degree,
thac Poſteritie may triumph in your Name ; and I know you are of coo good a Race, nor
co covet that your renown ſhould flouriſh after you are dead.

There may peradventure be ſomeold Captains about yov, who have neither done nor
ſeen any great matters ; for having lov'd their Houſes and their Riches becter than the
exerciſe of Arms. Truly (my Lord) there are two many Gentlemen of this humour, and
the King would do well to degrade ſuch dunghil-bred Gentlemen from all Nobilitie, who
can command nothing but their Hounds and Greyhounds, whilſt others are ſeeking dan-
ger inthe field, and think it ſufficient that they can wind a Horn, There is alſo another
ſort of men, who for want of underſtanding cannot retein what they have ſeen. They
can perhaps ſay I was at the Battels of Cerizoles and Dreux, Farnac and Moncontonr, buc
they are not able togive any account how Monficur 4' Angaien won the firſt, and how
Monficur de Gazſe ſav'd the ſecond ; the Errors the Admiral commicted in the two others,
your Highneſs noble reſolution, and finally all char paſſed, with the reaſons both of che
one and the other, ' nor any thing of all this 3 ſo that you would ſay they had never heard
talk of it, no more than the moſt ſtupid loggerheaded Lancequener that was there. Theſe
are not che men yor are.to rely upon. - You are not nevertheleſs to rejeR thele people,
for you are to make uſe of all ſorrs of men, eſpecially in. matters of war,

The men you ought to have about your perſon, and of your Cabinet Council, ſhould
be ſuch old Caprains as have reputation to be men withour fear, vigilant, and prompr of
execution. Such a Captain there may be, as may have done one brave thing in his life 3
bur who by his lownefs may have loſt a hundred fair opportunities, where honor and ad-
| : vantage

Boox Vil, de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

vantage might have been obrein'd, Yet will I not (ay that you ought abſolutely to de-
ſpiſe theſe people : I am nor fo imprudent as to intend any ſuch thing ; for fo peradven-
ture I may (finge my own wings, though what I am you will ſee in my Book. I dare
preſume to ſay, that ar this time good and valiant Leaders do not grow by cluſters, nor
are to be ſold by che dozen. You ſhould, Sir, do ſomething for every one of what degree
ſocver 3 not for all alike, bur according to every man's merit and renown. I know ſome
will tell you, that it you draw fo many about you, they will put you upon making great
demands of che King 3 (tor Soldiers are bold beggars) and char peradventure his Majeſtic
may take oftence at 1: ; bur tor chis there ts a remedy good enough in the old Rule,

Oui wa de Largent en bonrſe,
Ox'il ait ds Miel en Bouche.

Who in his Pocxet has no Money,
In his month mult carry Honey,

By ſpeaking them fair, and vouchſafing obliging language, you will entertein them
in hopes that you do nor forget them , bur that when an opportunitie preſents ir (elf,
you wall be ready to do them the beſt Offices jn your power. A kind reception, a gra-
cioas ſmile, a friendly embrace, will keep them in breath. Bur if chere be ſuch a trouble-
ſome importunate fcllow, chat wall nor be ſatisfied with your gracious anſwers, you may
conclude, that that man neither ſerves the King nor you heartily, or out of any great good
will or affeRion to your perſon, Such people will never do you any good ; and if the chance
of war do not of it ſelt free you from them , there are waies enough co ſhake them oft;
and whoſoever he 1s that ſerves his Prince more out of avarice than affe&ion, 1s unſound
at the heart : For an avaritious ſervant when he ſees he cannot ſatisfie his appetite of ger-
ting will defire to change his Maſter, thinking to get more by another, and to that end
will corrupt others by the complaints that he will daily make co thereſt, of che ill uſage
they receive, Avoid then (my Lord) having to do with ſuch kind of people, and be-
times before their venom have poiſon'd the reſt ; for ſuch men do all they poſſibly can to
make their Prince hated, ro the end that they may cover their own private malice under
the colour of a publick Odium, and ſuch are eafie to be known. Such I have known,
and ſach you daily fee , who alchough they bow under the burchen of the Kinz?s
bounty ncver ceaſe asking, nor ever will,

Morcover (my Lord) to nouriſh the good will, and cheriſh the affeRion of Gentlemen
and Captains, you may do well ſom-times ro write to them, that they may be cerrain they
are in your favour and remembrance; for this will make them believe that you have a
defire ro perform ſomerhing more and greater than before, and chat you intend to pur-
ſue your forrune. And from this I will cell you whar will follow, they will thew your
Lecters to their Relations and Friends, who ſo ſoon as they hail ſee them, and thar you
have ſuch a one 1n ſo great eſteem as to honor him wich your Letters, chey will lay on
all chey can wrap and wring to put cthemſclyes into equipage co follow him , by which
means one {ervant will bring you cwenty or thirty more, out of the hopes they ſhall con-
ceive, tharin doing you fervice, you will be as gracious ro them. And this will coſt you no
grcar trouble, your Secretaries will caſe you of chat, and but waving one hours recreation,
you will fign more Diſpatches than would ferve the whole Kingdom. If ir be to a man of
very grcat qualitie, a word or two under your own hand in a Poſtſcript will be no grear
trouble : bur chen it muſt nor be roo common, ar the ſame time, nor in the fame terms ;
a faulc char I have cyermore obſerv*d in the Secretaries of Princes, and particularly choſe
of our own Nation : for they communicate their Lecters to one another, and finding them
all run in the ſame ſtile, make afterwards no great account of the favour.

It (my Lords) you ſhall not pleaſe ro do as I adviſe you, ſee what will follow. When
the Caprain ſees chat you make no account of him, nor have him not in your remembrance,
he wall chink you are ſatisfied with the forrune God has already beſtowed upon you, and
thar therefore he 1s no more to hope that you ſhall have any ambirion to be greater chan
you are ; bur that every man muſt think of retiring to his own houſe, wichonc caring any
more for Arms, And atter a Soldier, ler him have never fo lictie a Competencie ro live
upon, has once begun to relih the pleaſure of his own Houſe, his Wite, his Hawks, or
his Hounds, and chac he 1s once ſaffer*d to take rhar benc, iris a very hard matter to
draw im out of the Chimaney-corner to go again co the Wars, and to pertwade him co
forſake his ſofr and warm feathers, to lye abroad upon the hard and cold Turf; and if
you get him og with much ado, it will be with a very ill will, and he will be alwaics

Ece 3 | bankering

Thar a G:ne-
ral ought to
write fre-
quently to his
Captains.

or ir Pie INDE I

p———_—

IT TE CT Ty

CD DCA
CE ER Dh

1% AI T6 EI: IB IF As
” prongs Re ee nn” CCR DRE

Ah
4
+

| nt es emma

. eader, which

wounds,

—_—

192 The Commentaries of Meſlire Blaize Boox VII,
hankering homewards to {ce his Wife and Children. He (hall never hear the report of
* A Frank a Muskert, bur, like a* Frank- Archer, he will think himſelf (lain. In all cheſe chings cu-
Archer is one Le jg all; Canon and Harquebnze-ſhor aſtonuth ſuch as are not uſed to them bur after
of uy arg a man has once or twice heard them rattle about his ears, he cares not ſo much, There is
ws "oe ſz1. noching ſo prejudicial ro War, as to let Soldiers and Officers lye idle and ruſt. Hang up
dom ſces ſer» your Headpiecc, or your Cuiraſle againſt a wall, and 1n a little ſpace 1: will be all ruſt and
vice but upon c:hwebs 2 ir is che {ame with men of war, if they be ſuffe?d to Tye (t:]] and do nothing.
extraordivary 1a7h1oofgre your Highneſs ought to have a ſpecial care of this; for keeping your Captains
occafionz and Lecters, and ſome liccle benefics from the King, you will hold every
by b-ing upon 45/025 WIT Y OUT EULSIS's | NEG 8) Y y
the Lift is ex- One in cxpeRation, and ready to march ſo foon as his Majeſtics Summons, or your Com-
empred from mand {hall be brought to them. To this end give your Secretaries order to put you in
all Tax*% mind, for otherwiſe the Ladies, or the delights of the Court, will put 1t our of your head.
You arc young, anc 'tis fic you ſhould caſte che pleaſures of the world ; it is bur reaſonable
you thould know what they arcz we have done it before you, and thoſe who are to fol-

low after will do the ſame. Burt g0 ſoberly to work,

By this Alarm you ſhall give your Soldiers with your Letters, you will diſcover to all the
world that you will not forget the facultie that God has given you, nor ſuffer your Talent
tolye idlez and every one who has an inclination to arms will reſolve to attend you to the
urmoſt ſtretch of your fortune. You will make it appear, that ſince God has already laid
his hand upon your ſhoulder, you will crie if he will not lay itupon your head alſo: you
ought to have an opinion that he will be pleaſed to do it, and to take rhe verſe in the
Pſalm for your Motto. Celnm (oi Domino + Terram autem dedit filiw hominum : which
is to ſay, that God has reſerv*d the Heavens for himſelf, and has letc the Earth for us to
conquer. This Verſe was not made for ſuch lictle Companions as I am , but for Kings
and ſuch Princes as you are : and yet give me leave to tell you, that although I am a
poor Gentleman , and have not the ſpirit of a King , yet had God pleaſed co preſerve
my Sons, and haye granted me a little better health, I ſhould have thought, with the
help of my friends, provided we had been at peace at home, to have got ſome corner of
the world or another to my own ſhare and if I could not haye got a great piece, I ſhould at
leaſt have had a Gobber; orat the worſt Tſhould only have loſt my labour and my life,
both which I ſhould have thought well laid our for the purchaſe of honor, Had my Son
liv'd Ido verily believe he would have brought about the deſign, that the Admiral knows
he had in his head, and that he may acquaint your Highneſs withal. Youare young,
your Brother has the great piece, you are to go ſeek your fortune elſewhere, and inſtead
of being a Subje&t, make others SubjeRs to you. Since then ſuch a poor fellow as T am
have the courage to ſoar ſo high, and that the Sons of Labourers and Forge-men (as TI have
heard) have by cheir vircue arriv*d at Empire, what are you to hope for who are che Son and
Brother tothe greateſt King in Europe ? you ought to look for no leſs whin occaſion ſhall
preſent ic ſelf, and har you ſhall ſee your time, A magnanimous Prince 1s never to reſt
contented, bur ſtill ro puſh on his fortune ; the world 1s {> wide thert 15 enough to conquer ;
and the King your Brother has power enough to afſift you, You are in your age of underta=
king, and you are forcunate. I am ſorry that you have laid afide the great and brave name

* For he was of * Alexander, who, if I miſtake not, was the moſt val:an: Warriour that ever bore arms.
Chriſtned Ed- His Majeſtie will help to fer ſome foreign Crown upon your head. If then God ſhall
ouard Alex doyou the grace to pur an end to theſe miſerable domeſtick Br-:ls, ſer your defigns on
ns foot, and trie to immortalize your Name. Employ thoſe many Scrvants you have in
e afterwards .
chang'd for <Onquering ſomething; and ſeeing my age, and the wounds I haverecery' will nor per-
Henry, and was Mit ne to ſerve you in ſo brave an Enterprize, I ſhall ar leaſt humbly adviſe you never
Henry the third co ſtop the Carcer of your Arms, but {till to attempt greater and wore difficule under-
of Fraice. takings, taking the device of the Emperor (Charles, who cut our fo rich work for your
famous Anceſtors. In caſe you cannor arrive at the utmoſt aim of your Ambition, you
ſhall at leaſt advance the better half way to your defires. I have no hopes, being a maim'd
Valetudinary as I am, my ſelf to ſerve you in theſe honorable deficns + but I leave you
three little 2fortincs, which I hope will not degenerate from their Grand f:ikr and their
Fathers, More I have noc to trouble your Highneſs wichal ; and alfo irs time to pur
an end ro my Book.

Bchold here (fcllows in Arms) you who ſhall read my life, che end of the Wars in
which I have ſerv'd five and fifty years together that IT had the honor ro be in Command
for the Kings my Maſters. From which ſervices, thac I might not forget chem, I broughc

The Sicur de away ſeven Harquebuze-ſhots for a Memorandum, and ſeveral other wounds beſides, there
Monluc!s being nor a limb 1n all my body that has eſcaped,my right arm only exceprec. Bur i have by
thoſe wounds purchaſed a renown throughout Earopey and my name is known in the rc-

moreſt

hk —_——

Book VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. 393

on,

moteſt Kingdoms, which I e{tzem more than all the riches in the world 3 and by the Grace

of God, who has ever been aſſiſting co me, I will carry this repuration along wich me co

my Grave. This is a marvelous contentment to me when I think upon ir, and call co Miſerable con-

mind how I am ſtep by ſtep arriv'd tothis degree of honor, and thorough ſo many dangers dition of a Sol-

am come to enjoy the. thort 1epoſe that remains to me in chis world, in thecalm and priva- Uer,

cie of my own houſe, that I may have leiſure to ask God forgivenels for the fins I havecom-

mitted. Oh if his mercie was not infinitely great, in how dangerous a condition were all

choſe chat bear arms, clpccially chat are in command ; for the neceflity of war forces us 1n

deſpite of our ow; mclinarions ro commir a thouſand m-ſchiefts and ro make no more 3c*

count of the lives of men chan of a Chicken : ro which the complaints and outcrics of the

people, whom we are conſtrain'd in deſpite of us every day to ſwallow up and deyourc, and

the Widows and th« Fatherleſs chat we every day do make load us with all thecurſes and

execcations, miſcrv anc affliction can help them to invent, which by imporcuning the Al-

mighty, and daily im vloring the a{iftance of the Saints, 'c15 ro be fear'd lye ſome of them

heavie upon our heads. Bur doubtlcſs Kings ſhall yer have a ſadder account to make than

we; for they make us commit thoſe evils (as I told che King in diſcourſe at Tholonze)

and there is no miſchicf whereof they are nor the cauſe : for ſceing they will make warres,

chey ſhould ar leaſt pay. choſe who venture their lives to execute their paſſions, thar they

may not commit fo many miſchiefs as they do. TI think my ſelf then exceedingly happy)

in that God has egiven me leiſure ro chink of the fins T have commirted, or rather chat che

neceſſity of war j1as cnforc'd me to commit, For I am not naturally addicted to miſchict ; The Sicur de

above all I have ever been an enemie to the viceof impurity, and a (worn adverſary to all Montluc's na-

diſloyalty and treaſon, TI know very well and confeſs, that my paſſion has made me ſay, 6:

and do things tor which I now cry 2eacalpa; bur *tis now too late to redreſs them, and I

have one that lies heavier upon my heart, than all che reſt, Bur had I proceeded other-

wiſe every one would have flirted me on the noſe, and the leaſt Conſul of a Village would

haveclapt coo his Gates againſt me, had IT aot alwaies had che Canon at my heels; for

every one had a mind to Lord it. God knows how fic I was to endure ſuch aftronts ; bur

als done and paſt; my hand was ever as prompt as my tongue, and it was but a word

and a blow. I could have wiſhr, could I have perſwaded my ſelf to ir, never to have worn

a ſword by my fide, bur my nature was quite otherwſe, which made me carry for my

device, Deo Dace, Ferro Comite, One thing I can truly ſay of my (elf, chat never any

Kings Licutenanc had more commileration of the ruine of the people than 1, in all places

where ever I came. Bur it is impoſſible to diſcharge thoſe Commands without doing miſ-

chief, unleſs the King had his Coffers cramm?®d with Gold to pay his Armies; and yer ic

would be much to do. 1 know not if thoſe that ſucceed me will do better 5 but I do nor

believe ic, All the Catholicks of Gajenne can witneſs, if I did not alwaies ſpare the people x

for 1 appeal from the Hugonots, 1 have done them too much miſchief co give me any good

reſtimomie 3 and yer 1 have nor done them enongh, nor ſo much as I would ; my good

will was not wanting, Neither do I care for their ſpeaking ill of me , for they will ſay as

much or more of cheir Kings,

But before I put an <nd to this Book of mine, which my name will cauſe to be read

by many, I ſhall defire all ſuch as (hall cake the pains ro read theſe Commentarics, not The Sicur de

to think me {ſo ingrace chat 1 do not acknowledge, after God, to hold all I have of Eſtate Montluc*s ac-

and Preferment of che Kings my Maſters, eſpecially of my good Maſter King Henry, v hom Knowledgmenr.

God abſolve. And it Ihave jn ſome places of my Book ſaid, that wounds were the re-

compence of my ſervice,it is nor atall intended co reproach them with the blood I have loſt

in their quarrels. On the contrary I think che blood of my Sons who diced in their ſer-

vice very well employed. God gave them co me, and he took chem from me. 1 have luſt The death of

three in their ſervice; Mare Anthony my eldeſt, Berirand (to whom I gave the name ys Sicur de

of Perot ( which is one of our Gaſcon names) by reaſon that Bertrand did not pleaſe me) NE 6298:

and Fabian Seigneur de onteſquieu, God gave me allo three o. hers. For of my ſecond Son

I had Blaize, and of my youngclt e4drian and Blaiz?, whom God preſerve, that they

may be ſerviceable to their Kings and Country, without diſhonouring cher Racez that

they may well ſtudy my Book, and ſo imitate my life, that, if pothble, they may ſurpaſs

cheir Grandfire 3 and 1 belcech your Majeſtic be mindful of chem. TI have left them, a-

moneſt my Papers, the Lercer your Majettie was pleaſed co write co me from Villiers dared

- the 3, of December 1570, which conteins thele words. Aſſure your ſelf, that 1 ſhall ever The King's ©

be mindfal of your many and great ſervices, for which if you ſhall in your own perſon fall ſhort Letter 10 the

of a worthy recompence, your poſterity ſhall reap the fruits of your merit 3 as alſo they are Sicur de Mongs

ſuch, and have ſo well behav'd themſelves in my ſervice, that they have of themſelves very Wes

well deſeru'd my acknowledgment, and that | ſhould do for them what 1 ſhall be very ready
i9

294 The Commentaries of Meſſre Blaize Book VII:
t» do whenever an opportunity (hall preſent it ſelf, Sir, this is your Maj:ſtics promiſe, and
a King ſhould never ſay or promiſe any thing bur he will perform.

I do not then by any means reproach my Miſters; and I ought alſo to be fatisficd,
though I am not rich, that a poor Cadet of Gaſcony is arriv'd at the higheſt Dignitics of
the Kingdom, T fee ſeveral atchis day who murmur and repine at their Majeſties ; and
for che mcſt part choſe who have done little or nothing make rhe greateſt complaints, Tn
others who have really deſerv*d ſomething it is a lictle more pardonable : all char we have,
of what degree ſocyer we are, wehold it of the Kings our Maſters. So many great Prin-
ces, Lords, Captains, and Soldiers, both living and dead, owe to the King the honors
they have receiv*d ; and their Names ſhall live by rhe Employments they have recei\?d
from the Kings they ſerv'd, and were not only enterr*d wich thoſe honorable Titles, bur
have moreover honour'd thoſe who are deſcended of them, and mention will be made of
their viitue whilſt any Records of honor remain in the world, I have liſted a good
number in my Book, and have my felf had Soldiers under my Command, who have
bcen no better in their Extraction, than the Sons of poor labouring men, who have liv'd
and died 1n arepuacion as great and high as they had been the Sons of Lords, through
ther own virtue, and the eſteem the Kinos and their Lieutenants had of them. When
my Son Mare Anthony was carried dead co Roms, the Pope and all rhe Cardinals, the Se-

Honor done to nate and all the People of Rome, payd as much honor to his Hearſe as if he had been a
Marc AmtÞowy Prince of the blood. And what was the cauſe of all chis, but only his own Valour, my
ae Montluc. 5
Reputation, and my King, who had made me what I was? So that the name of Mare
Anthony 1s again to be found in the Roman Annals, When I firſt entred into Arms our
of my Page-(hip in the Houſe of Lorrain, there was no other diſcourſe but of the greac
Gonſalvo, call'd the great Captain, How great an honor was it to hima (which alſo will
l:{t for ever ) to be crown'd with ſo many Vitories? I have heard it told, that King
Lewis and King Ferdinand being together, TI know not at what place, bur ic was ſome-
where where chey had appointed an Interview, theſe two great Princes being ſat at Table
together, om King cntreated the King of Spain to give leave that Gunſalvo might dine
with thuams which he accordingly did, whilſt men of far greater quality than he ſtood
waiting by. So conſiderable had the King his Maſters favour, and his own valour made
him. This was the honor he receiv'd from the King of France, who in recompence for
his having depriv'd him of the Kingdom of Neples pur a weighty Chain of Gold abour
his neck. I have heard Monſieur de Lantrec fay, that he never cook ſo much delight in
looking upon any man, as upon that ſame. O how fair an Exemple 1s rhis for thoſe who
incend to advance them(clves by Arms! When I went che ſecond time into Italy as I
paſſed through the Streets of Rowe, every one ran to the windows to ſee him char had de-
fended Sienna, which was a greater ſatisfaRtion to me than all the Riches of the Earth,
I could produce ſeveral Exemples of French men, of very mean Extration, who have b
Arms arriv'd art very great Preferments : bur out of reſpe& to their Poſteritie I ſha!l for.
bear; bur it was the bounty of cheir Kings that fo advanced them for the recompence of
their brave ſervices. '
Ir is then juſt that we confeſs, we'could be nothing without their bountie and favour z
if we ſerve them, *cis out of obedience to the Commandment of God, and we onghr nor
co try to o2tein rewards by importunities and reproaches ; and if any one be 1ll rewarded,
the fault is not in our Kings, but in them who are about them, that do nor acquaint them
who have ſerv'd well, or ill; (for there are many of both ſorts) to che end that his Ma-
jeſties largeſs ſhould be rightly placed. And there is nothing that goes ſo much to che
heart of a brave and loyal Subje, as to {ee the King heap honors and rewards upon ſuch
as:have ſerv'd him ill, 1 am ſure it 1s that that has vext me more than any diſappoint-
ment of my own. LI haveofcen heard fome men ſay, the King or the Queen have done
this, and that for ſuch a one, why ſhould they not do as much for me? The King has
pardoned ſuch a one ſuch an offence, why does he nor alſo pardon me ? I know alſo thac
their Majeſties have ſaid, They will no more commit ſuch over-ſights, we muſt wink at this
one fault : bur it was the nexr day to begin the ſame again. However a man ought never
ro [tomack any thing from his Prince. The honor of ſuch men lies in a very contemprable
place, fince chey more value a reward or a benefit than their own reputation or renown,
and are ſo ready to take [nuff if they fail of their expeRation. And moreover (as I have
already ſaid ) they are commonly men that have never {trook three ſtrokes with a ſword,
and yer will vapour what dangers they have paſled, and what hardſhips chey have endur'd.
Ifa man ſhould ſtrip them naked, one might ſee many a proper fellow that has not ſo
mach as one ſcar in all his body. Such men, if they have born arms any while, are very
fortunate» and at the day of Judgment if they go into Paradiſe, will carry all cheir mood
along

Honor done to
the great Cap-
rain Gonſalve,

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

ſ———

_—

along wich them, withour having loſt one dram of cheir own, or having ſhed one drop
of any orhers here upon earth, DEE
Others I have heard, and of all ſorrs of men, even to che meaneſt, complain that they

have ſerv*d the King four, five, or (ix years, and notwithſtanding have nor been able ro
get above three or four thouſand Livers yearly Rent : poor men they are ſore hurt. I ſpeak
not of the Soldiers only, bur of all other conditions of men his Majeſtie makes uſe of. I
have heard my Pather, who was an old man, and others older chan he, report that it was
a common ſaying at Court, and throughout the whole Kingdom in the Reign of Lews
the Twelfth,

Chaſtillon , Bourdillon,

Galliet, & Bonneval,

Governent le ſang Regal:

and yet I dare be bold to ſay, that all cheſe four Lords who govern'd two Kings, put them

all rogerher never gor ten chouſand Livers yearly Revenue, I have formerly (aid as much

ro the Mareſchal de Bowrdillon, who thereupon recarn'd me anſwer, that his Predeceſſor
was fofar from gecting 3000 Livers a year, thathe ſold 1500, and lefchis Family very ne-
ceſfirous. Should any one ask the Admiral to ſhew what his Predecefſor, who govern*d
all, got by his favour, I durſt lay a good wager he could not produce 2000 Livers yearly
Revenue, As for Galljot he liv'd a great while after the others, and he peradventure might
in chat long tune rake together three or four thouſand Livers a year. For what concerns
Bonneval ; Monfiear de Bonneval that now is, and Monfieur de Biron are his Heirs, and I
believe chey can boaſt of no greac Eſtates. O happy Kings that had ſuch Servants, *Tis eafic
co diſcern that theſe men ſerv'd their Maſters our of the love and afteQion they bore to their
perſons and the Crown, and not upon the account of reward ; and I have heard that they
evermore rather begg'd for the King*s own Domeſtick Servants, than for themſelves.
They are gone down to their Graves with honor, and their Succeſſors are not nevertheleſs
in want.

Since I have ſpoken of others, T will now ſay ſomething of my felf, Some perhaps after
I am dead will calk of me, asI talk of others. I confeſs that I am very much oblig'd ro
che Kings I have ſerv'd, eſpecially to Henry my good Maſter, as I have ofcen ſaid before,
and I had now been no more than a private Gentleman, had it not been for their bounty,
and the opportunities they gave me to acquire that reputation I have in the world ; which
I value above all che creaſure the Earth contains, having immortaliz'd the name of Jont-
Inc. And alchough during the long time that I have born arms, I have acquir'd bur very
little wealch, yer has no one ever heard me complain of the Kings my Maſters - marry [
have ſpoke at mouth of choſe abont them, when 1n theſe late Troubles I was calumniaced by
them, asf I could have done all things with nothing. Believe me che wounds I have
receiy'd have adminiſtred more comfort than afflition to me ; and one thing I am ſure of,
that when I am dead they can hardly ſay, that at the ReſurreQtion I ſhall carry all the
blood, bones and veins I brought with me into the world from my Mothers womb, along
with me into Paradiſe. As for Riches I have enough, Ir is truey that had I been bred
up in che School of che Baylifof Eſperon, I ſhould have had more z the ſtory is nor amiſs,
and therefore I ſhall inſerc ic here,

Lewis the Twelfth going to Bayonne lay in a Village call'd E(peron, which is nearer to A pleaſant ſto2
Bayonne than two Bowrdeanux., Now upon the great Road berwixt theſe two places, the ry of the Bay-
Baylif had builc a very noble Houſe. The King chought ic very ſtrange, that in a Coun- lift of 5/peren.,

try ſo bare and barren as that was, and amongſt Downs and Sands that would bear no-
thing, this Baylif ſhould build ſo fine a Houle, and at ſupper'was ſpeaking of ic to che
Chamberlain of his Houſehold ; who made anſwer , chat the Baylif was a rich man :
which che King not knowing how to believe, conſidering the wretched Country his houſe
was ſeated in, he 1mmediacely ſenr for him, and ſaid co him theſe words. Come on Baylif,
and tell me why you did not 6wild your fine Houſe in ſome place where the Country was good and
fertile ? Sir, anſwer'd the Baylit, 1 was born in this Country, and find it very good for
2m; Are you ſo rich, (aid the King, as they tell me you are? I am not poor, replied the
other, 1 have ( bieſſed be God) wherenithal to live. The King chen aske him, how it was poſ=
fible he ſhould grow fo rich in ſo pitiful a barren Country, Why, wery eafily Sir, reply'd che
Baylif, Tell me then which way ſaid che King, Aarry Sir, anſwer'd the ocher, becanſe /
þ ave ever had more care todo my own buſineſs, than that of my Maſter, or my Neighbonrs.
The Devil refuſe me, {aid the King (for that was alwaies his Oath) thy reaſon is very good ;
for doing ſo, and riſeng betimes, thou conldſt not chooſe but thrive, O how many Sons has
chis Baylif lefc behind him co inherit chis virtuons humour! I was never any of _

,
[bp
|
8 ;
:
b :
F534
VT |
6] :
|
l
|
!

396 OOO The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox VII,

I do really believe, that there is never a litcle Pedlar in che world, who, having trotted,
run and moyl'd as T have done, but would have enrich himſelf to a Merchant, And
there 1s never a Treaſurer nor a Receiver (ler him be as honeſt as he would) in the King-
dom, that had had ſo much money paſs through his hands , as has done through mine,
bur more would have ſtack to his fingers. I have been ſeven. or erght times Captain of
Foot, which is none of the worſt Commands for getting of money ; and I have known
ſeveral Captains in my time, who have enricht themſelves meerly out of their Soldiers
pay. I was not ſo ignorant, nor ſo raw a Soldier, neither did I want dextericy, bane that
1 could have done the feat as well as they ; neither was it any ſuch hard marter to learn,
for with a good Quarter-maſter,and ſome few other little helps the buſineſs had been done.
I have fince been three times Camp-maſter, in which Employment God knows I might
have had Skip-jacks enow to have made Muſter, and intelligence enough with the Com-
m'ſfaries. I could have diſcover?d when any thing was to be got, as ſoon or ſooner than
any man inthe Army, I had noſe good enough. I was after Governor of a place, where
I conld have had fourſcore or a hundred men at my devotion to have paſſed Muſter, as
Mcſſieurs les Governeurs know well how to do : by which means, having been ſo long in
theſe Commands as I have been, and made ſo many Muſters as I have done in my life, with
a lictle good husbandry, Good God ! what a Monntain of Gold might I have had ! I
never think of it bur it makes me wonder at my own honeſty, thar could reſiſt ſo many
temptations, I was moreover the King's Lieutenant in Sienna, and another time at fon-
zalſm ; whereT had wayes enow to have lin'd my pockets, as others in the like Com-
mands have done : for it had been no more but to have had intelligence with three or fonr
Merchants, who ſhould have affirm'd that the Corn of the Garriſon had been bought by
them, and taken up upon their Credit, and it had been done. God knows what profics
are made of theſe Magazines, TI could then haves made demands upon the account of bor=
rowing, and have depured ſome who would have been ready to have taken the Employ-
ment upon them, to have brought in a hundred or two hundred thonſand Francks in
Debentures. Bart inſtead of this his Majeſty owed us five payes when we came out of
Sienna, whereof I found means to acquit him of three fo ſoon as we came to Montal/en.
Afterwards the ſecond cime that T was ſent thither, in the place of Monſieur de Soubsze, IL
RNay'd fix weeks by the Kings Command at Rome with the Pope, and his Majeſties Am=
baſſadors and Agents, Ir was at the time when the Duke of eAlvs made war with his
Holineſs, and all the Sea- coaſt was ready to be abandon'd, and Greſſette was not able any
longer to ſubfiſt, having not a grain of Corn, no more than the other Garriſons. I found
at Rome ſome Siennois Gentlemen, that marcht out of Sjenng with me, who brought me
acquainted with a Banquer call'd J#lio d* Albia, a Siennais alſo, who upon my own bare
(a) A Moge is word lent me 660 (a) Mopes of Corn, which are 300 Tuns or Barrels, at twelve (b) Maids
« Meniure co0- the Barrel, conditionally that I ſhould monthly pay him 600 Crowns at every Muſter,
ES. This money 1 conld no way raiſe but out of the deduQtions I reſerv'd from the Muſters,
(b) Muid de and inſtead of purting it into my own pocker , I accordingly paid him all, the laſt pay-
bled > (meſure ment only excepred ; for there was no more money, nor means to have any; ſo that we
de Paris) cor= made no Muſter. I might have made my advantage of chis, for I furniſhe ſeveral pla-
pron "_ ces that ſtood in need , according tothe authority I was inveſted withal z and Ifay*d half
Sender *vo the Corn, which I lent to the Country people, who were more diftreſt for bread than the
Mines, the Soldiers. There it was that I began to play the Ufſurer z bur it was ar the expence of the
Mine 6 Boifſes King's Conſcience , for, for every Muid char I lent them then, I receiv'd rwo at the Har-
auz, the Boiſſe- eſt; and indeed it was double worth at the time when I lenc it, and yer a penny of this
a 4 Non profir never came into my purſe, for I left it all to the King, I ſtay*d yer ſeven months
'o abour five longer in theſe parts, without receiving ſo much as one Pay ; during four months of
Quarters, a whuch I made my men live of twenty ounces of bread aday our of the profits I made of
Coomb, anda the Corn, ſaving as much as in me lay my Maſters money. The other three Months I
Buſhe! : 1-03: paid the Soldiers with good words, and the liberality of my Bonnet, as I had done ac
"ou Meare. Siewna. Some time after Don Franciſco arriv'd, who found Corn yer in the Magazine.
] moreover dealt with the Dutcheſs de Caſtro, Wite ro the Duke who was ſlain ar Pix-
cenza, who knew Monſieur de Valence my Brother, at the time when he was in the ſer-
vice of Pope Paul Farneſe. Pope Paul Caraffa had made a Prohibition, that no manner
of Grain ſhould be carried ont of Remania; but this Dutcheſs under hand permirred cer»
rain Merchants to bring it by night into our Territories, where our merchants mety and
bought ir of them. I carried this praQtice very cloſe, of which 1 could have made a very
great advantage to my own private profic ; bur neyer ſo much as one Liard came into
my purle, .

[1

ll. IS "IS —_—

Boox VII.

de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

IT could have brought the King a Bill of two or three hundred thouſand Francs debt,
as did Signior Fourdans Corſo, and others whom I ſhall forbear to name, who were well
paid. I was neither fo ſimple, nor my opportunities were not ſo few, but that I could
have done it as well as any of them. [I have been his Majeſties Lieurenant in this Pro-
vince of Gajenne, and have been much up and down abroad in the world, but never ſaw

any Country equal to it, cicher in Richcs or Conveniencie of Living« And having ſuch The ferciliry
an Employment, I could have had intelligence with the Receiver of the Province, (choſe ® G#ene.

kind of men defire no better) and have ſtuffe my own Coffers ; for what upon Muſters,

Garriſons, and Equipages cf the Artillerie, I could have made infinice advantages, How _

many Impoſitions might Ihavelaid upon the Country ? for the King had given me power
ro do it , which would have rarn'd ro my particular benefit : for akhough his Majeſty
in that Commiſhon douvtleſs intended choſe Levies for his own ſervice ; I could, if I
would have pur the charge upon him, and have converted a great part of them to my
own proper uſe, I could if I would have fir'd Towns, and have ſent a Will with the wiſp
up and down to the Towns and Villages to whiſper the principal Inhabitants in the car,
that they muſt cither give me money to free them, or thar otherwiſe I would cauſe them to
be undone, and come quarter Soldiers upon them, who ſhould eat chem to the very bones:
for they know men of our Trade are {c|dom weary of ill doing. I could alſo have ſent
to tell the Hugonots, who liv'd at hom* nnder the proreRion of the Edic, thar unleſs
they greaſed me in the fiſt, I would cauſe them all co be ruin*d and pull'd in pieces;
and what would they not have given me to have ſecur?d their Lives and Eſtaces? for they
did not greatly confide in me, he:ring how I had handled them before. Bur inſtead of
making ule of ſuch Atifices of chele ro enrich my ſelf, I lec che Caprains and Gens- d'arms,
and others who ſerv*d the King, and aske ir of mz, take all ; reſerving very liccle or no-
thing to my own benefir. And even that which I had at Clairac I cook by the King's
permiſſion, Ler ochers cherefore reſt concent. It God, would pleaſe to ler me be oncecu-
red of this great Harquebuze-ſhot in my Face, I think yer, chat ſhould the War break
out again, I ſhould be one to mount to horſes and I think ir is not far off; for fo long
as thete are two Reljgions, France will evermore be in divifion and trouble. It cannot 0-
therwiſe be, and the worſt on'c 15, 'ts a War that will not be ended of a long cime.
Other quarrels are eaſily compos'd, but chat for Religion has noend. And although the
Marnal fort of. men are nor very devour, they however fide, and being once engag'd
ſtick to their Party, In che poſture chat affairs now ſtand, I do not think we arear an
end. HoweverT have this ſatisfaftion in my ſelf, that Thave ro my urmoſt oppoſed ir,
and done my beſt endeavour co ſettle the peace of the Kingdom. Would ro God thar all
thoſe who have been in Command had conniv'd no more than I. But we muſt lee God
work H own will, Afﬀcer he has ſufficiently ſcourg'd us for our fins he will burn
the Ro - ;

And now, you Lords and Captains, who ſhall do me the honor to read my Book,
let me beieech you not to read 1c with prejudice, bur believe that T have deliver*d che
truch, without depriving any one of his due and merited honor. - I make no queſtion
buc thar ſome will bring ſome chings that I have here related inco diſpare, to ſee if hey
can catch me tripping in point of cruch ; foraſmuch as they will find that God has ne-
ver more accompanied the forcune of any man, for the Employments I have. gone tho=
rongh, than he did mine. But let me affure ſuch, rhat I have omitted an infinice num*-
ber of paſſages and particalaricies, by reaſon that TI never commirted any ching to writing,
nor ever kept any memorial, as :3-ver ſuſpeRting my ſclf ro become a Wricer of Books, LI
ever thonghc my ſelf nnfic for hac Employment, but inthe time of my laſt hurt, and du-
ring my ficxnefles I have dictared this that I leave you, to the end thac my name may.
not be buried 1n oblivion 5 nor ſo many other gallant men, whom [I have ſeen perform fo

many and fo vraye exploits : for che Hiſtorians write only of Kings and Princes, How Negligence oi
many brave Gentlemen have I here ſer down, of whom theſe people make no mention, no Hivorians,

more than if chey had never been? He who has writ the Bartel of Ceriſolles, though he
does name me, yet it is but {lightly, and in tran/itz only ; and yer I can honeſtly boaſt, char
I had a good hand in that Viftory; as allo at Ballen and T hionville. Which they rake
no notice of at all, no more than of che yalour and gallanc behaviour of a great number of
your Fathersand Kindred, whoſe names you will find here. Do not then think it ſtrange
if Ihave bcen ſo fortunate as I have wricren, tor I never minded any ching but my Com-
mand, and have ever acknowledg'd that all my ſucceſſes came from God, into whoſe
hands I ever refign?d my (elf and all my affairs; alchough che Hugonors were pleaſed
ro report me for an Atheiſt, They are my profcſt enemics, and you ought nor to believe
them, And although I have had my imperteRions and my vices, and am no more a Sainr

Fett than

Ava <os Re III rr renening te.
”

.
—_—_—_— ——  - wv th __—

398 - The Commentaries of Meſflire Blaize Boox VII.

chan ocher men, (they had their ſhare too chough they pretended holineſs and mortifica-
tion), yer | have ever placed my hope in God, evermare acknowledging, that from him a-
lone I was to expe&t my good or evil fortane, actributing co his bounty and aſliſtance all
the (necefſes of my lifes Neither was I ever in any aftion whatever wherein Thave not im=
plor*d his Divine affiſtance, amt never paſſed over day of my life, lince 1 artiv'd at the ape
of man, without calling upon his Name, and asking pardon for my {fin'. And many times
I caii fay with truih, thar upon fight of the Enemy I have found my (elF ſo poffeſt with
tear, that I have felr my hearc bear; and my limbs tremble (ler us not make our ſelves
braver than weare 4 for every man upoh earth apprehends death when he ſees it before
hiseyes) bur ſo ſoon as I had made my prayer ro God, I felt my ſpirits and my ſtrength
return. The prayer which I continually uſed, from my fiſt entring 1hco Arms, was in
The Sieur de cheſe very words. My God, who haft created me, 1 moft humbly beſeeth thee to preſerve my
Meitlucs Pray” Zudgment entire, that this day 1 may not loſe it ; for it is thou that gaveſt it me, and 1 hold
nooggea W it from no othcy but thee alone. If thin haſt this day appointed me to die, grant that I may
" fall with the reſolution of 4 man of honey, which I have ſought for through ſo many dangers.
I ach thee not my life, L I defire nothing but what pleſes thee, Thy will be done, 1 refigne
all things to thy divine wiſdom and bounty. Afcer which having ſaid my little Latin prayers,
I declare and proteſt in the preſence of God aid mien, that I ſuddenly felr a heat creep o-
ver my heart and members, ſo that I had no ſooner made an end, but that I found my
ſelf quite another man chan when I began. TI was no more afraid, and my underſtand-
ing again rerurn'd to perform its Office, ſo that with prompritude and judgment I diſ-
cern'd what I had to dog withour ever lofing it after in any Engagemetit wherein I have
ever bcen,
How many are departed this life, who were they now living could witneſs, if ever
they ſaw me aſtoniſhr, or loſe my judgment in any ation of war, whether ar an Aſſault,
or in any other Rencounter or Battel. Meſſieurs de Lantrec, de | Eſcat, de Barbegiengx,
de Monpezat, de Termes, du Bie, de Strozzy, de Bourdillon, de Briſſac, d* Anguien, de
Boiticres, and de Griſe could have given teſtimony of me; for they had all had me nns
der their Command, and have all ſeen mein a thouſand and a thouſand dangers, with-
out the leaſt ſign of fear or amazement. Who, could they again return co life, would
be good witneſs of the truth of what I have deliver'd; and yet they are not all dead,
under whom , and by whom I had the honor to ſervey and to be commanded, who al-
though they were much younger Captains than I, it vas nevertheleſs fic I ſhould obey
them. Monſieur le Ducd'Aumale, and the Mareſchaux de {ofſe, and de Vielle Ville are
of this number ; and I beſeech you (my noble Lords if my Book peradventure fall into
your hands) to do me right,and declarewhether what I have here deliver'd be true, or falle 5
for you have been eye-witneſles of part of itz and I fancie that after my death you will
'be curious to ſez what I have writ. There are others alſo who are able to give me the lye,
if I have ſaid ought bur true ; namely Signior Ladovico de Biraga, and Monſieur le Pre-
fident de Birague, who never abandoned that brave Mareſchal de Briſſac. Several others
are yer living who have been my Companions in Arms, and many others who have ſerv'd
under my Command ; all which are able to affirm the truch of what I have ſaid, and
whether whenever there was a debate abour any Execution, I did not alwayes think no-
thing impoſſibleg but on the contrary concluded chings feafible, which others conclu.
ded impoſſible to be effected. I undertook it, and brought it about, having evermore
thac ſtedfaſt aſſurance in God, thar he would nor forſake me, but open the eyes of my
underſtanding to ſce what was to be done to make my Enterprize ſucceed, I never thought
any thing impoſſible but che taking of T hionville, of which che honor isto be attribured to
Monſieur ge Gxiſe alone, and in truth there was more of fortune chan reaſon in that ſacceſs,
chough che ſaid Sicur de Gui/e was ever confident he ſhould carry it, and ſo he did.
Fellows in arms, how many and how great things ſhall you perform if you pur your
whole cruſt in God, and ſer honor continually before your eyes? diſcourfing with your
ſelves, thar if it be determin'd you ſhall end your dayes in a Breach* tis to much pur-
* A brave poſeto ſtay behind in the Graffe, * Us bel morir, (layes the Italian) tuta la vita honora.
death illu- *Tis co die like a beaſt for a man to leave no memory behind him. Never go about to
ſtcares 3 man's deprive another man of his honor, nor ever ſet avarice and ambirion in your proſpedt :
_—_ you will find chat it will all come co nought, and end in miſcry and diſgrace. I do

not ſay this that I have any mind to play the Preacher, but meerly our of reſpe& to truth.
How many are there in the world, who are yerliving, and whom [1 ſhall forbear ro name
that havehad che reputation of valiant men, and yec have been very unfortunate in their
undercakings? Believe me the hand of God was in this, and though they might implore
his divine ayd, cheir deyorion was noc righe, which made che Almighty adverſe co wy.

Boox VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France.

A

—__—_—

If therefore you would have God to be aſſiſting to you, you muſt ſtrip your ſelves of am-
bition, avarice, and rancour, and be full of the love and loyaltie we all owe to our Prince,
And in ſo doing alchough his quarrel ſhould not be juſt, God will not for all that with-
draw his affiſtance from you 2 for it is not for us to ask our King if his cauſe be good or
evil, but only to obey him. And if you are not rewarded for the ſervices you have per-
formed, you will not ſtomack your being negleRed, by reaſon it was not your intention
nor defign to fight upon the ſcore of ambition and grearneſs, nor out of a thirſt of riches;
bur upon the account of fidelity, and dury that God has commanded you to bear to your
Prince and Sovereign, You will rejoyce co find your ſclves eſteem?d and belov'd by all
che world, which is the greateſt Treaſtze a man of honor ought to covet, For great E-
ſtates and high Tues periſh with the body, bur a good Reputation and Renown are 1m-
morcal as the Soul, 1 now ſee my ſelf drawing towards my end, and languiſhing in my bed
cowards my diſlclution, and *cis a great conſolation to me, thar in ſpite of Death my name
ſhall live and flouriſh, nor only in Gaſcony, but moreover 1n foreign Nations.

This then is the end of my Book, and of thus far of my life, which if God ſhall pleaſe
longer to continue to me, ſome orher may write the reſt, if ever I ſhsll again be in place,
where I ſhall perform any thing worthy of my ſelf 5 which neverthcleſs I do not hope for,
finding my (elf ſo infinitely decayed, that I never again expe& to be able to bear arms.
I have however chis obligation to the Harquebuze ſhor, which has pierced through and
ſhatter'd my face, that it has been the occafion of writing theſe Commentaries, which I
have an opinion will continue when I am dead and gone, I entrear all choſe who ſhall
read chem, not to look upon them as proceeding from the Pen of an Hiſtorian, bur of an
old Soldier, and a Gaſcon, who has wric his own life truly, and in the rough ſtile of a
Soldier. All ſuch as bear arms may cake exemple by it, and acknowledge that from God
alone proceed the ſucceſſes or rhe misfortunes of men. And ſeeing we ought to have re-
courſe ro him alone, ler us beſeech him to affiſt and adviſe us in all our afflitions, for in
this world there is noching elſe, of which the great ones have their ſhare as well as the
meaneſt of us all. Wherein he manifc{terh his own greatneſs, in thar neither King nor
Prince are exemp:ed from his correting hand, and who ſtand not continually in need
of him and his divine affiſtance.

Do not diſdain, you who defire to follow arms, inſtead of reading Amadit de Gazle,
and Launcelot du Lake, to ſpend ſometimes an hour in reading what I have done, and in
raking notice of what I have been, in this Treatiſe rhatT leave behind me. By which
means you ſhall learn to know your ſelves, and betimes to form your ſelves to be Soldiers
and Captains; for you muſt firſt learn to obey, that you may afterwards know how to
command, This 1s not for Glk- worms, and ſpruce Courtjers to do ; nor for thoſe that are
in love wich their caſe, but for ſuch as by the ways of virtue, and ar rhe price of their lives

will endeavour to immortalize their names, as I hope, in deſpice of envy I have done that
of Montlac.

Here the Sipnienr de Montluc had put an end to his Books Lut fence, the ſhort
Supplement following was found amongſt his Papers,

Here thought 1 had ar once put an end both to my Writing, and my Life ; never
| [SK that God would ever again haye enabled me to get on horſe-back to bear

arms; bur he wes pleaſed co order ic otherwiſe, For ſome time all France was happy
in che enjoyment of Peace and repoſe, whilſt I alone was affliged with fickneſs, and tor-
mented with my great wound, which togerher confin'd me for the moſt part co my bed :
notwithſtanding by lictle and lictle Trecover?d my health, being more glad to be diſcharg'd
of my Government, than if that heavy burthen had ſtill layn upon my ſhoulders. The

Marquis de Villars, who has now the charge upon him, will no doube acquit himſelf of

his truſt, as an old Cavalier, and a great Captain ought to do.

Now I ever ſaid with my ſelf, hearing news from Court (for I had yet ſome corre-
ſpondence there) that the Hugonors were too much careſled, tor any good to come of ir,
and ſavy very well that chere was ſome nuſchief a brewinge The King by his Leccers,
- which 1 haveyer by me, and alſo in diſcourſe to ſeveral of my friends, was pleaſed to

dedare, thac he was no way diſlatisfied with me, that he defir'd co manifeſt how much
I was in his favour and eſteem, and that my own indiſpoſition had been the only reaſon
of his putting the Marquis de Villars into my place. I was contenc to believe it co be ſo;
for we muſt believe as our Kings will have us, or otherwiſe we offend them. Now al-
though 1 was no more the Kings Lieutenant, notwithſtanding all che Nobleſs, and all che
| Fft 3 ERtaces

AR cx eowuwwy-

400 * The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book VII,

Eftaces of Gajenne ever paid me a very great reſpe&, and very ofren came to viſit me at
which times we never parted wichour ſome diſcourſe of what the times would come to :
for we thought the Hagonots were grown very inſolenr, and ſpoke almoſt as high as in the
firſt Troubles. Had I been as young and luſty now, as I was theny I ſhould have made

ſome of them have held their prating, ar leaſt in Gaſcony, where I was,
The Execution A year or thereabour being paſſed over in this manner, news was brought of what had
upon St, Bar- hapned upon St, Bartholomew's day art Pars; where the Admiral was ſo unadviſed as to en-
tholomew's EYE ooe his perſon, our of vanity to ſhew that he goverr?d all. I wonder that fo circumipe&t
bat and ſo wiſe a man, and a man ſo well beaten co the affairs of rhe world ſhould commir {o
erols an exror, He paid dear for ir, for it coſt him his life, and many others, And indeed,
to ſpeak the cructh, he had brought great troubles upon the Kingdom ; for I know char
al', nor the one half of the miſchief was never contriv'd by the Prince of Conde, The ſaid
Price communicated bur coo much of his defigns to me ar Poiſſy, and I do believe, thac
would 1 have given car to him, he would have told me all. I acquainted rhe Queen
wich every ſyllable of ic 5 bur (he enjoyn'd me filence. She did not then think char things
would have come co thac paſs, that they afcerwards did, I know very well, and ir is very
well known co all the world, that ſhe was accuſed for the cauſe of the Commotions, chat
hapned in the fuſt Troubles; and the Priace did her tae wrong to ſend her Letters 1nco
Germany, to ſhew them , and cauſe them to be printed and publiſhed in all places :
which nevertheleſs did not much advance his affairs, The ſaid Lady the Queen being ac
Tholouze, did me the honor to talk with me above three hours upon that ſubje& ,
and ſaid a great many things to me, that I hall be ſo wiſe as to keep ro my ſelf, Soir is,
that it is a very eafie matcer to reprehend, and find fault with thoſe who have che manage-
ment of the affairs of the world, eſpecially affairs of fo great importance as the had, ha-
ving the King and his Brochers ſo young upon her haads, and all che Princes being ban -
dicd againſt one another ; and afterwards this ſpecious Cloak of Religion, which has e-
qually ſery'd both Parties to ſhadow and palliate their Revenge, and to. make us deyour
one another, I pray what apparence could there be, that ſhe ſhould have any incelligence
with the ſaid Prince ? what ſhe has fince done has ſufficiently manifeſted che contrary.
| But I ſhall wave this diſconrſe (for perhaps I ſay roo much) and recurn co my former

; lubjc&,
The Nayal Every one was aſtoniſht to hear what had hapned at Pars, eſpecially the Hugonots,
Army before who could not find ground enough to fly over, the moſt of them eſcaping into Bearn.
Rochelle, The ret turn'd Catholicks, or atleaſt ſcem'd ro do fo. For my part I did them no harm
on my ſide but they were every where uſed exceedingly ill. I chen thought that our Na-
val Army, which ac that time lay before Rochelle, was deſign'd for ſomething elfe than to
go into Portugal, and then ſounded the bottom of rhe Defign : bur T could nor imagine
why they had only wounded che Admiral ar firſt, having the deſign that I afterwards
ſaw thcy had. For had all the Hugonots the next day reſolv'd with the great ones of their
Faction, ir had been eafic for them to have retir'd from Pars, and to have pur chemſelves
inco ſome place of ſafety : Bur they were blinded, and God depriv'd them of their under-
ſtandings. I ſhall nor here take upon me to derermine whether this proceeding was good
or evil; for there is a great deal co be ſaid on both fidesy and beſides it were now to no
purpoſe, for it would do no good. Thoſe that follow after us may ſpeak to better effe&t,
and without fear, For the Writers of this Age dare not ſpeak our, but mince che matter
for my parc I had rather hold my peace, and ſay nothing, |
Though I had ar this rime no ocher Command than that of my own Houſe and Fa-
mily, yer was the Queen pleaſed to do me the honor to write co me; and to ſend me word,
thac there was a dangerous Conſpiracy diſcover'd againſt the King and his Crown, which
had been the occaſion of that which had hapned. I know very well what I thought : *cis
Charles the a dangerousthing to offend ones Maſter. The King never torgor che time when the Ad-
IX, ac Meaux. miral made him go faſter than an amble betwixr CHeanx and Paris, We loſe our un-
derſtandings when we come to the pinch of aftairs, and never conſider that Kings have
greacer ſtomacks than we to reſent an injury, and that they are apter to forget ſervices than
offences. Bur let us talk of ſomething elſe, rhis will be (utficiently canvaſed by others, who
wall be becter able ro undertake it than I.

Rochelle the All che King and Queens care was how to take Rochelle, the only refuge of the Hugonors.
Refuge of the God knows whether I did not ſend the Queen my advice touching this affair. Ar the
Hugonots Yoyage of Bayonne, and afterwards at her coming into Xaintonge, I had propoſed it to
her, to make her ſelf Miſtreſs of ir, without noiſe, or breeding the leaſt diſturbance 3 and
by whac I gather*d from Monſicur de Farnac (to whom I diſcover'd my {elf alittle, and
not too much) I think there would haye been very litcle difficuly in the buſineſs, She

WAS

Book VII. de Montluc, Mareſchal of France. ” --

—_—

was evermore afraid of renewing the War 3 but for fo delicate a morſel one would nor
have been nice of breaking the Paſt, Ir mizhc have been done, and afterwards it had
been to much purpoſe for chem to have complain'd. There would have been wayes enow
found out to have appeas'd the people ; for what conld any one have ſaid, if the King
would have built a Cicadel in his on City > Bur it is now too late to repent that over-
fight, This Ciry has furnith: che Hugonors with meansto renew the Wars, and will (till
do it, if the King does nor take it from them, to which end nothing ſhould be omicted. |
For chorough the conveniencie of this Giry chey manage the intelligences they have in The impor?
England and Germany, and taxe grear prizes upon the Sea, with which chey maintain tance of Ro-
the War, They morcover «cep the Iſlzs, from whence they extra a Maſs of money, by elle.
reaſon of the Salr, The Qucen thall pardon me if ſhe pleaſe, ſhe then commirred a very
great crror, and moreover another fince, not to ſupply us with means to execureher Com-
mand then when ſhe ſcent us to befiege it : For Rochelle ar that time was not the ſame
that ir 1s now, and Ithink I ſhould have frighced them, |

And now behold all the world before Rochelle, and I alſo was invited to the Feaſt a-
moneſt the reſt : So God help me, when I took the reſolution to go thicher, I made full
account there co end my Gaycs, and tolay my bones before the Town. Being come thi- The Sicur de.,
cher ] was aſtoniſhr to ſce ſo many men, ſo many minds ; for they were ſtrangely divided worn wu 'Y
in cheir inclinations, and a grear many there were who would have been ſorry the Town Racket ;
thould haye been taken, The Siege was great and long, and many handſome aQions ;
were there perform'd, bur well afſaulted , better defended. I ſhall nor take upon me
to give the Narrative of the particulariries of this Siege, for I was no more chan a private
perſon, and I will ſpeak ill of no one, The Monſieur that commanded in chief ar this
Siege, and has ſince been King, knows verv well, that having done me the honor to talk
wich me, and to ask my advice, I told him frankly what I choughc. By chis Leaguer all
men who were preſent ar it, and thoſe who come after us, may judg, char places of ſuch
Importance are either to be taken by famine, blocking them up, or foot by fooc with time
and patience, There was here a great fault commicced, in hazarding ſo many men in
Aſlaulcs, and another greater 1n keeping fo ill watch, thac ſupplies of powder came in by
Sea, as they continually did : but to tell you my opinion, (which was alſo char of a greac
many others) they had been our own in ſpite of the beſt they could have done for their
defence, and muſt have come our to us with Ropes abont their necks $ for the Succours the
Count de Montgommery brought them were retir?d, and we were upon the point to grapple
with them, for they were reduced to the laſt necefficy of all chings. Bur ar the ſame time
Monſieur de Valence my Brother was in Poland, to labour the Monſieurs ele&ion to that
Kingdom, as he did. And I think the glory of chat buſinels is due co him : bur ic wasalſo The Monficur
the cauſe char every one thoughc of entring into Capitulation with the Rochellors, ag at ©'*&<d King of
laſt chey did. The Depacies of Poland there came to ſalute che Monſieur for cheir King, FOO,
and every one retir'd to prepare himlelf to ſee che Solemnity of this new Crown ; ſo that
after having loſt a vaſt number of men ar this Siege, we lefr the Rochellors (till in poſleſ- |
fion of their Ciry, Ir ſeem'd by ſome words che Monkieur caſt our at his departure, that ;
he was not very well ſatisfied wich this new Kingdom : for my parc I think ic was agreat
honor both to him, aad to usall, char fo remote a Kingdom ſhould come to ſeek a King
in ours. Monſieur de Y alence my Brother got a great deal of honor in this Negotiation,
and kis Oracions are very fine, I make no doubt but he will inſert chem in his Hiſtory,

During theſe unhappy Wars, and this Siege, where I loſt ſeveral of my Kindred and
Friends,cthe Admiral de Villars,who was the Kings Lieutenant in Gatennezdid in my opinion
the b:{the could; and in truth there was not much co do, forthe Hugonors were {quandred
here and there like a Covey of flown. Partridges. Bur having taken a little heare by che
length of this Siege, chcy made ſome atremprs, which made me for my laſt misfortune, i
to loſe my Son Fabian Signieur de Monteſqniex, who in forcing a Barricado at Nogaarol, F abian "ae. bl
receiv?d a Harquebuze ſhor whereof he died. Alchough he was my Son, I muſt needs Moztluc Nain,
give him this teſtimony, that he was loyal and brave ; and I verily believ?d thar che ſor-
row for his death would have ended my dayes, but God gave me courage to bear my loſs ;
not with chat patience I ſhould have done, bur as well as I could.

In che mean time all France was full of Triumphs to honor the departure of the new
King of Poland, whulſt I remain'd ar my own houſe, without other company than my own
ſorrows, ſaving char ſometimes I was vifited by my friends, and the Genilemen of the
Country, The King about this time made a new removal, which was very prejudicial co
che Province of Guienne. Thoſe who follow afcer us will learn to be wiſe by the overſights |
of others; and the error thar his Majeſty here committed, was, thac he divided the Go- FY
vernment of Gvienne 1nto two parts, wherein he gaveall on this fide the G aronze cowards

Gaſcony | J;

_ My > gee rs or. + ng -

PEPE nes cs ts gs ror bs, t , ee. jo ret pn

OS OC EE TER = A owe oa.

The death of
Charles the 9th
of F;an0e.

The Sijcur de
Montluc ate
tends the

Queen ro
Lyons,

Henry the 3d,
of France, and
King of Po-
land rerurns
into Fraxce,

I

The Sieur de
Montluc crea-
ted Mareſchal
of France.

= The Commentaries of Meſfire Blaize Book Vit

Gaſcony to Monſiear de 1a Yalette, and that on the other fide ro Monſieur de Lofſe, This
was a very great miſtake in the Kings Council ; and more eſpecially in the Queen, who
would again divide it into three parts, to give one to Monſieur de Gramont. Twas pitty
that ſo many wiſe head-pieces had not taken notice what inconveniences had already
accyn'd by gwing ſo much power to Monkear d' Anville before, by reaſon of the little in-
celligence there had been betwixt him and me, of which I have elſewhere given an account g
and ſeeing all the forces of the whole Province, under one head, had enough ro do to
cauſe the King to be obcy*'d, what was to be expected from them, when ſeparated, and
under ſeveral mens Commands? This ſows jealoufie and diſſention amongſt them, which
in the end grows to abſolute breach ; and all ar the expence of the King and his people.
The «fieRts ſoon difcover'd themſelves; for Monſieur de Lofſe undertook the Siege of {le-
rac, 2 paltry Town, that had never dar'd to ſhut her Gates againſt me 5 where Monſieur
de la Valette was alſo preſent, but it was only in the quality of a Tooker on ; where in the
end he did nothing worth ſpeaking of ; neither indeed am [I at all concerw'd in char af-
fair; ſo that whar I (ay is only to enform che King, that to be well ſerv'd he onght never to
divide a Government, but commit it entire to one Liencenant only, His Kingdom 15 wide
enoueh to ſatisfie the ambition of choſe who are greedy of Employmentrs ; and, with his
Majcſties pardon, they ought to ſtay their time, there will be enough for all.

Some time afrer we heard ſo many ſtrange chings, that me-thought I ſaw the Enterpri-
zes of Amboiſe again on foot ; for they ralkr of prodigious things, and ſuch as I ſhould
never have believ'd, if all was true that was ſ{ajd 5 which whether ic was or no, I leave to
others to examine. A little while after, news came of the Kings being fick, and of ſeyeral
great perſons at Court being committed to priſon, which made me think my ſelf happy thar
1] was (o far off; for a man is often trapr when he leaſt expeRs it, and when he knows no
reaſon why, In the end of all, news came of the death of the King, which was 1n truth a
very gieat blow to the Kingdom : for I dare be bold to ſay, that had heliv'd he would
have Gone great things, and to his Neighbour's coſt would have remoy'd the Scene of War
ont of his own Kingdom, Wherein if the King of Poland would have joyn'd with him,
and have ſer on foor the great Forces he had been avle to have rajs?d in his Kingdom » all
would have bowed betore them , and the Empire would again have been reſtor'd co che
Houſe of France. His death did very much afſtoniſh us, by reaſon of the great deſigns
he had, as it was ſaid, inthe Kingdom, and I do believe the Queen never found her (elf
in fo great a perplexity ſince the death of the King her Husband my good Maſter.

Her Majeſty did me the honor to write tome, and to entrear me co affiſt her in hex
ercat affliction, and to preſerve the State till the coming of the King her Son. Wherefore
ro gratifie her Majcſties deſire, though I was overburdn'd with years and infirmity, as alſo
to divert my own grief for the death of my Son, and eſpecially ro manifeſt ro her the defire
I had to keep the promiſe T had made to her at Orleans3 I went to Paris to receive her
Majcſtics Commands, and from thence attended her to Lyons, where I had the oppor-
unity of diſcourſing with her at large concerning ſeveral things which I have fince ſeen
diſcover themſelves ncarer at hand, and which it will be a great work in her to redreſs,

The King being recurn'd, they made him commit a very great error, at his firſt footing
in the Kingdom ; tor inſtead of compoking all differences and diforders in the State, and
eſtabliſhing peace and tranquility amongſt us, which ar that time had been a very eafic
matter codo ; they perſwaded him to reſolve upon a War, And they yer perſwaded him
ro a greater inconvenience, for they made him believe, that encring into Danphine all places
would immediacely {urrender to him , whereas notwithſtanding he found , that every
paltry Garriſon made head againſt him : bur I have nothing to do to give an accounc
of thoſe rranſa&tions. At his coming he was pleafcd to be exceedingly gracious and kind
to me; and yer he was not foto all; and indeed I obferv'd him to be much alter'd in his
humor, from whar he was wont tobe. There were there ſome publick Councils held, buc
there were alſo others chat were private and very cloſcly carrie.

Now his Majeſty calling to mind the ſervices I had done for the Kings his Grandfather,
Father, and Brother ; ſome of which he had heard of, and others had himſelf alſo ſeen,
he was refolv'd ro honor me with the Eſtate of Mareichal of France, and ro make me rich
in honor, fince he could nor do 1c in matter of wealth and eſtate. Having therefore caus'
me to be call'd for, and being come, to kneel down before him, after I had taken che Oath,
he put the Mareſchal's S:affe into my hand : Which having done, in returning my moſt
humble thanks, I cold him, That 1 had no other grief in this world, but that I had not ten
goed. years in my belly, wherein to manifeſ# how much 1 deſir'd to be ſerviceable to bis Majeſty
and (own in that honorable Command. Having receiv'd his Commands, and thoſe of che
Queen, Ireturn'd into Gaſcony to make preparation for war, for all things tended char

way :

Book VII. de Montluc, Mar efchal of France. a

way : but I very well perceiv'd by the rediouſneſs of my Journey, that I was rather co
think of dying my felf, than of killing others : for T was no more able co endure long
ourmes, nor to undergo any great labour. And moreover I very well forefaw, that the
ſame would happen berwixr the Kings Lieutenants and me, that had hapned before berwixt
me and the Mareſchal d'« Awville. | RE FH
Sometime afcer the Parliament of Bowrdeanx writ me a Letter, that the Hugonots were
playirlg prancks upon the River Dordogne, that ſome courſe muſt be taken with them, and
that therefore they entreared me to x5 a liccle nearer cochemy that ſome order might
be taken to prevent chem from proceeding to greater miſchicf. I hereupon accordingly
came to la Reofle , where Preſident Neſmond, to whom I was totally a ſtranger , Meſtieurs
de Merville, de Monferran, and de Gourgues came to meet me, and chere propos'd to me
a great many things. 1 was nor to ſeek in my anſwer, neither did I want ſufficient excuſes,
parcicularly that ſome promiſcs that had been made me had not been made good z ro which
I alſo remonſtrated to them my Age and indiſpoſitionz and moreover the ſaid Sieurs de {
Merville and de Monferr in coming to my bed-fide, I ſhew*d them my wounds, acquaint-
ing them withal wich che Oath I had made never more to bear arms ; bur in the end I

could nor deny them, and chey made me. break my Oach. They being then recurn'd to | os
make preparation for the atracquing of Genſac, I went thicher. Preſently afrer Monſieur =

de Monferran brought a brave Troop of Gentlemen out of his Government, (as alſo ſeve- #
ral others came in trom other paris) rogether with a conſiderable number of foot , ſo thac (
we carried the Suburbs and che Barricado?s at the very firſt aſſault. Meſſicurs de Duras, bi
dela Marques and dela Deveſe, there went on in their Donblers only, with their Swords |
in cheir hands up co the very Gates of the City, which was very madly done of them, for j'
che Harquebuze ſho flew very chick; but they did it in emulation of one another, and |
to ſhew that they were men without fear : but(as ill fortune would have it) Monſieur de Monficur de h
&Monferran receiv'd a Harqueburze ſhot quite through the body, of which he died ; which Mozferren b
was great pity, for he wasa Gentleman of extraordinary valour, and mightily beloy'd *997 ff
of the Country, which will find a great miſs of him.. [-

The Enemy ſeeing themſelves coopt in after this manner, and the Canon ready to play, _ þ
ſent our a great Rogue, whom they call'd Captain * Tonnelliey, but a very good Soldier, * Or Cooper. i
as it was ſaid, who capiculated and ſurrendred the place 3 in which Monſieur de Ranſan,
Brother co Monſieur de Duras, was placed Governor. I muſt now give an account of an
accident that befel me ar this Siege , which had never hapned ro me before. Aﬀeer the

death of Monficur de 2onferran I thought fic to diſpoſe of the Command he had in the | £1}

Army to Monkiear de Daras, conceiving that he being a Gentleman of ſo good a Family,

as he was, he would be very well accepted by all : bur every one was not well pleaſed with TT

my choice. From which another miſchief alſo aroſe, which was, I was told, chac the The Gentle=

Gentlemen who were come along with theſe Meſſteurs, to ſerve me upon this occaſion, high- men diſcon=
ly complained of ſome words which Thad ſpoken of chem) as falſe as the Devil himſelf, tenred,

The words were unhandſome and dirty, for which reaſon I will nor blot my paper wich |
chem ; buc they wereall in ſo high a mutiny upon it, char they were ready to mount to
horſe, and leave me engag'd with the Canon. I therefore ſenc to entreat chem co do me

the favour as to take the field bertimes in che morning, where I had ſomething to fay to
them ; which accordingly they did. I was fo early thac I went by Torch light, ſo impa-
cient I was to eaſe my heart 5; where the Gentlemen being all drawn round about me, wich

my hatin my hand, I ſpake tothem to this effeRt.

Gentlemen, _ | _ | | | .
" Þ is now many years that many of you have known me, having borh arms under my The Sieur de.
« | Command, both in our own domeſtick troubles of Gaijenne, as alſo abroad in for- SO _
« reign Countries : others alſo that are here preſent, I make no queſtion, have heard calk on | Au a is

& of me, of my chollerick diſpoſition and haſty humour z bucl aflure my ſelf nor one of muciny,

& you, as many as you are, ever knew, orever heard, thar I was of a derraCtive or an 1n- | fil;

&« ;uriousnature ; and although I am not without my faults, yer have I never been guilty. |
& of char, How comes it then to paſs, that you have done me the wrong to believe char |

& T ſhould be fo indifcreer as to ſpeak of you wich ſuch contempr, as Iam cold has been | i
* reported to you? Believe me I am fo far from being guilcy of ſuch an injury to you who /
[

« xre Gentlemen, char I would not have oben ſuch a word of the meaneſt- Soldier in
« the Arniy. I have ever lov'd and honour'd che Gentry,tor under God ic is they who have

* help*c me to chat honor and reputation I have acquir*d amongſt men; You know very ' }
£ well, Genrlemen) that in che qualicy I now ſtand I am our of Combat, and cherefore
& ſhall nor give che lye to any ; bur I do affure you iris nothing ſo, and thac I never ur-
red

—— 4
—_ -

an

l

*

4 Y

% ©

A

5
'T
[

\

i

404

= The Commentaries of Meſſire Blaize Boox VI

© rer'd ſuch a ſyllable; neither wo.ld IT have done it for the world. Methinks at this
© ape, and after having ſcen ſo much as I have done, I ſhould know what ir is to live in the
*world, and be careful of offending ſo many perſons of honor, and Gentlemen of good
© and noble Families, Now (Gentlemen) I have underſtood the reſolution you have ta-
&© ken to retire to your own houſes, for which T am very ſorry ; as alſo that you diſlike
* the nomination I have made of Monſieur de Daras, Wherein I ſhall ſo far comply
*« with your fſatisfattion, as not to impoſe him npon you contrary to your liking, and
*ſreing you are diſlatisfied with my choice ſhall no more namehim co yon. His Majeſty
*©{hall appoint ſome other in the place of thelate Monſieur de Monferran, whom I lamenc
* from my ſoul, In the mean time, Gentlemen, do not deny me this one favour ar leaſt,
* to conwy the Canon to ſome place of ſafeiy ; which if you ſhall nor think fit to do
'* for my ſake, who have ſo many years been your Leader and Caprain, yet do it for the

* zftection and ſervice you owe to the King your Lord and .Soveraign. As for my own

* part, I will alſo go retire ro my own houſe; for my age, my wounds, and other in-

* firmiries will no longer permit me to bear arms, nor to undergo the labours requir'd

* in war. Loveme alwayes I beſcech you, and remember your old Captain and feltow =
& Soaldicr.

This Remonſtrance of mine gave ſatisfaRion to all, inſomuch thar they all told me
with one voice , that in truth this ſtory had given them very pret «ff nee, it being reported
to them by one that carried the name of a Gentleman : but chey now believ'd nothing of it,
that they were my ſervants, and ready not on!y to convoy the Canon, bui aiſo to follow me
wherever I would ple;ſe to command them. 1 thought fir ro comnnic this paſſage to wri-
ting, to the end that thoſe who follow after may learn how to behave themſclves upon
the lixe occaſion, Had I npoa the inſtant known the man that had raiſed rhis fine
report of me, I doubt I ſhould have ſhew?d him a ſcurvy trick : bur the Canon was car=
ried back, which they attended till they ſaw it lodg*d in ſafery, and ſo we took leave of
one another, and departed every man to his own home.

I had nor been long at my own houſe before Thad every day very ſtrange news brought
me from Court, and of great deſigns that were laid by the greateſt men of the Kingdom:
buc when I heard that che King of Nav.rre made one amongſt them, and was ſtoln a-
way from Court without taking his leave, 1 from that crime forward concluded that Gaj-
enne Was again to ſuffer many miſeries ; for that he being a great Prince, young, and who
gave viſible hopes of being one day a great Captain, would cafily gain the hearts of the
Nobleſs and the People, and would keep the reſt in awe. So God help me a chouſand
miſchicfs were eternally before my eyes, fo that T was often in mind to withdraw my {elf
ro avoid the affliction of hearing ſo continual ill news, and of ſeeing the ruine of my na-
tive Country, To which end a certain Priory was evermore running in my head, that [
had formerly ſcen ſituated in the mopntains, part in France, and partin Spajn, calld
S-rracoliz to which place T had ſome thoughts of retiring my (elf out of the Tamulc of

the world, I might thicre ar once have {cen both France and Spain z and it God lend me
lite, I know not yer what I may dp,

The End ef the Seventh and laſt Book of the Commentaries
of Meſſire Blaize de Montluc HMareſchal
of France.

__ -  CEECEET _
?

—_— — __

BLASII MONLUCI
FRANCIZE MARESGHALLI
TUMULUS,

Iliadis rurſfum naſcatur conditor altz.
Hoc tumulo rurſum conditur A acides.

FLOR RE MONDVUS Senat. Burdigal.

_—

Quzris qui fiem? MoNnLucius Nomini
meo ſatis eſt nomen,.
 Conjugi conjux.

FG

\

ONLUCIUM bec urna tegit. Cujus varios caſus , terra marique exhantlatos labyres
Gala teftabitur, boſtes predicabunt, poſteri mirabuntur. Urbium propugnator, oppngua>
tor, Hoſtes ſepins fudi, vict, ſubegi- Patriam in ſua viſcera verſam quoties reftitui > Imis
fundus, maxima conſecutus. | Terrarum orbem fama complexits. Patis urgentibus Iubens

& integerrima mente ceſſts

Avo, Patri Filius, Nepos Blaſius Monlkcius | he
P;

Erum bumanarum vices quis non miretur ? feſtinantibus Pater fatis , tardantibus Avus in celun
| receptius. Ille ferro, bic morho. Tlle in inſulis Oceant Atlantici, bic in Gallia, hominibus exemptus.
Ile me unicum, vix primos edentem vagitus ſuperſtitem reluquit. Hic tres liberos Galiice florem nobilitatis,
tris Martis pignora, vivens amiſit & eluxit. Uterque bellum & lituos ſplrans. At juventus patris ſeda-
tior, ſenefus avi prefervidior. Ex equo tamen eadem utrique gloria. Ore facundus , corde catus, mayy

prompins, malitibus pariter uterque gratus, militarem veterum ducum adoream triumphalibus laureis uterque +

_ ſupergreſſus. Avus nunquam vidius, pater etiam moriens boſtium vicior extittt. Aalucete filio & nepoti veſtro
virtutis egregiam face ſantiſſime & fortiſime anime , mvicta avia pietats columing ; & me. veſtigia
per veſtra euntem ad eternum ſtirpis nominiſque noſtri decus tot inter rerum caligines, & errorum flexus, iti-
were inoffeuſo perducite.

EIS AAMIIPOTATON KAI TON ANAPEIOTATON TON
Kearay BAdooy + Moyauzov. *Emmmaquoy, :

Aus @, Paulo Te, 8 wpbOr forte ops "Eggs If 2} dgenlu x; 7 xxG- Seaviunnus

"HydgiQey Katonp, Karonps md BegTui. .Oudt T9 die), ame) de aidVs.

Taxmus T Imiailo Tt xz EQvi& 100ps mg: | Domus d\ 1914s 41d) aewerma s  Aenc,

Gy Moyasx©- s F avng ll & xmiley; ane Occ, | *OvI©&r Eyuy mn Wegs xg] Says MeanGe. ;
| ” > Ao, on : ETepar©- 0 Mayiandos.
TsTwusP & Ea ws Moniu©- eydade x6) Eis Þ aumW.

"Oui wagar waly T 5d? begyor fx. Tir] 0p8\0s mA usvre Gran AVI ua gd yes
call. AA _ Kai ations ant fuer "Aez©- x 2 alag
"Eye de Moyatie ways Aciava x9), Nu »d *Aeni gia MoyAtxa@- ou; & m9 Mey
 *O; mnagdemas dedls, wdlu Kunnlwis d gw. Toy 5 mauYXovts yiea@ nes voor,
*Ewaysja 6 MiggzNQr © voams of Bre- | Hru maydiudmoe KayvC7 , "Agzos by dgeior,

»

Shanko Yaeuorag BerdUThs, ESNK. ; Kat 7O0AU Poupatug eCUTECY IJp:milyy. :
'Ers 7 awmoy. | AN age FY 0 TE Kegve Juwrawioy xpaTrion;s

"Ev moAbuworre 2s WOLSTNCS 3a. Ss 164) Þard)uoy aydpa ues vero) erd Fre92.
Sau JS meum@ mp Mpy Karte. * © Iweyys 5 Teuwyt Cr emunct _
"20 TOMBEAU

(.

> > C
WT. IS. 4

armani ge, Y
_ ” - —_— -
——

29

-

&

Þ

":
£
by”
Fl

»

$4694
—_—

oo — RT LE
|

Tombeau de

M. B. de Montluc.

ew

Tombeau de Meflire Blaiſe de
Montluc,

FOE Marbreicy (paſſant ) le grand Montluc enſerre,|

4 Un tel homme que Iuy, dedans i pen. de terre

Ne peut eſtre compris : ce tombeau laboure
Cloſt ſeulement ſon corps, dont it eft honore.

Mais juge par ſa mort, le dominaze & la perte,
Due la Gaſcongne af ait depuis veufue E deſerte.
Et franc de paſſion , voy comme le laurier
Cetgnant ſo* front rec-ut bouneur de ce guerricy,

Ce grand guerrier qui fat 11 garde de ſon Prince,
Le ſouſitten & Pappuy de toute la provinces
Oz lieutenant de Roy & c1 guerre & en paix
Teſmoins de [a vertu , il fit tant de boaus faits,
Oil alaiſſe mourant ce bean doute a tout aaze
Duel des denx il eſtoit plus vaillant ou plus ſage.
Ex bataille: rangee, il deffit par trois fois
L'ennemy de ſen Roy, al yemat ſous ſes loix
La Gnyenne revoltee aux fations civiles.

Par force il emporta, @ print clnguanie villes,
Le primier a Faſſaut en temoignant la foy
UN avoit a ſun Dieu, qu 1 avoit a ſon Roy.

Par degrez i acquift d'une honoravle peine
Toms les tiltres dhonneur, de ſold t, capitaine,
Colonel, Lieutenant, Vice-Roy, Mareſchal.

Et touſionrs commandant, 4 ſoy toufiours efgal,
Dedans ſoy retenant ſous egale balance.

La vaillance a Ajax, de Neſtor Peloquence,

De Fbomme plus couard ul animoit le caur :

Et at plus couragenx faiſoit venir la penr

A ſaſeule parole, a ſa ſeule preſence.

Il fut chaud & atlif, remply de vigilance

Em tout il ſe monſtra, & par tout invaincu,

Et we ſcent oc vainqueur que ceſt deſtre vaincn,
O+ fut-ce par la force, ou par Ia courtoiſie,

Tart 11 avoit d'\hozneur ſa belle ame ſaiſte.

L' halie le ſcait, 0 de ſon brave canr.

Mainte marque il laifſa, © courtois & vatnquenre
Et le ſcait, F Angleterre, & Ia France & PEſpage,
Et cette nation, que | onde du Rhin baigue.
Brave Sil euft voulu de invincible mort

T leaſt encore pen faire languir Peffort.

Mais voyant la veriu faire place a Fenvie :
L'houneur a la faveur, il deſdaigna la vie

Et defira mourir au monde vitieux,

Ponr aller immortel vivre dedans les cieux.

O vous, de qui iamais I amitic #e varie
Pleurez-le ſes amis, vous mirant 61 ſa vice
Vous laſches envieux guidez, d un autre ſort,
Plearez enſeublement, &* ſa vie & ſa mort.

Sa vie vous ofta tout Fhonucur & la glare,

Et ſa mort vous ravit Pcſpoir de la vitoire,

Ayant ſi bien ſceu vivre, & encore mienx mourir-
C'eſt & Iny diſormais a qui faut recourir

Pour le patron des deux, afin qu'on y contemple

De bellevie & mort un aamirable exemple-

Heurenx trois fois Montloc, qui vivant fi longs Jours,
ls eu pour compagnonry avecque toy touſiours

Et Pheur & la vertu : & qui maugre Penvie, |
Vois d'un los immortel ta memoire ſuivie.

Sur le Tombeau de ſon cocur.

Try de Montluc vainqueur
Ejt eaclos Ie brave caur.
Ou pluſtoſt affermer Yoſe
Sil eft icy tout entier,
Car tout ce caur grand guerrier

. Eſtoit, & 104 antre choſe,

Siſte Hoſpes , & perlege. Magnus ille Monlucius
hic jacet & quieſcit mortuus, qui vivens nu(-
quam quieſcere poterat. Hzc te (cire volcbam,
quandoquidem 11lud poſtremum per me ut (ci-

res ipſemet voluit, morienſque commendavit.
Abi, & bene precare.

I, di Che Eveſque de Condom

Epitaphe de Blaiſe de Montluc Ma-
reſchal de France, & de M. An-
toine, Pierre, & Fabien ſes enfans.

{- Eluy ſe plaint en vain qui dit que notre vie,

4 (Theatre infortune de mainte Tragedie )

Ejt ſerve du deſtin : que le laſche & le fort

Peſle-meſle ſans chois ſont ravis dela mort.

Aingois que de Pluton la chartre tenebreuſe

Va pluſtoſt devorant une ame genereuſe

© me celle qui moifit Fun languiſſant ſeiour

Dans ſon corps inutle, & mange en vain le jour,
Un jonr du vertnenx vainc une lougue vie

De celuy qui Ia paſſe aux vices aſſervie.
Us adte valeureux eſt Fembelliſſement
Du tableau de la vie, & luy ſert Pornement,
Ores qu'il fait tout ſcul, & ne pert point ſa grace
Lors que la mort le vif de nos conlenrs efface.
T bonuore plus 4 Appelle une ligne, un ſeul trait,
Re le labeur entier d'un vilgaire pourtrait.
C'eſt le fait d'un grand maiſtre a bien tirer ſa vie
Et la'rendre Phounenr de tout point accomplie.
L'anvre artiſtement fait garde ſes liaiſons.
Sa grace, ſa beaute, & ſes proportions :
Le temps ne deſtaint point ſon raicuniſſant luſtre,
Ains contre ſes efforts il ſe rend plus illuftre :
De Findofie tableau Ia honte & lemepris,
Et une obſcure mort en eſt ſeule le pris,

C'eſt un fait Atlantee, eſtre endoſſe d auntes,
Dui ne les fait marcher d'honneur accompagnees.
L bonneur de la vieilleſſe eſt Peſtaugonnement,
Ceft ſon fonds, eſt ſon champ, eſt ſon propre element :
Cet aage eſt un tom eau ſans la' elle Iumiere
De Ia vert, qui doit Iny eſtre familicre.
Celuy qui maiſtriſe Pappetits hantes
Se precipite au ſein des fauſſes voluptcs
Eft ſous Feſcorce humaine une idolle mouvante.
Non homme, ains ſeulement ſa peinture vivante.
Noſtre vie eſt un ſonge, une ombre decevant 3

Ceſt un nuage vain pouſſe au gre du vent,

Ve

 Tomqeau de M. B, de Montluc.

Une fueille d' Autone a 1a premiere haleine

Des Aquilons que doit Cabbattre ſur 1a plaine.

© me Fon ſoit done d'bonneur, non des ans envieax :
Me Fils nous ſont donnes de la faveur des cienx,

Il les faut ſoulever d'une vivante gloire,

Dont la Parque ne puiſſe arracher la memoire :

Comme a fait ce Montluc, Montluc ce grand gucrricy,

#1 honore ſon front d'un belliquenux Laurier,
Er de Palmes ſa main, palmes wviforicuſes
Le ſignal verdoyant des armes glorieuſes.
Feſt ce Montluc, qui fut aux combats nomparetl,
Le plus prompt 4 Veſpee, le plus ſage on conjcil,
Capitaine mvincible. ayant ſous ſes banmere i
Rompu cent > cent fois mille bandes ouerricres.

Son bercean fut Gaſcongne, ou les peuples ardans
Naiſſent, meurent ſoldats, & dependent leurs ans :
Tadomptables, hautains 4 ſecourty leurs Princes,

Et replanter les bords de lenrs belles Provinces.

Il eftos deſcends dayeuls braves & farts,
Praticgs en toute guerres Cntreprenants, accorts,
Eſchauffez d'un beau ſang & une noble exvie
Ou de vaincre aux combats, ou d'y verſer la vie,

Le los de nos ayeuls va notre cxrnr banſſant,
Ainſi de Ia vertude ſon pere ſe ſent
Le ieune Lyonnean, qui Ja defia menace
De ſes ongles tranchans des fiers taureaux Paudace.

[aigle a grand peine eſclos de ſon lit maternel

Oze attaquer des cerfs le peuple au pied iſnel :
It afſant des dragons Fengeance venimeuſe
Ee eſchange ſa vie en mort vidtorienſe,

Ainſi ce chevalier avant que Ia ſaiſon

Lny friſoſt ſur la ioue une creſpe toiſon
Eſpoingonne d'honneur, i voulut chaud aprendre
Fier de cur & de mains en ſa ieuneſſe tendre

Le meftier de Belloxe, ayant devant ſes yeux

De ſes preus devanciers les geſtes glorienx,

Eien toſt on 5 appercent que / 4 vert# cogneiics

$2 vaillance aux dangers, ſa prudence cheſn;ic
Aux aff aires doubteux volott devant ſes aus

Tune ſoldat ja vieux de geſtes triomphans.

Comme Pon void la uni ala robe «toillee

ui 'a point ſa clarte de nuage voilee
Des chetifs journaliers affublant les travanx
Et d'un profond repos adouciſſaitt leurs maux
Ardente eſtinceler de mille flammes vives,

Due Thetys a leve dans le frais de ſes rives,
Entre toutes blucte un fe plus radienx,
Horrible, perruque qui menaſſe | es cieux,
Ou menaſſe la mer &* I4 terre 4 orage :
Ainſfi du grand Montluc le Martial courage
Terrible flamboysit entre tous les ſoldats
AFif, laborieux, vray champion de Mars.
La Toſcane en trembloit, la ſaperbe Ttalie,
Angleterre, Piedmont. Fland 728, la Cermanie,
Sa grand” picque en ſa main guide des battaillons
Eftoit I horreur, frayeur des peuples Bourguignons,
Sons les feits ondoyans de l acicr de ſa targe

Le Fran ois 2ros de caur ne crainnoit point la charge

Pe Parrogante Eſpagne, ayant plus cher mourir
Et vair ſon eſtomac d'un conp mortel ouvrir
©e recevoir le froid d'une peur palliſante,
Corlpable des bonyeur d'une ame peu vaillante.

—_—__——

Oil ſembloit Ja tenir la viftoire en la maiy.
1! 2 y a point d honneur ny tiltre militaire,
Dont ne Pait ennobly, non la favenr proſpere
De fortune, mais bien ſa famenſe valeur,
Qi a tonfiours vaincu des armes le mal-heuy :
Ayant e cur plus grand non que Mareſchauſſees,
Gouvernemens, grandeurs & la foule entaſſees,
Ains plus grand qu*un Empire, & nt pour commander

Depmss le ſtot Indois juſi 4 P Angloiſe mer,

; Poſez, moy un Coloſſe aut bas de Ia campagne
I! eſt toutesfois grand : un Nain ſur 13 montagne
E/t tontesfois petit : ainſi Pindignite .

D'un homme bas &* vil monſtre ſa laſchets

| Buoy que bauſſe d*honneurs, & que lamain royale

De biens &- de grandeurs luy ſoit trop liberale.
Depuis quand le Frangoiſe diviſe en deux parts

Fit floter contre ſoy ſes propres eftendars,

Et que Mars tout ſanglant, & ladiſcorde irte

Trainott ceſte couronne en pieces deſchiree,

Grand Alcide Gaulois il ramaſſa le bris :

Mille fois Ia campagne il ioncha d'ennemis,

Et vaingueur abbatit ſous le fer deſilance

De I beretique errcur I'outragenſe licence,

Hardy, determine, indomte, valeurenx, =.

Et Fexemple immertel des failis chevaleurenx.
Mais qui pourroit conter ſes guerres terminecs,

Eſcarmonches, aſſauts, & battailles dountes.,

Murs prins & defendus, celuy pourra nombrer

Les eſtozles des cieux, Of les flits de lamer

—_—_———

| Lay ſeul eſcrire a peu digne de ceſte gloire

De ſes divers travaux une immortelle hiſtoire,
Luy un ſecond Ceſar, le ſpavant eſcrivain

| Des exploits achevez, par ſa vaillante main.

Non autrement qu un cheſne orgueilleux de trophees
Ses armes reluiſoient de lauriers etoffees,

Ayant touſiours fait voir par le glaive pointu

Out eftoit impoſſible &abattre ſa vert

Sz bien que le Dieu Mars or quil portaſt envie

Gros de rage & deſpit auxgeſtes de ſa vie,

N'a iamais entrepris dedans leſt our ſanglant

Sur la poudre-adenter ce Tydide vaillant.

Dont epoin@ de furcur & boiiillant de colere,

A meurtry coup ſur coup en leuy fleuy printaniere
Trois freres, ſes trois fils, trois Achilles Francois,
Trois Scipions nouveaux flambans ſous les barnois,
Comme I aſtre iumeau qui ſauve dt tempeſte

Du matelot ja prift a naufrager la teſte. |
| Ces vieux Heros deGrece, & ſes foudres Romains
N euſſent paſſe Fhonneur des trois freres germains,
Sz leur forte vigueur aux armes fi bien nee

Em leur tendre bourgeon n'enſt efte moiſſunnee- |
Comme on void trois beaux lis quid'un luſtre pareil
Des byutonnent leur robe auxroyons du ſalei!

Oz trois beaux Hyacints d la face vermcille,

 Epanir les threſors de leur vifue merveille,

Le ciel Sen refiouit, & verſe ſur ſes fleurs
Les larmes dont Pamurore argente leurs couleurs :
Mais le coutre trenchant oi: le greflenx orage
Les cel:ſtes honneurs de leurs beautez ſaccages
Le deſtin nous monſtra puis @ ſaudain reppis

Ces trois freres a ſoy du terreſtre pourpris.
|

Craigniez

Sor fol gerdrendar llama

«an ere OG IIS ie AAS An -
x

ant 2s
- b —— , RS "Is - __ , :

. 7 T —_—_— Be; . —_—
— — D—— at ooo pen ry ng ye Y

EE

—_— Ee nv ee 25a PF »- »+£56Þ 4

ARES —— ena ak amne EDS ON
%

—_—

Tombeau & M. B, de Montluc.

Graigniez vous que ſous eux la Frangoiſe vaillance
Fit ployey ( 0 bens Dieux) du monde Ia puiſſance ?
Celny qui fit broncher le Macedonien,

Qui fit pomper ſon char du ſang Emathien,

Vid d'tm ail aſſcure, baut reveſtu de gloire,

La mort de ſes deux fil s aſſieger ſa vifoire,

De meſme ( 0 grand Montlnc heurte d'un tel malheur
On ne te vid 1amais foible ſous la doulenr :

Ferme comme un rocher dedans la mer profonde,

Lequel plus eft batu plus ſe mocque de Vonde.

Tu defſeignois encor les combats retenter

Duand la fienrenſe mort vint au lie} te donter.
Tel eſt le fier torrent des affaires hamanes

Du fail & puis deffailt toutes choſes mondaines :
Nous mourons en naiſſant, & mainte-fois au bord
De ceſte freſle vie on eſt pris de 12 mort :

Mais heureux qui a peu plein d honnewrs & Pannees

Attendre de pied toy les fiercs deſtinees,

©u a ven pres de ſoy ſans tamais £esbranler

Puiſſances, Royantez, Empires chanceler :

Oni apeu ſans frayeur voir fondre ſur ſa teſte

Des grands eſclats du ciel la bruante tempeſice

Tel fut ce Chevalier, auquel oncques Ia peur

Par aucun accident ne fit tomber le caur,

Ayant beureuſement vaincu Mars & Penvie

© ut voyort de travers la fplendenr de ſa vie :

Ayant veu retourner deux fois quarante Eſtezs

Aſſailly, combattu de mille adverſites :

Mais compris en ſoy-meſme, il eſpointoit 1a fleſche

Dont le malheur pouvoit a ſon los faire breſche.
Vous (on fils, bhonorez, du pere & des enfans

Le Tombean non de pleurs, mais de chars triomphans

Gemiſſans ſors le fais des deſpouilles vaiucuts,

Piſtolets, contelats, picques, lances, maſſes,

Morions, gantelets, braſſars, cuiſſots perces ,

Panaches tous ſanglaus. corcelets enfonees,

Phifres, tambours, guiaons fanfares de trompertes«

Enſeignes, eftandars, & lancieres cornettes,

Marques ae leur proveſſe, & dignes monumens

De ces quatre guerriers, les premiers de leurs temps,

Leſyuels ores la bart de Ia voute doree

Feront trembler d eſclairs leur ſalade timbree

Foudroyans Encelade, & l'orgueil furienx

Des Geans qui encor Sarment contre les Cieuxs

ALI1UD.

Jgnavi Pario querant in marmore vitam,
Qucis vitx tantum {pes jacct in tumulo :

Hec gcfhi ut mutos liceat contemnere teſtes,
PraxiteJifve manus, (cu Polyclete tuas.

Nec vatum ſcriptis mea buſta inciſa legantur,
Funditus extindtos hic tueatur honos.

Sic {cripſi, ut poſlint vates nil addere, nobis
XKternum ingenio ſuppeditante decus.”

Sed ne forte meum longinquo ex orbe profectus
Uc redeat viſo pretercat tumulum

Extremi nomen ſculpatur margine ſaxi
Hoc fatis eft : populis c#tera fama canct.

Sic olim qui Alpes, Italas qui fregerat arces,
Scribi unum hoc juſlit, Annibal hic fitus eſt.

Faciebat Godofridus Malvinus Regis, Burdigal e
Senator, anno 1577+

Epitaphe de Mefhre Blaiſe de Mont-
luc, Mareſchal de France.

'S; giſt le grand Montluc, duquel Ia renommee

| Pay mille cors divers ,

Embouchez hautement, a la gloire ſemee
Au champ de Punvers. |

Montluc, qui de ſon nom comme vn foudre de guerre

| Eftonua mille fois

LTralie, Le Piedmont, I Efpagne, & PAngleterre
Et le mutin Frangois.

De ces peuples domptez ayant ame eſchauffee

D'mn defir glorieux,

| Deſpoitille ſur deſpoiille, 31 dreſſa maint trophte
Toufiours viftorieux.

Mais la mort, qui demain doit trancher noſtre vie
Ou peut eſtre aujourd buy,

Le triomphe enviant de ſon hewrenſe vie
Triomphe ores deluy.

He que c'eſt peu de cas que des choſes mondaines:
Cen eft rien que du vent-

Car tout ainſi qu'on void qu elles naiſſent ſoudaines :
S en vont ſoudainement«

N agueres ce Montluc fat honueur de ſon aage
Va Alcide nouneau. |

Apres tant detravaux pour ſon dernier partage
[Il n'a que ce tombeau.

Lieutexances, eſtats, ordres, mareſchauſſees,
Ny lots, ay dignitez;

Ny honneurs, uy grandeurs, I'une @I autre entaſſees,
Ny lauriers merites;

N'avoient rendu content ſoneſprit plein d'envie
De plus outre tanter.

( Iamai#s un brave ceur cependant qu'il a vie

Ne ſe peut contenter )

| Ores il eſt contayt avec /*x pieds de terre
Partage egal a tous:

Car autant en emporte un chetif beche-terre
De le plus grand de noms

Sa gloire ſenlement apres luy nons demenre
Glorre qui ne meurt Pas-

Car la vertu tamais eucor que le corps menre
NPſt ſubjette au trepas-

Encor eſt fraiſche en nous d' Annibal la memoire;

| Encor vivent les faits

| Des $cipions, Catons & Ceſars, dont la gloire

Ne perira zamais.

Ainſi apres cent ans de vie al ne now reſte
Rien exempt du deſtin

Due le ſenle wertu : car toft ou tard le reſte
Eft conduit a ſa fins \

Repoſe done en paix 0 ame genereuſe,
FHonneur de FUnivers

Cependant que pleureus ſur ta tombe poudrenſe
le graveray ces vers.

Montluc comble d*honneurs de grandeurs & d'an-
Et de gloire charge - (nees

Atant ſervi cingq Rois fut par Jes deftinees.

Sous ce tombeau loge,

ALTUD.

Tombeau de M. B. de Montluc.

 _— _—_—

AL1uD.

Ne mip: pro tumulo ſaxorum attollite molem,
 Grandia nec titulis ſaxa notate me.
Verſe belly acies, quaſſataque mania, gentes
Edomite, nobis fint tumuli, @& tituli.
| Flor. Remondus Secnat.

Burdig.
ALIUD.

Sta Monlucius jacet ſub urna

Franciorum cquitum unus cx magiſtris,
Quo nemo melins ferire punctim,
Quo nemo melins terire c#{im
Vel pedes, vel eques valebit unquam.
Pellzum hic juvcnem, ſcncm Camillum,
Claros Scipiadas, ducernque laſcum.
Et duces veteres fuere quotquot
Bellandi docuiflet unus artem,
Vincendi docuiflet unus artem.
Mavors ſcilicet, & {oror flagello
Clara ſanguineo, Minerva, Apollo,
Ornnes denique di1, dezque, quos nos
Bellis impcritare luſpicamur,
Maximo ſiudio, improbo labore,
Scireilli dederant locare cafira,
Obſervare diem, locumque pugne,
Armatorum aciem ordinare, firmis
Ipſam {ubſidiis fovere, ſemper
Hoſiium infidias cavere, (pe
Hoſes infidiis necarc, nulla
Non cibaria militi expedire,
Torpeſcentia corda militantum,
Forti & compta animare concione,
EKſtuantia, dulcibus, {cveris,
Permulcere, vel increpare verbis
Munia omnia militis, duciſque
Excqui intrepide, ut frequens pudorem
Tantis incuteret ſu1s Magiſtris.
Noſter Monlucius deorum alumnus.
Princeps militie, decuſque nolirz .
Hlis artibus, hic graves Latinos,
Fortes Allobroges, teros Iberos,
Gentcs Czſareas, truces Britannos,
Plebem TeRoſagum impiam, rebclles
Vibiſcos tremefecitz imo ſzpe
Cxcidit, domuit : ftupes viator ?
Non noras hominem : volens profeato
Longe maxima pretitiflcee horum,

P. de Termes Senat- Bard.

| ———

Lucinz Vaticinium de fortuna Mon-
luct.

Ix bene Monlucum dias in luminis oras
Lucina extulerat, pueri cum pandere tata
Incipit, ac tanto matrem ſolatur alumno.
En, ait, en genctzix coelo hic gratifſimus Heros,

—

Ttaliam ſternet juvenis Ticinumque, Padumque,
Subjicict Franco. Nec deſzviſle juvabit,
Germanas acies, & magni Ceſaris arma,
Allobroges quin iple feros, Alpeſque ſuperbas
Obtcrat, atque ftugam caftris immittat Iberis.
Aſpera Monlucum Cyrnus tremet : addita lignis
Lilia, vi&riceſque rates mixabitur Xtna,
De ſuper, atque ſolo, atque falo congeſta trophza.
Hinc ubi jam matura viri proceſſerit ztas,
Eruct hic arces, & propugnacula Martis -
Belgica, tum Sequanz copet parere Moſzllam.
Cumque reſurgentes fiſtet Titanas Enyo,
Quos non ille manu, quas.non disjecerit urbes ?
At tu flos #vi, Divumque, Henrice, propago,
Ne propera, & {ceptri curam dimitte Poloni, A
Hic holtes premet excidio, flammaſque Rupellz, :
Interct, hic Francis avertet tinibus Anglum, [
Heu quibus in pugnas animis ruet ! Ecce Triumphi
Exuvixque micant : ſtridentque hinnitibus aures,
Arva rubent, cerno ftrages, tonitruque furenti -
Oppida quaſſa, tubis reboat clangentibus zther
Concuſſus valleſ{que, & vaſte ripa Garumne.
Hic vir hic eſt fato Gallis datus. Afﬀt ubi tandem
Monlucum vincet mors effera,tum quoque Mavors
Victus erit, nodoque manus Pax junget aheno, |
| Neme quezlicris extra.
E. du Mirail Senat. Burdiz.

Tumulo Blaſii Monlucii.

Unicus Al:ides Manes prope O Tufera rupit :
Druid modo quadruplici facient Alcide miſell;
Ecce tribus natis obſeſſs Blaſius Orco

Contulit arma parens : Fam ſcilicet Orce peri/tt.

AL 1I-U-D-

Geryouem triplicem ſcipſo Monlucius auxit.
am quadruplex.,aatt atq) pater, ſlupor orbis & horyer. j
Marc Monerius. |

i

Les Manes de Meſfire Blaiſe de Mont-
luc, Mareſchal de France.

Par. P. de Brach,

RAE

UVand Cloton file-vic, a .qui les deſtinees
Font tourner le fuzean de nos courtes annees, pf
Voulut du grand Montluc tramer les heureux jours,
Pour ne les tramer pas, comme elle fait touſiours, |
D'un fil ſimple commun, a Pouvrage attentive 11
Sa quenouille chargea d'une filace vive : |
En arma ſon cofte, & avec une main
Tira brin deſſus brin le bout Pun fil bumain,
Faiſant de V autre main avecle fil baiſſee
Ex Fair pirovetur la vitale fuzee. ©
Le fil par le pezon juſqu'en terre alongt "0
Fortement s arrondit bien retors, bien douge. vr
Et Ia Parque achevant de tirer [a filace | i011
Par trois fois ces deux vers chanta d'une voix baſſt,
Hhh Patrache

;
'
,
:

Toimbean de M, B. ds Montlac.

'
_—  — — — SS

v1 9 0 R—_ —__

Yattache celte vie avec vn h {1 fort,

Qu'a peine ſera-1l deſnoue par Ja mort.
Puis le fuzean groſt d'u'1 grand nombre d'annees
Au poids elle douna es mains des Deſtinees.
Et Fuppin retaſſant la pafie entre ſes mains,
Dequoy pere commun i moule les humains,
[ayant fort repai{trie en fit une grand maſſe :
Un beau chef en forma imprime d'une face.
©mnseflevoit hantaine, & Penta ſur un corps
Dont les membres fvicnt muſcleus, nervews, & forts,
Augquel ea Vavivant Mars vint 4 bouche plane
Nerf fois ſour defſirs le vent de ſon baleine,
Vent bruyant, ſous lequel avec mille Eangers
Le grand 101 de Mantluc fiſt voile aux eſtrangers,
Vent, qui venant de Mars ſoufler ſur cejte image,
Luy ſoufla dans le eauy Pardeur de ſon courage :
Alluma dans ſon ame un fen de guerroyer,
On Pa fait catre nous tempeſter, foudroyer,
hattre, bouleverſer mille fortes murailles,
Tenter & retenter le hazard des batailles
Apprendre comme il faut une ville aborder,
Comme i faut Paſſ nlir, comme il la faut garder,
Ce qui fiſt qu*un laurier marquint mainte acff aite
Eſpais fueille par fucille environna ſa teſte

Mais las ! comme il wet rien. 9z1 fi tojt qu 21 eſt ne,
Ne ſoit d'un ſort commnn & 1a mort deſtit:6,

—.

 S"eftanga dans Peſquif, qu ne voulont le prendre :
Et dit, ze paſſeray, c'eſt trop me faire attendre.
Si toft quiil enſt gaizne le bord de ce vaiſſeau,
Et charge & Nautonnier ſe renverſe avant Peay
Et le premier meſtier qu apprit cette belle ame
Dans ce Royaume nor, ce fut tirer Ia rame.
Et comme en ſon vivant 14mais neceſſite,
N' avoit reduit Montluc en telle extremitc.
Oil ny trouvaſt remede; ainſi dans Peafer meſine
Il troxva le remede a ſe paſſer ſoy-meſme,

Charon qui cependant dedans Pean greno#illiit,
Pluten &- ſes efprits a ſon aide appelloit.
Et tout ſoudain qui ent d'ongles croches pris terrs,
Commenga de crier, nous ſommes ala guerre.
Alarme, alarme, alarme > @* redoublant ces cric

 Eſponvanta Penfer, effraya les eſprits.

| Plmton craint que quelqu'un pay ſecrette rapine
F:
|

Vienne encor de nouveau ravir ſa Proſerpine.
| Il ne ſpait, qu'il pit faire, i va de tous coſtes;
| Rechercher dans Ienfer les ſoldats indomptez
| 221 ont durant leur vie avecques quelque gloire
| Achete par leur ſang Fhonneur d'une vittoire,
Hards, aſpres. vaillans, ardans de ſang humain,
Et qui ont furieux porte Ia guerre en main.
Dix mille tels efprits ſont ſortis des lieux ſombres,

O# logent dans Penfer plus plaifibles les ombres.

Ce Montluc plein #bonneurs, de biens, & de vitilleſſe>| L'un d'un grand coup d'eſpee a le chef avale,

Sentiſt le trait mortel. duquel Ia mort now bleſſe«
Or comme ſon eſprit deſlugeoit de ſon corps
Mercure il rencontra, Mercure, qui dcs morts
Tous les eſprits attend, afin deſtre leur guide
Au chemin tenebreux de Ponde Acherontide.
Ce Drier le conduiſſant de ſon double efleron
Hachoit Pair qui ſfiflant bruyoit a Penviron
Er F'eſprit le ſutvant parmy Pobſcure voye
De Venfer plein d'effroy ſans frayenr le couſtoye :
Augquel comme de loin ul cuſt mon(tre le lieu
Du paſſage infernal, Mercure dit adieu.
Lefprit demeure ſeul, pourſuivant ſon voyage
Se rendit a la fin ſur le bord du rivage,
Oz plantant fermement ſes picds ſur Ie gravois
Appella le Nocher a haute & rude vorx :
Mai ſa nacelie armee & de woille & de rames
Paſſoit a Pautre bord un nombre infint d"ames.
I! paſſe par deux fois & au meſme batteau_
Ponr la tourner paſſer, tourna repaſſer Peau.
Lefprit qui cepeadant attendant ſur Parene,
Contemploit ce Nocher quit ramott avec peine,
Au poil blanc, au teint noir, au regard eſgare,
Convert d*un vieil habit a lambeaux deſchire,
Plein de poix, qui meſlee au tortis des filaces
Avoit de ſon vaiſſeau calfentre les crevaſſes,
Ses bras tirozent la rame avec un tel effurt,
Owen trois coups ſon batteau revint baiſer le port-
De mille endroits divers ſuivant les advenues,
Afin de Sembarquer mille ames ſont venues,
D©ni dega, qui dela ſautant du bord de Pear
L'une ſur Vantre entroient fonle & foule an batteau,
Dui u'a deux doigts de franc, affeſſe de ſa charge,
De 14 le vieux Nocher vouloit pouſſer an large,
Druand Veſprit + Montluc, 3 qui chaſſe du bord
Le Nocher commandoit d*aitendre un ſecond port,

LU autre de bras detambe eftoit eſcartele,
Lun porte dans le ſeing une bale cachcec :
Lautre a d'un coup defpee une oreille tranchte.

Mais comme la pluſpart de ces braves ſoldats
Ont veu Fame a Montluc qui marchoit a graud pas
Ex Pair branlant ſa main d'une horrible menace
Sutvans a vauderoutte ils ont quitte Ia place,

Preſque tous les efprits a al arme venus
En voyant | autre efprit, ſe ſont reſſouvenus,
One efftoit ce Montiuc, qui vivant ſur la terre
Ejtoit un ſecond Mars, un foudre de la guerre,

Et tous ceux qui vivans luy furent ennems,

| Comme 5'il les cherchoit, en fuitte ſe ſont mis.

| A chaſque ame il ſembloit penſant eſtre attrappee
Sentir encor le fil de ſa ſanglante eſpe.

La Toſcans, la Lombars, Napolitans, Anglow.,
Allemans, Eſpagnols & rebelles Frangois
Peſle-meſle fuyans dune fuitte preſſce

Cul ſur teſte tombant a jambe renrerſee.

Tout Pegfer retentilt, & les eſprits peurencx
Cerchent pour ſe cacher leurs ſepulchres ombreus,
Ils veulent tous crier > mais une crainte mole
Pans leur bouche beante amortiſt la parole.

Pluton qui cependant cherchoit par tous moyens
De raſſeurer le caur de ſes noirs citoyens,

Et connoiſtre Fautheur de Peſmute avenie,

Ne les vayans ſuivis fors que dune ame nue

Se bouffit de colere : 11 envage de voir

©u mne ame ait pen Venfer de frayeur emouvoir.

Et rougiſſant de bonte a grand pas il Favance

| Vers Peſprit 4 Montluc qui ferme en countenance

Sans Seffrayer de luy devers luy s avangoit-
Comme aſſez pres de luy Ieſprit al appergoit,

Vomiſſant ſon conroux il commence luy dire,

Viens tu ſuperbe eſprit pony troubler mon empire ?

| Arveſte,

Tombeau de M. B. de Montluc.

Arreſte, arreſte toy : fizon malgre le ſort

Je te feray ſen ir une ſeconde mort :

Or ie feray ſouffrir 4 ton ombre coupable

Limpitoyable arreft du juge inexorable.

Plas rigorenx vers toy ſera [on jugement,

Due du fer, que du feu, que du geynrnx torment
ues tu? dou viens-tu ? de gulle andace folle

Ozes tu ſans Caron paſſer dans ſa goudolls.

Leſprit ayant efte Phoſte d'un corps vainguenr,
Duquel iamais la peur # avoit glace le canr.

Ne Seftonna craintif au bruit de fa menace :
Ains luy contre-reſpond avec une humble andace :

Tey te ne viens pas, comme ont faici autresfois
Hercale tugeant, Theſee, on Piritsis,

Pour troubler tou enfer © car cette ame eſchaufſee
De gloire u'a iamais deſire ce trophee,

Sans penr donques demeure ex ces ombreuz: enfers,
Deenfer le chien portier aux trois gaſiers ouverts
Et toy ſans peur de moy, pluton, garde ta fame.
La haut nne plus belle encor garde la flame

De ſon amour vers moy : mais ſ1 tu es le Roy

De ce Royaume noir plea 4 borrear © d ffroy, ©
Pour quoy # cſtabli-tu avec quelque juſtice,

Les favorables loix d une douce police ?
 Ergmoy? luy dit Pluton, qui a5-tu ga bas tromve,
Oni par nouvelle loy doive eftre reprouve ?

Apres qu on enft, dit-il, mis mon corps ſous Ia lame
Voulant paſſer ton flenve, ainſi queyfait toute ame
D*une rame Caron me chaſſa rudement,

Bien que 7 enſſe attendu ſur le port l_ouguement,
Et qu'il euſt 12 paſſe mainte ame en ſa barque,
Out avoient eu conge depuis moy par la parque,

Moy quti ay le caurgros & penſe meriter
Pour le corps, d'ox ie ſors, ae me voir mieux traitter,
Tout flambant de conrroux #entray dedans la naſſe
En renver[ant ſa charge : & tout ſeul ie me paſſe.

Or Pluton fi tu veux avec un long diſcours
Enteudre qui ie ſuis, & quels furent mes jours,

Te waurois iamais fait contant ma vie entirce
Le parler me faudroit pluſtoſt que Ia maticre,

Pluton, dont le courronx eſtoit deſia flatte

Par ſes propos dijerts plein d bumble gravite,

Luy dit, approche toy, ame generenſe

Viens ca bas pour parer ma grand chambre fumenſe,
D'oz es-tu qui tues, OE tes faicis conte moy.

Lame ſans ſouner. mot longuement ſe tint coy -
Puis dit en Selevant comme un, qui ſe reveille,
$i le nom de Nontlnc a frappe ton oreille,

Nom que la:renommee embouche en mille corps,

Ie fus quand il vivoit, | boſteſſe de ſon corps.

La France eſt mon pays, Gaſcongue eſt ma nourriſſe,
Oui blandift ſes enfaus d un guerrier exercice,

z arme lenrs berceaux de petits eſtandars,

Et leurs mains de tambours, les voi ans au Dicu Mars.
La lignee de ceux, deſquels ie pris naiſſance,

Eft afſez par. mou nom conneue par Iz France,
Comme un Lyon iamais 11 engendre un cerf pourenx.
Succedaytiaux Montlucs en leur caur genereux

De 2werre defireux ie u'eus loifir d attendre

un poilvint mollement ſur maoue Sepandre, :
Poul la flenr du printemps, qui poindt ſur noſtre teint
Car encor ie #?avois trois fols ſix ans atteint,

tC.

De ſortant hors de page au Duc de Lorraine s ſchappe,

N emportant comme on dit que Peſpee & la cape,
Comme #11 jeune poulain qui branlant teſte &+ co!

A force a deſtache la boucle a ſon licol,

Lors gue libre il ſent en fuyant | eſcurie

Diſpoſt court par les champs, & cherche un prairie,

O: la terre grattant d'un jarrct ſouple & prompt

1! galoppe, il gambade, il fait en Pair le bond,

Deſſous ſes pieds ven ens le long de ſa carriere.

L'air demeure epaiſſi d une obſcure pouſſiere

Jon crain flotant eſpars ſe meut au gre du vent,

Sous ſou viſte galop par accord ſe monvant

La terre retentit : mais quand ſur un rivage

I! oit banir la poutre, ou le poulin ſauvage.

Une oreille dreſſant 5 ctant court arreſte

Eſcoute ex quel endroit, pus court de ce coſts.
Ainſi au tabourin, qui le ſoldat reveille,

Pecortois quand le ſon viendroit a mon oreille :

Pouy couriy celle part. Alors cet Empereur,

Ce grand Charles, qui fut du monde la terreur

Deſſeignoit de Ia France eriger un trophee.

L2 guerre eſtoit par tout vivement echauffee. .
La donques #accourus > & ſous Odet de Foix

T appris jeune ſoldat a porter le barnois.

Et ores en Efpagne &: ores en Angleterre

leune ie madextray an meſticr de 1a guerre.

Je traverſay les monts ſuivant Feſpoir de tous,

Qi penſoient que Milan ſeroit garde par nou

Mais comme bien ſouvant la fortune ſe mocque,

Now fuſmes d'un malbenr ſuivis & ls Biquoque :

La 0# comme pieton, tout de poudre noircy

Te vis combattre @ pied le grand Mommorancy,

One 3 allay condoyant au miljeu dn carnage,

Faiſant ſentir Veffort de mon jeune conrage.
Apres que noſtre camp deſcſpera de voir

Par ſa force Milan remis ſous ſon pouvoir,

Revenu, ſans long temps m'arreſter en Gaſcongne.

La Navarre ievis, Picardie & Bourgongne.

Et bien que z euſſe ven ia maint & maint combat,

Mon vol n eſtoit plus haut, quele vol du ſoldat.
Mais lors un point d&'honneur ſalariant ma peine

De ſoldat ie receus tiltre de capitaine.

Bien toft ie me trouvay plus chand en guerre epris,

Lors que Fonterabie aux Eſfpagnoles fnt pris.

Iavincible au travail, apres Fonterabie

1 Te vis 0 grand malheur, la ronte de Pavie,

Fournee o# noſtre Roy demeure priſonnier,
Oz preſque te reſtay commbattant le denier :
Mas playe dans le corps, a la teſte, an viſage,
Avec peine a la fin Teſchappe ce carnage.
Puis avee ce Lautrec ſous qui iem'avance
Encor en Italte hardy ie repaſſe :
Et ſuivant Is Romaigne &* 1a Bruſſe & P Apouille
Melphe nous demeura pour gueeriere deſpoiille :
04 mes ſoldats Gaſcons mi ſuivant d'nn prin-ſaut
Furent veus les premiers ſur Ia breſche a I'aſſaut-
Naples ſgait quels aſſauts eu aſſiegeant 1 baill:
Et quantefois du picd i'ay marque ſa muraille.
De ce voyage long d'un malbeureux bonbeur
Te revins tout charge de Ioiange & d'bounenr,
Aux charges, aux aſſauts, rencontres, camiſades,

Ayant ſcelle mon los de quatre arquebuſades.

Me.

—-___ EE EE a IIS
tence He i, AE ot. — Roar F Ando

ON Cy Ts The

- "y
*
-7H
Das
IF,
"N
=
we :
3.7
* 6
a.
*"
'E.
* o
+) i
& F
v1 . -
IN
TP -
2 j
"x
\ 3

Ly
— nn dl

Tombeau de

—O— -

M. B. de Montlic.

Me trouvant a Marſeille on vid 1 de quel ſoing
Feſcay la peur dun fiege aſſeurcy au beſyin.
D o# | Empereur qui peut t en faire encore le conte
Partiſt ſans Paſſieger avec ſa courte hoyte.
A ſiege contre luy te fus a Perpignan.
Le Piedmont S* es mouvant Caſſal & Carignan
Et Carmagnole & Qmicrs virent en certe guerre,
Combicn de chevalicrs ie renverſay par terre,
Encor que de I honneur ſans Uawvoir deſire
De grand Maiſtre de Camp le Roy meuſt honore
Alars que Paigle joint aux armes Eſpagmolles
Entreprit d aſſailir nos gens a Ceriſoles,

St les bancs, files rocs, on les ondes boſſuee,
Ont enfonce les plus de ſes coſtez; penſues,
Dans Sienna auſſi 7 ally, viſitant les rampars,
T avoiſoy ſi du ſein quelqu'un de mes ſoudart s
Laiſſoit tomber le caur ; 4 ceux-la par menaſſe
Couards les hontoyant, ie remettois Paudace.
Vivement aſſailly ie garday les Siennoig,
Comme 2 avous promis non ſeulement deux moi,
Ains encor cy apres, dela ville aſſaillie
Faiſant coup deſſus coup mainte brave ſaillie
Ez la ze fuſſe mort combattant, ſila faim
N euſt vaincu mes ſoldats abayant dans leur ſein,

—_—

Ie vorln bien qu' aux chef s ces traits ſoyent deffendus, | Auſquels pour deſtourner la bonte de ſe rendre

Guider les pas doutenx de nos enfans perdus.

A tout accuſtomez ſous moy ie fis apprendre

Ce fut lors qucu painquant, le Frangois magnanime, | Four ne mourir de faim, a ſe paiſtre de chats,

T "ff rit maint ennemy pour ſanglante vitime.

Ce fut lors qu'achayne 5 empourpray mes deux mains

De chevanx, & ae chiens, & d aſnes & de rats.
Mais enfin entre nous manquant ce vivre meſme

Au ſang des Eſpagnols, des Lombards, des Germaigs. Now ſortiſmer vaincus d une famine extreme,
Or l Anglow cependants qui d autre part guerroye | Tous mes ſoldats & moy avant que deloger

Pour la guerre Sarmoit dans Ia terre dOye
Pour ne voir guerre aucune oj ie n'enſſe ma part
De gloire d:fireux te cours celle part.

Ayant troy jours entiers demeure ſans manger.
Apres ce ſiege long, ie m'en revins en France,
Oz te vis haut-loiant applaudir mawvaillance,

La ie fis voir le caur d'un guerrier de Gaſconguee Et mon corps entorner d'un belliqueux collier,

Alors mon Roy me vid en la baſſe boulogue

( Et cct afle ie mcts pour mes geſtes plus beaus )

Sauver Phonneur perdu de vingt deux drappeans :

Et malgre Pennemy qui tiroit la deff aite,

Faire ceuvrir de ſang une brave retraite.

En Piedmont appelle pour quelque remue ment

D Albe & de Moxcallier 3 ens Ie gouvernement:
Sienne pour ne rextrer deſſous la tyrannie

Des woiſias Florentine, dont elle cſt cnnemie,

D'eatre les mains deſquels nos Roys avoient ofte

Le jong qui captivoit ſa douce liberte,

Craignant & PEmperenr & le Duc de Florence,

En ce temps mandia leſecours de la Fraxce.

Le Roy preſtait Poreille au prier des Sicnnois

AM envoya pour levy aide ayant de moy fait chois.

La 0% repreſentant ja Majefte Royalle

T eus de ſon lieutenant la charge general.

Et gardant aux Siennos leur chere liberte

La Pavois les fleurons du Iis fi bien plante

Orencores aujuurd buy les baumieres Fraugoiſes

De Vordre de mon Roy, eſtant fait Chevalier,
Orare, qui lors pendoit porrr enſeigne honorable
A ſignaler en nou un ſervice notable.

| Augrandcamp d Amiens, ie fus fait Colonel :
Sue ce Prince Lorrain, dont le nom eternel

Sujvant de pere en fils commande & nos battailles,
Te conte de quel benr 7aſſaili les murailles,

De ce fort Thionville, on de projieſſe arme,
D'un tel caur mes ſoldats & Paſſaut i anime
Due 7emporte par force une tour baute & forte,
Oz pour entree apres uous ſervit dune porte.
Pris 4 bonnenr ſur bonneur eftant du Roy payt
En Toſcane ie fus lieutenant renvoye.

Mai apres que Ia paix eaft pay ferme alliance
Joint le ſang de Savoye, & 4FEſpagne ala France :
One F Anglois fut boucle plus eftrait dans ſa mer :
Due par la paix I Ttale on euſt fait deſarmer,

En France ie revins avec mes capitaines, ( pleines
Oui par leurs faits vailans emportoicnt leurs mains
De palmiers triomphans, & de vainqueurs lauriers,

Dans les vents boufferoient deſſus les tours Siennoiſes,| Dae la paix marioit aux paſles oliviers :

$1 de Strofſy le camp, en pieces eſtant mis
N euſt donne I advantage aux vainquenrs ennemile

Mais comme apres Ia guerre,xn vieil ſoldat Fon paye
Du ſervice paſſe, I enroollant morte paye

Henry lors noſtre Roy, Henry mon ſecond maiſtre. | De quelque vieux chaſteau ainſi de mes eftats

Augquel 3a ma veriu Seſtoit faite connoiſtre
Dans Sienne me ſgachant [ans ſeconrs aſſiege,
Bien toft pour ne me perdre exvoya mon congee

Due la paixraviſſoit au gain de mes combats,
Charles me ſurpaya, & d'une charge hantaine,
Me fit ſon Lieutenant ſur toute P Aquitaine,

Mais moy brave & vaillant, a qui iamais la crainte | Sou Lieutenant en chef honneur eftroitement

N avoit dedans le caur donne la moinare attainte.
Voulant voir les aſſaults des campez ennemw,
Dattandre ſon ſeconrs deux mois ie Iuy prom.

Et comme le Nocher, qui au fort 4'un orage
Eſt des flots & des vents menaſſe dc naufrage,
Provident or dega, or de 14, ſuit par tout, -

Dep uis un bous de nef,, juſques a Pautre bout,

Pour voir fi ſa navire au ventre crew & large,

Cale trop deſſous Peau, ſous le poids de ſa charge :
$2 les fiers Aquilons le cordage ont laſche,

$1 la bune eſt entiere, ou le maſt arrache :

Garde juſques alors aux Princes ſeulement,
En ce temps les Frangois qui trop chauds ala guerre
Ne peurent cn la paix vivre en paix en leny terre,
Firent comme 1adis les trop vaillens Romains
Contre lenr propre ſang armans leurs propres mains
Baignant leurfer ſanglant au ſang de leurs entrailles,
Demoliſſaus leurs forts, ſe donnans des battailles,
S*eftans, pour donner voite a leur ſedition,
Converts du faux mainteau d'une religion.
La France pitoyable, erroit toute troublee :
”y noſtre teune Roy la couronne evranlee

Panchant

| Tombean de M. B. de Montluc.

Pai :aut deſſus ſon chef ſa chente menaſſoit,

De ſos armes le 1s paſlement fletriſſoit,

Au Sceptre que tenoit en main ce jenne Prince

Pefia nobciſſoit ma rebclle province,

Suznd contre ces mutiNS aux armes 10 COUNMS :

Bourdeau, Tboulouſe priſe a temps te ſecourns,

L ecoure ie gaignay © & le fort du fort Pene,

La 07: fiit lo tombean de maint grand capitaine.
Apres (bien gue ſuivy de peu de cavalliers

Deſquels 3 avois fait chois, pour belliquenx guerriers )

En ſuivant ma fortune epuillonne de gloire

Te combati Duras, & gatgnay la vifoire ;

Sous mes coups ou de bale on de glaives trenchans,

Te fis long temps la mort errer parmy les champs,

|

Le malheur contre moy bourrelle d'une envi?

Aux trois tranchale fil de leur trop courte vie.
Mon brave Marc Antoine hayſſant le repos

Mourut en Ttalie, o# repoſent ſes os

Sur les rempars d Heſtie, 0 ſa main redontable

La memoire laiſſa de maint afte notable,

Perrot dont le caur baut & plein d ambition,

Eſtoit pour commander a quelque nation, 6

Faiſant voille au conqueſt d'un Royaume d' Aſſrique

Fujt te dans une Iſle en la mer Atlantique,

Fabien, le Frangoss, comme ie t ay conte,

Eftant contre ſoy-meſme en armes revolts,

Ayant d'un fort tenu, force Ia barricade,

Des champs f1tals de Ver, d oi: ſept mille ombres palles |

Vindrent (« bas burter tes partes wnfernales.
Depuis, bien que I byver de ma vieille ſaiſon

Euſt nege ſur mo4 chef, tout vial & tout griſon,

Defirant de garder mon pays par ma perte,

DP aſſiegeay Rabaſtens, Ia gnerre eſtaut rouverte,

La-pour marqzuer mon los par un exploit arrnier,

Te redevins ſoldat, ie devins pionnier,

Et plein de deſeſpoir, de deſpit &* de rage

Voyant qi en un aſſaut, mes gens perdojent courage,

Oils brayſloient au retour, a la breche hazardcus

Te marchay lc prentier, gnidant leurs pas dout:us.
La bome de me voir marchcr de telle audace,

C Encor Gu'un coup de bale a jour pergat ma face)

Combattre opiniaſtre avec un tel effort,

Cela leur donnant caur now fit maiſtre du fort.

| Qui a dans la cite de chevalicrs armee

Sentiſt un coup mortel, par une arquebuſade.
Ainſi vcuf de ces trois que ie plaindray touſiours,
Un ſeul 19/it 14 haut de la clarte du jour,

Par maint exploit vaillant plants ſa renommee, ;
Dnt les armes portant pour deffendre ſa boy,

Dans Farmee creiſce a fait parler de ſoy

Aux deſpens des vaincus + & qui brave #1 agneres,

Commandoit ſur la mer aux Royales galeres

| Les ſeent pour le combat fi bieu faire ramey,
' O11 demeurs vaingqueur, le maiſtre de 1a mer :

Vainqueur en terre, en mer, deux fois heureux en terre.
Me vaingaant, quin appris qu'a vaincre ſur la terre,

| Lors qu'il executoit ceſt ae Martial

; Tetirois a la mort, aggrave de mon mal :

' Mais m eſtant de ce fait la nouvelle annoncte,
| Tort ravy ie ſentis ma force renforcee,

Au bout de quelques ans,quand la mort qui aſſomme | Par cet aiſe dernier flatte fi doncemeat,

Les Princes & les Roys,auſſi toſt qu"un pauvre homme,
Ext Charles niſtre Roy mis deſſous le cercuctl,

Due ze Mouroys apres, plein de contentement,

Ez voyant apres moy reſter encor an monde

Laiſſmnt la France en proye, & le Frangois en ducil, | Pour mef aire revivre, un fils qui me ſeconds.

Ez ge Henry pour France cujt Poulogue laiſſee, |
Te me vis bonnore dela Mareſchauſſee,
Se ſouvenant mon Prince autrefois de mavoir,
Ala guerre ſous Iity ver fare mont devoir,
Poulant par ce honneur, liberal reconnoiſtre.
Mon ſervice employe pour ſon frere mon maiſtrc-
Ainſ aux grauds eftats, dont ie fus honnore
Te ne wins tout & coup, ains degre par degre, |
Comme | aſtre eclattant, qui dans le ciel flamboye,

© pour ſuivant le cours de ſon oblique voye
Marche & pas meſurez, & ſclon les ſaiſons
De degres, en degrez, vnd ſes doaze maiſons.

Bien cue ie fuſſe ſec, & caſſe d'un long ige,
Te me ſentois encor aſſez verd de conrage,
Pour ſuivre des diſſeins que 1 avois pourpenſts,

ut euſſent conronne tons mes geſtes paſſes,
Mais m*eſtant retire, pour xe voir tant de brigues,
Pour ne voir les plus grands conniver ſous leurs lignes,
Pieil ic pris le chemin, qu 4 #0us prexare il nous fant,
Monurant comme une lampe, a qui I buile deffaut.

Voyla doncques Pluton, le diſcours de ma vie,
Oui fuſt & de grandeur, & de bon-beur ſuivie,
Bon-hcur que t ay cherche, en guerroyant touſiours
N ayant tamais oyſenx en vain mange le jours

Mais le coi: ard mal heur, qui ne wozoit attendre
Pony s attaquer a moy, ſur les miens Salla prendre :
Car ayant eu ceſt heur, d'engenarcr quatre enfans
Tous quatre enfans de Mars,tous guerriers triomphans,

Or doxc Pluton, content dequoy plus ie ne vy,

| bf . .
| Ex & avozr mes trois fils avant ma mort ravy,
| Garde au moins celuy-la, & que la mort funcſte,

N emporte des Monilucs le peu de grand qui re(ie.
Garde mon frere encoy, Iequel ambaſſadeur

Nos Roys ont douze fois charge de leur grandeur :

| Ont fait voir les Romains, ont fait voir P Allemapne,

Ont fait voir la Hongrie, & la ville que baigne

La mer de tous coſtez,, I Anglois, & IEſeoſſois,

Deus fois voir le levant, deux fois le Pouloguoi,

Voyage par lequel ceſte gloire Iuy donne

Oran chef de noſtre Roy il amis leur conroune :

Renverſant les complots de mainte nation,

©11 briguoit la faveur de cite cſlefinn,

C*eſt ce doCte Prelat, qui pere d eloquence

Eſt baptise du nom d Ambaſſadeur de France * br

Ou par le miel coulant de ſa diſerte wois, |

A fait autant exploits, que moy par le harnoi.
Or attendant qu icy ſin ombre ie revoye,

Dont le terme ſoit long, fay moy manſtrer la oye,

Par 04: e ſois conduit au ſejonr bien-beureux

Ou togent les eſprits des hommes genercuz;.

L'ombre a peine avoit dit, que le Roy qui Sabaiſ?
Pour honorer les grands, Fembraſſe, la caveſſe,
Luy-meſme la guidant aux champs Elifiens,

Au quartier Martial des guerriers ayciens,
D' Alexandre, Haynihal, de Ceſar, de Pompee,
Des Catons, Sciptons, vrays enfans de Veſpee :

F1y 87-4

-
WE Og

bo 4 1 . _ 4 . . % > - [- - = S
» np 4 1 Sr 2 te nts edi ige et wt whe Eon tre be te nas I rp te 0 wt rp er ee ant er ere 4 rand ENTS) 4 ”

nb...

ores SS ee ren ne rn

-

—

ad 4 < *E .
<& tt AA A et

__ —_—_— OPACHS
ts DOES 424, Ao ar -
>

Meath —_— —_— _ — —_—

» .
mmm cnn... wt oat 6 6 dts 6 4 A th otros DA

 Tombeau de

M. B. de Montluc:

)

La Charles, 1a Frangois, Henry, Monmorancy,
Bourbon, Lantrec, Bryard, la Trimailie, Strofſt,
Leve, Termes, Briſſac, & cegrand Duc de Guyſe
Le bonclicy des Franco#, le pilicr de P Egliſe,
I:yſſent des rayons d nn antre plus beau jour
On cette ame avec cax, fait ſon heureux ſtjour :
Ft la trompant le temps, aun gucrriey extreice,
L'#9n de ces chevaliers clie appelle a la lice,
Elle court une bagne, & cherche les erbats,
Deſquels le ie figure un'ombre des combats.
Car mime quand le corps eſt ſous la ſepulture.
Lame imbut retient I inſti de ſa nature,
Les ames de ceux-la, qu amour a tourmentes, 7
Souſpirent, lamentant deſſous les bois mirtez;,
Des penibles nochers les ames marinieres,
La bas dans un eſquif frequentent les yivieres,
Er quand le corps et mort les ames des gucrriers
Combattent ſe jouans ſous Fombre des lauriers,
Ainſi va Sexergant cette ame bien heureuſe
Veufue du corps enclous ſous la tombe poudreuſe,
Ame qui pleine d'beur ne doit point defirer,
Or bon:rant ſa memoire on ailie Iabourer
Ny un marbre image des figures antiques,
Ny ae I or rebruny {i des pilliers Doriques,
Ny gu une Pyramide eflenee hautement
Preſſe ex terre ſes os ſervant de monument :
Car Jamais par leur mort, jamais ceux-1a ne meuront,
De qui les braves faits pour monumens demeurent :
Ce ſont les wrays tombeans :& le temps rouge tout
Pe fa rongearde dent a'en peut venir a bout.
Montluc donc ne monrra, & ſa gloire immortelle
Ne verra-que le temps ayc peutoir ſuy elle.
Mont!nc qui a laiſſe cette marque de ſoy,
D avoir (ix fois dix ans fait ſcrvice a ſon Roy,
Et cinquante & hui ans commande par ſon Prince
Soit en la France, on ſoit en cſtrange province.
De avoir, quand lny ſcul a eu commandement,
Attaque Peanemy, qu'il n ait henreuſement,
Soit qu'il fult foible on fort , emporte Padvantage,
De ravoir combattant jamais tvurue viſage.
D' avoir eu cette gloire, avaiit voir ſon trips,
9 autre homme plus que luy n'avoit ven de combats,
De baittailles, aſſauts, rencontres, entrepriſes,
Plus de murs deffendus, ay de plu belles priſes,
De #* avoir ver ſes fils de Iny degenerer,
0 beurezx qui ſe peut, comme luy bien-heurce
Par une heureuſe mort, par ane heurcuſe vie,
Dune telle memoire apyes 1a mort ſutvie.

| COSI rung

—

—

In Tumulumillsftriſſimi virt D. Montlacut,
&c. Neph. Manialdus.
(chrum,
F Agnanimi herois non pulchrum cerne ſepul-
M Et vitz & mortis nobile diſce genus.
Gentis Aquitane (plcndor Montlucius armis
Ingens, fortuna clarus, honore gravis,
Militiam intrepidus primis ſe&atur ab annis,
Atque ex militia przmia opima retert.
Nam celer eximios explevit curſus honores,
Fit torquatus eques, qui modo miles crat,

| |

—_—

Hinc belli auſpiciis melioribus uſus honorum
Scandit ad excelſos, Marte juvante gradus.

Diſcordes Gallos dum triſtis turbat Erinnys,

_ Civilt & rabie Gallia tota ruit,

Unus Aquitanz prefcctus rcgius ore

{ Debellat populos, magne Gerumna tuos.

Horrendum quoties hoftis, {cnlitque tremendun
Terrifticum belli tempore fulmen erat.

Scilicet ut tuerant primis vencranda (ub annis
Canicies animi, conliliumque fſagax :

Sic fuit extremo ſub tempore vivida bello
Virtus & corpus dexteritate vigens.

C#tera quid memorem noſtr#e non indiga laudis,

| Quz forct immenſus dinumerare Jabor ?

, Progeniem bello egregiam, vel Martia fratrum

Pectora, quid titulis inferuiſlc juvat ?

Vivit adhuc trater nulli pictate ſccundus,

Eloquio inlignis, conftilioque potcns.

Filjus unus adhuc numeroſa e prole ſuperſtes
Patris ad cxemplum non niſi magna ſapit.

In czptis numquam lic deerit honoribus heres.
Clareſcetque novis faſcibus ita domus.

Fortunata domus non que diviſa beatos
Ethciunt homines, omn1a mixta tenet :

Ergo fcnex inter tot tantaque commoda vivens,
Emerite recolit tempora mulitie.

Infeſtis tandem cum nil rationis in armis
Cerneret & totics faedera rupta dolis,

Annorum plenus magnorum plenus honorum
Expirat, placido & tunere lztus obit,

ALIUD EX GRACO.

[Hoc jacet in parvo tumulo Montlucius ingens,
Detundi cineres & brevis urna tegit.

Virtutes laudeſque viri, preclaraque facta
Nec rapit interitus, nec recipit tumulus ;

Morte rapit celeri celebres Mars improbus, aſt hic
Evo maturus, laude decorus obit.

Steph. Manialdus.

Montlucit Tribunt Militum Epicedium.

[-* triumphales Montluci ad funera turme
Ite ſub iNlius ftignis vidricia ſemper

| Agmina, voſque adeo promptiſlima peCtora bello
dean eXcquiis longas indicite pompas.

Et fortes fi faCta viros tortiſſima tangunt,

Si ftimulat virtas tanto ſubiifle feretro,

Ne pigeat, non #que animis armiſque potengi
Supremos unquam tumuli reddetis honores.
Splendida porticibus facris aulza premantur,
Templaque pullato obtentu color ater inumbret,
Perque vias paſlim triſti pro munere crines
Spargantur Cyparifle tui, quos delphica laurus
Mceſtior, atque Apium foliis intexat amaris.
Funereas exoſa faces lux zmula noctis
Marceſcat, picearnque vomant funalia nubem.
Atra procul lugubre ſonent, 6 Lyda gementem
Flebilibus numeris aſpirct tibia cantum :

Surda per armigeras acies fint tympana, nec ſe
Indiciis maniteſta ſuis humentia tangat

Lumina, pars imis animi penetralibus erret.

H#c

, . s , - Sr a1
, - 9 : - x 4d yes >. 5/44 4% $a Aba l *4 Sala dads th di pI AT OO No wee > Gti o 64d la,
- + 1 Rams, 0 ce ; 4 9 ry peg Or ry ; A te re te LR x
- —_—_— , "91 b . —R— _ -. þ Q 0 4 2 . - y FA * > N 5 b

Tombeau de M. B. de Montluc.
Hzxc tu Montluci, tu belli tulmen habeto, Semper & & duris molles fibi captat honores..
Qualia perſolvi manes fibi debita poſcunt Proſpera quis neſcit bellorum prelia quotquot
Emeriti & multa pracincti tempora lauro. Addita ſunt faſtis Franciſci a tempore primi ?

Jam tibi dele&tz procedunt ordine turb# Inſubres domiti Allobroges, pulſique Britanni, |
Signorum comites, & Martia calira {equentum : Belgarum truccs animi : damnum utraque (enlic
Figentur terre vultus, Jongiſque trahentur Hetperia & tumidi compreſla ferocia Rheni.
Arma notis, & humum vexilla ſequentia vertent. | At quis in his etiam Montluci nomina nefcit ?
Tum bellator equus nigro feralis amictu, Lndenis duCtor luſtris ille inclitus heros,
Ofhcium ad mceſium lentis ducetur habenis 3 Et patriZ murus, regumque hdele ſuorum
Quin ad certa tuum celebrabunt numina funus, | Przfidium, quantos bellorum pertulit (tus ?
Multaque viſentur tcralis fercula pomp r, Cuas rexit fuditque acies felicibus uſus _
Partim hominum,partim manibus geltata deorum. Fortiter auſpiciis?quem nunquam impune moratus
Mars frameam, Bellona decus thoracis ahent, Hollis, & averſum nunquam in certamine vidic :
Er galeam Pallas, manicas tarialis Enyo, Idque adco validis docuit non una CICatrix
Denique 8 allgero Praepes victoria Curru, Artubus, & pulchro violate vulnere nares.

Nunc ſtupe facta, graviſque & ſ#vo tarde dolore Nec tamen interea reliqua ornamenta latebunt
Bellorum feret exuvias, monumentaque laudis Virtutum, nec in hac liſtet tua gloria parte,
Plurima, Romanis ctiam ſpectanda triumphis, { Montluci dicetur honos Ithacenſis Ulixei

Nec vero indecores illis ad grande feretrum Conkiliis cecifle tuis, & Neſioris illa |
Gentis Aquitanz primi, quorum inclita virtus | Mcllea vox linguz patrio lermone diſertz ;
M1litie Claret {tudiis : morrentia jungent Et memoranda hdes etiam {ancifhma tetris | :
Agmiina, quos oculis aliquis tim torte pererrans, | Hoſtibus, 6 concors animis clementia magnis,
Miratuſque viros, ſpirantiaque ora furorem Ingentumque memor, vigilc{que in peRore cure,
Indomitum, tacito ſuſpirans corde loquetur. Et faciles aditus, & bland queltibus aures, |
Heu quantum imperium, fi belligerantibus iſtis, | Mens quoqz non avidis unquam temerata rapinis,
DuQtor in externos iſlet Montlucius holtes ? Infonte{que manus, nec iniqua cxde madentes,
Quale decus potuit tibi Gallica terra parare, Talibus exurget titulis Montlucius, utque
Sive tuos longo protendere limite fines, Septcnis errans tidibus moduletio quondam

Sive aliis velles populis tua dicere jura ? Threiciz viſaeſt citharz compelſcere tygres,

Sed durz impediunt leges, civica fatis, Et quercus agitare vagas, & grandia ſummis

Bella furunt, lzvoque agitantur Vejove Gallt. Saxa movere jug1s, lic vivida fama merenti

Eximium fi quicquam habuit vis impia Martis, | Nectareum e tantis concentum laudibus edet, _
En <tiam ut morbi populantur & zgra ſene&us. | Manuricam huic rabiem mulcens,huic crudaGeloni
Marmoreum tandem ad tumulum tiftetur, & alto] Corda vel Armenium quz gens uſurpat Araxem:.
Compolitum corpus lecto fragrantis amomi, Clara repercuſlz magnum thera vocis imago
Et pinguis cafiz & nardi lentore madebit, Pulſabit,plaudet Tanais, Ponti utraque plaudenc

Parva quidem fuerint magnis hzc przmia factis, | Littora : percipient extreme nomina terre,

Quzritu conceſla pio ſuprema dabuntur, Attomtzque bibent oves, & lzta beatis
Cum tibi perpetuos Montlaci inſtaurat honores - | Umbra locis, manclque inter veneranda quietos
Fama peregrinis longe tua nomina terris Elitias capiet fedes, ubt plarima laurus

Extento miſſura #vo : namque unde tepentem | Miſcet odoratis frondoſa cacumina lucis.
Producens rubicunida diem Pollentias exit, Fo. Cuioniuhe
Ec qua deciduo merguntur ſole quadrigz
Precipites, tua faCta canct, tibi mille parabit |
Linguas, mille annos & mille in carmina voces | Georg Buchanani Scoti, in obitum Marci

Extremaſque tuba gentes ad ſplendida rerum Antonii Montluct, qui Hoſtia pro defenſione
Argumenta ciens, calidis memorabit ut anriis Eccleſie obiit, Carmen,

Nobilicas generoſa tuo ſub peCtore primum

R————_—;

Extuderit vivas nativo fomite flammas : Ontluci armatZ reperes ut frena cohortis
Utque animofa ruens horrendus miles 1n arma, k Supra annos virtus confiliumque dedit.
Non ſatis ampla tibi pomaria laudis avite Supra annos animi vis Martia perdidit auſum
Protuleris, ſeu magnanimo ſatus {one quandam, | Obvia fulmineo peRore ferre globo.
Theffalicz quem non capiens angultia terr® Quam ſuper adſtantem muris prius horruit hoſtem
Corpulit ad Scyticas ignoti Phalidis oras. Hoſtia, defunGi vindicis offa colit.

Hic (uperatz Alpes, & vis inimica ferctur Ia licet tanto genetrix fit Gallia caſu
Eridani ingenteſque Tata furs labores. Plus genuiſſe retext, quam periiffe dolet.
Sed neque Senaturn dira obſidionis egeſtas, OE Nr" -
Ec Alofhuar Perufina fames,aut a6 addita Poe- In exudem Foachimi Bellai An degavi.
Conſilio immani placavit Ibcra Saguntus, (nis|Littora Dardaniz quondam ut contingere primus
Dekaerit titulis : nec defperata falutis - Dum cupis,& primus, Protelilae, cadis:
Spes produdta dia lethzas (enſerit undas. Sic cupidus pugnz foſſa Montlucius hoſtem
Scilicet acclivi vectatur gloria curru, - | Dum prohibet primus, primus ab hoſe cadit.

| Holtz

£0 lon ate

4

£
x
"|
>
i}
.
"IM

—— —__——

"Tombean de M. B. de Montluc.

Hottia prima fuit Montlucius, Holtla nempe |

Haud alia poterat conditione Capi.
At vos ne hxc decimum, Galli, vos ducat in annum
Holtia, Montluci pectora quilque gerat.

Ejuſdem in eundem.

Hoſpes liſte gradumn, rogo, hic parumper :
_ Quemque pretercas locum videto,
Hoc, hoc {ub tumulo jacet (cpultus :
Monluci illius ( hoc (at cft viator)
Natus optiumus, optiimi parentis,
Qui dum forte datum lJocum tuetur,
Pro fotfa vigil excubatque primus, _
\_ Cxco vulnere primus eſt peremptus.
1!1am mcoetta cobors prius Tribunum
Mox cxz{um 1ngemuere tota caſtra.

Pour Jcan de Montluc Eveſque de Valence.

7 T repoſe I honnexr de France
\ 1 Montlac Eveſque de Valence,
C'eſt aſſez, paſſe viutcar,
A ſen ſeul nom tu ſcais ſa gloire
It ſert de trompette & d hiſtoire
Deca & dela I Equatcur.

Pour le Capitain Montluc Sieus de Caupene qui
mourut a Madcre.

E Ciel qui ſeal te- ſembloit grana,
»_, Moxitluc, en jeune ige te prend
Vioyant que per ſert plus atteadre,
Car le monae a ton appetit ,
Ew/t efte toufiours þ petit
Ou'il ne t euſt jamaiy peu comprendree

Pour Fabien de Montluc Sieur de Monte(-
QuIEU.

SON N-E-T.
*Amour de ſon pays le brave Peleide
Condwiſoit a Ia mort, aloys que pour venger
Le Gregcois Menelas du Troyen eſtranger,
Sa vie Facheva par un trait homicide.
ILPamour de Dieu du Roy, & du pays te guide
Montluc, a meſme pas miſpriſant ton danger,
Duand chauſſant le Biernois ardent de ſaccager
Un plomb donna dedans ta cuiſſe d arnou vide.
Magnanime guerrier tu meurs avant ton temps,
$i celuy peut mourir qui encor jetne dans
Par une brave mort vient double vie acquerre.
Et ore que tu es fait habitant des cicnx ,
Peut-eſtre as tu pitie de nos jours ſoucienx,
Ot tu ris des deſſeins des autheurs de la guerre.

S"O-N”" NE. -T.

Sur le tombeau de Monſficur le Commandeur de

Montluc,

{. 3 Montluc, & ton puiſne de meſme elle prend,

Vant leur temps, la mort tes deux aiſnez atterre,

En Italie, Afrique, en la France elle eftend
 Morts de trois plombs fatals ces trois foudres de
Ton pere qui ſon chef de mille lauriers ſerre (gnerre.
Charge & ans & &honnear les ſuit, apres Iuygrand
Marche tou oucle grand, de qui le nom s'efpand
Pay tous les lieux cognens de I babitableterre,
Mais toy les ſurvivant, morts ils ne ſembloient pag,
Vaoyant en tes diſcours, emtrepriſes, combats,
De tous revivre en toy le caur & eloquence.
Nous les voyons en toy & combattre & parler ;
Maw ores toy mourant, ils remcurent, & Þ atr
Emporte #os regrets, le Ciel noſtre eſperance.
I. du C. E.deC.

i.

”——

Tumulo Blaſii Montluci,

Eſine mirar1 ſata gens & ſtirpe virorum,
Omnia f1 morſu laceret mors digna maligno,
Heroum divina cohors huic ſubdita legi eft
Tantalus elt teſtis, Sarpedon, quique parente
Avo progcniti magnus domitorque ferarum.
Nunc quoque Montlucius divis przſtantior illis,
Haud virtute ſua valuit depellere lethum

Quin mors cxultat tanto ducore pe empto.
Interea ſuper aſtra volat, coelumque capeſcit :

Et tot geſta viri ftupet omnis turba deorums

MT co

ALIUD.

Bcllipotens varios terrz pelagique labores

Qui domuit, tegitur mortuus hoc tumulo
Nempe ſuis 1terum diffidens Jupiter armis
Montluci Stygits lumina merfit aquis,

DT rr nr een ————

S ONNE T,
dur la deuiſe de Blaiſe de Montluc Mareſchal de

France.

DEO DUCE, FERRO COMITE.

"  Reature de Diex, 7eus Dieu touſiours pour guide

(-; Enfant de Mars ie fus de fer accompagne
En cet aage defer 07 je fus deſſeigue
Pour manier uu fer inftement homicide
Guerroyer juſtement, cet alors que Dieu guide
Et le caur & Ia main, Tay cela teſmoigue,
Pour defendre nos Roys ne m*eſtant eſpargnt6-
Ny pour ſaver la France au Frangois parricidee
En cette mer Dieu fuſt mon ejtoile du Nort,
Le fer mon inſtrument, pour maint gnerrier effort,
Aux uns,pour leurs tombeaux on baſtit leur memoire.
L' edifice elevant du fer de maint marieau,
Et moy pour m'arrather des mains dela mort noire,
Avec le fer au poing 7 ay briſe mon tombean-
P. DE-BRACH.

FIN.

P

ff
k{ af 4

wa”

4. 0 (nil
| y nin]

—_—_—

NS AAA RA es"

hy
K ip 7 *
PF © STM
CR ig

= > 4" t 8 he =, wr". ney I RE +
= is 7 A +». © *s 2 3% 297 oe ; - , Ww % E997 : NES >
; 1 : * bs. q G ©
: RE, "WI: - GL by p27 x -”. I AP” 4 >
a - t 64

- 4 « :
# yp

"i

F
I
|

*
-
*
* -_-
* .-
\
»
-
,
"
. *
.
.
Fd .
,
,
EY |
7
4 -
>
-
-
\
"
.
»-
oy $.- 2 Ze
- ki. et”,
” FA £
» 8 3 L
- > as.
, > *
S ; . f of 2 "
; AREA OR 56 - $h 't
. « ; %, EO Rouen. Lb . - wy - _ MP 5 5 ;
. 1 - = Re Re % . 44 5 h Ted wer PRE a SY. Pr d*-
; . oy ; ' &=. 5 : er
; ly "I © I - p *s
" ds n ” ; : DES? n we $4 9
* — —_ : Ws. . F LS . <p_2 _ ES 38. ©
: . > - - - FIT Oye age . ar. SOTO 4 CO b
\ $95" 0 B2J - DSS, FP : By Q : a 6. Z m gr Es 4 2 - E ”
" T < : 7 <_— f . 7 L + c + be pe ths - © B
— wat PL W—_—_— In S oon_—_—_— JLO0 TIDY. THT IT IOC" "a hy - —_

ran gt entre er tre ny we