wie


Hot Fa ey
has H Ay me


atevtiperi |
Or aCea aL Sc ol ery?
ico


hen hth


mete
' by
weer


epealte ‘ \ 5 i
ea ies a6 te bay ued} ‘ ed rt 3
H Lh sear sais Aedy wate

PAA LATTE FSG Gav acptet
; DEES pbett try pas
. tic


\
tear Wc hes Cd


teed
ye a4


isidear pte?
Mabrorsry
eh uiart
(ee ae


tay ey tl
Fay he AG EE AZESNLY
DAE D pOe Att

q Py ES TAA EHENS

Nee
ir age.
MEY YS WE Sy ee
ha heath tote
ieee


Veta Reyes
By Liwt LANES ids RF
mi


viyonea te
haa tes :


‘ea
ieee
sees


ry
CARER TENE MeN RS
aay chee oe es


Rea t


pear ertge stir
CELRLTE SA


Citas test
Berktatsc :


pares tsti oy


¥
ey


eLtetel
thinetatne
Eparet an


‘ reg é

2 PALO TL OLY BRStyr ries ‘ nA 7

; tee Err ate 4 f a ‘

fea ; H rie Sperestiet
eegesn sie) ated

ot erties orks |


Paper Tres Lc


rend AOE OES
yer ata


taLeneity
ee EY 4 <
eet Bien ort eed ae Lem Rae fog Mest
7 Palit eeee ears eateete

nersests des ogy 9 Ph ee pis e Crate t eb is pata ob
reereaters et Aes Hotere helps secret ps MT a porter
reyes Recht Vie ge Oe5 $ Hee peed eteces

Dread ih widen Weeerr ire ot) cplecaneiae

i Agee se iets totes ogetet
ates Abeta Stile

\
RY) 2 apt
Nee Fey Pee btn nas Ue TORRE Et

eat be RBS
eat :
aga esate nr (ime wi.

ra iad

erate es 7 nares
apne
oder


Sppeeecte de
ip he mpbee fide
‘
apts he Serr etenen ye
Prey Bi 4 ALARA CERO daeter
To yevede nates Sheet
yO anon ap part ds ones
" start fan qeinner os at cell siet papan tte CLG
eer eats y peas a hecetenn eer sant
er Plat Uh EECETAUM 1 y eet ean Ht REL OT OF
er d av AE Ce fel OR Re ys Pi thn aoa sae
Ag hee aie) bent aes Coy ; aerate ee ae
eee rppiraes eee ere te
saerared
ne per earerey Co vad "
lps ed eye g ee bate
§ TaD ahead
i ergs a ee
i Seykete po pi ayeneteet it ties kum ete? peawariee
bee habe state ode Fuge hi vied tae eT as ab eteban Jape
Ld ott & babu n : PP WAL At as cana wie es
-_ PTD ahh gis ene en an tar ane!
dD. Ap htog pms


fe ee


arnt
ee ok oe


ae


~


ese:


s


Digitized by the Internet Archive
in 2007 with funding from
Microsoft Corporation


http://www.archive.org/details/digestofjustiniad2monruoft


xf


THE
DIGEST OF JUSTINIAN


VOLUME II


CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Dondton: FETTER LANE, E.C.
Cc. F. CLAY, Manacer


€vinburgh: 100, PRINCES STREET
ALSO
Lonton; STEVENS AND SONS, Lrp., 119 anp 120, CHANCERY LANE
Berlin: A. ASHER AND CO.
Leipsig: F. A. BROCKHAUS
few Bork: G. P. PUTNAM’S SONS
Bombay and Calcutta: MACMILLAN AND CO., Lrp.


All rights reserved


THE
DIGEST OF JUSTINIAN


TRANSLATED


BY


CHARLES HENRY MONRO, M.A.


FELLOW OF GONVILLE AND CAIUS COLLEGE CAMBRIDGE
BARRISTER AT LAW


VOLUME II
Cambridge ;
oe
at the University Press ila
1909 > ,


a


|
|


4 |
Ao Nar tot
4 |


Cambridge :


PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.


AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.


PREFATORY NOTE


A the time of Mr C. H. Monro’s lamented death 336 pages of

this volume were already printed off, and there existed also
a considerable amount of manuscript, on which he had been at
work. This had not received his final revision, but it has been
thought best to print it substantially as it stands, rectifying only
a few obvious slips and omissions, too unimportant to call for
indication. The parts of this volume not due to Mr Monro are
the passages from D. 13. 7. 8. 4 to the end of the title, and from
D. 14. 1. 1.18 to the end of the volume.


I am sensible that the task of completing Mr Monro’s volume
ought to have fallen into better qualified hands. That my work is
not worse than it is must be put down to the fact that I have had
the advantage of Professor Reid’s advice on many difficult passages.
But as I have not ventured to impose on him the burden of revising
the whole, the responsibility for all defects rests entirely on me.
I can only hope that what is meant as an expression of gratitude
may not discredit the memory to which it is dedicated.


W. W. BUCKLAND.


24 March 1909


Vil.
VINE


Vil;


CONTENTS.


VIL.


On Usufruct and the rights of the Usufructuary. (De use fructu
et quemadmodum quis utatur fruatur.)

On accrual of Usufruct. (De usu fructu Pipgeniee ) : 3

When the bequest of a Usufruct vests. (Quando dies usus
Jructus legati cedat.) ; F : : :

The ways in which Usufruct or Usus is lost. WOusbus modis usu-
Sructus vel usus amittitur.)

On Usufruct in things which are paeaen or ee by the
using. (De usu fructu earum rerum quae usu consumuntur
vel minuuntur.) ‘

On the case of Usufruct fone ed for or the sept of it near
denied. (Si usus fructus petetur vel ad alium pertinere
negetur.) . 3 : é : é

On the Services of Slaves (De operis servorum.) .

On Usus and Habitatio. (De usu et habitatione.)

What kind of undertaking is given by the Pan p San (Us
Sructuarius quemadmodum caveat.) :


VIII.


On Servitudes. (De servitutibus.) : : é ; :
On Servitudes of Urban Estates. (De servitutibus praediorum
urbanorum. ) : : : ; : : :

On Servitudes of Rustic states. (De servitutibus praediorum
rusticorum.) . : : . 2

Rules common to Urban a Rustic Histaten, (Communia prae-
diorum tam urbanorum quam rusticorum.)

Where an action is brought to recover a Servitude or ‘to Contest
another’s right to one. (AS? servitus vindicetur vel ad alium
pertinere negetur.) . : : ; 4 . : ; ;

How Servitudes are lost. (Quemadmodum servitutes amit-
tuntur.)


44


47
50
51


58


64


68


79


90


97


107


WIT.


Contents


IX.


On alleged commission of Pauperies by a four-footed animal.
(St quadrupes pauperiem fecisse dicatur.) .

On the lex Aguilia. (Ad legem aquiliam.) : : ;

On the case of persons pouring out or throwing out. (De his qui
effuderint vel deiecerint.) ;

On Noxal Actions. (De noxalibus actionibus.)


X.


On settling Boundaries. (Finium regundorum.) .

On Dividing an Inheritance. (Familiae erciscundae.) .
Partition of Common Property. (Communi dividundo.)
Action for Production. (Ad exhibendum.)


De


On administering Interrogatories before the Magistrate and on
Interrogatory Actions. (De interrogationibus in iure faci-
endis et interrogatoriis actionibus.) : : :

When various Matters are heard by the same J ibe. (De quibus
rebus ad eundem iudicem eatur.)

On Corrupting a Slave. (De servo corrupto.)

On Fugitive Slaves. (De fugitivis.)

On Gamblers. (De aleatoribus.) 3

When a Surveyor makes a false report as ‘to Dimexisions (St
mensor falsum modum dixerit.)

On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses and on the right to
conduct funerals. (De religiosis et ania Sunerum et
ut funus ducere liceat.)

On Carrying in a Dead Body and Building a Sepulchral Monit
ment. (De mortuo inferendo et sepulchro aedificando.)


XII.


On Things given in Credit where a Specific Demand is to be made,
and on the Condictio. (De rebus creditis si certum petetur
et de condictione.)

On Swearing an Oath, whether Voluntary, Oaapilecry 6 or J ndicial
(De tureiurando sive voluntario sive necessario sive iudi-
ciali.)

On Swearing to the Claim. (De in an iurando,) 4

On the Condictio to recover a Thing given for a Consider ation
where the consideration fails. (De condictione causa data
causa non secuta.) . ,

On the Condictio on the Ground of an iin the or Gnjust Cars:
sideration. (De condictione ob turpem vel iniustam causam.)

On the Condictio for Money [paid] that was not due. (De con-
dictione indebiti.) ‘

On Condictio for want of Gueid (De thee sine 5 causa.)


Vili Contents
XII.
I. On the Condictio Furtiva. (De condictione furtiva.) .
II. On Condictio under the Statute. (De condictione ew lege.)
III. Ona Triticarian Condictio. (De condictione triticiaria.) :
IV. On things which are to be rendered at a specified place. (De eo
quod certo loco dari oportet.) . - : ;
V. Ona Constitutum of Money. (De pecunia constituta.) )
VI. The Action on Loan for Use or the counter action. (Commodati
vel contra.) . F ‘ :
VII. On the Action on Bledops or the Coaniee Been (De pigneraticia
actione vel contra.) . é : , ;
XIV.
I. On the Exercitorian Action. (De exercitoria actione.)
II. On the Rhodian Law of Jettison. (De lege Rodia de iactu.)
III. © On the Institorian Action. (De institoria actione.)
IV. On the Tributorian Action. (De tributoria actione.) :
V. Dealings alleged to have been had with a person in the potestas of
another. (Quod cum eo qui in aliena potestate est negotium
gestum esse dicetur.)
VI. On the Senatusconsultum Macsdomanune (De or consulta
Macedoniano.)
KV:
I. On the Action on the Peculium. (De peculio.) :
II. When the Action on the Peculium is limited to a Year. (Quando
de peculio actio annalis est.) .
III. On the Actio dein Rem Verso. (Dein rem ee)
IV. On the Actio Quod Iussu. (Quod tussu.)
ERRATUM.
p. 167 read TENTH BOOK.
1


On Serriinc BounpDARIEs.


PAGE
331
336
336


337
342


352


363


378
385
390
398


404


407


414


439
44]
452


DIGEST OF JUSTINIAN.


SEVENTH BOOK.


M. J. Il.


1


[;
On USUFRUCT AND THE RIGHTS OF THE USUFRUCTUARY.


PAULUS (on Vitellius 3) Usufruct is the right to enjoy the
use and produce of another man’s property without encroachment
on the substance thereof.


CELSUS (Digest 18) In fact, usufruct is a right over
a material object, and, when the object is gone, the usufruct must
needs go too.


Galus (Daily matters or golden things 2) A usufruct can
be created in any landed estate by way of legacy, the heir being
ordered to convey the usufruct to the party ; and he is held to
convey it, if he takes the legatee on to the land or suffers him to
enjoy the use and produce thereof. Even without a testament,
however, if anyone wishes to create a usufruct, he can effect his
object by means of pacts and stipulations. 1. A usufruct may
exist! not only in lands and houses, but also in slaves, beasts of
draught, and other kinds of property, 2. but in order to prevent
the bare ownership becoming altogether valueless, in consequence
of the usufruct being constantly outstanding, it has come to be
held that the usufruct may be extinguished in certain definite
ways and revert to the bare ownership. 3. Add that in whatever
kind of way the usufruct is established or terminated, the bare
usus can in practice be established or terminated in the same way.


Pauwus (on the Edict 2) Usufruct is, in respect of many
incidents, a portion of the ownership, and it is a distinguishable
thing (exstat)?, as it can be made to take effect either at once or
from and after a day named.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) A usufruct can from the very
first be created with respect to an undivided share in a thing or
a several share ; it can also in both cases equally be lost by lapse


1 For constitit read consistit. 2 Cf. Roby.
1—2


4 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


of the statutable period, and on the same principle be reduced in
pursuance of the lex Falcidia; moreover, on the death of one
who promised [to grant a usufruct], the burden of the obligation
is divided according to the shares held in his inheritance, and
if the usufruct has to be given in a landed estate which is owned
in common, then, if one of the co-owners should be defendant in
an action [brought to enforce the obligation], the conveyance
which will have to be made will correspond with the share of the
one so defending.


GaAtus (on the provincial Edict 7) A usufruct can be
created in several different ways ; for example, by way of legacy.
On the other hand the bare ownership itself can be given by way
of legacy, with reservation of the usufruct, so as to let such
usufruct remain with the heir. 1. Moreover, a usufruct may be
created on an action famelie erciscunde (for dividing an in-
heritance) or communi dividundo (partitioning common property),
the judge making an order which gives the bare ownership to one
party and a usufruct to the other. 2. People may acquire usu-
fructs not only directly, but also through any persons whom they
have under their potestas. Moreover, there is nothing to prevent
my slave being appointed heir and thereupon the bare ownership
being left by way of legacy with the reservation of the usufruct.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) When a usufruct is left by way
of legacy, the whole produce of the property goes to the usu-
fructuary. A usufruct may be bequeathed either in landed property
or in something movable. 1. Where a usufruct is left in landed
property, say a house, all returns from the property go to the usu-
fructuary, as well as anything there may be coming from buildings,
courtyards and whatever else is appurtenant to the house. Accord-
ingly, the law is that the usufructuary can have an order authorizing
him to take possession of an adjoining house on the ground of
damnum infectum (anticipated damage), and that he will hold
possession of the same as owner, if the other party persist in with-
holding security, and this without losing anything when the usufruct
expires. On the same principle, so Labeo says, the owner of the
property is not at liberty even to raise the height of the building
without your [the usufructuary’s] consent, just as, where the
bequest is of the usufruct of a vacant space, a building cannot
be erected on the spot; and this opinion I should say is correct.
2. Seeing then that the whole produce of the thing goes to the
usufructuary, he can, in fact, so we read in Celsus (Dig. 18), be


TIT. I] Righis of the Usufructuary 5


compelled, by application to the judge, to repair the house ; so far
only, however, as to keep it wind- and water-tight ; but if any part
should have collapsed from age, neither party is bound to repair
it, though, if the heir does repair it, he must allow the usufructuary
to use it. Hereupon Celsus raises the question as to how far the
usufructuary must keep it wind- and water-tight, assuming that he
is not compellable to repair what has collapsed from age ; and, in
fact, [as he tells us,] he is chargeable with [only] a moderate
amount of repair, seeing that, if he is legatee of the usufruct, he
undertakes other burdens as well, such as stipendium and tributum
(property taxes), or a personal allowance1, or an alimentary pro-
vision charged by testament on the property. This we read in
Marcellus (b. 13.) 3. Cassius too says (Jus civile 8) that, by appli-
cation to the judge, a usufructuary may be compelled to repair,
just as he is compelled to plant trees; and all this, so Aristo
observes, is sound. What Neratius says (Parchments 4) is that
the usufructuary cannot be prevented from repairing, just as he
cannot be prevented from ploughing or cultivating ; and not only
may he execute necessary repairs, but he may make improvements
of a luxurious description, such as plastering, ornamental flooring
and the like ; still he is not at liberty to enlarge the buildings or
to remove anything that is of use,


THE SAME (on the Edict 40) even where he intends to put
something better in the place; and this view is correct.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 17) Again, if there is a legacy of
the usufruct of land, then, whatever springs on the land and
whatever can be gathered on it is produce (fructus) and belongs to
the legatee, provided always that he takes it in accordance with
[what would be] the judgment of a fair arbitrator; in fact, Celsus
himself declares (Dig. 18) that he may be compelled to cultivate
properly. 1. And, if there are bees on the land, he has a right to
the usufruct in these as weil. 2. If the land contains stone
quarries, and he desires to hew stone, or it has chalk-pits or sand-
pits, according to Sabinus, he has a right to work ail these as a
careful proprietor would work them, and with this opinion I agree.
3. Even if these quarries were discovered subsequently to the
bequest of the usufruct, what was bequeathed being the usufruct
of the whole field, and not of portions of it, they still are included
in the legacy. 4. Closely connected with the above is a point often


1 Salarium : perhaps read solarium, ground-rent. M.


10


11


6 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


discussed as to cases of accession: and the rule adopted is that the
rights of the usufructuary extend to alluvial ground. If however
an island makes its appearance in a river over against some estate,
Pegasus has it that no usufruct therein belongs to the usufructuary
of the riparian land, though it is an accession to the bare owner-
ship; it is, he says, so to speak, a special estate, the usufruct in
which does not belong to you. There is something to be said for
this view: where the increase is imperceptible, the usufruct itself
is enlarged, but where the part added by accretion is_ plainly
discernible by itself, it does not accrue so as to benefit the
usufructuary. 5. Again, Cassius tells us (Jus civile 8) that profits
derived from fowling and hunting go to the usufructuary, con-
sequently those from fishing do so too. 6. The produce of a nursery
bed, I should say, will go to the usufructuary, with liberty to him,
that is, both to sell and to plant, but he is bound, with a view to
the re-stocking of the land, to have the nursery bed ready and
always renew it, as a sort of working plant for the land, so that it
can be handed over to the owner when the usufruct expires.
7. Of [actual] working plant he has a right to the produce, but he
is not at liberty to sell it; the fact is that if there is a bequest of
a usufruct in land, and there is some field from which the owner
was in the habit of getting stakes or osiers or reeds for purposes
connected with the land a usufruct in which was bequeathed, I
should say that the usufructuary can make use of the field ; subject
to this, that he must not sell anything out of it, unless, of course,
it so happen that a usufruct was left him in the actual willow bed
or the wood containing the stakes or in the bed of reeds; if that
should be the case, he can sell: Trebatius himself says that the
usufructuary can cut coppice and beds of reed to the extent to
which it was generally done by the proprietor, and can sell, even
where such proprietor himself was not in the habit of selling [what
he cut] but of using it: the position of the usufructuary must be
regarded with reference to the quantity that is taken, not to the
nature of the use made of it.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) From coppice the usufructuary
may take props and boughs from trees; from wood which is not
coppice he can take what he wants for his vineyard, provided he
does not impoverish the estate.


Pauuwus (the Digest of Alfenus epitomized 2) But where the
trees are of great size he is not allowed to fell them.


12


TIT. I] highis of the Usufructwary if


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Where trees are pulled up or
thrown down by the force of the wind, the usufructuary, according
to Labeo, can carry them away simply for his own use and for [the
needs of | his house, but he must not use the timber for fuel, if he
has some other source of supply for that purpose ; and this I hold
to be correct; otherwise it would follow that, if the whole estate
should be visited by the above mishap, the usufructuary could
carry off every single tree. Labeo holds however that he can cut
down timber so far as is required for the repair of the house, in
the same way, he adds, as he can burn lime or dig gravel or take
anything whatever which is needed for buildings. 1. Where the
legacy is of the usufruct of a ship, I should say that the ship may
be sent on a voyage, even though there should be some danger of
shipwreck, as the very object of having a ship is to send her to sea.
2. The usufructuary can either take the produce of the thing
himself or assign the right to take it to someone else, or he can
lease such right or sell it; a man who leases uses and so does a
man who sells. Indeed, if he grants it to someone on precariwm
(at will), or gives it away, I should say that he uses it, and con-
sequently retains the usufruct; this is stated in fact by Cassius and
Pegasus, and it is approved of by Pomponius (Extracts from
Sabinus 5). We may add that I do not retain the usufruct merely
where I let it myself; even where someone lets it as a voluntary
agent on my behalf, I still, according to Julianus (b. 35), retain it.
Suppose, however, instead of my letting it, that such voluntary
agent, in my absence and without my knowledge, enjoys the use
and produce himself: I still retain the usufruct, in virtue of the
fact that I have acquired an action on negotia gesta, and this is
supported by Pomponius (b. 5). 3. On one point Pomponius is
doubtful. Suppose a runaway slave in whom I have a usufruct
stipulates for something on the ground of my property (ea 7e mea),
or takes delivery of something: do I retain the usufruct [in the
man] by this fact, on the principle that I am thereby using him ?
On the whole he accepts the view that I do. Very often, he says,
a man may not be making use of slaves on the spot, but yet he
retains a usufruct in them; for instance, where a slave is sick, or
he is a child, and so cannot discharge any service, or where he is
a man in extreme old age; there is no doubt that if you plough
a field, and the field is so barren that it bears no crops, still you
retain the usufruct. Julianus however (Dig. 35) says that, even
without the runaway slave making any stipulation at all, the
usufruct may still be retained ; the owner, he says, retains possession


8 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


even when the slave has taken to flight, and exactly on the same
principle a usufruct may be retained too. 4. He also discusses
the following point : suppose someone [under these circumstances, |
acquires possession of the slave, must we hold that, just as the
slave ceases to be possessed by the bare owner, so too the usufruct
is lost? To this he says, first of all, that it may be maintained that
the usufruct is lost, but even granting this to be the case, it must
still be held that whatever the slave may have stipulated for on
the ground of the property of the usufructuary within the legal
period goes! to the usufructuary. From this, he says, we may
infer that, even if the slave is in the possession of someone else,
still the usufruct is not lost, provided always the man actually
stipulates for something on my behalf, and it makes very little
difference whether he has got into the possession of the heir, or of
someone to whom the inheritance was sold, or of someone who
acquired the bare property by a legacy, or of a mere depredator ;
all that is required to enable the usufruct to be retained being a
disposition of mind amounting to a desire to retain it, and some
act or other done by the slave on behalf of the usufructuary. This
opinion is not unsound. 5. Julianus (Dig. 35) discusses the
following question. Suppose a thief plucks or cuts off ripe fruit
on the tree; who can sue him in a condictio (personal action to
recover it)? is it the owner of the land or the usufructuary? As to
this, he holds that as fruit does not become the property of the
usufructuary unless he gathers it, even though someone else
should sever it from the ground, it rather follows that it is the bare
owner who has a right to bring the condictio, but the usufructuary
has the right of action for theft, because he had an interest in the
fruit being left where it was. On the other hand, Marcellus is
struck with the consideration that, if the usufructuary afterwards
gets hold of the fruit in question, it will perhaps become his
property ; and, if it does, what other account can you give of the
matter than the following: that the property in such fruit first
passes to the owner, and then, when the usufructuary gets hold of
it, it becomes his? The case would resemble that of a thing which
is bequeathed on a condition, which is, for a time, the property of
the heir, but, as soon as the condition is fulfilled, passes to the legatee.
In fact, the truth is that the right of condictio belongs to the bare
proprietor ; but, when the ownership is in suspense, (to use
Julianus’s own language as applied to the case of young which are
allowed to grow up and to a thing delivery of which has been
1 del. potest. M.


13


TIT. 1 Rights of the Usufructuary 9


taken by a slave in whom there is a usufruct, where he has not yet
paid the price, but, however, has given security to the vendor,) it is
correct to say that the right to bring a condictio is in suspense,
+and that still more the ownership is in suspenset?.


THE SAME (07 Sabinus 18) If there is a legacy of the usu-
fruct in anything, the bare owner can claim security in respect of
the thing, this to be ordered on motion made to the judge (officio
judicis); for, just as the usufructuary has a right to use and
produce, so the bare owner has a right to be assured in respect of
his ownership. This applies to every usufruct, as Julianus agrees
(Dig. 38). On a legacy of a usufruct, the usufructuary ought not to
be allowed to bring an action for it until he gives security that he
will use and take the produce in such wise as to satisfy a reasonable
arbitrator ; and if there are several [heirs] at whose charge the
usufruct is left, security should be given to every one separately.
1, Accordingly, when an action is brought in the matter of a
usufruct, the judgment does not turn simply on what has been done
already, but involves also directions as to the exercise of the right
of usufruct for the future. 2. For cases of damage already done
the usufructuary is answerable under the lex Aquilia as well, and
he is liable to an Interdict quod vi et clam, so Julianus says; there
being no doubt at all that a usufructuary is amenable to the
proceedings mentioned and also to actions for theft, just like any
other person who should have been guilty of any such offences in
respect of another man’s property. Moreover, to the question
what is the use of the preetor holding out a special action when
there was already a good right of action under the lea Aquilia,
[Julianus| replied that whereas there were cases in which the
action under the /ex Aquilia was not available, for that reason a
judge was assigned, so that the party might go by his decision ; a
man, for instance, who does not plough up the arable land, who
does not plant fresh vines, or who allows watercourses to fall out of
repair is not liable under the lex Aquilia. Similar rules apply toa
man who has the wsus simply. 3. Ifa dispute should arise between
two usufructuaries, Julianus lays down (Dig. 38) that the fairest
plan is that they should be allowed actions analogous to the commun
dividundo, or else that they should give mutual undertakings by
stipulation as to the way in which they will exercise their respective
usufructs ; why, asks Julianus, should the preetor allow them to
proceed to the extremity of an armed conflict, when he is able to


1 Meaning obscure and text doubtful. Some would omit the last clause. Cf. M_


10 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


bring them to terms by the exercise of his judicial authority ?
This opinion is upheld by Celsus himself (Dig. 20), and I agree that
itis sound. 4. A usufructuary has no right to make the owner's
position worse, but he is at liberty to make it better. [In the first
place,| it may be that what was bequeathed was a usufruct in land,
and then the usufructuary is not allowed to cut down fruit-trees or
to destroy the mansion or to do anything that will injure the bare
property. If the estate happened to be one that was used for
purposes of luxury, and contained pleasure-grounds, alleys, or
shady and agreeable walks under trees other than fruit-trees, he
has no right to fell such trees in order to make, say, kitchen-gardens
or anything else calculated to bring in profit. 5. Hereupon the
question has been asked whether the usufructuary himself may
open quarries or chalk-pits or gravel-pits ; and I should say that he
may go as far as this, provided it will not entail his taking with a
view thereto some part of the arable land itself which is required
[for other purposes]. Accordingly he can search for beds suitable
either for quarrying or for mining operations similar thereto, so
that he can either work such mines of gold, silver, sulphur, copper,
iron, and other minerals as were opened by the owner, or he may
open them himself, if this does not obstruct agricultural operations ;
and should it chance that there is more to be got by such workings
than by the vineyards, plantations or olive groves which are there
already, perhaps he will be allowed to cut these down, seeing that
he is at liberty to improve the position of the bare owner. 6.
Where however the works set on foot by the usufructuary poison
the atmosphere of the farm (agrz) or are likely to require large
numbers of workmen, pickers, etc., so that the whole thing is more
than the bare owner of the estate can put up with, the usufructuary
cannot be held to be exercising his right in accordance with the
view that would be held by an impartial arbitrator. We learn
further that he cannot erect a building on the land, except such a
one as is necessary in connexion with the gathering of produce. 7.
[Secondly] the thing in which a usufruct was left may be a house,
and then, as Nerva the son says, the usufructuary may even put in
windows, and he can aiso add wall-paint, pictures, marble slabs,
statuettes, or anything else that serves for ornament to a dwelling-
house. But he will not be allowed to alter the shape of rooms, or
throw them together, or divide them, or reverse the front or back
doors, or throw open retired places, or alter the hall, or make a
different arrangement of the pleasure-grounds ; in short, what he
can do is to improve what he finds without altering the character of


14


15


TIT. 1] hights of the Usufructuary 11


the house. Moreover, according to Nerva, a legatee of the usufruct
of a house is not at liberty to raise the height of the building, even
if this should obstruct no lights, because the roof would be more
exposed to disturbance ; and Labeo lays down the same rule as to
the bare owner. Nerva adds that the usufructuary cannot block
up windows. 8. Where, again, the usufruct is of a dwelling-house,
the usufructuary cannot let out lodgings in it, or break the house
up into separate apartments ; no doubt, he may let, but he must let
the whole as one dwelling-house. Add that he must not set up a
public bath there. With regard to the statement that he must not
let out lodgings, this must be understood to mean what are
commonly called deversoria (travellers’ quarters), or jfullonica
(fullers’ workshops). For my own part, I should say that, even
where there is a bath in the house which is commonly available for
the use of the owner’s household and is placed in some retired part
of the house or among agreeable apartments, he would not be
acting rightly nor in accordance with what would be held by a
reasonable arbitrator, if he were to proceed to let it out for public
use, any more than if he were to jet the house as a place to stall
horses, or, where the house had a building available for a stable
and coach-house, he were to let it as a bakery,


PauLus (on Sabinus 3) even though he would make much
less profit by the practice.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) If however he should affix any
structure to the house he cannot afterwards take it down or detach
it ; no doubt anything once detached he can claim at law as owner.
1. Further, where the usufruct’ bequeathed is of slaves, he must not
put them to a wrong use, he must deal with them in accordance
with the characters of the respective slaves. If he sends a copying
clerk into the country and makes him carry a hod of lime, turns an
actor into a bath attendant or a concert singer into a hall porter, or
takes a man from the wrestling ground and sets him to superintend
the emptying? of privies, he will be held to be making a wrong use of
the property of the bare owner. 2. He is bound further to furnish
the slaves with food and clothing corresponding to their respective
ranks and characters. 3. In fact, Labeo lays down the general rule
that, in the case of movables of every kind, the usufructuary must
keep within certain limits, so as not to spoil them by special roughness


1 For usus fructus read usu fructu, cf. M.
* For stercorandis read destercorandis, cf. M.


16


17


12 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


or hard usage; indeed otherwise he can even be sued under the lex
Aquilia. 4. And, ifthe usufruct bequeathed is in articles of clothing,
the bequest not being in terms implying the usufruct of a quantity
[but of specific things], the proper rule is that the usufructuary
must so use the things as not to use them up ; still he must not let
them out, as a respectable man would not make that use of them.
5. Accordingly, if the usufruct bequeathed were of theatrical
apparel or curtains or equipment of some other kind, he must not
use anything anywhere but on the stage. Whether he may go so
far as to let [such things] out is a point to consider, but I should say
that he may, and even where the testator’s own practice was to lend
them and not to let them for hire, still I think the fructuary may
let both theatrical and funeral attire. 6. The owner of the bare
property has no right to interfere with the fructuary so long as the
latter uses the thing in such a way as not to put him |the owner]
in a worse position. In the case of some things, there is a doubt
whether the proprietor would be acting within his rights if he
forbad the other to use them, such as tuns, in the case, for instance,
of a usufruct of land, and some hold that the use may be forbidden,
even where the tuns are let into the ground, and they hold the same
of vats, barrels, jars, and pitchers, also of window-panes, where the
usufruct bequeathed is of a house. I should say however, unless
there were an intention to the contrary, that the whole equipment
of the land or the house is included. 7. The bare proprietor cannot
subject the land to a servitude, nor is he at liberty to let a servitude
be lost ; no doubt, so Julianus tells us, he can acquire a servitude,
even against the will of the fructuary. On the same principle, the
fructuary cannot acquire a servitude for the land, but he can keep
one up ; and we may add that if any servitude should be lost by the
fructuary’s non-user, he will be liable on that account. The owner
of the property cannot subject the land to a servitude even with the
fructuary’s consent,


PauLus (on Sabinus 3) unless it be one by which the
fructuary’s position would be none the worse ; for example, where
the owner grants a servitude to a neighbour to the effect that he
himself shall not have the right to raise his house.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) He may make the spot religious
with the usufructuary’s consent ; this is held in deference to religion.
Indeed in some cases the proprietor can make the ground religious
even without such consent ; suppose, for instance, he buries the
body of the testator in it, there being no other equally convenient


18


19


20


Fry. 1 Rights of the Usufructuary 13


place for the interment. 1. It being assumed that the proprietor
is not to put the fructuary in a worse position, the question is often
asked whether the owner of a slave [in whom someone has a
usufruct] can punish him. According to a note to Cassius by Aristo,
he has an unrestricted right of punishment, provided he acts
without malice [towards the usufructuary], although the usu-
fructuary is not allowed to spoil the slave's capacity by calling upon
him for unsuited or unaccustomed services, or to disfigure him
with scars. 2. The owner however may very well surrender the
slave for nowa, if he does it without malicious intent, as surrender
for noxa does not by law put an end to usufruct any more than
does acquisition of the ownership by use, where this takes place
after the usufruct has been created. It is true that no action can
be allowed for recovery of the usufruct, unless the amount at which
the value of the matter in question in the noxal action is assessed
is offered by the fructuary to the surrenderee. 3. Should anyone
kill the slave, I never had any doubt that the fructuary may have
an utilis actio, framed on the lines of the lea Aquiélia.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 3) | Where the usufruct bequeathed is of
a field, fresh trees must be planted in the place of any that have
died off, and the old ones will belong to the usufructuary.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) — Proculus holds that [the usufruct
in]' a block of chambers can be bequeathed in such terms as to
subject it to a servitude to exist in favour of some other block
forming part of the inheritance, in some such words as these :—“ If
such a one promises my heir that nothing shall be done on his part
so as to raise the height of such and such buildings, then I give
and bequeath to him the usufruct of the said buildings”: or as
follows :—“I give and bequeath to such a one the usufruct of such
a house so long as it shall not be built higher than as it now
stands.” 1. If, where trees are blown down by the wind, the pro-
prietor does not take them away, the result being that a usufruct
in the estate or a footway over it is enjoyed less commodiously, the
usufructuary can sue him by the appropriate action.


ULprAnus (on Sabinus 18) If a man makes a legacy
as follows: “I give and bequeath the yearly produce of the
Cornelian estate to Gaius Mvzevius,” these words ought to be
understood to amount to the same thing as a legacy of the
usufruct in the estate.


1 Cf. M.


21


22


23


24


14 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


THE SAME (on Sabinus 17) If the usufruct bequeathed is
of a slave, then whatever the slave acquires by his own services
or through the property of the fructuary belongs to the latter,
whether the slave stipulates or takes delivery of possession. But,
if the slave is appointed heir to some one or receives a legacy,
Labeo makes a distinction turning on the question for whose sake
it is that he is appointed heir or gets the legacy.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 18) Again, the question arises what
ought to be done where a gift is made to a slave in whom some-
one has a usufruct. In any such case, if something was left or
given to the slave with a view to the benefit of the fructuary,
the slave acquires for the latter; if it was for the benefit of the
bare proprietor, he acquires for such proprietor; if it was for
the sake of the slave himself, he acquires for his owner, and
the law does not consider the question how the donor or testator
got his knowledge of the slave or to whom he is indebted for it.
Moreover, if a slave in whom there is a usufruct has something
given him by way of fulfilling a condition, and it is ascertained
that the condition was inserted with a view to the benefit of the
fructuary, the correct view is that what is given goes to the latter ;
it may be remembered that the rule is the same in the case of a
donatio mortis causa.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 17) But just as the slave by stipu-
lating acquires for the benefit of the fructuary, so too, according
to Julianus (Dig. 30), he can by informal agreement acquire an
exceptio for the fructuary. He says further that by taking a
formal release he can procure a discharge for the fructuary. 1. And
as we have already said that what is acquired by the slave's
services goes to the fructuary, it should be understood that the
slave may be compelled to work ; in fact, according to a written
opinion of Sabinus and a dictum of Cassius (Jus civile 8), the
fructuary has a right to inflict moderate corporal punishment ;
only he must not put the slave to the torture nor scourge him
severely.


PAaULus (on Sabinus 10) If a man, intending to make a
gift to one who has the usufruct of a slave, makes a formal
promise on the stipulation of the slave himself, he will contract
an obligation towards the usufructuary; as it is a matter of
ordinary usage that a slave in the position in question should
be able to make a stipulation for the usufructuary.


vir. 1] kights of the Usufructuary 15


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) Moreover if a man stipulates
for something for himself or Stichus, a slave held in usufruct
[by someone else], intending thereby a gift to the usufructuary,
the proper view to take is that if the money is paid to the slave,
it will belong to the usufructuary. 1. Sometimes however the
question for whom it is that a slave so held in usufruct acquires
is in suspense ; suppose, for instance, he [the slave] purchases a
slave and takes delivery, without, so far, paying the purchase
money, but only giving security to the vendor that it shall be
paid, and, in the meantime, the question is asked who owns the
slave [so purchased]. To this Julianus says (Dig. 35) that the
ownership is in suspense, and the payment of the purchase money
will determine who is owner ; and that, if payment is made out of
the monies of the fructuary, the slave had been his by relation
back: and in fact the same holds where, to take another case, a
slave [held in usufruct] makes a stipulation for the repayment of
money which he is going to advance ; here the advance itself will
determine the question who gets the benefit of the stipulation.
It is evident then from this that the ownership is in suspense
until the price is paid. What however is to be said in a case
where the price is only paid after the usufruct has come to an
end? Julianus says (Dig. 35) that the essential question still is
where the payment came from; but Marcellus and Mauricianus
hold that, as soon as the usufruct is gone, the ownership [in the
slave purchased] will appertain to the person who has the property
[in the slave who made the purchase]; however the view of
Julianus is the more indulgent. Should the price be paid
out of the monies of both [proprietor and usufructuary], then,
according to Julianus, the ownership will appertain to both,
rateably, that is, according to the respective sums which they paid.
Supposing, however, the slave pays out of the monies of both on
one and the same occasion, for instance, he had to pay ten
thousand as the price, and he paid ten [thousand] out of the
monies of each, for which of the two does the slave really make
the acquisition? [The answer is that,] if he pays by counting out
the money, the question is who was owner of the coins paid first ;
as for those paid afterwards, he [, the other owner,] can sue to
recover them as owner, or, if the money is already paid away by
the recipient, it is a case for a condictio [to recover the amount] ;
but if the slave pays the whole sum [of twenty thousand] in a bag,
he does not pass the property in anything to the recipient, and
consequently he is not held so far to acquire for anyone the property


16 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


in the thing bought ; as, where the slave pays more than the price,
he does not pass the property in the money. 2. If the same slave
lets out his own services and stipulates for a definite sum to be
paid every year, this stipulation, so far as it relates to the years
for which the usufruct lasts, will entitle the usufructuary, but, so
far as it relates to the ensuing years, although at the outset it
entitled the usufructuary, it passes to the bare owner, true as it is
that, as a rule, when title under a stipulation is once acquired to
any particular person, it does not pass to anyone else, unless it be
to his heir or to someone by whom he is arrogated. On a similar
principle, in a case in which the usufruct [in a slave| is bequeathed
for every one of a number of years in succession, and the slave
hires out his services with a stipulation such as above mentioned,
with every loss of the usufruct by capitis diminutio and subse-
quent reacquisition of the same, the benefit of the stipulation will
shift, and, after going to the heir, it will come back to the
usufructuary. 3. It is a matter of question whether gain which
is not allowed to go to the usufructuary must needs go to the bare
proprietor. As to this, Julianus lays down (Dig. 35) that gain
which will not go to the fructuary does in fact go to the bare
proprietor. Lastly, he says that where a slave stipulates on the
strength of the fructuary’s property for the bare owner expressly
or by his order, he acquires for such owner; but, on the other
hand, if he stipulates for the fructuary, not on the strength of the
fructuary’s property nor yet in consideration of his own services,
the stipulation is inoperative. 4. If a slave who is held by way of
usufruct stipulates for a conveyance of the usufruct im himself,
either without naming any particular person or on behalf of his
bare proprietor expressly, he acquires for such proprietor, the case
being like that of a slave owned by two persons in common, in
which, if the slave stipulates on behalf of one of his owners for
something which already belongs to such owner, the stipulation is
void, because, when a man stipulates for his own property, it is a
void act, but, if the slave stipulates on behalf of the other owner
[for the same thing], he acquires the whole [for him]. 5. The
same writer, Julianus, in the same book, has the following : if the
usufructuary lets out the slave’s services to the slave himself, this
is null and void ; as a matter of fact, he says, if a slave in whom I
have a usufruct makes a stipulation with me founded on my
property, this has no effect, any more than, if another man’s slave
who should be serving me in good faith did the same thing, he
would acquire title for his owner. Similarly, he adds, even if the


26


TIT. I] kights of the Usufructuary 17


slave hires my property from me, the usufructuary, this will not
bind me. In short, the general rule he lays down is this: where a
slave [in whom I have a usufruct], by making a stipulation with
another, would acquire for me, any stipulation which he makes
with me for the same thing is inoperative ; unless indeed, Julianus
adds, he stipulates with me or hires from me expressly on his
owner's behalf. 6. If you put the case of two fructuaries [of the
same slave], and the slave makes a stipulation for something on
the strength of the property of one of them, the question arises
whether that one becomes entitled to the whole, or only to a share
such as he has in the usufruct. It may be remembered indeed
that the very same question is discussed in Sceevola (Questions 2)
with reference to the case of two bona jide possessors ; what that
author says is that it is commonly held and in fact stands to
reason that, if the slave’s stipulation is founded on the property of
one of the two, then part is acquired for that one exclusively [of
the other], and part for the owner ; but, if the stipulation is made
[on behalf of either] expressly, it does not admit of doubt, the
name of the party being mentioned, that he acquires the whole.
A similar result follows, he says, where the slave stipulates by the
order of one of the two; as an order is taken to be equivalent
to express mention. The same rule must be applied in the
case of fructuaries too, so that, in any case in which what
goes to the fructuary is less than the whole, it [that is, the
rest,| will go to the bare proprietor ; we have already shown that
he [such proprietor] can acquire by a title founded on the property
of the fructuary. 7. With regard to the statement made above
that the fructuary can acquire [through the slave] by a title
founded on his own property or on the slave’s services, a point
to consider is whether this applies only where the usufruct is
created by way of legacy, or it holds equally where the title is
founded on delivery or stipulation or any other ground. But the
correct view is that of Pegasus, which in fact is followed by
Julianus (b. 16), that the fructuary acquires in every case.


PauLus (on Sabinus 3) If a slave held in usufruct lets out
his services, and, before the expiration of the period of service
agreed on, the usufruct comes to an end, the period runs on for the
benefit of the bare proprietor. Moreover, where the slave at the
outset stipulates for a fixed sum as the consideration for a fixed
amount of service, if he [the usufructuary | suffers capitis diminutio,
a similar result follows.

M) Je DR 2


27


28


18 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) If the testator left fruit on the
tree already ripe, the fructuary will get them, if he found them still
on the tree when the legacy vested ; in fact even standing crops go
to the fructuary. 1. Where the owner was in the habit of using
shops for the sale of his wares or the transaction of business, then
no doubt the fructuary will be at liberty to let them for the sale of
wares, even though these should be of a different kind ; all that
has to be attended to is that the usufructuary do not destroy the
character of the property nor make use of his usufruct in a manner
which amounts to an insult or affects the proprietor’s good name.
2. Where the usufruct bequeathed is that of a slave whom the
testator used to employ, so to speak, for indeterminate services, if
the usufructuary gives him some kind of schooling or teaches him
an accomplishment, he can make use of the accomplishment or skill
so acquired. 3. If anything is owing by way of a charge for drains
or has to be paid for the channel of an aqueduct which crosses
the land, this burden will fall on the fructuary ; and if there
is anything due by way of a contribution for keeping up the high-
way, I should say that the fructuary will have to bear this too ;
and, on the same principle, where anything has to be contributed
out of the produce on the occasion of troops passing, or, again, has
to be paid to the municipal authorities, all these dues will be
chargeable to the fructuary ; as a matter of fact, possessors of land
are in the practice of assigning to the municipal authorities a fixed
portion of their produce at a reduced valuation, as also of discharg-
ing taxation’ due to the Treasury. 4. If the land has been subjected
to any kind of servitude, the fructuary will be bound to allow it,
and consequently, if there is an obligation to create a servitude
existing in pursuance of a stipulation, I should say the rule is the
same. 5. We may add this question: if a slave has been sold, but
the purchaser is debarred under a penalty from putting him to
certain specified uses, and then there is a bequest of a usufruct in
the slave, is the usufructuary bound to attend to the same restric-
tions? My opinion is that he is so bound; otherwise he is not
enjoying the usufruct in accordance with what would be held by
an impartial arbitrator.


PoMPONTIUS (on Sabinus 5) A bequest can be made of the
usufruct in old gold and silver coins which are habitually used as
ornaments.


' For fusiones read functiones. Cf. Roby, 185.


29


30


31


32


33


TIT. Rights of the Usufructuary 19


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) We are told by Celsus (Dig. 32)
and Julianus (Dig. 61) that a man may make a bequest of a usu-
fruct in the whole of his property, as long as this does not exceed
in value three-fourths of the inheritance ; and this is the better
opinion.


Pauwus (on Sabinus 3) Where a man who has two houses
bequeaths the usufruct in one of them, then, according to Mar-
cellus, the heir is at liberty to raise the height of the other so as to
interfere with the lights of the first, because, even where a house is
darkened, it is still possible to live in it. The rule must be taken
subject to this qualification that the house must not be darkened
completely, there must be some moderate access of light retained
such as will suffice for the needs of the occupiers.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 10) The expression “ founded on the
property of the fructuary” (ea re fructuarit) is held to apply to
any gift or allowance which the fructuary may have made to the
slave, or any profit that the latter may make in the course of
managing the fructuary’s affairs.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) Where a man makes delivery
of a single house, which is the only one he has, or of a piece of
land, he may reserve a servitude which is personal and not preedial,
for example, wsws or usufruct. However, if he reserves a right of
pasturage or a right to live on the land, this too is a valid reserva-
tion, as there are many cases of forest tracts in which the profits
are taken by pasturing cattle on them ; and where what is reserved
is a right to live on the land, whether such reservation is for a
definite time or for the life of the party who makes it, this is held
to amount to reserving the wsus.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 17) If the usufruct is bequeathed to
Titius and the bare property to Mzevius, and Titius dies in the life-
time of the testator, nothing is left in the hands of the party named
heir ; indeed, this is laid down by Neratius himself. 1. It is agreed
that in certain cases the usufruct in a thing does not receive the
same treatment in law as the property!; thus where proceedings are
taken to recover a portion of an estate or a portion of a usufruct,


1 Tread proprietatis for partis, the latter word standing alone in the MS: M.
would read both words, and so did the Basilica. Cf. D. 44. 2. 14. 1, Assuming this
last view to be correct, I should be inclined to read, or at least to understand, partis
after usumfructum, and the meaning would be “the usufruct in a part does not
receive the same treatment as the property in a part.”


2—2


34


20 On Usufruct and the [BOOK Vil


and thereupon, the suit being lost, an action is brought to recover
a further portion which is derived from accrual, then, according to
Julianus, in the action for the property, the eaceptio of “judgment
pronounced ” is a good defence, but in that for the usufruct, it is not
a good defence, because the additional portion of the land itself
—say an alluvial strip—would accrue to the first portion, but the
[additional portion of] usufruct would accrue to the person.


JULIANUS (Digest 35) Whenever a usufruct is bequeathed
to two persons in terms importing that they are to enjoy the
same in alternate years, then, if the bequest is made in the
words “to Titius and Meevius,” it may fairly be said that it is given
for the first year to Titius and then to Meevius ; but, if there are
two legatees of the same name, and the words are as follows :—
“T give the usufruct to the two Titii for alternate years,” then,
unless they come to an understanding as to which of them is to
have it first, they will be in one another's way. If, however,
Titius [in the case first mentioned,] should, in the course of one of
his years of usufruct, acquire the ownership, then, for the time,
he will not have what was bequeathed him (viz. the usufruct),
though Meevius will have a right of usufruct every other year, and
thereupon, if Titius should dispose of the ownership, he will have
his usufruct, because, supposing the case were that a usufruct was
bequeathed me on a suspensive condition, and, before the event
happened, I acquired the ownership from the heir, but while the
event was still pending, I disposed of such ownership to someone
else, I should be allowed to enjoy the legacy. 1. If you bequeath
the usufruct of a farm to your tenant [therein], he can bring an
action to recover such usufruct, and he can sue your heir on the
contract of lease, by doing which he will secure that he shall not
have to pay any rent and that he will get back the cost he has
incurred in the cultivation. 2. The question whether the testator
bequeaths the usufruct of his entire property or of separate specific
objects has, I should say, a practical bearing in the following
way :—if a house is burnt down, the usufruct of the house, where
specifically bequeathed, cannot be sued for ; but where the bequest
was of a usufruct in the whole property, there can be an action for a
usufruct in the bare site : a man who bequeaths the usufruct of his
property generally is held to bequeath the usufruct, not only of the
things which are there in specific form, but in fact of his whole
substance, and part of the substance of his property is the site in
question.


TIT. 1 Rights of the Usufructuary 21


THE SAME (on Urseius Ferox 1) If a usufruct has been
bequeathed, but the person named heir delays making entry in
order to defer the acquisition of the legacy, in the opinion of Sabinus
this will have to be made good. 1. A bequest was made to me of
the usufruct in a slave, it being added that on the termination of
my usufruct he was to be free : after this I accepted from the heir
an estimated equivalent of the usufruct in money: the slave, accord-
ing to an opinion given by Sabinus, will not on that account be
thereupon free, because when I have got something as an equivalent
for the slave, I may be said to be enjoying the usufruct in him, and
the contingent event on which he becomes free remains the same
as before, so that he will acquire his freedom on the occurrence of
my death or capitis diminutio.


AFRICANUS (Questions 5) A man first bequeathed the
usufruct of a vacant plot of ground and then built a block of
chambers thereon, after which the building collapsed or was burnt
down in the testator’s lifetime: the opinion given was that the
usufruct could be claimed. On the other hand a corresponding
conclusion would not hold, if the usufruct were bequeathed in the
block itself, and thereupon first the place were made into a bare
site and after that into a block again. It would be a similar case
to this last if there were a bequest of the usufruct in bowls, which
were thereupon reduced to a mass of metal and this again made
into bowls ; as, however true it might be that the original character
of bowls was restored, still they would not be the same bowls as
those in which usufruct was bequeathed. 1. I stipulated with
Titius that he should give me the Cornelian estate, reserving the
usufruct ; after which Titius died ; the question was asked what it
was that his heir was bound to give me. Our authority answered
that the real question was what was the intention in the reservation
of the usufruct ; if the real agreement was that a usufruct should
be established simply in the person of someone or other, then the
heir will only be bound to convey the bare ownership ; but if it was
that the usufruct should be reserved for the promisor alone, his heir
would have to give ownership with immediate enjoyment. That
this is the true state of the case appeared, he said, more plainly in
the case of a legacy, as where an heir at whose charge the bare
ownership is bequeathed with a reservation of usufruct dies before
proceedings are taken on the testament, there is still less room for
doubt that the heir of such heir will have to give the ownership
with enjoyment. The construction is the same where the legacy is


37


38


39


40


41


22 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


made on a condition and the heir dies pending the fulfilment of the
condition. 2. A usufruct in a slave was bequeathed to Titius ; and,
at a time when the heir was already in default as to conveying the
usufruct, the slave died; the only possible conclusion is, se our
authority says, that the obligation of the heir is measured by an
amount representing the interest the legatee had in there being no
default ; so that, in short, an estimate should be made of the value
of the usufruct reckoned from the time [of default] to the day on
which the slave died ; and this implies further that, if Titius died
himself, then, in like manner, there would have to be an amount
given to his heir which would represent the value of the usufruct
from the time when default was first made down to the day of
Titius’s death.


THE SAME (Questions 7) The following question has been
asked. I stipulated with you that you should give me a usufruct
in something or other for the next ten years, but you failed to give
it, by your own default, and so five years passed. How stands the
law? Again, suppose I stipulated with you that you should give
me the services of your slave Stichus for the next ten years, and as
before, five years passed. The answer made was that there was a
good action for both usufruct and services for the time which you
allowed to pass without the gift being made.


MARCIANUS (Institutes 3) There is no user on the part of the
usufructuary where neither he himself uses nor anyone else uses on
his account ; as, for instance, a person who bought [the usufruct |
or hired it or took it as a gift, or who volunteered to act as agent
to the usufructuary. There is, no doubt, this distinction to be made,
that, if I sell a usufruct, then, even though the purchaser should
make no use of the thing, I am regarded as still retaining the
usufruct ;


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) because a man who
enjoys the purchase money is regarded as having [the usufruct]
just as much as one who has the use and enjoyment of the actual
thing :


MARCIANUS (Institutes 3) but, if I give the usufruct away,
I no longer retain it, unless the donee uses the thing.


THE SAME (Institutes 7) It must be held on the whole that
there can be a good bequest of a usufruct in a statue or a picture,


42


43


44


45


46


TT. 1 Rights of the Usufructuary 23


because even objects such as these can be turned to a certain use if
put in a suitable place. 1. There are some estates of such a kind
that they are rather a source of expense than of profit, still a
usufruct can be left even in such estates.


FLORENTINUS (Institutes 11) If there should be a bequest
of the use to one man and the produce (fructus) to another in
respect of the same thing, the fructuary will get whatever remains
after the just claims of the usuary are satisfied ; but this will not
prevent him from having some use too with a view to having
produce. 1. It makes a practical difference whether you have a
usufruct left you in the testator’s property or in the money value
thereof; if what is left is the usufruct in the property, you must
deduct from such property any specific thing which is given you by
a separate bequest, and you will havea usufruct in all the rest ; but.
if what is bequeathed is the usufruct of the value in money, the
valuation will comprise even the thing so separately bequeathed.
The fact is that where a testator bequeaths the same thing over
and over again, this does not enlarge the legacy, but, when a par-
ticular thing has been bequeathed, you can enlarge the legacy
by bequeathing the estimated value of it as well.


ULPIANUS (Rules 7) A usufruct can be bequeathed even of
a share in the testator’s property, and, if it is not said expressly
what share, it is taken to be half the property.


NERATIUS (Parchments 3) A usufructuary is not at liberty
to put fresh plaster on walls which are at the time in a rough
condition, because, granting that he would put the owner in a better
position by improving the building, still he cannot do this in pur-
suance of any right that he has as usufructuary ; it is one thing
for him to maintain what he received, and another to set up some-
thing new’.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) Just as the cost of
a slave’s board falls on the person who has a usufruct in him, so


‘too cost incurred through his illness it is plain as a matter of


common sense must fall on the same person.


Pauuus (Extracts from Plautius 9) In a testament a
stranger is appointed heir, an emancipated son is passed over, and
the ownership [in the whole estate] is bequeathed to the mother
of the testator, with a reservation of the usufruct ; in this case, if


1 For an ete. read aliud novum facere. M.


47


48


49


50


24 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


the bonorwm possessio contra tabulas is sued out, the full ownership
must, in deference to filial duty, be given to the mother. 1. Where
the testator orders that his heir shall repair a block of chambers in
which he bequeaths the usufruct, the usufructuary can brig an
action on the testament to compel the heir to execute the repairs.


Pomponius (Extracts from Plautius 5) Should the heir
fail to execute them, and the usufructuary in consequence be
unable to get the benefit of his usufruct, the latter's own heir will
have a right of action accordingly ; the damages being the amount
of difference it would have made to the usufructuary if the heir
had not neglected the matter; even though the usufruct should
have come to an end by the death of the usufructuary.


Pauuus (on Plautius 9) If, in the absence of the usufructuary,
the testator’s heir executes repairs, as his voluntary agent, he will
have an action against the usufructuary on negotia gesta, although
in fact the heir had an eye to his own future advantage. But if
the usufructuary is prepared to abandon the usufruct, he is not
compellable to repair, and he is released from the action on negotia
gesta. 1. Coppice, even though cut out of season, is quite re-
cognised to be part of the produce, just as olives gathered before
they are ripe are part of the produce, or grass cut for hay before
the regular time.


Pompontus (on Plautius 7) If a usufruct is bequeathed to
you and me at the charge of Sempronius and Mucius, heirs of the
testator, then I shall have a quarter of the whole out of the share
of Sempronius and another quarter out of the share of Mucius, and
you will similarly have two quarters out of their respective shares.


PAULUS (on Vitellius 3) Titius left the Tusculan estate as
a legacy to Meevius, with a fjidei-commissum that he should convey
to Titia the usufruct in half the same estate; Meevius rebuilt
a farmhouse which had fallen to pieces from age, but which was
required for storing and keeping farm produce: the question was
asked whether Titia was bound to undertake part of the expense
in proportion to her usufruct. Sczevola’s answer was that if
Meevius was obliged to build before the usufruct was given, he
could not be called upon to hand it over except on the terms
of! the expense being taken into account.


1 ut inserend. before ejus.


Tr. .1| Rights of the Usufructuary 25


Mopestinus (Differences 9) It is held that the bequest of
a usufruct to Titius “when he dies” is inoperative, as it is referred
to the very time at which the usufruct ceases to belong to the
person named.


THE SAME (ules 9) Where a usufruct in a thing is left by
testament, then, if taxes are payable for the thing, there is no
doubt that the usufructuary is bound to pay them, unless it is
shown that the testator directed by way of express fidei-commissum
that these charges as well as others should be paid by the heir.


JAVOLENUS (Epistles 2) If the usufruct bequeathed is in
a block of chambers, then, as long as any portion of the block
remains, the legatee has the usufruct in the whole site.


THE SAME (Epistles 3) The usufruct of an estate was
bequeathed to Titius on a contingency at your charge as heir ; you
sold and delivered the estate to me, with a reservation of the
usufruct: I wish to know, supposing the contingency fails to
happen, or it happens and the usufruct has expired, to whom
it belongs. Answer: I understand your question to refer to the
usufruct which was bequeathed. I should say then that if the con-
tingency on which the legacy depends comes to pass, there is no
doubt that the usufruct in question will belong to the legatee, and
that, if by any chance it should be lost to him, it is merged in the
bare ownership of the estate; but if the contingency does not come
to pass, the usufruct will belong to the heir, all rules of law
holding good with reference to the heir which regard the loss of
usufruct and which are commonly put in force. However, in a sale
of this kind, we ought to look at the precise terms of the agree-
ment between the vendor and the purchaser, so that, if it is shown
that it was for the sake of the legacy that the usufruct in question
was reserved, then, even if the contingency does not come to pass,
it ought to be given up by the vendor to the purchaser.


Pomponius (on Quintus Mucius 26) Should there be a
bequest of the wsws in an infant slave and nothing more, then,
although for the present the wsws amounts to nothing, still as soon
as the child outgrows the age of infancy, it begins to be in force.


Gatus (on the provincial Edict 17) It has been made a
question whether an action in respect of a usufruct ought to be
allowed to a municipal body; the point being that there seemed to
be a danger of the usufruct becoming perpetual, as it would not


57


58


26 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


be lost by death, and hardly by capitis diminutio, and the con-
sequence would be that the ownership would be valueless in
consequence of the usufruct being always outstanding. However
the law now is that an action must be allowed. This leads to a
further doubt, viz. as to how long the municipality is to be
protected in the enjoyment of the usufruct; but it is held that it
will be protected for a hundred years, because that is the utmost
extent of the life of a man, however long he lives.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 7) A landowner left by testament
to a usufructuary the estate in which the latter had the servitude
of usufruct, but this estate the legatee was compelled, after being
in possession for a considerable time, to give up to the son of the
testator, who had carried through successfully a case of inofficious
testament: it was clear from the event that ensued that the right
of usufruct remained untouched. 1. The produce of certain
portions of land being left by jidet-commisswn to various freedmen
by way of alimentary provision, on the death of any beneficiaries
the profits of their respective shares revert from them to the bare
owner.


ScAVOLA (Responsa 3) A woman who had a usufruct in
land died in the month of December, all the produce procurable
from the land having been already carried by the tenants in the
month of October. Hereupon the question arose whether rent
ought to be paid to the heir of the usufructuary, although she
herself died before the first of March, which was the day on which
rents became due, or it should be apportioned between the heir of
the usufructuary and the municipality (res publica), to which the
ownership was bequeathed. I replied that the municipality had
no right of action against the tenant, but that, upon the facts as
stated, the heir of the usufructuary would have a right to receive
the whole rent on the regular day. 1. “I give and bequeath to
Sempronius a sixth part of the produce of the crops of cabbage
and leeks which I have in the field of the Farrarii.’” The
question is whether these words can be held to amount to a
bequest of the usufruct. My answer was :—‘No, not of the
usufruct, but of the particular portion of the produce gathered
which was mentioned in the bequest.’ 2. It was further asked,
assuming that it was not a case of usufruct, whether the bequest
was one of the sixth part of the produce for every successive year.
I answered that it must be held to be left for every year, unless
the contrary were expressly proved by the heir.


59


60


61


PEP ‘| Rights of the Usufructuary 27


PAULUS (Sentences 3) Where trees are overturned by the
force of a tempest without any negligence on the part of the
usufructuary, it is not the law that he must put others in their
place. 1. Whatever is produced on the land or is gathered from it
goes to the fructuary, and so do the rents of farms already leased,
if such rents are expressly included. But, as in the case of a sale,
if the rents were not expressly excepted, the usufructuary can
eject the lessee. 2. Profit derived from cutting reed or stakes
goes to the fructuary, where this has formed part of the usual
returns from the land.


THE SAME (Sentences 5) The usufructuary of any estate
may, if warned off or ejected, bring an action to have restored to
him everything which was seized on the occasion; moreover, if the
usufruct should meanwhile be terminated by some independent
event, then too an utilis actio is allowed, to recover any produce
already got in. 1. Where it is sought to recover a usufruct in
land, and the land is in possession of someone who is not owner,
an action is allowed. Consequently, if there is a question between
two persons as to the ownership in the land, the usufructuary has
none the less a right to be in occupation (¢ possessione), but
if the usufructuary’s own title as such should be disputed, his
enjoyment as usufructuary is postponed for the time, but an under-
taking has to be given him! for making over to him whatever he
would receive out of the profits, or, if [such] security is not
furnished, he is allowed to take the profits himself, and then
security must be given him by the person in possession (possessor)
that he will not prevent the person to whom the usufruct was left
from taking such profits, so long as he is himself endeavouring to
establish his legal rights”.

NERATIUS (Responsa 2) A usufructuary cannot put a fresh
gutter on the walls; [and,] where a building is only begun, the law
is that a fructuary is not at liberty to complete it, even if he cannot
make any use of that part of the property without doing so; indeed,
it is held that there can be no usufruct in such a building itself ;
unless, in both cases, when the usufruct was created or bequeathed,
it was expressly added that the things above mentioned might be
done.

1 After caveri read or understand oportet.

2 The above translation is more or less conjectural. Mommsen puts the clause
from satisque ci (and then security) down to de jure swo probet at the end, instead


of after in possessione esse debet (a right to be in occupation), and I have followed
him. The words ipse frui permittitur betray the hand of the interpolator.


62


63


64


65


66


28 On Usufruct and the [BOOK VII


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 7) It is quite correctly said
that a usufructuary may hunt in the forests or on the moors on a
landed estate ; and if he captures a boar or a stag, he is not taking
any property of the bare owner’s, but he makes what he takes his own
either by the law of usufruct or else by universal law. 1. If wild
animals were kept on the estate, confined in preserves when the
usufruct began, is the fructuary at liberty to train them, but not to
kill them? and if there are any which he confined by his own
exertions at the outset, or which afterward were caught in a snare,
or slipped into one, are these in law the usufructuary’s property ?
The most convenient rule is, in order to avoid the uncertainty
which there would be as to the right enjoyed by the usufructuary
in cases of different animals, owing to the difficulty of establishing
sound distinctions, that it is enough to assign to the bare proprietor
on the expiration of the usufruct the same numbers of the different
kinds respectively as he had at the time when the usufruct began.


PAULUS (on exceptional law) It is possible for people to
transfer to others what they have not got themselves ; for instance,
when a man has an estate, then, though he has not got a usufruct,
nevertheless he can grant a usufruct to someone else.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 51) Where a _ usufructuary is
prepared to abandon his usufruct, he cannot be compelled to
repair the house, even in those cases in which this duty would
fall on the usufructuary. Indeed, after issue has been joined
with the fructuary, it must be held that, if he is prepared to
abandon the usufruct, the judge ought to dismiss the action.


PomMPontIus (Hatracts from Plautius 5) However, as the
fructuary is [absolutely] bound to repair anything which has been
damaged by his own act or that of any member of his household,
the action ought not [in such a case] to be dismissed, even though
he should be prepared to abandon the usufruct ; and in fact he
is himself bound to do whatever a careful householder would do
in his own house. 1. The heir is no more bound to repair
anything which was left by the testator in a ruinous condition
from age than he would be if the testator had bequeathed the full
proprietorship.


PAULUS (on the Edict 47) There may be a good right of
action against a usufructuary not only on the lex Aquilia, but also
for spoiling a slave (servi corrupti) and for tnjuria, in any case
where he reduces the value of the slave by torture.


67


68


69


70


7, | hkights of the Usufructuary 29


JULIANUS (extracts from Minicius 1) The legatee of a
usufruct can sell it to a stranger, even against the will of the
heir.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) It was a question in old days
whether the child of a female slave belongs to the fructuary ; but
the opinion of Brutus came to prevail, to the effect that the law! of
usufruct has no application to the case, as a human being cannot
be treated as produce of a human being ; and, on this principle,
the fructuary will not even have a usufruct in the child. Suppose
however the usufruct were left in the expected child itself,
would the legatee have this usufruct? As to this, seeing that
expected offspring can be bequeathed, so can the usufruct therein.
1. The young of cattle, however, Sabinus and Cassius were both
of opinion would belong to the fructuary. 2. No doubt, where
there is a bequest of the usufruct in a flock of sheep or a herd
of cattle, the usufructuary will be bound to fill up the flock out of
the young that are born from time to time, that is to supply the
place of dead


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) or useless animals by means of
others which he provides for the purpose, so that, after these are
put in the place of the old ones, these latter may become the
property of the usufructuary, so as to prevent the bare owner from
making a profit by the whole thing. Of course, just as the sub-
stituted animals at once become the property of the bare owner,
so too the old ones cease to belong to him, in accordance with
the legal character of produce ; in fact the general rule is that
whatever is produced belongs to the fructuary, and, when he puts
it in the place of something else, it ceases to be his.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) How then, if he does not act in
the way described and does not fill up the number? According
to Gaius Cassius (Jas civile 10) he is liable to be sued by the bare
proprietor. 1. In the meantime, however, until they are reared
and the number of the animals that are dead is filled up, the
question arises to whom these young belong. To this Julianus
says (Dig. 35), that the ownership in them is in suspense ; so that,
if they are set apart, they belong to the bare proprietor, if not, to
the usufructuary, and this is a sound opinion. 2. According to
this, if the young die, the loss will fall on the usufructuary and not


1 Ins. jus after optinwit. M.


71


72


73


30 On Usufruct and the [ BOOK VI


on the bare proprietor, and he will be obliged to rear other young.
Hence Gaius Cassius declares (b. 8) that the flesh of any young
that die belongs to the fructuary. 3. With regard however to
the rule above given, that the usufructuary is bound to rear
animals to set apart, this is only so in cases where the usufruct
bequeathed is of a flock or a herd or a stud of horses, in short of
some collective unity; if it is of such and such individual animals,
there will be no number for him to fill up. 4. Again, suppose
that, at the time when the young were born, nothing had occurred
to make it necessary for any to be set apart, but something has'
occurred now, subsequently to their birth ; a point to consider is
whether he will be bound to take animals to set apart only from
among those born later or he must take them from those born
already. I should say however that the better opinion is that
such as are born at the time when the flock is complete are the
property of the fructuary, and the fructuary will suffer only in the
case of some subsequent falling off in the flock. 5. Setting apart
is matter of fact, and Julianus calls it expressly parting off,
separating, making a separation, as the ownership in the creatures
set apart is in the bare proprietor.


MARCELLUS (Digest 17) Where a man builds on a vacant
plot in which someone else has a usufruct, then, if the right to the
surface is taken away before the expiration of the period required
for the usufruct to be lost, according to what the old lawyers laid
down, the usufruct is restored.


UuLpranus (on Sabinus 17) If the owner of the bare
property bequeaths a usufruct, the true view is, as is stated by
Meecianus (Questions on jidei-commissa 3), that the bequest is
valid, and, if it chance that it [the preceding usufruct] is merged
in the bare property in the lifetime of the testator, or before entry
is made on the inheritance, then it [the later usufruct] goes as
bequeathed. Meecianus is ready to go further still ; in his opinion
even where the [preceding] usufruct only falls in after entry is
made on the inheritance, it [the later usufruct] is validly vested
and goes as bequeathed.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) Where there is a bequest to me
of the usufruct in a vacant plot, I can build a shed there for the
purpose of keeping in it goods of mine which are on the spot.


1 For et read est. Cf. M.


f
i
i
Ae
‘

,


74


TIT. 11] Rights of the Usufructuary 31


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 7) if a usufruct is be-
queathed to your slave Stichus and my slave Pamphilus, such a
bequest is equivalent to one made to you and me; accordingly
there is no doubt that the usufruct belongs to us in equal shares.


Il.
On ACCRUAL OF USUFRUCT.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Whenever there is a bequest of
usufruct, the right of accrual as between two usufructuaries exists
only where the usufruct was left jointly (conjunctem) ; but if a
usufruct in a share was left to each separately, there is no doubt
that the right of accrual does not exist. 1. Hereupon the question
is asked in Julianus’s Digest (b. 35), supposing a usufruct is left to
a slave who is owned by two persons in common, and so a right to
it is fully acquired by the two owners, whether, if one of the two
declines the usufruct or loses it, the other has the whole; as to
which Julianus’s opinion is that it belongs to the other ; and, even
if the usufruct came to the owners of the slave not in equal shares
but in shares equal to their respective shares in the slave, never-
theless you look at the person of the slave and not of the owners,
so that it goes to one of the owners, and does not become an
accession to the bare property [in the thing]. 2. The same writer
says, Supposing a usufruct is bequeathed to a slave owned by two
persons in common and to Titius separately, then, if one of the two
co-owners loses the usufruct, it will not belong to Titius, but to the
other co-owner alone, as being the only person who was entitled
jointly ; and this is the proper view, since so long as even one only
[of the two joint owners] is using the thing, you may say that the
usufruct is still lodged where it was. The rule is the same if the
usufruct should be left to two jointly and a third separately.
3. In some cases, however, even if the two legatees did not take
jointly, still the usufruct bequeathed may come to one of them by
accrual ; for example, suppose the usufruct in the whole estate is
left to me separately and is left to you in similar terms. For, as
Celsus himself says (Dig. 18) and Julianus too (b. 35), the fact of
concurrence (concursus) makes us own shares, and the same would
be the case even with the bare property itself, as, if one declined,
the other would have the whole estate. But, in the case of usufruct
there is this in addition, that! even when the usufruct has been


1 For quia read or understand quod.


32 On Accrual of Usufruct [BOOK VII


created and afterwards lost, it may none the less be the subject of
a right of accrual ; indeed all writers cited by Plautius agree upon
this point, and, as Celsus and Julianus cleverly put it, usufruct is
created and bequeathed every successive day, and not necessarily,
like the bare property, only at the time when [it can be first] sued
for. Accordingly, so soon as either legatee finds no one else in
concurrence with him, he will enjoy the usufruct to its full extent
by himself and it matters not whether the bequest was joint or
several. 4. Again, Julianus says (Deg. 35) that if a testator appoints
two heirs, and bequeaths the bare property with a reservation of
usufruct, the heirs have no right of accrual ; the usufruct is held to
be created [in shares'], it does not become divided by concurrence ;


AFRICANUS (Questions 5) consequently any share in the
usufruct which may have been lost will revert to the legatee, that
is the owner of the bare property.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Neratius himself holds that the
law of accrual will have no application [in such a case] Responsa
1); and with this view agrees the principle laid down by Celsus,
where he says that the right of accrual occurs only when, two
persons having the usufruct for the whole, it is divided between
them by their concurrence. 1. Hence Celsus declares (b. 18) that
if two co-owners of an estate both convey the bare property with a
reservation of usufruct, then, whichever of the two loses his
usufruct, it reverts to the bare property, not, that is, to the whole
property, but rather the usufruct of each [conveying party | becomes
an accession to the share which he himself conveyed ; in short it
must needs merge in the particular share from which it was
originally parted. 2. Moreover, the right of accrual exists not
only where a usufruct is bequeathed to two persons, but equally
where a usufruct is bequeathed to one and the estate to another ;
as, if the one to whom the usufruct was bequeathed should lose it,
it thereupon belongs to the other rather by right of accrual than
in virtue of its merger in the bare property. This was to be
expected, seeing that, if a usufruct is bequeathed to two, and, in
the hands of one of the two, it comes to be merged in the bare pro-
perty, this does not put an end to the right of accrual either for the
benefit of the one in whose hands the merger takes place or from
him [for the other], and in whatever way he might have lost [his
usufruct| before the merger, he may lose [it] in the same way now.
This is the view of Neratius and Aristo, and Pomponius confirms it.


+ MG


a


TET.) I | On Accrual of Usufruct 33


JULIANUS (Digest 35) If the bare property in an estate is
bequeathed to you, and the usufruct of the same estate to me and
Meevius and you, | and Meevius will have third parts respectively
of the usufruct, and the remaining third part will be merged in the
bare property. But if either Mzevius or I should suffer capitis
diminutio, a third will be divided between you and the other of us
two, so that the one of us two who has not suffered capitis dimi-
nutio will have half the usufruct and you will have a right to the
property together with [the other] half of the usufruct ;


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) and, if you convey away
the bare property, reserving the usufruct, Julianus is of opinion
that it is still a case of accrual, and that you are not held to
acquire a fresh usufruct.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) The law is the same where the
usufruct is merged in the property in the hands of one of three
fructuaries. 1. Again, if the property is bequeathed to any-
one with a reservation of usufruct, and a share in the usufruct is
bequeathed to me, it is worth considering whether the law of
accrual applies as between me and the heir ; however, the correct
view is that, if either of us loses the usufruct, it falls into the bare
property. 2. If the usufruct in an estate is left to me absolutely
and to you on a condition, it may fairly be said that the usufruct in
the whole estate belongs to me in the meantime, and that, if I
' suffer capitis diminutio, I lose the whole ; but, if the condition is
fulfilled, then, should I have suffered capitis diminutio, you have a
right to the whole usufruct, but, if I keep my status, the usuiruct
must be shared between us.


PAvuLus (on Sabinus 3) If a man leaves a usufruct to Attius
and his heirs, Attius will have half and his heirs will have half ; but
if the words are “to Attius and Seius with my heirs,” the usufruct
will be divided into three parts, so as to give one to the heirs, one
to Attius, and one to Seius ; it makes no difference whether the
bequest is “to A and B with Mevius” or “to A and B and
Meevius.”


ULpPrIanus (on Sabinus 17) If a usufruct is bequeathed to a
woman “with her children,” then, if she lose her children, she has
the usufruct ; on the other hand, if the mother herself dies, still her
children have the usufruct by the law of accrual. Julianus himself
says (Dig. 30) that we must adopt the same construction in the case
of a testator appointing heirs his children only, even where he does

M, J. II. 3


10


11


12


34 On Accrual of Usufruct [BOOK VIZ


not name them as legatees, but only desires to make it clear that
his wish is that the mother’s enjoyment should be one in which she
has her children associated with her. Here, however, Pomponius
asks the question, “How if the heirs are children and outsiders
mixed up?” To this he says the sons (sc) must be held to be
legatees, and, conversely, if his desire was that the children in
question should be associated with their mother in the enjoyment,
the proper rule is that the mother must be regarded as a legatee,
and thereupon the legal result will be in all respects similar to that
in the other case.


AFRICANUS (Questions 5) If the bare property in an estate is
bequeathed to two and the usufruct to one, the three persons do
not take third parts respectively in the usufruct, but the two take
a half and the usufructuary has the other half ; and a corresponding
rule holds if there are two fructuaries and one legatee of the
estate.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 17) In some cases a share of
usufruct goes by accrual even to a person who has no share of his
own, but has lost it ; for example, suppose a usufruct is bequeathed
to two persons, and one of these, after joinder of issue [in an action
to recover it] loses his right of usufruct, shortly after which his
co-legatee, who has not joined issue, loses his right of usufruct too ;
in this case the one who joined issue in the action against the person
who came forward to defend the case will [by such action] get from
the person in possession only the half part which he lost; as for
the share lost by his co-legatee he gets that by accrual, and it does
not go to the bare proprietor: the accrual of usufruct is to the
person, though it [his original share] should be lost.


PAPINIANUS (Definitions 2) Where the usufruct in one and
the same thing is bequeathed to different individuals at the charge
of different heirs respectively, such usufructuaries are regarded as
being just as truly separate as if the usufruct of the same thing had
been bequeathed to the two in equal shares ; and the consequence
is that there is no right of accrual between them ;


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) as one legatee will bring his action
for the usufruct against one heir and the other against the other.


TIT. 1] When the Bequest of a Usufruct Vests 35


Ii.
WHEN THE BEQUEST oF A UsuFRUCT VESTS.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Although usufruct involves the
taking of produce, in short, some active behaviour on the part of
the person who has the usufruct, still it vests once for all ; the case
is not like that of a thing being bequeathed a man for every
separate month, or day, or year (¢” menses etc. singulos); in such
cases the legacy vests daily (per dies singulos), or monthly, or
annually. Hence arises this question :—supposing a usufruct is be-
queathed a man from day to day or for every year, does it vest
once for all (semel)? As to this I should say that it does not
vest all at once (simul), but at the different times mentioned, so
that there are so many different legacies. This view is upheld
by Marcellus (Dig. 4) in the case of a man to whom a usufruct
was bequeathed for every other day (alternis diebus). 1. Ac-
cordingly, if the bequest is of a usufruct such as cannot be
taken advantage of every day, the bequest is not void, but the
legacy will apply to those days on which the party can take the
produce. 2. However, a usufruct, and, similarly, an wsus, will
not vest before entry is made on the inheritance, as a usufruct
is only fully created when a person is able to enjoy it at once. On
this principle it is that, according to Julianus, if a usufruct is
bequeathed to a slave who is part of an unclaimed inheritance,
however much any other kind of legacy would be acquired to
the inheritance, in the case of usufruct we wait for the person
of an owner who can enjoy the use and produce. 3. Again, if the
bequest of usufruct is from and after a given day, the usufruct will
not vest until it is immediately claimable (dies nondum cedet
nisi cum dies venit) ; it is of course settled law that a usufruct can
be bequeathed from and after a given day or until a given day.
4. Not only is it true that the usufruct does not vest before entry
on the inheritance, but the right of action for usufruct does not vest
sooner, and the same rule holds where the usufruct is bequeathed
from and after a given day; Sceevola says plainly that a man who
sues before the day of the usufruct will get nothing by it, though
indeed in any case a man who sues before the day sues to no good
purpose.


36 The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus ts lost [Book vi


TV.


THE WAYS IN WHICH USUFRUCT OR Usus IS LOST.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) It is settled law that by capztis
diminutio not only is usufruct lost but the right of action for
usufruct as well, and it matters little whether the usufruct was
created by direct law or by the aid of the pretor ; on the same
principle, where usufruct is created by delivery, or, contrary to
strict law, is in land let on a perpetual lease ( fundus vectigalis) or
in a superjicies, it is lost by capitis diminutio. 1. Usufruct however
can be lost by capitis diminutio only where it is already created ;
if a man suffers capitis diminutio before entry on the inheritance
or before the usufruct has vested, there is no doubt it is not lost.
2. Where an estate in land is bequeathed to you from and after a
certain day, and you are requested to hand over the usufruct to me,
we may fairly consider whether it is not really the fact that, if I
suffer capitis diminutio before the day mentioned in the legacy to
you, my usufruct is perfectly safe, on the ground that the capitis
diminutio takes place before the usufruct vests ; and upon an
indulgent construction this may be held. 3. Indeed, so true is it
that capitis diminutio only destroys a usufruct which is already
created, that if the usufruct is bequeathed for every separate year,
month, or day, the only usufruct that is lost is the one which is
already running, so that, for example, if it is bequeathed for
separate years, the usufruct for the current year alone will be
lost, if for separate months, that for the current month, and if for
separate days, that for the current day.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 17) If a usufruct is left to two
persons separately for every other year (altermis annis), the right
of property runs on year after year without the enjoyment, whereas,
if, instead of this, we suppose one legatee only, to whom the
usufruct is bequeathed for every other year, the heir will have
the property with the enjoyment during such time as the legatee
is not entitled to have the usufruct. If however [in the case first
mentioned] one of the two should die, then the property will be
coupled with enjoyment for the odd years (per vices temporum);
there can be no accrual for the benefit of the survivor, since each
party had his own times of undivided usufruct without the other
being in concurrence with him. 1. If what occurs is not death,
but capitis diminutio, then, seeing that it is a case of distinct


TIT. IV] The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus is lost 37


bequests, the only usufruct lost will be that of the current year,
if, that is, he [the party who suffered capitis diminutio] had the
right of usufruct [in that year]; indeed, even in the case of a
single legatee to whom the usufruct was given for so many
Separate years respectively, this is the proper rule to maintain,
so that the express mention of periods is equivalent to a renewal
of the usufruct. 2. Where the usufruct is bequeathed to separate
persons for every other year, then, if they agree that they shall
both take in the same year, they obstruct one another, as it does
not appear to have been intended that they should take in con-
currence ; and of course it makes a great deal of difference
whether a usufruct is given to two persons together for every
other year, (in which case the enjoyment cannot continue over
the end of the first year, any more than it could if the usufruct
had been given in the same terms to one person,) or it is given to
separate persons for every other year, in which case, if they choose
to have it concurrently, either they will be in one another’s way,
considering what was the testator’s intention, or else, if such
intention is really not inconsistent with it, it will come to pass
that one year’s profits will [every other year] go a-begging.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Just as a usufruct can be
bequeathed for each of so many separate years, so too it can be
made the subject of a further bequest [to take effect] after loss by
capitis diminutio, some such words being added as “ whenever so
and so shall suffer capitis diminutio I bequeath to him” ete. or
“whenever it shall be lost”: and, in such a case, if it should be
lost by capitis diminutio, it will be held that it is renewed.
Hereupon this question has been discussed: a usufruct being
bequeathed to a man for as long as he shall live, must it be
considered to be renewed [for] every time that it is lost? This
view is suggested by Meecianus, and I should say that it must be
held to be so renewed. Hence, where a usufruct is bequeathed
for a definite term, say, for example, for ten years, we must lay
down the same rule. 1. With regard to the renewal mentioned
which takes effect after a usufruct has been lost by capitis dimi-
nutio, the question has been asked whether it carries with it the
undiminished right of accrual: for instance, suppose a usufruct
was bequeathed to Titius and Meevius, and the testator, in case
Titius should suffer capitis diminutio, bequeathed him the usu-
fruct over again ; hereupon it is asked, if Titius takes the usufruct
by renewal, whether the right of accrual will still be preserved
between the two. To this Papinianus says (Questions 17) that it is


38 The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus is lost [Book VII


preserved, just as it would be if some third person had been put
in the place of Titius to receive the usufruct; as the legatees
[Titius and Meevius] must be held to be joint by the fact (re),
though not by the words. 2. Papinianus proceeds to raise a
further point. Suppose the testator, after bequeathing the usu-
fruct to Titius and Meevius, should, in a renewed bequest of
usufruct, give Titius not the whole, but a part,—would the two
legatees be held [after that] to be joint? To this what he says is:
should Titius lose his usufruct, his co-legatee will get the whole by
accrual, but, if Mzevius lost, the whole would not go by accrual,
part would go to Titius (ewm), and part fall into the bare property.
This is a reasonable view, as it cannot be maintained that the
ground (momentum) on which a man loses his usufruct and then
takes back usufruct will actually entitle the same man by accrual
to any portion of what he lost, as what we hold is that a man who
loses a usufruct will get nothing by accrual out of what he loses.
3. That death is one of the ways in which usufruct is lost does not
admit of doubt, seeing that the right of enjoyment is put an end to
by death, just like any other right which is attached to the person.


MARCIANUS (Institutes 3) If the legatee of a usufruct is
requested [in the testament] to hand it over to someone else, the
preetor ought to take care that, if it is lost, it should be rather in
the person of the fidei-commissary than in that of the legatee.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) A usufruct which is bequeathed |
can be renewed, however it may be lost, so long as it is not by
death, unless, indeed, the testator renew the bequest in that
event to the heirs, 1. If a man who has acquired a usufruct
through a slave conveys away to another a usufruct in such slave
and nothing else, there is no doubt that he retains the usufruct
which he acquired through him. 2. Usufruct is held to come to
an end by a complete change in the thing which is the subject of
it ; for instance, say a bequest was made to me of the usufruct in
a house, and the house has fallen to pieces or has been burnt
down, the usufruct in the house is undoubtedly extinguished. Is
that in the site too? [As to this,] it is quite certain that, when
the house is burnt down, no usufruct exists in either the site or
the materials. Julianus himself has this. 3. If there is a bequest
of the usufruct in a site, and [then] a building is erected on the
site, it is well settled that the subject-matter is changed and the
usufruct is extinguished. No doubt, if it was the bare proprietor
who erected the building, he will be liable in an action on the
testament or for dolus,


vit. Iv] The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus is lost 39


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) (besides which the usufructuary
has a right to the Interdict quod vi aut clam,)


JULIANUS (Digest 35) unless such bare proprietor takes
the building down and grants me a usufruct in the site; I am
assuming that the time has passed lapse of which puts an end to
the usufruct.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) The usufruct of an estate being
bequeathed, if the residence should be destroyed, the usufruct will
not be extinguished, as the residence is an accession to the land ;
this would no more follow than it would if trees were to fall.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 3) It should be added that I still have
a usufruct in the ground on which the residence stood.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Suppose however the estate was
an accession to the residence ; how then? let us consider whether
in that case the usufruct in the estate itself would be extinguished ;
but, as to this, we must say, as before, that it will not be ex-
tinguished. 1. The usufruct is extinguished not only where the
house is reduced to the bare site, but also where the testator
pulls down the house and puts a new one in its place ; no doubt,
if he executes partial repairs here and there, we cannot lay down
the same rule, even though at last the whole house should be
rebuilt. 2. Where there is a bequest of usufruct in a field or
a close, then, if it should be flooded, so as to be turned into a pool
or a swamp, beyond doubt the usufruct will be extinguished.
3. Again, if the bequest is of the usufruct in a pool and the pool
comes to be dried up and so turned into a field, the subject being
changed, the usufruct is extinguished. 4. If however what is
bequeathed is the usufruct in an arable field and vineyards are
made on it or the converse takes place, I do not think the usufruct
will be extinguished. It is true that where the usufruct is in a
forest, and thereupon the forest is cut down and the ground sown,
the usufruct is undoubtedly extinguished. 5. Should the usufruct
of a mass of metal be bequeathed and vessels be made out of it or
the converse take place, Cassius, as quoted by Urseius, says that
the usufruct is gone; and this view I should say is correct.
6. On the same principle where an ornament is destroyed or its
form is altered, this puts an end to the usufruct in it. 7. Sabinus
too tells us, in connexion with the usufruct of a ship, that if the
ship is repaired now in one part and now in another, the usufruct
is not destroyed ; but if the ship is taken to pieces, then, though


11


12


13


14


15


40 The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus ts lost [Book Vil


it should be made up again out of the same timbers without a
single piece being added, still the usufruct is extinguished; and
this, [ should say, is the sounder opinion. In fact, even if a house is
rebuilt, the usufruct is extinguished. 8. If the usufruct bequeathed
is in a team of four horses, and one of the horses dies, the question
may be asked whether the usufruct is extinguished. For my own
part, I should say it makes a great deal of difference whether the
usufruct bequeathed was in the horses or in the team; if it was in
the horses, it will continue with reference to the remaining horses,
if in the team, it will not continue at all, as there has ceased to be
any team ;


PauLus (on Sabinus 3) unless another horse is put in the
place of the dead one before the legacy vests.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Where a usufruct is bequeathed
in a bath room, and the testator turns it into a room to live in, or
in a shop, and he turns it into a dwelling-place, then, according to
the proper rule, the usufruct is extinguished. 1. On the same
principle if a man leaves a usufruct in an actor, and then transfers
him to some other kind of service, we must hold that the usufruct
is extinguished.


PAULUS (on Sabinis 3) If the usufructuary has reaped the
corn and after that dies, according to Labeo, the crop which is lying
cut belongs to his heir, and the ears which are unsevered from the
ground belong to the owner of the estate ; the produce, he says, is
gathered when the ears of corn [are severed], or the grass for hay
is cut, or the grapes are plucked, or the olives are shaken down,
though the corn should not be ground, or the oil made, or the
vintage completed. (But true as is Labeo’s remark about olives
which are shaken down, still, according to Julianus, the rule is
different with respect to olives which fall of themselves.) The
produce [Labeo proceeds to say,| becomes the property of the
usufructuary when he has gathered it, although it goes to a bona


jide possessor as soon as it is once severed from the soil.


PoOMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) Setting aside capitis diminutio
and death, all other grounds of extinction of usufruct will admit
of the extinction being even partial.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) Sometimes the bare proprietor
can bestow freedom on a slave held in usufruct; for instance,
where the usufruct was bequeathed till such time as the slave
should be manumitted ; in which case, as soon as the proprietor
proceeds to manumit, the usufruct is extinguished.


16


£7


18


19


20


21


vit. Iv] The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus is lost 41


THE SAME (Disputations 5) Where a usufruct is bequeathed
to me on a condition, and in the meantime the thing is in the
hands of the heir, such heir can bequeath the usufruct to a third
person ; the result being that, if the condition attached to my
legacy comes to pass, the usufruct left by the heir terminates.
Should I myself however lose the usufruct, it will not revert to the
legatee to whom the heir bequeathed it in absolute terms, because
the legal position of joint legatees cannot be acquired under two
different testaments.


JULIANUS (Digest 35) The usufruct in an estate is be-
queathed to you absolutely, and the bare property to Titius on a
condition ; pending the condition, you acquire the right of bare
property, and after that the condition is fuifiiled. In this case
Titius will have the estate with all rights, and it makes no
difference that the bare property was bequeathed with a reservation
of the usufruct, because when you yourself! acquired the property
you lost all your right to the legacy of usufruct.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 3) If a usufruct was bequeathed to
a slave who was part of the assets of a deceased person, such
bequest taking place before entry was made on the inheritance,
the better opinion is that, when entry is made, the usufruct
passes to you (the heir), and is not extinguished on the ground of
change of ownership, as it did not so much as vest before you
became heir.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) Neither a usufruct, nor
a foot-way nor a carriage-way is lost by change of ownership.


PAULUS (on Plautius 15) Where a man has a usufruct, wil
he retain it if he only exercises wsus, his reason being that he
believes wsus to be the only right that he has got? My answer is
that if he chooses to exercise the use only, knowing that he has a
right to the use and produce (wsusfructus), he must still be held to
be enjoying produce too ; if he does not know, I should say he loses
the right to produce (fructus), as his use is founded not on what he
has, but on what he thinks he has.


MODESTINUS (Differences 3) If a usufruct is bequeathed to
a city and, after that, the ground of the city is ploughed up, it
ceases to be a city, as it happened to Carthage ; consequently it
ceases to have the usufruct, as it were by death.


1 Ins. tu before enim. M.


22


23


24


25


26


42 The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus ts lost [BooK VII


POMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 6) If the wsus of a house
is bequeathed to a woman, and she goes beyond seas and is absent
for the time which suffices by law for the loss of the wsus, but her
husband uses the house, then there is nothing to prevent the usus
being retained, just as if the woman had left her slaves at the
house and herself stayed abroad. Still more strongly will the
corresponding rule apply where a husband leaves his wife in the
house in a case in which the wsus of the house was bequeathed to
the husband himself.


THE SAME (on Quintus Mucius 26) If a field in which a man
has a usufruct is inundated by a river or the sea, the usufruct is lost,
as, in fact, the bare property itself is lost in such a case ; indeed
the usufructuary cannot maintain his position even by fishing. At
the same time, just as the bare property is reestablished, if the
water recedes with the same suddenness with which it came, so too,
it must be held, will the usufruct be reestablished.


JAVOLENUS (Extracts from Labeos Posteriores 3) I had
a usufruct in a garden, and, that being the case, a river spread over
the garden and afterwards receded again ; here Labeo holds that
the right of usufruct itself is restored, as the soil of the garden
always remained in the same legal position. I should say that this
is only true in case the river spread over the field in the way of
inundation ; if the river shifted its course and came to flow in that
quarter, my opinion is that the usufruct is lost, because the ground
occupied by the old channel becomes public property, and I hoid
that it cannot be put back upon its former footing. 1. The same
rule of law, according to Labeo, ought to be observed with reference
to a foot- or carriage-way ; but I hold with respect to these the
same opinion that I do with respect to the usufruct. 2. LABEO.
Even if the surface soil is taken off my land and other soil put
in its place, the ground does not on that account cease to be
mine, any more than if the field were manured.


PoMPoNIUs (Selections from various passages 11) The law
is that usufruct may be lost by non-user, whether it is the usufruct
in a share or is undivided.


PauLus (on Neratius 1) Should a field be taken into
possession or a slave be captured by enemies and afterwards
be relinquished, any usufruct is reestablished by the law of
posthimnium.


30


Tit. Iv] The Ways in which Usufruct or Usus ts lost 43


THE SAME (Manuals 1) If a slave in whom someone has
a usufruct is surrendered for noxa by the bare proprietor to the
usufructuary, by the acquisition of the proprietorship the servitude
of usufruct is merged and is thereby at an end.


THE SAME (on Plautius 13) If a usufruct is bequeathed for
alternate years, it cannot be lost by non-user [by one legatee], as it
is a case of more than one legacy.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Pomponius raises this question.
The bare proprietor of an estate [in which I have a usufruct} hires
the land from me and sells it to Seius without reserving the
usufruct; do I retain the usufruct through the action of the
purchaser? The opinion he gives is this: though the proprietor
should pay me rent, nevertheless the usufruct is lost, as the
purchaser enjoys as of his own right and not in my name: of
course the proprietor is liable to me in an action on the lease, to
the extent of the interest I had in his not doing what he did. [t
is true that if a man hires the usufruct from me and lets it to some-
one else, I retain the usufruct, but where the bare proprietor of the
land lets the usufruct in his own name, we must hold that I lose it,
as the lessee does not enjoy it in my name. 1. As to whether! if
the bare proprietor bought the usufruct from me, and then sold it,
I should lose it, this is a proper question to ask. But I should say
that I should lose it, as, again, the purchaser of the estate does
not enjoy it as on a purchase from me. 2. Pomponius asks
further this question. Suppose a usufruct is bequeathed to me,
and I am requested to hand it over to you; am I held to enjoy
through you, so that the usufruct will not be lost [by non-user]?
As to this, he says himself that he is in doubt; but the better
opinion is, as Marcellus remarks in a note, that there is nothing in
the case to prejudice the fidei-commissary, as he has an utilis actio
in his own name.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) The flesh and fleece of
dead cattle are not part of the produce, because, as soon as the
animal is dead, the usufruct is extinguished.


PoMPoNtIUus (on Quintus Mucius 4) If the usufruct of a flock
is bequeathed and the numbers of the flock are so far reduced that
it cannot be called a flock at all, the usufruct is at an end.


1 After vendidisset ins. an.


44 On Usufruct in things which are [BOOK VII


wv


On USUFRUCT IN THINGS WHICH ARE CONSUMED OR WASTED
BY THE USING.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) The Senate decreed that it
should be possible for a usufruct to be bequeathed in every kind of
thing that was understood to be in any person’s patrimony; the
result of which decree clearly is that a bequest can be made of the
usufruct of such things as are destroyed or wasted by use.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) But, in the case of money,
a proper undertaking must be given to those at whose charge a
usufruct in such money is bequeathed. 1. This senatorial decree
did not operate so as to make it possible that there should be a
usufruct in money, strictly speaking ; as the authority of the Senate
cannot subvert common sense; still, the above relief being given,
the consequence was that there came to be something analogous to
a usufruct.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) After this a valid bequest can
be made of the usufruct in anything whatever. Does this include
a usufruct in pecuniary demands? Nerva said No; but the better
opinion, which is that held by Cassius and Proculus, is that this
also can be bequeathed. However, Nerva himself goes so far as to
say that the usufruct in a pecuniary demand can be bequeathed to
the actual debtor himself, and that, in that case, he must be
excused the payment of interest.


PAULUS (on Neratius 1) Consequently the debtor too can
be called upon to give the undertaking.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) This senatorial decree does not
refer exclusively to the case of a man who bequeaths the usufruct
of money or anything else which he has of his own; it applies
equally where he deals with what belongs to someone else. 1. If
there is a bequest of the usufruct of money, or of anything else
which can only be used by consuming it, and no undertaking is
given, a point to consider is whether, when the usufruct comes to
an end, the money that was handed over, or whatever else it may
be the worth of which is bound up in the diminution of it, can be
recovered by a condictio. However, as long as the usufruct is still
going on, if the heir wishes to bring a condictio to have the under-


TIT. V| consumed or wasted by the using 45


taking given, it may fairly be said that the omitted undertaking
can be sued for by a condictio for an unliquidated amount (incerti) ;
but if he waits till the termination of the usufruct, then, as Sabinus
holds, the condictio can be brought for the actual sum. This
opinion is approved of by Celsus himself (Dig. 18), and it seems to
me not to be wanting in acuteness. 2. What is said above as to
the usufruct in money or in anything else which is used by
consuming it applies equally to the usus; we are told by both
Julianus and Pomponius (Stipulations 8) that the wsws and the
usufruct of money have the same legal implications.


JULIANUS (Digest 35) If ten thousand (aure?) are be-
queathed to you and the usufruct of the same ten thousand to me,
the whole ten thousand will become your property; still five
thousand will have to be paid to me, on the terms of my undertaking
that at the time of my death or capitis diminutio the money shall
be handed over; as in fact if a landed estate were bequeathed to
you and a usufruct in the same estate to me, you would have the
property of the whole estate, but you would have part of it with
the use and produce (asusfructus), and part without the use and
produce, and I should give an undertaking to the satisfaction of an
impartial arbitrator, not to the heir but to you. 1. Where
however the usufruct in the same ten thousand is bequeathed to
two different persons, they will both get five thousand, giving
undertakings to one another mutually and to the heir as well.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) Where the usufruct
bequeathed is of wine, oil, or corn, the actual property ought to be
transferred to the legatee, and he must be required to give an
undertaking to the effect that whenever he dies or suffers capitis
diminutio, goods of like quality shall be handed over; or else the
original goods must be valued and an undertaking must be given
to pay a fixed sum of money. This last is indeed the more
convenient method, and we may assume exactly the same rule in
the case of anything else the worth of which is given by the using
thereof.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 17) A testator appointed three heirs
and bequeathed to Titius the usufruct in fifteen thousand (aw7ez),
ordering at the same time two of the heirs to give security for
Titius. It was held that there was a valid legacy of [the benefit
of | the undertaking [for security so ordered to be given], and that
the decree of the Senate did not militate against this construction


10


1


46 On Usufruct in things which are {Book VII


as there was nothing in it to prevent the [statutable ?] undertaking
being given. There were, in fact, it was held, two legacies, the one
being for an ascertained sum and the other for an unliquidated
amount. Accordingly, on the head of usufruct, a portion of the
money might be sued for [by the legatee|] at the hand of an heir
who had had security given him by his co-heir, and the same de-
fendant was subject also to an action for unliquidated damages,
if he had himself failed to give security. With regard to an heir
who gave security himself, but owing to the default of his co-heir
failed to have security given him, he would not in the meantime
be liable in pursuance of the legacy of usufruct under the sena-
torial decree, nor would he be liable to the action for unliquidated
damages, seeing that he had already given the required security to
his co-heir. We are further of opinion that the legatee can be
compelled to promise [to refund]. When however the usufruct
comes to an end, if the co-heirs should be sued as sureties, they will
not have a right of action on mandate [to recoup themselves], the
fact being that they never contracted a mandate, they only obeyed
the will of the testator, and, in any case, they are themselves
released from their obligation under the legacy of security. One
point there is which did not require a long discussion, viz. that
the second legacy, that of the security, was not given to the heirs,
but to the person to whom was left the usufruct in the money,
whom in fact the testator desired to benefit, and in whose interest
he thought it was that he should not be looking about for sureties
at his own risk.


PauLus (on Neratius 1) In a stipulation for restoring
the amount in the case of a usufruct in a sum of money, two
eventualities only are referred to, viz. those of death and capitis
diminutio,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 79) as the use of the money cannot
be lost in any other way than by one of these two. 1. If the wsus
only of the money is bequeathed, then, seeing that in this par-
ticular case we must, on the whole, take it that the term usus
involves fructus as well, the same stipulation must be made.
Some say that the stipulation is not made till the money is given ;
I should say however that the stipulation holds, whether it comes
after or before the payment over of the money.


TRE SAME (on Sabinus 18) If a usufruct is bequeathed to
aliyone in wool, or perfumes, or spices, no usufruct in these things


12


TIT. V | consumed or wasted by the using 47


is held to be legally created, but the matter comes under the
decree of the Senate, which prescribes the undertaking to be given.


MARCIANUS (Institutes 7) Money being left to Titius on
such terms that after the legatee’s death it was to come to Meevius,
it was laid down by a rescript of the divine Severus and Antonius
that, although it had been added that Titius was to have the wsus
of the money, nevertheless what was bequeathed him was the
property in it, and the reason for making mention of wsus was
that the money was to be handed over from Titius to Mzevius on
the death of the former.


VI.


ON THE CASE OF USUFRUCT BEING SUED FOR OR
THE RIGHT OF IT BEING DENIED.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) If some [real] servitude is attached
to a landed estate in which there is a usufruct existing, Marcellus
(b. 8), as cited by Julianus, upholds the opinion of Labeo and
Nerva, to the effect that he (the usufructuary) cannot bring a wn-
dicatio to recover the servitude, but he can bring one for the
usufruct ; the consequence being that if the neighbour does not
allow him, say, to walk or drive, he, such neighbour, is liable on
the ground that he does not let the other enjoy the usufruct.
1. When a usufruct is bequeathed, it requires [those]' subsidiary
rights without which a usufruct cannot be enjoyed ; consequently,
in the case of such a bequest, there must needs go with the usufruct
a right of access, so much so that, where a man bequeaths the
usufruct of some spot on the terms that the heir is not to be
compelled to allow a road [over adjoining ground], this addition
must be held to be inoperative ; again, if a usufruct is bequeathed
and a right of pathway is withheld, such withholding is operative,
because a right of access always goes with the usufruct. 2. Again,
if a usufruct is bequeathed and there is no right of access to the
estate which is the subject thereof over [other] land which forms
part of the inheritance, the usufructuary can certainly bring an
action on the testament to procure that the usufruct shall be given
him accompanied with means of access. 3. Whether, when the
usufruct is bequeathed, the usufructuary has a right of access
simply, and so a right to a foot-way, or he can claim a road-way too,


1M.


48 On the case of Usufruct being sued for [Book vi


Pomponius hesitates to say (b. 5); but he holds, and that rightly,
that he ought to have such accommodation as is required to enable
him to get the benefit of his usufruct. 4. Will the heir then be
bound to furnish him with further conveniences or servitudes too ;
for example, servitudes of lights and water, or not? As to this,
I should say he is only compellable to furnish those conveniences
without which the other cannot “use” the premises at all; if the
party can use the premises, though not without some inconvenience,
he has no claim to the above.


PomPpontvs (on Sabinus 5) If a usufruct is sued for on a
testament, at the hands of an heir who has cut down trees or pulled
down the house or in any way lowered the value of the usufruct,
either by subjecting the land to servitudes or releasing the adjoining
property from servitudes attached to the land, it is a matter for the
conscience of the judge to take into consideration what the con-
dition of the estate was before joinder of issue, so that the
usufructuary may be protected by him in the enjoyment of the
rights so ascertained.


(JULIANUS Digest 7) Where a man to whom a usufruct had
been delivered in pursuance of a fidec-commissum has been out of
enjoyment of it for the full period the lapse of which would have
caused him to lose it, if it had become his legally, he cannot have an
action to have it made good ; it would be an absurd thing that
people who have acquired the possession only of a usufruct and not
the property in it should be in a better legal position. .


THE SAME (Digest 35) An estate was bequeathed to Titius
with reservation of usufruct, and the usufruct in the same estate
was bequeathed to Sempronius on a condition. In this case I
expressed the opinion that, during the interval, the usufruct was
joined to the property, though the law is, that when an estate is
bequeathed with reservation of the usufruct such usufruct goes to
the heir. The reason for the above is, that when the owner
bequeaths an estate saving the usufruct, and bequeaths the usufruct
to another person on a condition, it is not his intention that the
usufrnuct should remain with the heir.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 17) | The only person who can assert
at law the right to use and produce is one who has the usufruct ;
the bare owner of the estate cannot do it, because one who has the
proprietorship has not got a separate right to the use and produce,
as in fact he cannot have a servitude over his own estate, and a


TIT. VI] or the right of it being denied 49


man must bring an action on his own right only ; he cannot do it
on the right of someone else. It is true that the bare owner has a
prohibitive right of action (acto negativa) against an [alleged]
usufructuary, still he may be held to proceed on his own right
rather than that of another, so far as he denies that the [alleged]
usufructuary has a right to the use against his will, or [asserts] that
he himself has a right to stop him. Should it happen that the plaintiff
in the action is not the owner, then, although the [alleged] fructuary
will not have the right of use, still this latter will gain his case,
in virtue of the principle which puts possessors in the better position,
though they. should have no legal right. 1. Whether the usufruc-
tuary has a good right of action in rem against the bare proprietor
only, or equally so against anyone in possession, is a matter of
question. Julianus says (Dig. 7) that he has such a right of action
against anyone in possession, as, if you take the case of a [real]
servitude being attached to the estate which is in usufruct, the
usufructuary ought to lay claim, as against the owner of the adjacent
land, not to such [real] servitude, but to the usufruct. 2. If a
usufruct is created in a portion of an estate, an action iz rem can
be brought in respect of it, whether the party lays claim therein to
the usufruct or denies someone else’s right to it. 3. In all actions
which are brought in respect of usufruct, it is abundantly plain that
the question of produce is included. 4. If, after joinder of issue in
an action for usufruct, the usufruct should come to an end, will
produce cease to be claimable for any further time? I should
say that it will so cease ; in fact, Pomponius tells us (b. 40) that, in
the case of the death of the usufructuary, his heir will be allowed
an action for arrears of produce only. 4a. Ifthe usufructuary is
successful, he has a right to recover all incidental benefits (omnes
causa), consequently, if the usufruct bequeathed was in a slave, the
possessor will be bound to hand over any acquisition made by the
slave founded on the property of the usufructuary or derived from
the slave’s own services. 5. Add that if it so happen that the
usufruct is lost by lapse of time, the fact being that one man was in
possession and another came forward to defend the action, it is not
enough for the latter to renew the usufruct, but he must give a
guaranty against recovery of the same by superior title ; suppose,
for example, the party who was in possession had pledged the slave
—or the land—for a debt, and the plaintiff should be forbidden by
the pledgee to exercise his lawful right. Accordingly a guaranty
will have to be given him. 6. Just as, where a usufructuary brings


M. J. II. 4


50 On the case of Usufruct being sued for [BOOK VII


a confessorian action! in rem (asserting his usufruct), he has a right
to have the produce given to him, so too has the bare proprietor, if
he has recourse to a negatorian action (denying the other's
usufruct) ; but, in any case, this is only where the party who sues
is not in possession ; (—it may be observed that there are cases
where the possessor himself may sue—; ) if either party [being
plaintiff] is in possession, he will get nothing under the head
of produce. On the whole then, does the duty of the judge com-
prehend more than this : to see that the usufructuary is held free to
take the produce without being molested, and the owner of the
property is protected against disturbance ?


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) When a man has joined issue as
defendant on a question of usufruct, then, if he gives up possession,
and that without fraudulent intent, he will be dismissed from the
action, but if he volunteered to take up the defence of the case and
joined issue in the action as though he were in possession, there
will be judgment for the plaintiff.


aa bbe
ON THE SERVICES OF SLAVES.


PAULUS (on the Edict 2) A service consists in something
that is done, and it is not an overtly existing thing until the day
arrives when it has to be rendered ; the case is like that of a man |
making a stipulation for the child that is to be born of Arethusa.


ULPIANus (on the Edict 17) When there is a bequest of the
services of a slave, the right thereto will not be lost by capitis
dimimutio.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) The usufruct of a slave


comprises his services and the hire that can be got for such
services.


THE SAME (book two of the urban edict on trials of the question
of freedom) The produce of a slave consists? of services, or, to
invert the phrase, the services of a slave are comprised in his
produce. but as in other cases produce is understood to be what
remains over after necessary expenses are deducted, so it is also in
the case of services of slaves.


1 For confessoriam read confessoria. Cf. M.
* For constitit read consistit. Cf. M.


TIT. Vit] On the Services of Slaves nt


TERENTIUS CLEMENS (on the lex Julia et Papia 18) Where
the services of a slave are bequeathed, I have myself always been
taught and Julianus is of opinion that the wsus is understood to
be given.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 55) When an action is brought on
a claim to the services of a slave who is an artificer, the compensa-
tion to be ordered will be according to their value, but, in the
case of a common drudge, they will depend on the nature of
his work. This is to be found in Mela. 1. Ifa slave is under five
years of age or is physically weak, or is for any other reason one
who could perform no service for his owner, no valuation of his
services will be made. 2. Moreover the pleasure or the fondness
felt by the owner will count for nothing in the valuation ; for
example, where the owner has a strong regard for a slave or makes
a favourite of him. 3. It must be remembered that in estimating
the value necessary expenses should always be deducted.


VIII.
On Usus AND HABITATIO


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) Let us now consider the
question of wsus and habitatio. 1. Besides usufruct there may be
such a thing created as bare usus, that is use without produce
(fructus) ; and this is commonly created in just the same ways as
usufruct.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) When the wsus is left a man he
can use, but he cannot take the produce. Let us consider some
cases in detail. 1. The wsus of a house, say, is left to the husband
or to the wife. If it is to the husband, he can live in the house,
and that not [merely] by himself, but with his slaves too. Whether
he can have his freedmen there also was once a matter of question,
but Celsus says that he can have his freedmen, and that he may
also take in a guest. This is said by Celsus in his Degest (b. 18),
and the same opinion is supported by Tubero. I remember that
in Labeo, in the book called Posteriores, the question is discussed
whether he can go so far as to take in a lodger, and Labeo says
that a man who lives in the house himself can take in a lodger ; he
also says he can take in guests as well as his freedmen


PAULUS (on Vitellius 3) and clients,


52 On Usus and Habitatio [BOOK VII


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) but that even such persons as
these must not occupy the house without him. According however
to a note by Proculus, dealing with the subject of lodgers, a person
cannot be properly called a lodger (¢qualinus) when he lives with
the other. It follows from the above that, even if the usuary
receives a rent, still, as long as he is occupying the house himself,
this is not to be grudged him: suppose, for instance, that a man of
inferior means has had left him the wsus of such a spacious house
that he is content with a small portion of it. We may add that the
usuary may have with him such persons as he has to serve him in
the place of slaves, though they should be in fact free or the slaves
of another man. 1. If the wsus is left to a woman, then, as
Quintus Mucius was the first to allow, she can have her husband
living with her, because otherwise, if she chose to make use of the
house, she would have to live unmarried. That, to take the con-
verse case, a wife may live with her husband, [if the usws is his, |
was never a matter of question. Suppose then the usus is be-
queathed to a widow, would such a woman, if she contracted a
second marriage after the wsws was created, be at liberty to have
her husband living with her? The true rule is, as Pomponius (b. 5)
and Papinianus (Questions 19) agree, that she can have her
husband to live with her, even if she marries after the usus is
created. Pomponius goes further and says she can have her father-
in-law too.


PAULuS (on Sabinus 3) Indeed the father-in-law can have
his daughter-in-law to live with him ; at any rate if her husband is
there too.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) A woman may have living with
her not only her husband but her children and freedmen or
freedwomen, also her parents: Aristo himself makes a note on
Sabinus to this effect. In fact we must go so far as to say that
women can admit the same kind of persons as men can ;


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) still a woman is not at liberty
to admit an inmate where he is not one who can live with propriety
in the same house as the woman herself who has the zsvs.


Ubpranus (on Sabinus 17) But those who are entitled to
usus cannot let the house for exclusive occupation, nor allow
persons to live in it without them, nor can they sell the asus.
1, Should however the usus of a house be bequeathed to a woman
on condition that she should be divorced from her husband, she must


10


11


TIT. VIII | On Usus and Habitatio 53


be excused the condition, and she can have her husband living
with her in the house. This is approved of by Pomponius (b. 5).


Pautus (on Sabinus 3) Moreover, where the wsus of
anything at all is bequeathed, the rule is that the wife can
have the wsus of it in common with her husband.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) Where what is bequeathed is a
habitatio, it is asked whether such a bequest is the same thing as
that of an wsus. That the two bequests, of wsws and habitatio
respectively, operate to much the same effect Papinianus himself
admits (Questions 18). For example, the legatee of a habitatio
cannot give it away, and he can only take in the same kinds of
persons as a usuary can; but the habitatio does not pass to the
heir, as such, nor is it lost by non-user or capitis diminutio.
1. Where what is left is chresis, it may be fairly considered
whether this is an uses ; as to which Papinianus says (Responsa 7)
that in this case the wszus is left but not the fructus (produce) too.
2. But if it is left in such words as the following : “to such a one
the usufruct of the house so that he can live in it,” let us consider
whether the legatee will have a habitatio and no more or will have
the usufruct too. As to this, Proculus and Neratius hold that it is
a legacy of the mere right of habitatio, which is a sound view.
No doubt if the testator had said “the wsas so that he can live
there,” no one would hesitate to say that it was a good legacy [of
usus|. 3. It was a question among the old lawyers whether the
habitatio was a right of dwelling for one year or would last for the
party’s lifetime ; but Rutilius says that the right of habitatio is
good for a lifetime, which view is confirmed by Celsus (Dig. 18).
4. If the wsus of an estate is left, this, as all agree, is less than the
Fructus (produce), indeed far less. However let us consider what
are the rights involved. According to Labeo the legatee is free to
live on the estate, and he can forbid the owner to enter; but he
cannot forbid a tenant to enter, nor the owner’s gang of slaves,
that is to say, such as are there to cultivate the land ; still, if the
owner should send his domestic slaves there, such slaves can be
forbidden to enter, on the same principle as that on which the
owner himself can be forbidden. Labeo also says that the usuary
can make exclusive use of the places that serve for storing wine
and oil, but the owner cannot use them without the usuary’s
consent.


Galus (Everyday points ov golden things 2) The usuary
has a right to remain on the land for so long only as he causes no


12


54 On Usus and Habitatio [BOOK VIL


annoyance to the owner and is not in the way of the persons who
carry on agricultural operations ; moreover he cannot sell or let
or give away for nothing to anyone else the right which he
possesses.


ULpianus (on Sabinus 17) He has a right to have the full
use, if the wsus of the country-seat and mansion are left him. No
doubt we must on the whole say that the proprietor can! come and
take produce and, during the time required for getting the produce
together, it must be allowed that he is at liberty to take up his
abode there. 1. In addition to his right of living on the spot
(habitatio), a legatee of the asus will also have the right of
walking about, as well as of riding or driving; Sabinus and
Cassius add that he may use wood for ordinary daily purposes,
also the garden, and take apples, kitchen vegetables and flowers,
as well as draw water, not however so as to make a profit, his right
is to use only, in short, it does not go so far as using up. Nerva
says the same thing, but adds that he can use straw and sticks,
though not leaves or oil or corn or agricultural produce. Sabinus,
Cassius, Labeo, and Proculus go further, and say that he may in
fact take enough to maintain himself and his family out of what
is grown on the estate, and that in cases where Nerva says he may
not; Juventius goes so far as to let him share the use with guests
and friends, and this is, I think, the true view, as a usuary may be
treated a little more liberally, in accordance with the consideration
due to a person to whom a bequest of wsws has been made. But
the things last mentioned he can, I should say, only use in the
country-house ; as to apples, kitchen vegetables, flowers and wood,
it is worth considering whether he can only use them on the spot
or they can be actually brought into the town to him ; but we had
better take the rule to be that they can be brought into the town,
as this amounts to no great burden, if the estate yields a plentiful
supply. 2. Where the bequest is of the wsus of domestic animals,
say a flock of sheep, according to Labeo, he can only use them for
manuring purposes, he cannot take wool or lambs or milk, as these
are rather of the nature of produce. He may, I should say, go
further and take under the head of asus a small quantity of milk,
as the will of deceased persons is not to be construed with such
extreme strictness. 3. If what is left is the wsus of a herd of
cattle, the legatee will have a right to every kind of use, whether
for ploughing or any other purpose for which cattle are fit.


1 Insert posse before plane. Cf. M.


14


TIT. VIII | On Usus and Habitatio 55


4. Where the wsus bequeathed is that of a stud of horses, we
may consider whether the legatee can break them in and use
them in harness for draught. Should the man to whom the usus
of the horses is left be a charioteer, I should say that he cannot
use them for the races in the circus, as this might be held to
amount to letting them out; at the same time, if, when the
testator left them, he knew that such was the legatee’s profession
and way of life, he may be supposed to have contemplated the
very thing. 5. If the wsus of an attendant (ministerium) is left
anyone, he can use the slave to attend upon himself (ad sawn
munistertum) and his children and his wife, and he will not be held
to have made his right over to another, if he makes use of the man
along with them ; although, if the wsus of a slave is left to a son
under potestas or to a slave, then, inasmuch as such wsus will
belong to the father or the owner, as the case may be, it imports
a right of use on their part only, and not on the part of those
subject to their potestas. 6. The legatee cannot let out the
services of a slave held in wsws nor make them over to another ;
this is maintained by Labeo ; how, indeed, can a man make over
services to another when he has to use them himself? However,
Labeo himself holds that, if a man hires a farm, a slave in whom
he has an usus may work on it; what does it matter, he asks, in
what way it is that he makes use of his services? Accordingly, if
a usuary should contract to work up wool, he can very well carry
out the work by means of slave women in which he has the wsas,
and again, if he contracts to make woven garments or to build a
block of chambers, or a ship, he can employ for the purpose the
services of a slave in whom he has the wsws; and this does not
clash with the known opinion of Sabinus that, where the wsus of a
female slave is given, she cannot be sent to a wool factory, nor her
services be let out for money, but the legatee must, as a matter of
law, make the woman work the wool for himself; of course, where
the party does not let out the slave’s services, but simply executes
the work which he undertook to do, he does work it for himself.
This view is upheld by Octavenus too.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) However Labeo holds that
the slave himself or the slave woman can be required to pay money
instead of rendering service.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 17) If I make a stipulation or take
delivery of something by means of a slave whom | hold in wsws, the


15


56 On Usus and Habitatio [BOOK VI


question arises whether I acquire anything, assuming that what is
done is founded on my property or on the slave’s services. If it is
founded on the slave's service, it will be void, because a usuary
cannot let out the slave’s services ; but, if it is founded on my
property, the rule is that a slave whom I hold in wsus will, by
stipulating or taking delivery, acquire for me ; in fact, | should in
the case supposed be using his services. 1. It makes no difference
whether usufruct is bequeathed or fructus (produce) only ; fructus
includes wsus, but usus does not include fructus, and though there
cannot be any fructus without usus, there may be wsus without


Fructus. To take a plain case :—if you have a bequest of the fructus


with reservation of the wsas, the bequest is void, so Pomponius says
(on Sabinus 5); and he also says that in the case where there is
a bequest of usufruct, but the /ructus is revoked, the whole
legacy must be held to be revoked, but where there is a bequest
of fructus without usus, the usws must be held to be created too,
just as it might be expressly created at the outset. If usufruct is
bequeathed and then the wsws is revoked, according to Aristo, this
is no revocation at all, and this is the more indulgent view. 2. If the
usus is first bequeathed and then the fructus to the same person,
Pomponius says the latter is united to the wsws. He says also that
if the usus is bequeathed to you and the fructus to me, then we take
in common as far as the wsws is concerned, but I alone am entitled
to the fructus. 3. It is possible, however, for the wsus to go to one,
Fructus without usus to another, and the bare property to a third ;
suppose, for example, the owner of the estate bequeaths the wsas
to Titius, and after that his heir bequeaths the fructus to you or
makes it over to you in some other way.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 3) When the usus of land is bequeathed,
the usuary will have a right to take of the edible produce thereof
enough for a year, though not more, even if by that means the
produce of an estate of average size should be consumed ; on the
principle on which he might enjoy the wsws of a house or a slave in
such a way as to leave nothing over for anyone else under the head
of produce. 1. Just as, where there is a bequest of the usus of
land, the legatee cannot prevent the proprietor from being
frequently on the spot with a view to agricultural operations, by
doing which he would in fact be preventing the proprietor from
enjoying the produce itself, so too the heir cannot do anything to
prevent the legatee of the wsus from making use of the land in the
way in which a prudent householder ought to use it.


TIT. VII} On Usus and Habitatio 57


16 #Pomponivus (on Sabinus 5) If the wusus of an estate is
bequeathed in terms which require it to be properly stocked and
equipped, the legatee will have as full a claim to the use of the
things constituting the equipment of the estate as if the usuz of the
things themselves had been bequeathed him expressly. 1. The
actual proprietor is at liberty to keep guard over the estate or the
house by means of a forester or a town-agent, [as the case may be,]
even without the leave of the usufructuary or the usuary, as he has
an interest in preserving the boundaries of the property. All this
applies equally in whatever way the usufruct or the usus may be
created. 2. When people have the uauz of a slave and not the
Sructus too, it is admissible that they should make him some present
or that he should carry on some business with their money on the
terms that whatever the slave acquires thereupon shall be his
peculium with reference to them (the usuaries).


17 AFRICANUS (Questions 5) If the usus ofa house is bequeathed

to a son under potestas or to a slave, I should say this is a valid
_ legacy, and the same kind of procedure is available for recovering
it as would be if the produce had been bequeathed as well

Consequently the father or the owner, [as the case may be.| may

live in the house just as well when the son or the slave is absent as

__-when he is on the spot.

18 Pacts (on Plautiuz 9) If the usus of a dwelling-house is
bequeathed without the fructus, the obligation to execute repairs
so as to keep the property wind and water-tight falls on the heir and
the usuary equally. We may consider, however, whether the real

_ rule is not this, that if the heir takes the produce he is* himself
bound to repair, but if the thing the sus of which is bequeathed
is of such a kind that the heir cannot take the produce, the legatee
is compellable to repair it himself. This is im fact a reasonable
Jistincti

19 «©6«.: THe same (on Vitelliuz 3) There can be no bequest of a
share in an uss; a man can take produce to the extent of a share,
but he cannot make use to the extent of a share.


290 Marceies (Digest 13) If I am bequeathed the usus of a
slave, the slave acquires for me if he acts as my commercial agent
(institor) and 1 make use of his services in a shop: in short, he
acquires for me in buying and selling wares; and so he does by
taking delivery of anything by my order.


i Read zit for ef. Ch M


21


22


23


1


58 On Usus and Habitatio [BOOK VII


Mopestinus (Rules 2) The asus of a water is a personal
right, consequently it cannot be transmitted to the heir of the
usuary.


PomMponlvs (on Q. Muctus 5) The Divine Hadrian, in a case
where the wsus of a forest was bequeathed to certain legatees, laid
down that the produce too must be held to be bequeathed to the
same persons ; because, unless the legatees were at liberty to cut and
sell the timber in the way that usufructuaries are, they would take
nothing by their legacy. 1. Although a legatee to whom the wszs
of a house is bequeathed should keep up such a small establishment
that he cannot avail himself of the wsus of the whole house, never-
theless the unoccupied part cannot be used by the proprietor, because
the usuary will have a right to use the whole from time to time as
occasion may arise, the fact being that not uncommonly the very
proprietor of a house uses some parts and leaves other parts unused,
according to the requirements of the particular occasion. 2. When
an usus is bequeathed, if the legatee makes ampler use of the thing
than he has a right to make, what does the duty of the judge
prescribe who determines the question how far the right of use
extends? It comes to this, he must see that the legatee do not use
otherwise than as the law allows.


PauLus (on Neratius 1) NERATIUS. The person who has
the bare property cannot in any way change the specific character
of the thing held in wsus. Pautus. The fact is that he is not at
liberty to alter the position of the usuary for the worse; but he
may alter it for the worse even where he changes the condition
of the subject-matter! for the better.


IX.


WHAT KIND OF UNDERTAKING IS GIVEN
BY THE USUFRUCTUARY.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 79) Where there is a usufruct
bequeathed in anything, the preetor thought it most in accordance
with justice that the legatee should give two undertakings ; one to
the effect that he would use the thing in such a way as would
satisfy an impartial arbitrator, and the other that when the usufruct
should cease to belong to him he would restore what was left of it.


1 Insert ve before etiam. Cf. M.


mir. 1X] Undertaking given by the Usufructuary 59


1. This stipulation is required to be made, whether the property
is moveable or consists of land; 2. and it must be added that the
undertaking ought to be used for jideccommissa too. Again, there
is no doubt that, if a usufruct is created by a donation mortis
causa, the undertaking ought to be given, as in the case of legacies ;
and if the usufruct is created in any other way the rule is the
same. 3. The party must promise that the usufruct shall be
enjoyed in such wise as to satisfy a reasonable arbitrator, that
is to say, that he will not bring down the prospective value of the
usufruct, and that he will act in all respects as he would if the
thing were his own property. 4. However the heir and the legatee
will do well, if as soon as the legatee begins to take the produce,
they have an attestation made as to the present state of the
property, so that it may be made clear thereby whether the legatee
has diminished its value, and, if so, how far. 5. It was thought
best that an undertaking should be given to the effect above
mentioned by means of a stipulation, in order that, if the party
should not use the thing in question agreeably to the judgment
that would be given by a reasonable arbitrator, it might be possible
to sue on the stipulation at once ; and thus people do not have to
wait till the usufruct expires. 6. The stipulation refers to two
occasions in which it may come into operation ; there is first the
case of the party using in some way which would not be approved
of by a reasonable arbitrator, secondly the case in which the
usufruct is to be surrendered ; the former clause will take effect
as soon as ever the usuary commits an irregularity in respect of
the use such as is described, and it may take effect again and
again; the second takes effect on the termination of the usufruct.
7. With regard to the above statement that what there shall be
left of the thing will have to be surrendered, the proprietor is not
therein stipulating for the actual thing, as he would not be held to
be capable of making any valid stipulation for his own property,
he only stipulates that what there shall be left of it shall be sur-
rendered. Still the engagement may comprise the putting a valua-
tion on the property, for instance, [in view of a case] where a
usufructuary who has it in his power to interrupt the acquisition
of the property by use omits to do so ; as he undertakes thorough
care of the thing ;


Pauuus (on the Edict 75) in fact, the usufructuary is bound
to answer for the custody.


60 What kind of Undertaking is given [BOOK VII


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 79) This stipulation embraces every
kind of contingency in which the usufruct would be lost. 1. We
must regard the usufruct as ceasing to belong to the party even
where it has never yet begun to belong to him at all, although
it was given him as a legacy, and the stipulation can none the
less be sued on, it being assumed that a thing ceases to belong to
a man to whom it never did belong. 2. Where the usufruct is
renewed by the legacy [for] every time it is lost, the stipulation
can be sued on, unless the undertaking is worded so as to meet the
case, but an exceptio will have to be raised. 3. Again, where the
testator leaves you a usufruct, and, subject to the condition of your
having children, the full proprietorship, then, if the usufruct should
be lost, the above stipulation will be enforceable, but it will
be a case for an exceptio. 4. Hf the heir disposes of the bare
property, and after that the usufruct is lost, let us consider whether
he can sue on the stipulation. Strictly speaking it may be held
that in actual law the stipulation is not enforceable, because the
thing cannot be handed over to the heir or his successors, and the
person to whom it can be handed over, that is, the person who has
become owner, was not privy to the stipulation; however this
last-mentioned person must look out for himself by making a
separate stipulation at the time when his ownership is acquired ;
indeed, even if he has not done so, he can still have recourse to an
action tn rem.


VENULEIUS (Stipulations 12) —_ If the [usu]fructuary acquires
the property, then, as the usufruct is merged, it ceases to belong
to him ; but if an action is brought against him on the stipulation,
the proper rule is that either the action fails, even in direct law, if
we go so far as to apply to this case the principles which guide a


reasonable arbitrator, or else the defendant must raise a special
eaceptio.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 79) The stipulation contains an
assurance that no malicious fraud has been committed or will be


committed, and, the reference to such fraud being drawn iz rem, it |


is held to include fraud on the part of anyone, whether a successor
or an adoptive father. 1. Ifthe bequest is of wsus without fructus,


the preetor orders security to be given without the article of ~


produce being referred to; and quite rightly, the object being
that the undertaking should relate to use only, not produce as —
well. 2. Consequently it is equally true that if what is acquired |


TIT. IX | by the Usufructuary 61


is the right to fructus without usus, the stipulation is in place.
3. And where a right of habitatio is left or the service of a man or
of any animal at all, the stipulation is required, although these
rights are not modelled on usufruct altogether.


6 PAULUS (on the Edict 75) The same rule applies to returns
from an estate, for example when there is a bequest of vintage or
harvest; as if the things which on the death of the legatee revert
to the heir were taken in pursuance of the bequest of a usufruct?.


7 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 79) Where something was de-
livered in pursuance of a usufruct, but security was not given, then,
according to Proculus, the heir can sue to recover the thing, and if
he is met with an exceptio to the effect that the thing was delivered
in pursuance of a usufruct, he has a good replication. This view is
sound in principle ; but a personal action can still be brought to
compel the giving of the actual undertaking. 1. Where there is a
bequest of the usufruct of a sum of money, the stipulation ought to
make express mention of the two cases referred to in the words “shall
be given when you die or suffer capitis diminutio.” The reason
why these two cases alone are to be mentioned is that it is in such
cases only that the use of a sum of money can be lost.


8 PAULUS (on the Edict 75) If the usufruct is bequeathed to
you and the bare property to me, the undertaking must be given to
me ; but if the bare property is bequeathed to me on a condition,
some authorities, including Marcianus, hold that the undertaking
should be given both to the heir and to me ; and this is a sound
view. Again, if the property is bequeathed to me, and, when it
should cease to belong to me, to another, then again the under-
taking should be given to both, as was held in the case mentioned
above. If the usufruct is bequeathed to two jointly, they will be
bound to give undertakings to one another and also to the heir,
such undertakings containing a reference to the contingency
expressed in the following form of words ; “to give up the usufruct
to the heir, if the right to the same does not pertain to the other
co-legatee.”’


9 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 51) If a usufruct is bequeathed to
me, and I am requested to hand it over to Titius, it is worth con-
sidering who is bound to give the undertaking ; is it Titius or I, the


1 Read guasi for quamvis and transpose que and legato. So M. suggests,
rather than despair of the passage.


10


11


12


62 What kind of Undertaking is given [BOOK vil


legatee? or shall we say that the heir can sue me and that I must
sue the beneficiary? The simplest rule is the following :—if I have
any contingent interest in the usufruct left in my hands, so that it
may possibly revert to me, in other words to the legatee, when you
lose it, the matter can be disposed of by you, [Titius,] giving the
undertaking to me and my doing the same to the bare proprietor.
But if the usufruct was left me for the sake of the beneficiary, and
there is no chance of its reverting to me, then the beneficiary
ought to give the undertaking to the bare proprietor directly.
1. One thing is certain, that whether a man has a usufruct by direct
law or even by the help of the preetor, in any case the usufructuary
is compellable to give the undertaking or defend any actions
brought. 2. It is true that if the bare property is bequeathed to
anyone from and after a given day, but the bequest of usufruct is
immediate, then the rule is, according to Pomponius, that the
usufructuary should be excused the undertaking, because it is certain
that the property will come to him or his heir. 3. If what
is bequeathed is a usufruct in dress, then, according to Pomponius,
though the heir should stipulate that the dress should be given up
on the termination of the usufruct, still the promisor does not incur
any liability if he gives it up in a worn condition without deliberate
ill intention. 4. Where several persons are bare proprietors, each
will stipulate with reference to his own share.


PauLus (on the Edict 40) If you and I have a slave in
common, and I bequeath the usufruct in him to you, the under-
taking will be required for the benefit of my heir ; it is true that he
can take proceedings with regard to the actual property by an action
communi dividundo, but the matter of a usufruct to which you
have an undivided title does not come within the scope of the
judge’s duty who hears the action in question.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 7) Where the asus of a house is left,
an undertaking ought still to be given to use in such manner as to
satisfy a reasonable arbitrator ; and it would not alter the case if
the father desired that his sons, being heirs, should occupy the
house along with his widow, who is legatee.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) If what is left is the usufruct of
actual vases the undertaking mentioned in the senatorial decree will
not be required, but only the one which says that the party will use
and take profit so as to satisfy a reasonable arbitrator. If then the


TIT. 1X] by the Usufructuary 63


vases were delivered in order that the deliveree may get the profit
of them, no one hesitates to say that the property in them does not
pass to the person who received them; as in fact it was not intended in
the delivery of them that the person who delivered should part with
the property, but that the legatee should use and take the profit.
Accordingly, the vases not becoming the property of the fructuary,
they can be recovered by the owner by means of a windicatio,
though no undertaking was given. It is of course established that


no one can recover his own property by a personal action except
from a thief.


1


2


3


4


EIGHTH BOOK.


I.
ON SERVITUDES.


MARCIANUS (tues 3) Servitudes are either attached to
persons, as in the case of asus and usufruct, or to things, as in the
case of rustic and urban estates.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 17) Where a house is owned in
common, one of the owners cannot by himself subject it to a
servitude.


Pauwus (on the Edict 21) Of servitudes attached to estates
some regard the soil and some the surface.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) Servitudes cannot in direct law
be created from and after a given day, or to last until a given day,
or so as to depend on a condition, or to last until a given conditional
event, for example, as long as I choose, still, if any such qualifica-
tion is made, a person who sues to recover the servitude against
the terms agreed upon can be met by an exceptio of pactum!' or of
dolus ; this Cassius tells us is to be found in an opinion of Sabinus,
and is his own view. 1. It is settled that servitudes can be
qualified by expressing certain limitations, as by saying what kind
of transport may be used or may not be used, for instance, that it
must always be by horse, or that no more than a given weight shall
be conveyed, or that such and such a flock shall be driven, or that
charcoal shall be carried. 2. Where intervals of so many days or
hours are specified, this does not deal with the question when the
servitude shall exist, but only with the mode of enjoyment of a
servitude legally created.


‘ Ins. per before pact’. Cf. M.


of. 1{ On Servitudes 65


GAIus (on the provincial Edict 7) Via (roadway), iter (path-
way), actus (driftway), and ductus aque (water-course), are created
in much the same ways as those in which we have already said that
a usufruct is created. 1. The enjoyment of a servitude may be
given with particular limitation as to the time for it, for instance,
it may be understood that the party is to enjoy the servitude
from the third hour until the tenth hour, or that he shall have
it every other day.


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) A servitude can be either released
or created as to a certain portion of the land exclusive of the rest.


ULPranus (on the lex Julia et Papia 13) The right to
conduct a drain is a servitude.


PavuLus (on Plautius 15) A servitude cannot be created to
the effect that a man shall be at liberty to pluck apples, or to walk
about, or to dine on another man’s ground. 1. If your land serves
me, then if I come to be owner of a share in your land or you of a
share in mine, the servitude is in both cases retained as to a part


[per partes], though it could not have been originally acquired as
to a part.


CELSUS (Digest 5) If a via over anyone's land is conveyed
or bequeathed to a man without more’, he will be at liberty to walk
or drive without restriction, that is to say over any part of the land
that he likes ; only, however, in a reasonable way, as the language
which people use is always subject to some tacit reservation. The
party cannot be allowed to walk or drive through the house itself,
or straight across the vineyards, when he might have gone some other
way with equal convenience and with less damage to the servient
land. It is in fact an established rule that, wherever it was that he
directed his course at the outset, he is bound to walk or drive that
way only, and he has no power after that to change his direction.
This was the opinion of Sabinus himself; that writer argued from
the case of a water-course, which, he said, the party could at first
carry in any direction he pleased, but, when it had been once made
in any particular direction, he was not at liberty to carry it some-
where else ; and it is perfectly true that this rule ought to be
observed with a via as well.


1 Read simpliciter for simplicius. Cf. M.


[ws |


M. J. Il.


10


ile


12


13


14


66 On Servitudes [BOOK VIII


THE SAME (Digest 18) Where a right of er is _ be-
queathed which cannot be enjoyed without special works being
executed, then, according to Proculus, the legatee has a right to
make a pathway by means of levelling or substructure.


Mopestinus (Differences 6) It is commonly received that a
servitude cannot be acquired in respect of a share of ownership ;
consequently, if a man who has an estate stipulates for a via and
afterwards disposes of a share in his estate, he vitiates the stipula-
tion by putting matters into a position in which such stipulation
could not at the outset have been validly made. Again, a via
cannot be either bequeathed or revoked in respect of a share,
and if either is done [in words], the bequest or revocation is void.


JAVOLENUS (Epistles 4) I have no doubt that a servitude
can be lawfully acquired through a slave, so as to be attached to
land belonging to a municipality.


PoMPONTIUS (on Quintus Mucius 14) If there isa gift of a wa,
but the space pointed out for it is so narrow that neither a carriage
nor a horse can be got into it, it will be held that what is acquired
is an ¢fer, rather than a via or an actus: if however a horse could
be taken along it, but not a vehicle too, it will be held that what
is acquired is an actus.


Pautus (on Sabinus 15) Servitudes of rustic estates,
although attached to corporeal things, are nevertheless incorporeal,
and for that reason they are never acquired by use ; or the reason
may be that they are servitudes of such a character that they are
not subjects of determinate and continuous possession ; as no one
can use a path so constantly and continuously that his possession of
it cannot be held to be intermitted for any moment. The same
rule is applied to servitudes of urban estates too. 1. Theservitude
of an der giving access to a burial-place will remain a matter of
private property, and consequently it can be released to the owner
of the servient estate ; moreover it can be acquired even where
the religious character of the burial-place is already established.
2. Where a piece of public ground or a public road lies between
[two estates], a servitude of drawing water can still be created,
though a water-course cannot ; however, the practice is to petition
the Emperor that the party may be at liberty to make a water-
course across a public road in such a manner as not to incommode
the public. If what lies in the way is a spot which is consecrated
or religious, this prevents even the servitude of an ¢ter ; as no one
can have any servitude over such land.


15


16


17


19


TH, 1 On Servitudes 67


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) Wherever a [supposed] servitude
cannot belong to any person or attach to any estate, then, inasmuch
as no neighbour has any interest therein, it has no valid existence ;
take, for example, a servitude to the effect that you shall not walk
over your own estate or be upon it. Hence, if you grant me a
servitude to the effect that you shall have no right to the use and
produce of your own estate, this is inoperative; it would bea
different thing if it were to the effect that you should have no right
to take water on your own estate in order to diminish my supply.
1. It is not of the nature of servitudes that a man should [have to]
do anything ; for instance, remove shrubs so as! to afford a more
pleasing view, or, with the same object, paint something on his own
ground ; but only that he should submit to something being done
or abstain from doing something.


JULIANUS (Digest 49) When a man has taken an estate by
way of security for debt, it is not unjust that he should have allowed
him an wtilis actio to enforce a servitude attached to it, just as he
will be allowed an wét/is actio to recover the estate itself. It is
quite understood that the same rule is observed as to a man who is
a tenant of vectigalian land (a perpetual lease).


PoMPONIUS (Rules) It is impossible for a share in a va,
iter, actus, or water-course to be made the subject of an obligation
[to grant it], as the use of such rights is undivided ; consequently
where a man who has stipulated for any such servitude dies leaving
several heirs, any one heir can sue for the whole wa, and, if the
promisor dies leaving several heirs, there is a right of action for the
whole against any one of them separately. -


PAULUS (Questions by Papinianus 31, note) In all cases
where servitudes are extinguished by merger on entry by the heir,
it has been laid down that a legatee [of the servient estate] will be
barred by an eaceptio, if he decline to let the servitude be created
again.

LaBEO (Posteriores epitomized by Julianus 4) I am of
opinion that where a man sells an estate, it can be subjected to a
servitude [in his favour], even if such servitude should be of no use
to him ; suppose, for instance, some vendor should have no object
in * having a water-course, still that servitude might be created [in his
favour]; there are some things which people are able to* possess even
where they are of no use to them.

1 Read ut for awt. Cf. M. et Bas.
* del. debere. M. 3 del. debere. M. :


—Z


20


68 On Servitudes [BOOK VIII


JAVOLENUS (Extracts from Labeo’s Posteriores 5) Whenever
a roadway or any other right to be attached to an estate is being
purchased, Labeo holds that an undertaking should be given to the
effect that nothing will be done by you [the vendor] which will
prevent the purchaser being able to use the right in question, as
there is no such thing as clear delivery of a right of that kind. I
should say myself that the exercise of the right must be treated as
equivalent to delivery of possession, and for this reason interdicts
have been established answering to possessory ones.


II.
On SERVITUDES OF URBAN ESTATES.


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) If public ground or a public road
comes in the way, this does not hinder the servitude of a va or an
actus or a right to raise the height of a building, but it hinders a
right to insert a beam, or to have an overhanging roof or other
projecting! structure, also one to the discharge of a flow or drip of
rain-water, because the sky over the ground referred to ought to
be unobscured. 1. If you have the usufruct and I have the bare
property in a house which is subject to the servitude of support to
the neighbour’s building, I am liable to be sued in respect of the
whole, and you are not liable at all.


Gatus (on the provincial Edict 7) Rights attached to urban
estates are such as follows :—that of raising a building higher and
stopping the neighbour's lights, that of preventing such raising, also
that of discharging eavesdrip on to the roof or the vacant ground
belonging to a neighbour, or the servitude of not being free to
discharge it ; also the right of letting beams into the neighbour's
wall, lastly that of having a projecting house or other structure and.
other similar rights.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 29) There is also such a servitude as
that of a right to enjoy an unobstructed prospect.


PauLus (Institutes2) Where? servitudes of lights are created,
what people are held to acquire is a right to the effect that some |
neighbour of theirs shall have to submit to their lights (lamina |
nostra excipiat) ; but, if the servitude imposed is that lights shall
not be blocked, what they are on the whole held to acquire is this,


1 Kor prohibendi read projiciend?. Cf. M. 2 del. ir. M.


7


9


TIT. 11] On Servitudes of Urban Estates 69


that the neighbour shall have no right to raise his own building
against their will so as to diminish the flow of light to their
building.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 17) When we speak of a thing
being against a man’s will in the matter of a servitude, we must
understand this to imply not that he expressly objects, but that he
does not consent. Accordingly Pomponius holds (b. 40) that a
thing may properly be said to be against the will of an infant or
lunatic ; the expression does not refer to the act which is done,
but to the existence of a right to do it of the nature of a servitude.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) These servitudes, exactly
like those of rustic estates, are lost by non-user after lapse of a
specific period ; subject however to this distinction, that they are
not lost by non-user as a matter of course, but only where the
[servient| neighbour acquires freedom by the user of the same.
Suppose, for instance, your house serves my house in this way, that
your house must not be raised higher, lest it obstruct my lights, and,
that being the case, I keep my windows blocked up or built up
for the period prescribed ; I still lose my right only in case you
have had your house raised and standing higher throughout the
same period ; but, if you made no alteration, I retain the servitude.
Again, if your house is subject to a servitude of having a beam let
into it, and I take the beam out, [ do not lose any right, unless you
fill up the cavity out of which the beam was taken, and keep things
in that condition for the required time ; but, if you make no altera-
tion, the! servitude remains unaffected.


POMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 26) With regard to the
statement that I may succeed in acquiring freedom for my building
by user of the same, it is said by Mucius that I could not have
acquired it as well by having a tree planted on the same spot ; and
this is perfectly sound, because a tree would not remain in the
same precise posture and condition as a wall would, owing to the
natural movement of the tree.

Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) Where a wall is on
natural principles common [to two houses], it is not lawful for one
of the two neighbours to pull it down or repair it, as he is not sole
owner.


ULpPIANus (on the Edict 43) Where a man, by raising the
height of his own house, cuts off the flow of light to that of his


1 del. sum. Cf. M.


10


11


12


70 On Servitudes of Urban Estates [Book vm


neighbour, but is not subject to a servitude in respect of the latter,
there is no right of action against him.


MarcELLUS (Digest 4) Gaurus to Marcellus :—I own two
houses, and one of them I bequeath to you; [after my death] my
heir raises the height of the other, and obstructs your light: can
you take any! proceedings against him? and do you think that it
makes any difference whether the house which he raises was his
own or is one which he has as heir? I desire your opinion on
another point too; namely, whether the heir is bound to allow
access to the property bequeathed through a house which belongs
to a different owner [from the legatee]?, a question often asked
where there is a bequest of the usufruct in a piece of ground to
which there is no access to be had, except through the land of
some other person [than the usufructuary|. Marcellus replied as
follows :—Where a man who had two houses has bequeathed one of
them, there is no doubt that his heir has a right to stop the access
of light to the one bequeathed by raising the height of the other ;
and the same must be said where a man bequeaths a house to one
person and the usufruct of another house to another. But we
cannot always apply a similar rule to the case of a right of way ;
because a legacy of usufruct is worth nothing without a right of
access, whereas a man can live in a house even where it is
darkened. In fact, where there is a legacy of the usufruct of
some spot, access ought to be given as well, since if what was left
were a right to draw water, a right of way for the purpose of
drawing water would be given too. It should be observed that the
heir is allowed to build out the light and darken the house
bequeathed only to an extent which does not cause the light to be
shut out entirely, but leaves remaining so much as the inmates
require for reasonable daily use and enjoyment.


ULPIANUS (on the Office of Consul 1) Where a man wishes
to block out his neighbours’ lights or to construct anything at ail
which interferes with their convenience, he must bear in mind that
he is bound to observe the form and position of the original
buildings. 1. If you have got no agreement with your neighbour
as to how high a building which you have taken in hand to
construct may be raised, you can have an arbiter appointed.


JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Cassius 10) Where buildings are
subject to a servitude to the effect that no part of them is to


1 Read newmaguid for quid. Cf. M.
2 Probably to the heir himself.


13


14


15


TIT. 11 | On Servitudes of Urban Estates v"


be raised in height, they may very well have shrubs placed wpon
them in excess of that height, but if the servitude is one of
prospect, and the shrubs would be in the way, they cannot be
so placed.


PrRocULUS (Episéles 2) A man named Hiberus, who has a
block of chambers at the back of my warehouses, built some
bathrooms against our party-wall; at the same time a man has no
right to have tubes brought up against a party-wall; just as, in
fact, he has no right even to build another wall of his own! over it.
The rule applies the more strongly in the case of the tubes for the
fact that they cause the wall to be scorched by the fire: so I wish
you would speak to Hiberus about the matter, and prevent him
from doing what a man has no right to do. Proculus replied :—
“TY do not suppose Hiberus has any doubt in this case that he is
doing an illegal act in setting up tubes against a party-wall.”
1. According to the opinion of Capito, it is lawful to put facing on
a party-wall, just as I am at liberty to have on such a wall paintings
of very great value ; at the same time, if the neighbour pulls the
wall down and proceedings are taken for damnum infectumn,
by way of action on [the regular| stipulation, such paintings cannot
be valued at a higher rate than ordinary stucco ; and the same rule
must be observed with the facing.


PAPIRIUS JuUSTUS (on Imperial enactments 1) The Emperors
Antoninus Augustus and Severus Augustus declared by rescript,
with reference to vacant ground over which no one has a servitude,
that the owner, or anyone else with his consent, is free to build on
it, if he leaves clear the statutable space between the spot and the
neighbouring block.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 29) Various differences are main-
tained in practice between the servitude of not blocking out lights
(ne luminibus oficiatur) and that of not interfering with the
prospect (ne prospectui offendatur); as, in the case of the
prospect, the dominant owner has this particular advantage, that
nothing may be constructed so as to prevent his having a pleasing
and unimpeded view, but, in the case of the lights, the right
enjoyed is that the servient owner shall erect nothing by which the
other’s lights would be obscured. Accordingly, whatever he does
which tends to impede the light can be put a stop to, if there is
a servitude existing, and there can be a “notification of novel


1 For suum per read super. Of. M.


16


17


18


72 On Servitudes of Urban Estates [BooK VIII


structure ” served on him, supposing, that is, that his operations
are such as to interfere with the light.


PauLus (Epitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 2) Light means
a view of the sky, and there is a difference between light and
prospect ; a prospect may exist in respect of places on a lower
level, but there can be no light enjoyed from a place on a lower
level.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 29) If a man plants a tree so as to
shut out [a dominant owner’s] light, it may perfectly well be said
that he acts in violation of the servitude created; even a tree
causes a smaller extent of sky to be seen. But if what is placed on
the spot in no respect impedes the light, but only keeps off the
sunshine, then, if it is done in a place where it was more agreeable
to be without sunshine, it may be said that the party does not do
anything in violation of the servitude; but if he does it over
against a room meant to be exposed to the sun (heliocaminus), or
a sundial, then it must be said that, by causing shade in a place
where sunshine was indispensable, he is acting in violation of the
servitude created. 1. Ifa man, on the other hand, should remove
a building or, say, branches of trees, with the result that a spot
which up to that time was in the shade comes to be fully exposed
to the sunshine, he does not violate the servitude ; the servitude to
which he was subject was to the effect that he should not obscure
the light, but, in the case in question, he does not obscure the
light, he lets light in to an excessive extent. 2. However, there are
cases in which it may be said that even a man who removes or
lowers a building does obscure the light, where, for example, light
found its way into the house by reflexion or some sort of
repercussion. 3. The following clause in an agreement for delivery
of a house,—“eavesdrip to be such as it is now,”—imports that
neighbours are under the necessity of admitting eavesdrip, it does
not go so far as this, that the purchaser himself is to submit
to eavesdrip from the adjoining buildings ; so that what the vendor
engages is that he enjoys a servitude in respect of eavesdrip but that
he is subject to none in favour of anyone else. 4. What is here
said as to eavesdrip must be understood to be true of all other cases
of servitudes too, where no express agreement is made to a different
effect.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 10) If pipes through which you |
conduct water are laid against my house and do me an injury,


19


20


TIT. 11] On Servitudes of Urban Estates 73


I have a good right of action in factum, but I can also call upon
you to give an undertaking by way of stipulation against damnum
infectum.


PauLus (on Sabinus 6) According to Proculus, a pipe
attached to a party-wall and supplied with water from a cistern or
from rainfall is a thing which cannot legally be had ; at the same
time an adjoining proprietor cannot be prevented from having
a bath against such a wall, though the wall should contract
moisture thereby, any more than he could be prevented from
spilling water in his own dining-room or his bedchamber. How-
ever Neratius says that if a warm bathroom is used in such a way
as to keep up constant moisture, and this is a nuisance to the
adjoining owner, it can be put a stop to. 1. A chamber made
of earthenware constructed against a party-wall is a thing which
may legally be had, if it is so supported as to remain standing even
when the wall is taken down, always provided it does not interfere
with the repair of the party-wall. 2. Sabinus says very reasonably
that I have a right to place a set of steps against a party-wall,
because this is a thing which can be taken down again.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 15) Servitudes which affect only the
surface of the soil are kept alive by possession; suppose, for
instance, I have a beam reaching from my house and let into
yours', then, by means of the beam, I possess the easement of
having it so let in. A similar result will follow if I have a balcony
resting on something on your ground, or I discharge eavesdrip on to
your ground, as, in that case, I make use of something which
is within your precincts, and so” have possession [of an easement]
by what may be called an act of mine. 1. If your courtyard is on
a higher level than my house, and you have granted mea right of
way on foot or by carriage to my house across your courtyard, but
there is no level approach across such courtyard, I have a right to
construct steps or a sloping approach by my door, so long as I do
not, with a view to maintaining the way, break the place up more
than is necessary. 2. If a building from which eavesdrip is dis-
charged is taken down with a view to its being replaced by another
of the like form and character, it is requisite in the general interest
that the latter should be regarded as the same building ; whereas,


1 del. habendi consuetudinem. Cf. M.: even so the passage must be corrupt ;
sense, on the whole, clear.
2 For si read sic. Cf. M.


21


74 On Servitudes of Urban Estates {Book VII


no doubt, if you take a strict view of the matter, what is erected in
the second instance is a different building, and, consequently, by the
removal of the old building, any usufruct in the same is lost, true as
it may be that the site of a building is a part of it. 3. If a servi-
tude of eavesdrip is created, it is not lawful for the owner of the
servient ground to build on the spot to which the eavesdrip has
reached. 4. If the eavesdrip was originally discharged from the tiles,
it cannot afterwards be legally discharged from a floor made
of beams or other material. 5. In whatever way aright to dis-
charge eavesdrip is acquired, the discharge may be made from
a higher level, as the servitude thereby becomes less burdensome,
because water that falls from a height falls with a less forcible im-
pact, and sometimes is carried away and does not reach the place on
which the servitude attaches ; but the discharge cannot lawfully be
carried lower down, because that would make the servitude more
burdensome, that is to say, instead of a drip it would be a stream.
For a similar reason, the discharge of eavesdrip may be carried back,
because then the fall will begin more on the property of the
dominant owner, but it cannot be carried forward, because then it
would fall on a different spot from that to which the servitude
applies ; the dominant owner is at liberty to make the discharge
more tolerable, but not more burdensome ; in short, it ought to be
understood that the position of a servient neighbour may legally
be altered for the better, but not for the worse, unless some express
[provision for an] alteration was made at! the creation of the servi-
tude. 6. A man who builds on vacant ground which is subject to
a servitude of eavesdrip is at liberty to bring up his building to the
place from which the fall comes ; indeed, if the fall takes place on
to the building itself, he is allowed to carry the building higher,
provided always the drip is duly submitted to.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) If your house is subject to two
distinct servitudes in favour of my buildings, viz. first that it is not
to be raised higher, and secondly that it must receive rain-water
from off my buildings, and I thereupon grant you the right to raise
your house without my consent, the rule which will have to be laid
down, as far as my eavesdrip is concerned, is as follows: if, on your
house being raised higher, it would become impossible for my rain-
water to be discharged on to it, you will for that reason not be at
liberty to raise it; but if the discharge would not be interfered
with, you are at liberty to raise it.


1 Ins. iz after nominatim. M.


22


23


25


26


TIT. 1] On Servitudes of Urban Estates 75


JULIANUS (Haxtracts from Minicius 2) The owner of a
building can subject his neighbour to a servitude of such a kind
that he gives an undertaking with reference not only to lights
actually existing, but to any that may afterwards be created.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) If a servitude is created with
these words :—“lights now existing to remain as they are,” this is
not held to involve any provision as to future lights; but if the
words of the undertaking are “lights not to be built out,” this ex-
pression leaves it doubtful whether it is only meant that lights now
existing are not to be built out, or subsequent lights are included
too. The more indulgent construction is that the expression, being
general, refers to all lights, whether they exist at the moment or
come to exist after the date of the agreement. 1. Even a building
which is yet to be made, but does not at present exist, may be
subjected to a servitude or have one attached to it.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 15) Whoever has a building which is,
with good right, superposed on another may lawfully build on the
top of his own structure as high as he pleases, so long as this does
not [tend to] impose on the buildings underneath a more burden-
some servitude than they ought to have to bear.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) — The above rule applies to cases
in which something is inserted from one building into another ;
this being the only way in which a man can have an upper building
superposed on another which is not his. 1. There are three
houses standing on an incline, of which the house in the middle
serves the uppermost house, but the lowest is subject to no
servitude, and a party-wall which divides the middle house from
the lowest is raised in height by the owner of the lowest house.
In this case, according to Sabinus, the owner last mentioned can
legally keep the wall so raised.


PauLus (on Sabinus 15) In a case of common property it
is not open to either owner, in virtue of a servitude, to construct
anything without the consent of the other or to prevent the other
from constructing anything ; as no one can have a servitude over
his own property. Accordingly, seeing the endless contests that
might arise, it generally comes to a partition. However, by means
of the action communi dividundo, one part-owner can prevent works
being executed by the other or procure that the other shall remove


any work that he has executed already, provided such removal*is


advisable in the joint interest of both.


27


28


29


30


76 On Serviiudes of Urban Hstates [BOOK VIII


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) But if you and I own the Titian
house in common, and something is unlawfully inserted from that
house into another belonging to me in severalty, I have a right to
bring an action for damages against you on account of it or to have
a partition’ of the property. The same is the case where, in a
similar way, some part of your house has been made to reach over
a house belonging to you and me in common, as I have an action
in my own person against you. 1. If you are going to build upon
ground common to you and another, your fellow-owner has a right
to stop you, even though you should have a right to build given you
by the adjacent owner, as you have no right to build on common
property” without the consent of the other part-owner.


PAvuLUuS (on Sabinus 15) An opening made at the botiom of
the wall of a [neighbour’s] apartment or dining hall and intended
[by him] to be used for the purpose of washing the floor is not held
to imply the servitude of discharging a stream nor to be a thing a
right to which can be acquired by lapse of time. This is true on
the assumption that no water comes to the spot in question in the
form of rain, as what is effected by human hands has no perpetual
cause ; but water that falls from the heavens, although it does not
keep on without interruption, still has a natural cause, and therefore
is regarded as being produced perpetually, and all real servitudes
are required to depend on causes that are perpetual, for which
reason it is impossible to grant a right to a water-course which is
supplied by a reservoir or a standing pool. The servitude of a
right to discharge eavesdrip is also required to depend on a
natural and perpetual cause.


POMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 32) Accordingly if the
adjacent proprietor suffers any damage owing to an opening such as
above mentioned, in respect of which there is no servitude, we must
say that it is a case for a stipulation against damnum infectum.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 15) If a man purchases and takes
delivery of a house which serves his own house, the servitude is
merged and taken away, and, should he wish to sell the house again,
the servitude must be expressly renewed ; otherwise the house will
be sold free. 1. If I acquire a share in an estate over which I
have a servitude, or in respect of which I am subject to a servitude,


l Read partiri for perdere. Cf. M.: otherwise the translation must be “or to
lose my property.”
2 Read in re for in jure. Cf. M.


~~ ————————e~_ .».©—
a


—— ae


TIT. 11] On Servitudes of Urban Estates 77


it is held that the servitude is not merged, as it still exists in respect
of ashare. Hence, if my estate serves your estate, and thereupon
you’ deliver to me a share in your estate and I deliver to you a
share in mine, the servitude remains. Again, the acquisition of a


usufruct in either of the two estates will not interrupt the
servitude.


31 THE SAME (on the Edict 48) If the heir, being ordered by
testament not to obscure the lights of an adjacent owner, but to
allow him a servitude, pulls down the [servient] building, the
legatee [adjacent owner] must have an wéilis actio allowed him by


which the heir can be stopped, if he afterwards attempts raising
the building above the old limit.


32 JULIANUS (Digest 7) My house serves the house of Lucius
Titius and that of Publius Meevius, [the servitude in both cases
being] to the effect that I may not raise the height of my house,
whereupon I ask Titius’s leave to raise it, and I keep it so raised for
the legal period ; in this case I acquire by user freedom from the
servitude as against Publius Meevius, as Titius and Meevius did not
have one servitude between them, but two respectively. This view
derives support from the consideration that, if either of the two
were to release me from the servitude, I should thereby be free so
far only as that one was concerned, but I should be under a servitude
in favour of the other just as much as before. 1. Freedom from a
servitude is acquired by user where the house is kept in possession
[and not otherwise] ; accordingly, if a man who has raised the
height of a house [in violation of a servitude] goes out of possession
of the house before the expiration of the legal period, such ac-
quisition is interrupted ; and then anyone else who comes into
possession of the same house will acquire freedom by user by lapse
of the entire legal period. The fact is that the nature of servitudes
is such that they cannot be possessed, but the person who possesses
the [dominant] tenement is regarded as possessing the servitude.


33 Pauuus (Epitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 5) The person who
is bound to replace a column which afforded support to an adjacent
house in virtue of a servitude is the owner of the servient house,
not the party who desires to enjoy the support ; as, where part of
the written terms of a contract for sale of a house was as follows :—
“the wall is to continue to give the same support that is given now,”


1 Ins. tu before ‘tuorum. Cf. M.


34


35


36


37


38


78 On Servitudes of Urban Estates [Book vat


this very plainly implies that a wall was required to exist in
perpetuity ; no doubt it is not declared by these words that the
same wall is to be there for ever, which in fact would be impossible,
but that there should for ever be a wall of the same kind to
support the burden ; just as, where a man has given an undertaking
that! he will afford anyone support for his building (onus), it
follows that supposing the thing which is the subject-matter of the
servitude and bears the burden imposed by the other should be
destroyed, another thing of the same kind would have to be
supplied to take its place.


JULIANUS (Hatracts from Minicius 2) Where a man has


two vacant plots, he can convey the one so as to make it serve the
other.


MARCIANUS (Rules 3) Where a man owns two houses, and,
in selling one, he declares that it is to be subject to a servitude
[attaching to the other], but, when he makes delivery, he says
nothing about the servitude, he can either sue on the contract of
sale or bring a condictio for an unliquidated amount in order to
have the servitude created.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) | Aman had two houses covered by
a single timber roof, and bequeathed them to two legatees respec-
tively. What I said was that, inasmuch as it is the better opinion
that the timbers of a building may be shared between two persons
on the principle of each owning a specific portion of the whole
connected structure, therefore the materials in question here will
belong to the two owners over their respective houses, and they
will not have mutual rights of action the one against the other so
as to contest their respective claims to insert beams from one
house into the other; moreover it makes no difference, I said,
whether the houses are bequeathed to the two men in absolute
terms or to one of them subject to a condition ;


JULIANUS (Digest 7) and the same holds where he [the
owner first mentioned] conveys the houses to two persons.


PAULUS (Questions 2) _. If my house is so distant from yours
that they are out of sight of one another, or there is a mountain


1 Instead of reading “si quis alicwi cavisset ut servitutem preeberet qui” M.
would like to omit the words in italics and read cuz for gui, and I have followed
him above; we at least get the sense.


39


40


41


DEL. Xt | On Servitudes of Urban Estates 79


between them which shuts out the view, there can be no servitude
created between them.


THE SAME (Handbooks 1) In fact no one can subject his
own buildings to a servitude, unless both the grantor and grantee
have the respective buildings within the field of view, so that the
one building could stand in the way of the other.


THE SAME (Responsa 3) I gave it as my opinion that persons
who did not enjoy the servitude of making a window (lwminis
emmittendi) had acted illegally in making an aperture in a wall
owned in common with the neighbour and making windows in it.


ScAVOLA (Responsa 1) A testator bequeathed to Olympicus
for his life the right of habitation in a particular house and [the
use of | a warehouse which there was in the house ; and adjoining
the same house there was a garden, and also an upper room which
was not bequeathed to Olympicus, but there had always been
access to the garden and the room through the house in which the
right of habitation was left. The question was asked whether
Olympicus was bound to allow such access. My answer was that
it was not acase of a servitude, but still that the heir was at liberty
to pass through the house to the parts mentioned, provided he did
not incommode the legatee. 1. Lucius Titius made an aperture
in a wall in his house and opened a doorway leading to public
ground, so as not to exceed the limits pointed out by vertical
eavesdrip and a projecting’ eave ; I wish to know, seeing that he did
not interfere with the access of light enjoyed by Publius Meevius,
his neighbour, or with his means of approach, nor do anything to
prevent the discharge of rain-water from his house, whether Publius
Meevius, the said neighbour, has any right of action to interfere
with him. My answer was that on the facts stated he had none
whatever.


Ill.
ON SERVITUDES OF Rustic ESTATES.


ULPIANUS (lnstitutes 2) The following are servitudes of
rustic estates, iter, actus, via, aque ductus (footpath, drift-
way, roadway, water-course). Jter is the right of passing or
walking for a man, but not of driving a beast of draught as well ;


1 For protectus read projectus. Cf. M.


80 On Servitudes of Rustic Estates [BOOK VIM


actus is the right of driving a beast of draught or a vehicle ; so
that one who has [only] an zfer has no actus, and one who has an
actus has an iter too, even without a beast of draught. Va is the
right of passing or driving or walking ; via in fact includes both
iter and actus. Agwe ductus is the right to convey water over
another person’s ground. 1. Among rustic servitudes must be
reckoned the right to draw water, the right to take cattle to water,
the right to pasture, the right to burn lime or to dig for sand.
2. There is no doubt that the delivery of servitudes and
acquiescence in them will constitute sufficient ground for the aid
of the preetor.


NERATIUS (Rules 4) | Among servitudes of rustic estates are
the right to raise the height of a building and thereby to obscure
the neighbour’s residence, or to maintain a drain under the house
or residence of a neighbour, or to maintain projecting eaves.
1. The right to have a water-course or to draw water to be conveyed
by a water-course across the same place can perfectly well be
granted to a number of persons ; again, the grant may be that the
water-course should be used on different days or at different hours ;
and, if the water-course or the means of drawing water should give
a large enough supply, the right may even be granted to a number
of persons to take the water across the same place, and that on the
same days or at the same hours.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 17) Again, a servitude may be
granted to the effect that’ oxen used for ploughing the farm may be
pastured on neighbouring land; Neratius tells us (Membranes b. 2)
that this kind of servitude can be created. 1. The same writer
says that there can be a servitude created to the effect that
agricultural produce may be collected in a neighbour's country-
house and there kept, or that props for vines may be taken from a
neighbour's estate. 2. In the same book he says that where a
neighbour has stone quarries adjoining your land, you can grant
him the right to cast soil or rubbish or bits of rock on to your land
and to leave them as they lie, or to let stones roll on to your land
and be left as they are, and then afterwards to carry them away.
3. When a man has a right to draw water, he is held to have an
iter as well, to enable him to draw it, and, according to Neratius,
(Membranes 3), if the right to draw and the right of access for the
purpose are both given him, he will have them both, and if the


1 del. et. M.


TIT. U1 | On Servitudes of Rustic Estates 81


only right granted is that of drawing, this includes that of access
too, or if it is only that of access to the spring, this includes that of
drawing. This applies to the case of water being drawn from
a private spring. In the case of a public river, Neratius says
further in the same book, that a right of iter up to it ought to be
conveyed, though a right to draw need not, and if a man only grants
a right to draw, it is inoperative.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 2) A servitude of pasturing? cattle
or of taking them to water, where the main produce of the estate
is derived from cattle, is held to be attached to the estate rather
than to the person ; but if a testator pointed out some particular
person to whom he wished the servitude to be given, the same
servitude will not be vouchsafed to a purchaser of the land from
such person or to the person’s heir.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 17) Consequently, in his opinion,
such a servitude can be recovered by a vindicatio. 1. Neratius
says in his books on passages from Plautius that there can be
no such thing as a right to draw water, or take cattle to water,
or to win chalk or burn lime on another man’s ground, except
where the party has an adjoining estate, and this he says was the
doctrine of Proculus and Atilicinus. At the same time he adds
that, however true it may be that there can be a servitude created of
burning lime and winning chalk, still it cannot be given for a greater
quantity than is required for the purposes of the dominant estate ;


Pauwus (on Plautius 15) it might exist, for instance,
where a man had a pottery at which earthenware vessels were
made which served for carrying off the produce of the same land
(just as on some estates it is the practice for wine to be despatched
in jars, or for vats to be made), or one at which bricks were
manufactured for building a country-house*. If however the pottery
were worked to produce vessels for sale, this would amount to a
usufruct. 1. Again, a right to burn lime or to take stones or dig
for sand for the sake of building something which is [to be] on the
estate falls a long way short of a usufruct, and so does a right to
take coppice in order that there shall be no want of props for
vines. How then if the rights described improve the prospective
value of an estate? 2. There can be no doubt that they may be the
subject of a servitude ; Meecianus himself is so much in favour of this


1 Read servitus for servitutes. Cf. M.
2 del. vel after tegula. Cf. M.


My J. Ii, 6


10


11


82 On Servitudes of Rustic Hstates | BOOK VIII


view that he holds that a servitude can be established to the effect
that I shall have a legal right to set up a hut on your land, that is
to say, assuming that I already have a servitude of pasture there ox
of watering cattle, so as to enable me to have a place of shelter if
a storm comes on.


THE SAME (on the Edict 21) When a man is carried on a
chair or a litter, he is said to have an ¢fer, not an actus, but a man
cannot take a beast of draught where he has only an eer. If he
has an actus, he can take a waggon or drive beasts of draught.
But in neither case has he a right to drag stones or timber ; and
some say that he cannot carry a spear in an upright position, as this
he would not do by way of walking or driving, moreover fruit
might be damaged by it. A man who has a vq@ has an der and an
actus,and most authorities hold that he has a right to drag things,
and also to carry a spear upright, provided he does not damage the
fruit. 1. In rustic estates, however, a servitude is barred by a
third estate lying between the two concerned which is subject to
no servitude.


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 7) The breadth of a via is
by the Twelve Tables eight feet where the road is straight, but in
an “anfractus,”’ that is, where the road winds, sixteen.


PauLus (Sentences 1) No servitude can be created for
conveying or drawing water from any other place than the source
or spring ; however, at the present day, the practice is to create it
so as to start anywhere.


THE SAME (on the Edict 49) According to Labeo, there
can be a servitude created to the effect that a man shall be at
liberty to search for water and convey it in a channel when found ;
in fact, if it is lawful to create a servitude with reference to a
building which is not yet constructed, why should it not be equally
lawful to create a similar servitude where the water has not yet
been found? Again, if we can grant a man a servitude which
authorizes him to search for water, it is possible to grant one which
authorizes the conveying of the water when it is found.


CELSUS (Digest 27) The easement of passing or driving across
land which belongs to a number of different persons in common can
be conveyed to me by the respective owners separately. It follows
that, upon strict principles, I shall not get the easement unless all
grant, and then, when the last grant is made, and not before, all the


TIT, U1 On Servitudes of Rustic Estates 83


preceding ones will come into force ; however the more indulgent
construction is that, even before the last man grants, those who


have already granted cannot stop me from using the easement
granted.


MopEstinus (Differences 9) There is some difference
between an actus and an téer; where a man can travel either on
foot or on horseback [as he pleases], it is an dter, but where he
can drive a herd of cattle or take a vehicle, it is an actus.


JAVOLENUS (EHatracts from Cassius 10) A servitude may be
acquired, to attach to landed estates of some specified kind, for
example, vineyards, because in that case it would be a servitude
which concerned the soil rather than the surface. Accordingly, if
the vineyards are done away with, the servitude will remain ; still if,
when the servitude was created, a different intention was enter-
tained, there will have to be an eaxceptio of dolus malus. 1. Ifa
whole field is subject to a servitude of ¢éer or actus, the owner is
not at liberty to do anything in the field to interfere with the
exercise of the servitude, the right being so general that every sod
is subject to it ; again, if an ¢fer or an actus is bequeathed, without
any special limits to it being given, such limits must be assigned
straightway, and where they are first assigned, there will the
servitude be’, and all other parts of the field will be free from
it ; accordingly, an arbiter must be appointed whose duty it will
be in both cases to settle the course of the right of way. 2. In the
case of an actus or an iter the breadth will be whatever was pointed
out, and if nothing was said on the matter, it must be settled by
the arbiter. In the case of a via, the rule is different; if the
breadth was not pointed out, the statutable breadth can be claimed.
3. If the part of the estate is pointed out without the breadth of
the way being given, the party may go over such part wherever he
likes, but, if the part is left undetermined, and, as before, no breadth
is specified, some one roadway may be selected over any part of the
estate, but of no greater breadth than is laid down in the statute ;
and to settle the course itself, if there is a doubt, recourse must be
had to the office of an arbiter.


PoMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 32) If I grant a roadway
to one man on certain lines, I cannot then grant another man a
watercourse on the same lines; and again, if I grant one man a
watercourse, I cannot sell or grant in any way a footpath on the
same lines to another.


1 For constitit read consistit. Cf. M.
6—2


15


16


17


18


19


84 On Servitudes of Rustic Hstates [Book vil


THE SAME (on Quintus Mucius 31) Quintus Mucius tells
us that where a man has a watercourse, yielding a supply either for
every day or for the summer, or one serviceable at longer intervals,
over another man’s estate, he has a right to lay down a conduit of
his own of earthenware or of any other material, in the channel, so
as to spread the flow of water, and he has a right to make any
construction he likes in the channel, so long as he does not make
the watercourse less serviceable for the servient owner.


CALLISTRATUS (on Cognitiones 3) The Divine Pius issued
the following rescript to fowlers:—“It is not reasonabie that
you should snare birds on other people’s land without the land-
owners consent.”


Papirius JusTUS (on Imperial enactments 1) The Emperors
Antoninus Augustus and Verus Augustus laid down by rescript that
the water taken from a public river ought to be divided for pur-
poses of irrigation in proportion to the dimensions of the respective
[riparian] properties, except where anyone could show that he had
a special right in virtue of which he was allowed a larger supply.
They further laid down that a man was at liberty to convey water
only where this would not involve any wrong being done to
another.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 14) Where a wa is created over
several servient estates, it is still a single roadway, as it is a single
servitude. Hereupon this question is asked:—If I pass over
one estate and forbear to pass over another for’ such length of
time as is required for extinguishing a servitude, do I still keep the
servitude? As to this, the better opinion is that either the whole
servitude is lost or else the whole is retained ; consequently, if I
did not make use of either estate, the whole servitude is lost ; if
I made use even of one only, the whole is retained.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 6) If one of several co-owners stipulates
for an eter to the common estate, the stipulation is operative, as
the right itself could not be granted him, but, if they all stipulate,
or a slave stipulates whom they hold in common, each of the
co-owners can bring an action in which he prays that the right
of way should be given him, as a grant can be made to them all in
this way: otherwise it would follow that, if the stipulator of the
right of way died leaving several heirs, the stipulation would
become inoperative.


20


BEE ET | On Servitudes of Rustic Estates 85


PoMPoNIUs (on Sabinus 33) If you agree with me at one
and the same time that I shall have a right to an iter and an actus
over your land and also that I shall have a right of usufruct in the
same, and then I agree with youjthat I abandon the usufruct, you
will not be able to have the use and produce yourself, except on
the terms of my having a full right to the éter and actus. Again,
where I have a good right to convey water across your estate, and
you have no right to build upon it without my leave, if I agree that
you shall have the right to build, nevertheless you will be bound
to give me a servitude to this effect, that you shall build only in
such a way as will allow of my watercourse being kept up ; and the
whole state of things will have to be such as it would have been
if at the outset oniy one grant had been made. 1. A servitude
may [lawfully] injure the servient estate through something that
happens in the natural course of things, though not through
anything caused artificially; as, for example, where the water in a
channel is increased by a shower of rain, or water flows into it
from neighbouring fields, or a spring is subsequently discovered
by the side of the channel or within it. 2. If there is a spring
close to the boundary of the Seian estate and I enjoyed a right to
a watercourse from the spring across that estate, then, should the
Seian estate become mine, the servitude will remain. 3. A right
to draw water is not attached to a person but to an estate.


PauLus (on Sabinus 15) If you grant me a watercourse
(iter aque) across your estate, without assigning the particular
quarter in which I am to conduct it, your whole estate will be
subject to the servitude.


Pompontus (on Sabinus 33) At the same time, the only
parts of the estate which will accordingly be affected by the
servitude are such as were not occupied by buildings trees or vines
at the time when the grant was made.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 15) A via may be created more than
eight feet in breadth or less, provided always it is broad enough for
a vehicle to pass along it ; otherwise it will be an cer, not a via.
1. If there is a permanent lake on your land, there may be created
over it aservitude of boating, so as to afford access to a neighbouring
estate. 2. Ifa servient estate, or the estate to which the servitude
is attached, should become State property, in either case the
servitude remains unaffected; land which comes to the hands
of the State does so without its condition being changed,


24


25


26


27


86 On Servitudes of Rustic Estates [BOOK VIII


3. Wherever there is a servitude attached to an estate, it is
attached to all parts of it alike; consequently, even if the dominant
estate is sold piecemeal, the servitude goes with every part, with
the result that the different owners have a right to bring actions
respectively in which they claim [for example] to have a right of
way. But where land to which a servitude is attached has been
divided into portions marked out by metes and bounds among a
number of owners in severalty, then, although the servitude
attaches to all parts alike, still it is requisite that those owners
whose portions do not adjoin the servient estate should have a
legal right of passage across the other portions of the divided land
or should be able to pass, with the leave of the respective adjoining
owners.


Pompontus (on Sabinus 33) We read in Labeo that if I
have a watercourse, I can lend the use of it to any neighbour I
please ; Proculus, on the other hand, says that [' cannot even use
it myself for a different part? of my estate from that for which the
servitude was acquired. The opinion of Proculus is the sounder of
the two.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 34) If I sell you a particular part of
my estate, the right to a watercourse will come to you with it as
well, even though the watercourse should be chiefly used for the
sake of some other portion; and no account need be taken, in
respect of that portion, either of the goodness of the soil or of the
use which is made of so much of the water, so as to make out that
the right to convey the water goes with that part of the estate only
which is the most valuable or is the most in need of the use of
the water: the rule is that the water must be divided in proportion
to the amounts of land retained and conveyed away respectively.


PAULUS (on the Edict 47) Where a via, an téer, an actus, or
a watercourse across an estate is bequeathed without more, the
heir has a right to create the servitude in any part of the estate that
he likes, provided it puts the legatee to no unfair disadvantage m
respect of the servitude.


JULIANUS (Digest 7) if the Sempronian estate serves an
estate which you and I own in common, and we thereupon purchase
it to hold in common, the servitude is extinguished, because both


' Read possim for possit.
2 Read partem mei for meam partem. Cf. M.


|


28


29


30


31


TIT. OT] On Servitudes of Rustic Estates 87


owners have come to have the same rights over the two respective
estates. But if the land which is purchased was serving my several
estate and also your several estate, then the servitude will remain ;
as an estate which a man owns in severalty can bave attached to it
a servitude over one which he shares with another person.


THE SAME (Digest 34) Where an @er is bequeathed leading
to an estate which is common to two persons, then, unless they
both agree as to the course which the path is to take, the servitude
is neither acquired nor lost.


PauLus (Hpitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 2). A man had two
estates abutting on one another, and sold the upper one. One
term of the agreement for sale was that the purchaser should be at
full liberty to discharge water through an open trench on to the
lower estate. Hereupon this question was asked :—If the purchaser
receives water from a third estate and wishes to discharge it on to
the lower estate, can he do so in pursuance of the right acquired as
above, or not? My answer was that the lower neighbour was not
bound to admit more water than the purchaser discharged for the
purpose of draming his own estate.


THE SAME (Hpitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 4) A man who
had two properties in selling one of them reserved [the use of]
water the source of which was on the land sold, and round the
same a breadth of ten feet. The question was asked whether he
had thereby the ownership in the space in question, or only the
right of access over it. The answer given was: if the reservation
was expressed to be of “ten feet round such water,” it must be
held that the vendor had only a right of way.


JuLIANUS (Extracts from Minicus 2) Three properties
lying side by side belonged to three owners respectively’, and the
owner of the lowest of the three had acquired for such lowest
estate as against the highest estate a servitude of watercourse,
which watercourse he conducted into his own land across the
intervening estate with the consent of the owner thereof. After
this he bought the uppermost estate, and then he sold the lowest
estate on to which he had conducted the water. The question was
asked whether the lowest estate had lost the right of watercourse
in question, on the ground that, the two estates having come into
the hands of the same owner, there could be no servitude between


1 del. adjecta. M.


32


33


34


88 On Servitudes of Rustic Estates [Book vil


such two estates themselves. The answer of our authority was
that the lowest estate had not lost the servitude, because the
[intervening] property, across which the water was conducted,
belonged to another person, and just as there was no way in which
the uppermost estate could be subjected to a servitude to the
effect that water should come to the lowest estate, except by the
water bemg conducted across the intervening estate as well, so too
this servitude, when once existing in favour of the same [ze. the
lowest] estate, could not be lost without the watercourse at the
same time ceasing to be conducted across the middle estate itself,
or all three properties coming to be in the hands of one owner.


AFRICANUS (Questions 6) You and I have an estate in
common ; you convey to me your share and also a roadway to the
estate across neighbouring land which belongs to you in severalty.
Our authority declares that by this means a servitude is properly
created, and that in such a case the common rule that servitudes
can neither be acquired nor imposed for a share (per partes) has
no application ; as here the servitude is not acquired for a share,
being acquired with reference to a time at which I shall be sole
owner of the estate.


THE SAME (Questions 9) You and I having two estates in
common, the Titian and the Seian, and having agreed, on making
a partition, that the Titian estate should go to me and the Seian
to you, we made mutual deliveries of our respective shares in the
estates, and it was specified, when we did so, that each party was
to have a right to a watercourse across the estate of the other:
the servitude, he says, was well created, especially if the
informal agreement was followed by a stipulation. 1. You conduct
water across the lands of a number of different owners in virtue of
a servitude created some way or other ; in this case, you cannot
convey to any one of such owners or to any other neighbouring
owner the right to draw water from the channel, unless some pact
or stipulation was added to that express effect ; in fact such a
right is not uncommonly given by some pact or stipulation being
interposed, though of course no estate can serve itself, and there
cannot be such a thing created as the usufruct of a servitude.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) If one co-owner of an estate held
in common allows anyone to have an fer or an actus, this is
inoperative ; consequently, if two estates which serve one another
become the common property of the two owners, then, seeing that


35


|
|


TIT. I On Servitudes of Rustic Hstates 89


the law is that servitudes can be retained in respect of a share
(pro parte), the servitude cannot be released by one party to the
other ; for, although each co-owner having a right to a servitude
has it to himself in severalty, still, as the subject burdened with
the servitude was not the person but the estate, it is impossible
for exemption from the servitude to be acquired, or for the servitude
to be released, for a share (per partem). 1. If a spring dries
up from which I have a watercourse, but the same spring begins
to flow again after the expiration of the legal period, the
question arises whether the watercourse is lost :


PauLus (on Plautius 15) as to which Atilicinus says that
the Emperor issued a rescript to Statilius Taurus in these words :—
“The persons who were in the habit of getting water from the
Sutrine estate came before me and stated that they had been
unable to convey from the spring which is to be found on the
Sutrine estate the water which they had used for a number of years,
because the spring had dried up ; but that afterwards water began
to flow again from the same spring ; and their petition was that,
whereas they had lost their right through no default or negligence
of their own, but because they could not possibly get any water, it
might be restored to them. This request seemed to me not to be
unjust, and accordingly I held that relief ought to be given them.
I therefore decide that the legal position which they had on the
day when it was first impossible for them to get a supply of water
be restored to them.”


THE SAME (Responsa 2) When one of two estates is retained
by a vendor [of the other], and is subjected by him to a servitude
of watercourse [in favour of the other], the servitude thus acquired
for the estate which is purchased will follow that estate on a
subsequent sale ; and it is immaterial that the stipulation by which
the parties agreed that a penal sum should be promised referred
to the purchaser personally and provided for the case of his not
being allowed to use the servitude.


THE SAME (Responsa 3) “Tjucius Titius sends best wishes to
his brother Gaius Seius. Of the water which flows into the reservoir
constructed on the isthmus by my father I give and present to you
one inch in depth [to be conducted] into your house on the isthmus
or wherever else you like.” My question is whether on these words
the use of the water passes to the heirs of Gaius Seius as well.
Paulus answered that the use of the water being personal would


38


90 On Servitudes of Rustic Estates [Book vit


not pass to the heirs of Seius, the latter being in the position of a
usuary.


THE SAME (Handbooks 1) A via can be created though
there is a river in the way, provided the river can be crossed by a
ford or there is a bridge over it ; but it is different where the only
passage is by a ferry (yontonibus). This is so on the assumption
that the river passes through the lands of one person ; but, if we
suppose the followmg case,—your land adjoins mine, after your land
comes the river, then lands belonging to Titius, and then a high-road
to which I wish to acquire a right of way,—let us consider whether
there is anything to prevent your giving me a va up to the river,
and Titius one from it up to the high-road. It is a fair question
however whether the legal position is [not] the same, even where
you are owner of the lands beyond the river on this side of the
high-road ; the fact is that a complete via generally reaches as far
as some town, or up toa high-road, or to a river which is crossed by
a ferry, or to some other land under the same ownership [with the
dominant estate]; and, this being the case, it cannot be held that
the servitude is barred even by a public river flowing between two
estates which belong to the same person.


Dye
RULES COMMON TO URBAN AND Rustic: ESTATES.


UxLpranus (Institutes 2) Buildings are called urban predia,
and it may be observed that, even where buildings are part of
a country-house, it is still possible to create servitudes of urban
predia. 1. The reason why these servitudes are said to be of
preedia (estates, tenements), is that they cannot be created with-
out predia, as no one can acquire a servitude over urban or
rustic predia, unless he has got a prediwm himself.


THE SAME (on the Edict 17) With regard to the taking or
drawing of water from a river with a wheel, or the case of a man
creating a servitude over a cistern, some have been in doubt
whether these were servitudes at all; but, in a rescript of the
Emperor Antoninus to Tullianus, there is an observation to the
effect that, although there were no valid servitude in law, still, if
the party obtained such a right under an agreement to the effect
in question, or acquired it by any other lawful means, a man who


Tit. IV] Rules common to Urban and Rustic Estates 91


has been in possession of such an easement must receive pro-
tection.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) If a man who owns two
pieces of land conveys one of them to you with an agreement that
the land so transferred shall serve the property which he retains,
or the converse, a servitude is held to be legally created.


JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Cassius 10) No valid assurance
can be given that a [sepulchral] monument shall not be built so as
to exceed a given height, because that which is no longer under
human law cannot be subjected to a servitude, just as no such
servitude can exist as one to the effect that only some specified
number of bodies shall be buried on one spot.


THE SAME (Epistles 2) I am selling jand which belongs to
me: can I lay a servitude on such land in terms expressing that
I myself and my neighbour shall have the benefit of it? Again,
if I am selling land which I own in common with someone
else, can I procure that it shall be subject to a servitude in favour
of me and my fellow-owner? My answer was :—No one can reserve
a servitude in favour of any other person than himself ; consequently
the mention of the neighbour must be treated as void, so that
the whole servitude will belong to the person who reserved it.
Moreover, on the sale of land owned in common, I cannot put
it under a servitude in favour of me and my fellow-owner, as,
where land is owned in common, no servitude can be procured
in favour of it by the act of one co-owner.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 28) If a man has two houses and
conveys away one of them, he can express in the terms of his
conveyance either that the house which he does not convey is to
serve the one which he conveys, or, conversely, that the one
conveyed is to serve the one which is retained ; and it matters little
whether the two houses adjoin or do not. The rule is the same
with rustic predia ; if a man has two estates, he can, by the terms
of his conveyance (¢radendo) put one under a servitude to the
other. But if he conveys two houses at the same time, he cannot
put one under a servitude to the other, as he cannot acquire
a servitude for another man’s house nor can he subject such a house
toa servitude. 1. If a man conveys away a share in a house or
a share in an estate, he cannot subject it to a servitude, as servitudes
cannot be imposed nor yet acquired in respect of shares (per


92 Rules common to Urban and Rustic Estates | Book vill


partes). No doubt, if he has divided an estate into two parts by
metes and bounds, and then conveys away a divisional part, he can
impose a servitude on either of the two ; in fact, such a part is not
a portion of an estate, it is an estate. The same thing may be said
in the case of a house, supposing the owner of a single homestead
builds a wall across the middle of it, and so divides it into two, as
is often done ; here, too, the house must be treated as two houses.
2. Again, suppose we are two persons who own two houses in
common, we can, by joining in a conveyance, bring about the same
effect as I could by myself, if I had two houses of my own. But
even if we make separate conveyances, the result will be the same,
it being always held that the later conveyance gives effect to the
one first made. 3. If, on the other hand, one cf the houses belongs
to one of two persons, and the other is common to both, then,
according to Pomponius (extracts from Sabinus 6. 8), I cannot
create a servitude in favour of either or over either. 3a. Ifa man
makes it a term in a contract of sale that the house which he sells
shall be subject to a servitude, he is not obliged to convey the
house free from all servitudes ; accordingly he can either impose
a servitude in favour of his own house or give a servitude to
a neighbouring proprietor, so long, that is, as no delivery has taken
place. No doubt, if he expressly said that there was to be
a servitude in favour of Titius, and he grants a servitude to Titius,
there is an end of the matter, but if he gives it to anyone else, he
will be liable on the contract of sale. This is not inconsistent
with what is said by Marcellus (Dig. 6); [that writer asks this
question :—] supposing a man, on delivery of land, declares that it
is subject to a servitude in favour of Titius, whereas this is not the
case, but the vendor is under an obligation to Titius to confer it on
him,—can the vendor sue the purchaser on his contract of sale, to
call upon him to allow the servitude to be imposed on the land
which he bargained for ?—and his opinion is, on the whole, that he
must be allowed to bring the action. The same author also says
that, even if the vendor should be able to sell the servitude to
Titius, he must none the less be allowed to bring the action.
The above is on the assumption that the declaration was made
in the conveyance with a view to reserving the servitude ; but if,
as Marcellus proceeds to say, the vendor only had a misgiving that
Titius might have a good claim to the servitude, and made the
above provision on that account, he will not have a right to sue on
the contract of sale, if he had really made no promise to Titius
about it.


10


Tit. Iv] Rules common to Urban and Rustic Estates 93


PAULINUS (on Sabinus 5) Whenever one house is conveyed
by a man who owns two, the precise servitude [which he wishes to
create] ought to be expressed, or else, if it is simply said in general
terms that the house is to serve, either the words will produce no
effect, because it does not appear what kind of servitude is reserved,
or there is no kind of servitude which it may not be obligatory to
create. 1. Even where a house which belongs to a third person
is between the two in question, [a servitude] can be imposed, as,
for example, one to the effect that the height of either house may
be raised or may not be raised, or even, in the case of a right of
way, [with a clause providing] that it shall only come into force if,
at any time thereafter, a servitude should be imposed on the
intervening house ; as, in fact, a servitude [of this kind] can be
created over the lands of several owners, and that even at different
times. Still it may fairly be said that if I have three estates forming
one continuous piece of ground and I convey the estate at one end
to you, a servitude may be acquired for either your estate or my
[remaining two] estates; but if it is acquired for the estate which is
furthest from yours, which I retain, the servitude will hold good,
seeing that the middle estate too belongs to me; whereas, if
I afterwards dispose of either the estate in favour of which the
servitude was acquired or the one in the middle, the right will be


interrupted until a servitude is imposed on the middle estate
itself.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 8) If I have two blocks of chambers
and I convey them to two purchasers respectively at the same
moment, it may fairly be considered whether any servitude
imposed on either of the two is valid, seeing that no one can
impose a servitude on, or acquire one for, another man’s house.
However, so long as the conveyance is not completed, the party
conveying acquires the servitude for, or imposes it on, his own
house rather than another’s, so that it will be valid.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 10) If I have become heir to a man
over whose land I had a servitude, and I have thereupon sold you
the inheritance, the servitude must be established again, such as it
was before, as the understanding is that you yourself, as it were,
are to be deemed heir to the deceased.


ULPIANus (on Sabinus 10) Whatever a vendor wishes to
reserve to himself by way of servitude ought to be reserved
expressly ; a general reservation in such words as these: “whatever


11


12


13


94 Rules common to Urban and Rustic Hstates|BooK Vu


persons have any servitudes, they are still to have them ”—only
refers to strangers, it makes no provision for the vendor himself in
the way of preserving his rights, as, in fact, he had no rights,
seeing that no one is subject to a servitude to himself; moreover,
even if there was once a servitude existing in my favour, and then
the ownership of the servient land came to me, the necessary
construction is that the servitude is extinguished.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) Persons who have a right of
servitude are allowed freedom of access, for the sake of executing
repairs, to parts which are not affected by the servitude, but access
to which is a necessity for them ; assuming that no express pro-
vision was made, when the servitude was created, defining the
quarter in which access should be allowed. Accordingly the
owner of the [servient] land is not at liberty to make the ground
“religious” either close to a watercourse or above one,—supposing,
for example, the water should be conducted m an underground
channel,—lest the result should be that the easement is lost. This
is a correct statement of the law. In fact, if you have a legal right
to carry a stream of water through a particular channel, you may
either lower or raise such channel, except where provision has
been made that you should not do so. 1. If I have a right to
conduct water in a channel close to your land, this gives me by
tacit implication the following rights as well:—I can repair the
channel; | and my workmen may, for the purpose of such repair,
get as near to the spot as we can ; moreover, I may claim that the
landowner shall leave me sufficient free space to admit of my
approaching the channel on both the right and left banks and
throwing down soil, mud, stones, sand or chalk.


PavuLus (on Sabinus 15) Where one plot (fundus) serves
another, if either plot is sold, the servitudes pass too ; and, where
buildings serve plots or plots serve buildings, the rule is the same.


ULPIANUS (Opinions 6) The vendor of the Geronian estate
made it a term of the sale in favour of the Botrian estate, which he
kept in his hands, that no tunny-fishery should be carried on off
the latter. It is true that no servitude can be imposed on the sea
by private agreement, seeing that it is by nature free to every one,
still, as the good faith of the contract requires that the terms of agree-
ment of sale should be carried out, [it follows that] the individuals
who are in possession at the time or who succeed to their legal
position are bound by the terms of the stipulation or the sale


14


15


16


17


TIT. Iv] ales common to Urban and Rustic Estates 95


[contracted by the parties|. 1. If it is understood that there are
stone quarries on your land, no one can hew stone there, either as
a private person or in the Government service, without your con-
sent, where he has no easement (2s) allowing him to do so ; unless
indeed there is a custom existing in those quarries to the effect
that, should anyone desire to hew any such stone, he is to be at
liberty to do it, if’ he first gives the owner of the land the
customary payment in consideration thereof. Even then he must
first give security to the owner that the latter’s use of such stone
as he requires shall not be barred by the other’s exercise of his
right, nor his enjoyment of his property spoilt.


JULIANUS (Digest 41) There is nothing to be said against a
right of way being created in such terms as to allow of its being
used by day only ; indeed such a restriction is almost necessary in
the case of urban property.


PauLus (Epitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 1) Where a man
has granted anyone an ?fer or actus across a particular close,
there is no doubt that he can grant either of such easements across
the same close to a number of persons ; just as, where a man has
laid a servitude on his house for the benefit of his neighbour, he is
none the less able to lay a similar servitude on the same house for
the benefit of as many other persons as he likes.


Gaius (Everyday matters or golden things 2) A man may
in his testament order his heir not to raise the height of his house,
lest he obscure the lights of the neighbouring house, or [order him |
to suffer the neighbour to let a beam into the wall, or discharge
eavesdrip on to the land, or to allow the neighbour to walk or drive
over his land or conduct water from it.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) If a neighbour carries a wall
across your land by leave asked of you, no proceedings can be
taken against him by way of interdict “quod precario habet”
(whereas the defendant has by leave asked), nor, when the wall is
built, can it be held that there is a completed gift of a servitude,
nor can there be a valid claim made at law on the neighbour's part
to the effect that he has a right to maintain the structure without
your consent, seeing that the building takes the legal position of
the land and so makes the claim void. But if a man who was
under a servitude existing in your favour carries a wall across his


1 Tn the text—“he is not to be at liberty etc. unless.”


18


96 Rules common to Urban and Rustic Estates [Book vm


own property on leave asked from you, he will not acquire by user
freedom [from the servitude] and proceedings can be effectively
taken against him on the interdict “quod precario habet.” Should
you however allow him to build by way of gratuitous bounty, then
you cannot sue for the interdict, moreover the act of bounty puts
an end to the servitude.


PauLus (Manuals 1) It is established law that different
co-owners, even without joming in the grant of a servitude, may
still impose one on their estate, or may acquire one, the construc-
tion being that, when the last grant is made, the previous grants
come into force along with it, and the result is the same as though
all the co-owners had granted at the same moment. It follows
that if the man who first granted should die or! should dispose of
his share in some other form or manner, and then, after that, his
fellow proprietor should grant, the whole will be inoperative. The
reason of this is that, when the last man grants, it is not held that
the servitude was acquired by relation back, but the construction
is that things are on the same footing as though, at the moment
when the last grant was made, all had granted ; accordingly this
last grant itself will still be in suspense until the new co-owner
grants. A similar rule applies where a grant is made to one of the
co-owners and then some event such as above mentioned comes to
pass in respect of another person among the number. On the
same principle, on the other hand, if anything such as mentioned
happens to a co-owner who has not made a grant, they will ail
have to grant afresh, as they are excused for so long a time from
executing whatever” gift or act it is in their power to execute as*
to be still able to execute it, even though at different times, and
accordingly the grant cannot be made to one person nor by one
person. A similar rule holds where one man grants a servitude
and another leaves it by testament, as, if every co-owner leaves a
servitude by testament, and all their respective inheritances are
entered upon at the same moment, it may be said that the
servitude is duly bequeathed, but if the entries are at different
times, the legacy vests to no purpose; the acts of living persons
may have their operation suspended, not so those of persons
deceased.

1 Or perhaps “or seccession to his estate should take place in some other form
or he should dispose of his share in some other manner.” This is preferred by M.
who would insert after genere the words in bona ejus successum sit.

2 For quo read quod. Cf. M.

3 Ins. ut before vel. M. would read wt for vel.


TIT. V| 97
N.


WHERE AN ACTION IS BROUGHT TO RECOVER A SERVITUDE OR
TO CONTEST ANOTHER’S RIGHT TO ONE.


1 ULpianus (on the Edict 14) Rights of action in respect
of servitudes, whether rustic or urban, belong to the persons who
have the property in the land; but a place of sepuiture is not a
subject of private property at all: it is true that a man can lay
claim to a right of way up to a sepulchre.


2 THE SAME (0n the Edict 17) People may have an action in
rem for a servitude framed on the same lines as one relating to a
usufruct, whether such action be confessory or negatory, the
former being used by one who maintains that he has a right of
servitude, and the latter by an owner who denies [that some other
person has such aright]. 1. The confessory action ez rem can belong
to no one else than an owner of land ; nobody is at liberty to sue
to recover a servitude except a man who is owner of adjoining
land and who claims that the servitude is attached toit. 2. Neratius
tells us quite correctly, that if there is a bequest of the usufruct in
ground surrounded [by other land of the testator], a right of way
must needs go with it, I mean, that is, across those parts of the
surrounding land across which a man who granted [the usufruct]
would establish it,—so far as right of way is necessary for enjoyment
of the usufruct; it should always be remembered that a right of
transit which is allowed toa usufructuary to enable him to enjoy his
usufruct is not a servitude, indeed no [real] servitude can belong to
one who has a usufruct in the land ; though, if there is one attached
to the land, then the usufructuary can make use of it. 3. Pomponius
says that a usufructuary can sue for the Interdict de ctinere (for a
right of way), if he has used the way within the year, as there are two
kinds of inquiry, one into a matter of law, as in a confessory action,
and another into a matter of fact, as in the case of the Interdict
referred to; the same thing is said by Julianus (zg. 48). The
opinion of Julianus is confirmed by a passage of Labeo, who says
that even where the testator who bequeathed the usufruct was
himself the person who made use of the way, an Interdict founded
on equitable principles should be allowed the usufructuary, just as
these Interdicts are available to an heir or a purchaser.


3 THE SAME (on the Edict 70; | We may add that the rule
applies equally where what is purchased is part of an estate.


MJ. Ii, 7


98 Action brought to recover a Servitude [Book vm


THE SAME (on the Edict 17) The actual material place does
not fall within the proprietorial right of the person who has a
servitude ; what belongs to him is a right of way. 1. A man who
has eter without actus or actus without ¢fer can bring an action for
a servitude. 2. In a confessory action which is brought for a
servitude profits can be included in the order. Let us consider,
however, what profits there can be of a servitude ; and, as to this,
the better opinion is that the only thing that can be reckoned as
coming under the head of profits is such interest, if any, as the
plaintiff has in not being prevented from using the servitude. Hven
in a negatory action, so Labeo says, profits are included, namely,
the interest the plaintiff has in the opposite party not using a way
over his ground; and this opinion is approved by Pomponius
himself. 3. If the land to which a right of way is attached
belongs to several co-owners, each of them has a good right of
action for the whole, as indeed Pomponius himself says (b. 41), but,
in assessing damages, interest will be taken into account, the
interest, that is, of the person who takes proceedings. Accordingly,
as to the bare right to the easement, any owner can proceed
separately, and, if he succeeds, the others will get the benefit of it,
but the assessment will be confined to the question of his interest ;
though, of course, the servitude cannot be acquired through one
person. 4. Similarly, if there are two owners of the servient land,
the action in question can be brought against either of them, and,
as Pomponius has it in the same book, whichever defends the
action must make good the whole, as this is a thing which does not
admit of division. 5. Where my case is, not that a man raises any
dispute as to my right to some ¢er or actus or via, but that he will
not suffer me to make repairs or lay down gravel, then, according
to Pomponius in the same book, I must bring a confessory action ;
indeed, even where a neighbour has a tree which reaches over so as
to make the via or the iter impassable or unusable, then, according
to Marcellus in a note on Julianus, there may be an action for the
iter or an action to recover the via. With regard to the repair of
the via, recourse may also be haa to an Interdict, namely, the one
given for the repair of an ¢ter or actus; which, however, is not
available where the applicant wishes to lay down flints, except
where such right was expressly agreed for. 6. Add to this that a
right to draw water too, being a servitude, is a thing for which
people may have an action in rem. 7. On the other hand, the
owner of a building may bring an action in respect of a servitude,
in which he denies that he is subject to any servitude for the


vit. V| Action brought to recover a Servitude 99


benefit of his neighbour, where his house is not free altogether, but
is subject to no servitude for the benefit of the defendant. For
instance, suppose I have a house, adjoining which there are the
Seian house and the Sempronian house; I am under a servitude


appertaining to the Sempronian house, but I wish to take pro-


ceedings against the owner of the Seian, because he hinders me from
raising the height of my house. My course will be to bring an
action 7 rem ; it is true my house is under a servitude, but it is
not under a servitude in favour of the defendant, accordingly my
contention is that I have a right to raise the height without the
consent of the defendant, since, as far as he is concerned, my house
is free. 8. Where a man is not at liberty to raise the height of
his house at ail, an action may very well be brought against him in
which itis contended that he has no right to raise it. This kind of
servitude may exist even for the benefit of a man whose house is
not the adjoining one;


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) and, consequently, if your house
comes between my house and Titius’s, I can put Titius’s house
under a servitude to the effect that he shall not be at liberty to
raise the height of it, though your house should be put under no
such servitude ; as, so long as you forbear to raise the height of
your house, I derive benefit from the servitude.


ULPIANUS (on the Hdict 17) — And if it happen that the inter-
vening owner, seeing that he is under no servitude, raises the height
of his buildings, the result being that I cannot now be held to
obstruct your light if I build myself, it is im vain for you to contend
that I have no right to keep up such building without your consent ;
at the same time, if within the prescribed period, the neighbour
takes his building down again, your right of action (vindicatio)
will be resuscitated. 1. It should be understood that in these
servitudes the person who is in possession of the easement may
still be plaintiff! Now, if it so happen that I have not raised the
height of any building on my land, then the other party is in
possession of the easement, as, no innovation being yet made, he
has got possession, and, if I proceed to build, he can resist me by
a civil action or by an interdict quod vi et clam, or he can stop me
equally well by the throw of a pebble. But if I build without any
interference on his part, then I myself will become the possessor.
2. Furthermore, a right of action exists in respect of a servitude


1 del. eum. Cf. M.


bo


100 Action brought to recover a Servitude |BooK vit


which was imposed with a view to support (oneris ferendi causa),
the object being to make the servient owner keep up the support and
also keep his building in repair in such manner and form as was
defined at the time when the servitude was created. Gallus, no
doubt, is of opinion that no servitude can be created to the effect
that a man shall be compelled to do anything, but only that he
shall not prevent me from doing something; in fact, in every
servitude, the execution of repairs is the business of the person
who claims the servitude, not of the person whose property is
subject thereto. However, the view of Servius has prevailed, to
the effect that he has a right to compel the other party to repair
his wall so as to support his burden: though what Labeo says is
that this servitude binds not the person, but the property, and he
makes it come to this that the owner is free to abandon the
property. 3. And in fact the action is iz rem and not in personam,
and is open only to the owner of the [dominant] house and against
only the [other] owner, agreeably to the statement of claim in
servitudes in general. 4. If a [dominant] house belongs to several
co-owners,—such is the question discussed by Papinianus (Questions
3),—can proceedings be taken in respect of the servitude in
its entirety? To this his answer is that the co-owners can proceed
each separately in respect of the whole, as in the case of other
servitudes, setting aside usufruct. But this, he says, is not the
right answer to give where the house which has to support a
burden which a neighbour lays upon it belongs to several co-owners.
5. The kind of repair that can be sued for in this action depends
on the question what kind of repair was mentioned when the
servitude was created: the arrangement may have been that the
party should repair with rectangular blocks or with built up
stones, or any kind of work that was mentioned in the terms of
creation. 6. Profits are taken into account in the action, in short
the advantage which the plaintiff would have gained if the neighbour
[z.e. the defendant] had furnished support to the weight imposed by
the plaintiff's house. 7. The servient owner is at liberty to make
the wall better than was required by the terms in which the servitude
was created ; but, if he proceeds to make it worse, he can be stopped,
either by means of this action or by “ notification of novel structure.”


PauLus (on the Edict 21) The outcome of these actions is
that the successful plaintiff, by motion to the judge (officio judzecs),
gets either specific relief or else an undertaking. The specific relief
is this,—the judge orders the defendant to amend the defective


ae


mit. Vv] Action brought to recover a Servitude 101


condition of the wall and to put it into a serviceable state. As for
the undertaking, the judge orders him to engage that the wall
shall be repaired and that neither he nor any of his successors will
prevent the plaintiff from building on it and keeping up the
building so made ; and, on giving this undertaking, the defendant
is discharged. But if he will give neither specific satisfaction nor the
undertaking, the judge must order him to pay damages on a scale
determined by the plaintiff’s oath as sworn for the purposes of the
trial.


ULpianus (on the Edict 17) The repair of the wall being
thus incumbent on the neighbour, it is equally true that the
business of propping up the building of the owner who has a right
to the servitude, during the execution of the repairs, need not be
undertaken by the owner of the lower building ; if the superior
[z.e. dominant] owner does not care to prop his buildings up
himself, he can take them down and rebuild them when the wall
is restored to its previous condition. In this case too, just as in
that of servitudes in general, the converse action will be allowed,
that is to say, an action in which it is asserted that you [the
dominant owner] have no right to compel me [to prop up your
building]. 1. I have a good right of action against anyone who
grants me a servitude to the following effect :—that I shall be at
liberty to insert beams into his wall, and upon such beams to
construct, say, a gallery to walk up and down in, with built up
columns placed on the top of the wall to support the roof of such
gallery. 2. The actions above mentioned differ from one another
in this respect ;—the first action (oneris ferendi) may be used
even for the purpose of compelling the adjoining owner to repair
my wall, but the other can be brought only to make him admit my
beams ; and this is not inconsistent with the rules governing servi-
tudes. 3. Should the question be asked which party is in the
position of possessor and which in that of demandant, the answer
is that, if the beams are already inserted, the character of possessor
is borne by the party who claims to have a right to the servitude,
but, if they are not inserted, by the party who denies the right.
4, If, in such a case, the party who claims the right to the servi-
tude gains his case, no servitude will have to be granted to him ;
for the reason, if the judgment is sound in law, that he has got it
already, and, if it is unsound, because the proper object of the
decree is not to create a servitude, but to declare one already
existing. No doubt, if, after joinder of issue, the plaintiff lost the


102 Action broughé to recover a Servitude | BOOK VHT


servitude by non-user, owing to the malicious contrivance of the
owner of the house, it ought to be restored to him, just as a similar
rule is held in the case of the owner of a house. 5. Aristo says, in
an opinion given to Cerellius Vitalis, that he does not think that
smoke can lawfully be discharged from a cheese factory on to
buildings which are overhead, unless the buildings are subject
to a servitude of that particular kind‘, and such a servitude he
recognised. The same author declares that it is not lawful to
discharge water or anything else from the building above to the
building below, as a man is at liberty to carry on operations within
his own premises in such a manner only as not to discharge
anything on those of anyone else; and it is, he adds, just as
possible to discharge smoke as to discharge water ; accordingly,
he says, the upper owner can bring an action against the lower
owner in which he asserts that the latter has no right to act in the
way described. Lastiy, he says that we are told by Alfenus that
an action may be brought in which what is asserted is that such
a one has no right to hew stone on his own ground so as to let
broken bits fall on the plaintiff's property. Aristo therefore
maintains that the person who hired a cheese factory from the
town authorities of Minturnze could be prevented by the upper
owner from discharging smoke, but the town authorities are liable
to the lessee on the contract of hiring; he says further that the
declaration he can make in his action against the person who dis-
charges the smoke is that he has no right to discharge smoke. Con-
versely, therefore, there may be an action in which the declaration
is that the plaintiff has the right to discharge smoke, and this too
Aristo clearly approves. Besides this, the Interdict ‘ utd possidetis ’
may be employed, if a man is prevented from using his own
property in the way that he likes. 6. We find in Pomponius
(Lectiones 41) a doubt expressed whether a man can make such
a claim in an action as this :—that he has a right, or that another
has no right, to cause smoke to a moderate extent on his own
ground, say, for instance, smoke from a hearth. On the whole, he
says, no such action can be brought, just as no action can be
brought to maintain that a man has a right to light a fire, or to
sit down, or to wash on his own ground. 7. The same writer
approves of a decision to a dissimilar effect ; as he says that, in
a case of vapour from a bath, where one Quintilla had made an
underground passage which penetrated to the premises of Ursus
Julius, it was held that such a servitude could be created.


+ After rez ins. serviunt, nam. ° M.


NIDA ae RAD a eli EEE ET a ray -


EEE PE NN tial et nes inp Se, Ag Hb ctl


10


Tr. Vv} Action brought to recover a Servitude 103


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) If you build on a spot over
which I have a right to an ¢éter, I can bring an action in which
I claim that I have a right to walk and drive there; and if I
establish this, I can stop your operations. Julianus says further,—
If an adjoining owner to me, by building on his ground, contrives
to avoid admitting the eavesdrip which I have a right to discharge,
I can bring an action to maintain my right, that is, the right to
discharge such eavesdrip on his ground: the case is like that of
the via above mentioned. But, if the party has not yet built,
the other, whether he has a usufruct or a via, can claim by action
that he has a right to walk and drive or a right of usufruct [as the
case may be], whereas, if the owner in question has built already,
then one who has an ¢ter or an actus can still claim by action that
he has such a right, but a usufructuary cannot make a claim [as
such |, because he has lost the usufruct ; consequently in this case,
according to Julianus, an action de dolo must be allowed. If, on
the other hand, you build across the course of an ¢ter in respect
of which my estate is subject to a servitude in your favour, I have
a good right of action in which I can declare that you have no
right to build or to keep up a building, just as I could if you built
on a vacant space belonging to me. 1. Where a man has been
using a broader or a narrower via [than he had a right to use],
he will have kept the [actual] servitude on foot, just as a man who
has a right to take water and uses it mixed with other water at
the same time keeps up his right.


ULPIANusS (on the Edict 53) Where a man has acquired
a right of watercourse by lasting user and, so to speak, long
possession, he is not required to bring evidence to show the legal
title on which his right to the water was founded, such, for example,
as a legacy or any other ground of title; he has a good right of
action if he can show that he had the use of the watercourse, say
for such and such a number of years, and that not by force or by
stealth or by leave and license. 1. Proceedings can be taken in
this action not only against the person who owns the land where
the spring is, or over whose land the water is conveyed, but equally
well against anyone whomsoever who seeks to prevent the party’
from conducting the water, just as in the case of servitudes
generally. The rule in short is that whoever it is that tries to
prevent me from conducting the water, I can take proceedings
against him by this action.


1 Read nos for non. Cf. M.


11


12


13


14


104. = Action brought to recover a Servitude [B00K vim


MARCELLUS (Digest 6). The following questions have arisen.
Can one of several co-owners lawfully build on the common ground
without the consent of the others? that is to say, if his fellow-
owners try to stop him, can he take proceedings against them, and
therein contend that he has a right to build? or, on the other
hand, can his fellow-owners bring an action against him in which
their contention is that they have a right to stop him or that he
has no right to build? Furthermore, if the building is raised
already, can they! take proceedings in which they say: “ You have
no right to have such a building there”? To this the best
answer may be said to be that a co-owner has a right to prevent
construction rather than a right to construct ; as, on the whole,
a man who is attempting to construct in the way described, if he
aims at making use of the common property’ at his own pleasure,
as if he were sole owner, is more or less snatching for himself
a right which belongs to others as well.


JAVOLENUS (Hpistles 2) I brought an action in which I con-
tended that the defendant had no right to have his beams let into
my wall: will he have to undertake in addition that he will not let
any into it in future? My answer is :—1 hold it to belong to the
judge’s office to see that an undertaking is given with reference
to future operations as well.


PROCULUS (Epistles 5). I have got pipes by which | conduct
water laid on a public road ; these pipes have burst and your wail
is in consequence drenched with water; I should say you have
a good right of action against me in which your claim will be that
I have no right to have a discharge of water from my ground
flowing on to your wall.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 33) If I am the owner of a wall
and I suffer you to let into the wall the same beams that you have
had so let into it for some time past, and, this being the case, you wish
to let in fresh beams, I have a right to stop you ; not only so, but
I have a right of action to compel you to remove any fresh beams
that you have let in. 1. Ifa wall which you and I own in common
should, in consequence of some operations of yours, lean over
towards my house, I have a right of action against you in which
my claim will be that you have no right to have the wall in that
position.


1 For non possit read num possint. Cf. M.
2 For jure read re. Cf. M.


15


16


Tit. Vv} Action brought to recover a Servitude 105


ULPIANUS (Opinions 6) A man raised his house in such
a way as to make it obstruct the lights of a person under twenty-
five, or under the age of puberty, to whom he was himself curator
or guardian: in this case, it is no doubt true that the man in
question and his heirs will be liable to an action, because he had
no right to commit in his own person the very act which in con-
sequence of his position he was compellable to stop anyone else
from committing ; at the same time the boy or the minor ought to
be allowed an action against anyone who should be in possession of
the house in question, to make him remove a structure which was
wrongfully put up.


JULIANUS (Digest 7) If I purchase from you the liberty of
discharging eavesdrip from my house on to yours, and, after that,
I discharge it with your knowledge in pursuance of such purchase,
I wish to know whether I can, on the strength of these facts, protect
myself by an action or an exceptio? The answer was that I can
have recourse to either defence.


ALFENUS (Digest 2) Should there in any case be, between
two houses, a wall which so protruded as to lean over half a foot
or more towards the adjoining house, the proper action would be
one in which it is claimed that the defendant has no right to have
the wall encroaching in the way described over the plaintiff's
precincts without his consent. 1. A portion of the house of Gaius
Seius being under a servitude in favour of the house of Annius
to the effect that Seius was not to have a right to have anything
placed on that portion, Seius planted trees there, and underneath
the same had basins, vessels!, and kettles. Hereupon Annius was
advised by all those learned in the law to bring an action against
Seius and claim therein that the defendant had no right to have
the above objects placed on the spot without his leave. 2. A dung-
hill had been put against someone’s wall by an adjoining owner
from which moisture came through the wall; whereupon the
aggrieved party asked for a legal opinion as to how he could
compel the other to remove the dunghill. My answer was that,
if the other had set up the nuisance in a public place, he would
be compelled to remove it by an Interdict, but if it was in a private
place, the proper course was to bring an action raising the question
of servitude; again, that if the applicant had stipulated in respect
of damnum infectum, he would, if he had suffered any damage


1 For et tenes read lenes et. Cf. M.


18


19


20


106 Action brought to recover a Servitude [Book vii


from the cause mentioned, protect himself by means of the
stipulation.


JULIANUS (Hxtracts from Minicius 6) A man whose slaves
prevented an adjoining owner from using a watercourse kept out
of the way in order to avoid being sued: the plaintiff seeks to
know what is his proper course. My answer was that the preetor
ought, after hearing the application, to order that the other party’s
property should be taken into possession and not be given up until
he had created in favour of the applicant a servitude of water-
course ; and, if such applicant, in consequence of being prevented
from conveying water, had suffered any harm through drought,—
for instance, his meadows or his trees were dried up {,—had
made it good |}.


MARCTIANUS (Rules 5) Where a man brings an action about
a servitude which he has in common with others and therein
frames his claim to the same in due form, but he in some way or
other loses the case by his own negligence, it is not fair that this
shouid cause any loss to his fellow-owners ; but, if he colludes with
the opposite party and abandons the suit, then, according to Celsus,
the others must be allowed to bring an action de dolo, and this,
he says, was the opinion of Sabinus.


Scavoia (Digest 4) A testatrix who bequeathed a certain
estate had some houses close to such estate: the question was
asked whether, assuming that the houses did not go with the
estate, and the legatee sued to recover it”, the estate would be
subject to any servitude in favour of the houses ; or, supposing the
legatee claimed to have the estate conveyed to him in pursuance
of a fideicomnissum the heirs ought to reserve a servitude in
favour of the houses. The answer was—Yes (sic), 1. Several
members of a municipal body who respectively possessed estates
purchased a piece of forest land to hold as co-owners, in order
to have common rights of pasture, and the same position of things
was kept up by their successors ; but after this some of those who
were in enjoyment of the right of pasture sold the estates above
mentioned which they respectively owned. I wish to know whether
after the sale the right referred to still follows the respective estates,
seeing that the intention of the vendors was to convey this right
too? The answer was that the understanding which there was


! For exaruisset read evaruissent, restitiisset. Cf. M.
2 For cum read eum.


21


mir. Vv] Action brought to recover a Servitude 107


between the contracting parties must be adhered to; but if their
intention was not clear, the right in question would go to the pur-
chasers with the rest [of what was sold]. I also wish to know,
supposing a part of any one of the above-mentioned estates held
in severalty should pass to a legatee, whether it would carry with
it any portion of the common right of pasturage. The answer was
that, imasmuch as the right in question was one which must be
held to be attached to the estate bequeathed, such right would
equally go to the legatee.


LABEO (Pithana epitomised by Paulus 1) Where no
water so far appears, no way thereto nor conduit thereof can
be established. Paulus: on the contrary, this, I should say, is
not the fact, for the reason that it is quite possible for a grant to
be made to the effect that you [the grantee] shall be at liberty


to search for water, and, if you find any, to convey it by a water-
course.


Vit
How SERVITUDES ARE LOST.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) Preedial servitudes are


lost by merger, if the same person comes to be owner of both
estates.


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) When a man has an ¢fer and an
actus, if he should for the period required by law use the ¢ter only,
then, according to Sabinus, Cassius, and Octavenus, the right of
actus is not extinguished, but holds good ; a man who has a right
of actus is at liberty to use that of i¢er as a matter of course.


GaAtus (on the provincial Edict 7) It is generally received
that easements attached to estates are not lost by death or capetes
diminutio.

PauLus (on the Edict 27) An iter existing at law by, way
of access to a burial-place is never lost by non-user.


THE SAME (on the Edict 66) A man can keep up a servitude
through a fellow-owner or a usufructuary or a bona side possessor ;


CELsus (Digest 5) ‘it is enough that an ¢fer has been used as
attached to the land. 1. If you and I have a via across the land of


108 How Servitudes are lost [BOOK VIII


an adjoining owner, and I make use of it, but you, for the regular
period, forbear to use it, will you have lost your right? .
Conversely, if an adjoining owner who has a wa across our
land should walk and drive over my portion, but should not
enter your portion, will this exempt your portion from the
servitude? Celsus’s answer was this:—if the estate is divided
between the co-owners in distinct portions, then, with regard to
the servitude which was attached to the land, the legal position is
the same as if it had been attached originally to two separate
estates ; accordingly, each of the two owners can keep up his own
servitude, and each may lose his servitude by non-user, and the
legal implications affecting the respective estates are no further
mixed up in the matter; moreover this construction does no wrong
to the man whose estate serves, indeed, if anything, he is the better
off, because user by one of the two owners benefits that owner only
and does not benefit the whole united estate. 1a. If, on the other
hand, it is the servient estate which is divided in the way mentioned,
the matter then involves a little more uncertainty. If the right of
way has a distinct and specific course, then, if the whole land is
divided in the line of the way, the same consequence in all respects
must follow as if there had equaily been two distinct estates in the
case when the servitude was originally created ; but if the land is
divided by a line which crosses the way,—and it makes very little
difference whether it is divided into equal or unequal parts,—then
the same right of servitude remains as was existing before the
division was made, moreover what is retained by user or lost by
non-user will be nothing short of the whole right of way ; and if it
should happen that the dominant owner used so much only of the
way as lay across one of the two estates, it will not follow that the
other estate becomes free, as the right of way is one single right
and so indivisible. 106. At the same time the parties can exempt
either of the estates, provided they expressly agree to do so; at
any rate, if the person who has a right to the servitude should
purchase one of the two estates which resulted from the division,
can it be said that the servitude to which the other is subject will
be any the less still on foot? I do not see how any absurd con-
sequence will follow from this view, so long as one of the estates
remains subject to the servitude, assuming that from the first a
more restricted right of way could have been created than was
defined in the agreement, and that, in the estate as to which the
servitude was not released, there is space enough left to allow the
right of via to be exercised ; but if there is not space enough left


TIT. VI| How Servitudes are lost 109


for such exercise of the right, then both estates will be exempt, one
because it was purchased [by the dominant owner], and the other be-
cause the space left is such that no right of way could be established
over it. lc. If however, lastly, the nature of the via constituted
was sucn that the party entitled could walk or drive over any part
of the estate at his pleasure, and there was nothing to prevent his
changing his course from time to time, and, after that, the land was
divided, if [as I say] he is free to walk or drive through all parts
equally, in that case we shall have to treat the matter in the same
way as if at the outset there had been two servitudes imposed on
the two estates respectively, so that the one could be kept up and
the other could be lost by non-user. 1d. I am quite aware that
upon this view of the matter one man’s right would be impaired by
another man’s act, because, before the division, it was enough! that
the party entitled walked or drove over one part of the land for
him to retain the same right over the other part, but we must
remember that the party who was entitled to the via has gained
this advantage that he is able to walk or drive along two roadways
equally, and enjoys twice over a road which is eight feet wide
where it extends in a straight course and sixteen where it bends.


Paulus (on Plautius 13) If the right to a watercourse is
given under circumstances such that it can only be enjoyed in the
summer or only in one month, the question arises how it can be
lost by non-user, as there is no continuous period to be shown
during which the party was” able to use it but did not do so.
Accordingly, if a man enjoys a watercourse only every other year,
or every other month, the right is lost by lapse of twice the regular
period ; and the same rule is followed as to a right of way. But if
he has a right which he can exercise every other day, or only® by
day, or only by night, this will be lost by lapse of the time laid
down by the statute, because it is all one servitude ; and if he has
a servitude which he can use every other hour, or for one hour
every day, then, according to Servius, he will lose the servitude by
non-user [for the regular period], because what he has is available
every day.


THE SAME (on Plautius 15) If I have the right to discharge
rain-water on to a vacant place belonging to you, and I allow you
the right of building on the space in question, I lose the right to

1 For satius read satis. Cf. M.


2 del. non.
° For toto read tantum. Cf. M.


10


11


110 How Servitudes are lost [BOOK VIII


discharge rain-water. Similarly, if I have a right of wa over your
land, and I allow you to do anything on a spot across which the
roadway runs, I lose the right. 1. A man who passes along a
portion of an ¢ter to which he has a right is held to keep up the
user of the whole right of way.


JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Plautius 3) If water flows into
a portion of a channel for conveying water, though it does not go
as far as the extreme end of it, still the user is maintained as to
every part.


Pauuus (on Plautius 15) If I and my ward have land in
common [to which a right of way is attached], then, though we
should not both use it, [but only the ward,] still, in the interest of
the ward, I retain the right of way myself. 1. If a person who has
a right to draw water by night draws it by day only, for the period
laid down for loss by non-user, he loses the right to draw it by
night, because he failed to use it. A similar rule applies to a man
who, having a right to the use of a watercourse for certain specified
hours of the day, uses it at other hours and not for any portion of
the hours specified.


MARCELLUS (Digest 4) A man who had a right to a via or
an actus, provided he used vehicles of a particular kind, used a
vehicle of some other kind ; in this case we may fairly consider
whether he has not lost his servitude, and whether it is not a
different case where a man has been conveying a greater load
than he had a right to convey; the position of this latter being
that he may be held to have used the roadway to excess rather
than used it in the wrong way, just as if! he had used a greater
breadth of road than he ought, or driven too many horses, or
added water from some other source [than that to which he had a
right]. Accordingly, in all the cases mentioned, the servitude is
not lost ; but the party is not to have by way of servitude a more
extensive right than is embraced by the terms of the agreement.
1. Land being given by way of legacy, on a condition, the heir
subjected it to certain servitudes ; if the condition is fulfilled, the
servitudes will be extinguished. We may consider whether, sup-
posing the servitudes had been created in favour of the land
bequeathed, the legatee would not get the benefit of them; and
the better rule is that he would.


1 Ins. st after sicutz.


TIT. VI How Servitudes are lost 111


12 CELSUS (Digest 23) A bona fide purchaser of land which
did not belong to the vendor made use of a right of way attached
to the land; here the right of way will be maintained ; and that
even if he should be in possession on precariwm, or after forcibly
ejecting the owner ; as the fact is that when an estate which has
acquired a particular bent and character (qualiter se habens) is in
that character taken into possession, such a right is not lost, and
it is immaterial whether one who possesses it, such as it is,
possesses lawfully or not. For this reason, still more is it true
that, if there has been a natural flow of water through some
channel, the right of watercourse is kept up. This is held by
Sabinus very reasonably, and it is to be found in Neratius
(Membranes 4).


13 MARCELLUS (Digesé 17) If a man who has an estate to
which there is attached a right of way over adjoining land should
sell a part thereof abutting on the servient estate, without imposing
the servitude, but he should, before the expiration of the statutable
time by lapse of which servitudes are lost, acquire once more the
part which he sold, he will enjoy the servitude to which the ad-
joining owner was subject.


14 JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Cassius 10) Where a space of
ground over which there exists a via or an ?éter or an actus is
submerged by the influx of a river, but, before the expiration of
the period which suffices for the extinction of servitudes, the spot
of ground is recovered by soil being deposited by the stream, the
servitude is restored too, such as it was before ; but if so much
time passes that the servitude is lost, the owner of the ground can
be compelled to renew it. 1. Where a public road is effaced by
the flow of water from a river or by the fall of a building, the
nearest iandowner is bound to afford a passage.


15 THE SAME (Mpistles 2) If I have a right of servitude over
several estates, and, that being the case, I acquire one of such
estates which lies between two others, I should say that the servi-
tude is not lost, as a servitude can be lost only when the person
to whom it belongs is unable to use it; but, if that person has
acquired an estate between the two, it may very well be the case
that he has a right of way over the estates that come first and last.


16 ProcuLus (Hpisiles 1) A number of persons were in the
habit of conducting along one and the same channel, in virtue of


17


18


112 How Servitudes are lost [BOOK VIII


a right so to do, water which came to the surface on the land of
an adjoining owner ; the arrangement being that each one on his
own particular day conducted the water from its source first of all
along one channel which was used by all in common and then
along a special channel of his own, the parties coming one after
the other in the order of distance. One of the number took no
water for the whole of the regular period by lapse of which servi-
tudes are lost. My opinion is that he lost the right to take water,
and that his right was not made the subject of user on the part of
those who took water, as such right belonged to each one as his
own separate property and could not be exercised by user on the
part of another. But if a watercourse had been attached to an
estate belonging to several persons, it would have been exercised
by user on the part of one for the benefit of all the persons who
shared in the ownership of the estate. It may be added that if [in
the case first mentioned] one of the persons who were entitled to
a servitude for conducting water and who conducted water along
the same channel should lose the right to conduct it by failing to
exercise it, no portion of right would accrue on that ground to the
others who used the channel, and the benefit would go to the land-
owner across whose estate the watercourse lay’ which, as to the
share of one person, was lost by non-user ; the landowner enjoying
liberty in respect of so much of the servitude.


Pompontus (Eztracts from various readings 11) Labeo
says that if a man who has aright to draw water should for the
period required for the loss of a servitude by lapse of time go to
the spring but draw no water, he loses the right of way too.


PauLus (on Sabinus 15) Where a man uses some other
water than the one intended when the servitude was created, the
servitude is lost. 1. Any period of time during which the last
owner of land to which a servitude is attached failed to use it is
reckoned against the person who succeeds to his place. 2. Where
you have a right to insert a beam, but the adjoming owner has
allowed the regular period to pass without any building of his
being there, and you in consequence are not able to insert anything,
you will not thereby any the more lose your servitude, because the
adjoining owner cannot be held to have acquired by wsws exemption
from the servitude affecting his house, as he never interrupted your
exercise of the right.


1 Insert est after agua. M.


19


20


2


my 22,
23
24


25


TIT. VI] How Servitudes are lost 113


PomPpontus (on Sabinus 32) If I sell part of my land and
provide in the agreement that I shall have a right to conduct
water over that part to the rest of my estate, and the regular time
passes by without my making a channel, I do not lose any
right, as there is! no watercourse, and my right to a servitude
remains unimpaired ; but if I had made a channel and not used it,
I should lose it. 1. If I bequeath to you a via over my land, and, after
the time when my inheritance is entered upon, you should, for the
whole of the period which is required for loss of a servitude, be
unaware that the bequest was made, you will lose the via by non-
user. But if, before the expiration of the period, you should sell
your land, without having yet become aware that the servitude was
bequeathed you, the purchaser will have a good title to the right of
way, if he should use it for the rest of the time, because, in short,
it had already begun to belong to you; one result being that you
could never become entitled even to repudiate the legacy, as the
land [to which the servitude would be attached] would not belong
to you.


Sc@VOLA (Rules 1) A servitude is kept up by user when it
is enjoyed by the actual person who has a right to it or who is in
possession of it, or his hired servant, or his guest, or his doctor, or
someone who comes to visit him, or a tenant of his, or a usu-
fructuary ;


PAULUS (Sentences 5) even though, in the case of the
usufructuary, he should be in occupation in his own name ;


Sc@VOLA (Rules 1) in short, whoever it is that uses the
roadway as if he had a right to it,


PauLus (Sentences 5) whether he uses it for the sake of
access to another man’s estate or of exit from it,


Sc#voLa (Rules 1) and that even as a mala jide
possessor,—it will keep the servitude alive.


PauLus (Sentences 5) A man is not regarded as using a
servitude except where he thinks he is using a right of his own ;
consequently where a man uses it by way of using a public road or
of using a servitude belonging to someone else, there is no available
interdict or action open to him.


1 The text has fuerit. I think the sense must be as above, though that seems
more to agree with fuit, which some would read.


Bais 5


NINTH BOOK.


I.


ON ALLEGED COMMISSION OF Pauperies BY A FOUR-FOOTED
ANIMAL.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) Where a four-footed animal
is alleged to have done pawperies (damage), there is a right of
action which has come down from the Twelve Tables: that Statute
iays down that either the offending subject, that is, the animal
which committed the noxwia (harm), should be handed over or
pecuniary damages should be given equivalent to the amount of
harm done. 1. The word nowxia signifies the actual delict. 2. The
action is given in the case of every kind of four-footed animal.
3. The pretor’s words are “have done pauperies.” Pauperies
means damage done without legal wrong on the part of the doer,
and of course an animal cannot do any legal wrong, as it is devoid
of reason. 4. Accordingly, as Servius says, this action lies where
an animal does harm because its savage nature is excited ; suppose,
for instance, a horse given to kicking actually kicks, or an ox butts
with its horns which is in the habit of butting, or mules [do some
mischief] owing to exceptional vice; but if an animal should
upset a load on some passer by, owing to the roughness of the
ground or the negligence of the driver, or because it was too
heavily laden, this action will not be allowed, but the proceedings
will be for wrongful damage. 5. Again, suppose a dog that some-
one is leading should out of a vicious disposition break loose and
injure anyone, in such a case, if it could have been better held by
another person, or it ought not to have been taken along that
particular way, this action will not lie, and the person who was
holding the dog will be liable. 6. Furthermore, the action will
not lie if the creature does damage through someone setting it on.
7. To give a general rule, this action lies whenever a creature does


TIT. 1| On Commission of Pauperies 115


pauperies under some excitement which is contrary to the nature
of such animals ; consequently, if a horse kicks out because it is
excited by pain, then the action will not lie, but the person who
struck or wounded the horse is liable, the action against him being
im factum rather than on the lex Aquilia, were it only for this
reason, that the person did not do the damage with his own body.
But if a horse kicks a man when he stroked or patted it, there is
ground for the action. 8. If one animal provokes another so that
it does damage, the action must be brought in respect of the one
which provokes. 9. This action will lie whether the animal did
pauperies with its own body or through some external object with
which it was in contact ; say, for example, that an ox crushes some-
one by upsetting a waggon or anything else. 10. The action will
not apply in the case of wild beasts, because they are savage by
nature ; consequently, if a bear has got loose and so done harm,
there can be no action against the late owner, because, now that
the wild beast has got away, he ceases to be owner ; accordingly, if I
kill the bear, the carcase will be mine. 11. Where two rams or two
bulls fight and one kills the other, Quintus Mucius draws a distinc-
tion ; if, he says, the animal killed is the one who first attacked,
there will be no action, but if it is the one who gave no challenge,
there is a good right of action, and consequently the party
[who owns the other] must either make amends for the mischief
or surrender the animal for nova. 12. We may add that as the
rule is that noxa follows the offending subject, even in the case of
four-footed animals, this action will be allowed not against the
party to whom the animal belonged when it did the damage, but
against the one to whom it belongs at the moment, 13. and, no doubt,
if the creature dies before joinder of issue, there is an end of the
right of action. 14. Surrender for noxa means handing over the
live animal. If it belongs to several persons in common, the rule
is that there is a right to a noxal action against each co-owner for
the whole amount, just as in the case of a slave. 15. In some
cases however the action against the owner will not be brought to
make him surrender for noxa, but will be for the whole amount ;
for example, where, on being asked before the magistrate whether
the animal is his, he replies that it is not; as, after that, if it
should be shown that it is his, he will be ordered to pay the whole
amount [without the alternative]. 16. If some third person should
kill the animal after joinder of issue, then, seeing that the owner
has the right of action on the dea Aquilia, account will be taken
of the lex Aquilia [by the judge] in the action [against the owner],


to


116 On Commission of Pauperies [BOOK IX


because the owner has lost the power of surrendering for noxa ;
consequently in the action which we are discussing he will have to
tender the damages assessed, unless he is prepared to assign his
right of action against the man who killed the animal. 17. This
action, as no one will hesitate to say, is allowed to the heir and to
every kind of successor ; moreover it is available against the heir
and other successors, not, that is, by right of succession, but on
the ground of their position as owners.


PAuLus (on the Edict 22) This action is open not only to
the owner of the property injured, but equally to anyone who has
the requisite interest, for example, to a person to whom the property
was lent, also to a fuller, as these persons clearly suffer damage
owing to their own liability. 1. If aman should be trying to get
away from somebody, say from a magistrate, and should betake
himself to the nearest shop, and there be injured by a savage dog,
then, according to the opinion of some, the action cannot be brought
in respect of the dog ; though it could, if the dog were at large.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) There is no doubt that
an action can be brought on this statute by or on behalf of free
persons, supposing, for example, an animal wounds a paterfamilias
or a son under potestas ; not, that is to say, that disfigurement can
be taken into account, as no valuation can be made in respect of
a free individual, but there may be account taken of expenses
incurred for medical treatment and the loss of employment which
the party has had to give up or has lost an opportunity of taking
in consequence of being disabled.


PAvuLus (on the Edict 22) This action is open as an wéilis
actio, where it is not a four-footed animal that did the pauperies,
but one of some other kind.


ALFENUS (Digest 2) A groom was leading a horse into
an innyard, when the horse snuffed at a mule; whereupon the
mule kicked out and broke the groom’s leg ; an opinion was desired
as to whether there could be an action brought against the owner
of the mule, because the mule did pauperies. My answer was Yes.


.


TOT pu] On the lex Aquilia ue


IL.
ON THE LEX AQUILIA.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) The lea Aquilia was a partial
repeal of all the statutes which before it dealt with illegal damage,
whether it were the Twelve Tables or any other enactment ; which
statutes need not now be rehearsed. 1. The lew Aquilia is a
plebiscite ; Aquilius, a tribune of the plebs, having moved it before
the plebs.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) It is provided by the lex
Aquilia in Chap. I as follows :—“If anyone slays unlawfully a
slave of either sex belonging to another person, or a four-footed
animal of the class of ‘pecudes, then, whatever was the greatest
value of the same in the year then last past, let the party be
ordered to pay brass to that amount to the owner ;” 1. and then,
further on, it is provided that, against one who denies the fact, the
action shall be for double the amount. 2. It appears therefore
that the statute puts a man’s four-footed animals on a level with
his slaves, such animals being of the class of pecudes and kept in
herds, as, for instance, sheep, goats, kine, horses, mules, and asses.
Whether swine are included under the term pecudes is a question
sometimes asked, and Labeo holds very properly that they are.
But the term does not comprise dogs: much less are wild beasts
members of this class, such as bears, lions, and panthers. Elephants
and camels are, so to speak, half and half, as they do the work of
beasts of draught and, at the same time, their nature is wild, con-
sequently they must be held to be included in the first chapter.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) If a slave of either sex should
be killed unlawfully, the lex Aquilia applies. It is very properly
added that the killing must be unlawful, as it is not enough that
the slave should be killed, but the act must be done unlawfully.


GatIus (on the provincial Edict 7) Accordingly, if a slave of
yours is a robber and lies in wait for me, and I kill him, I need be
under no apprehension ;—common sense allows a man to defend
himself from danger. 1. The statute of the Twelve Tables allows
anyone to kill a thief who is caught at night [in the act of thieving],
provided always the party gives notice of his intention with a shout ;
if the thief is caught by day, the statute only allows him to be


118 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


killed where he defends himself with a weapon, provided, again,
the party gives notice with a shout.


ULPIANUS (0n the Edict 18) However, when a man kills any-
one who seeks to attack him with a weapon, he will not be held to
kill him unlawfully, and if a man should kill a thief to save his
own life, no one will hesitate to say that he is not liable on the lex
Aquilia. Still, if, where he had it in his power to apprehend the
thief, he chose to kill him, he must, on the whole, be held to have
done it unlawfully ; consequently he will be liable on the lex
Cornelia too. 1. By injuria we must not here understand some
kind of insult, as we do in connexion with an action for ¢njurie,
but something which is done not according to law, in short, against
the law, that is to say a case in which a man kills by negligence
(culpa); consequently sometimes the two actions, the one on the lex
Aquilia and the one for injurie, are both admissible, but there will
be two assessments of damages, one for damage and the other for
insult. Accordingly we must here understand injuria to mean
damage done by negligence, even by a person who had no desire to
do harm. 2. Hence arises the question whether there is an action
on the lex Aquilia where damage is done by a lunatic. Pegasus
said there was none: what negligence, he asked, can there be in
such a person, seeing that he is not in his right mind? This is
perfectly sound. Accordingly there will be no action on the lex
Aquilia ; just as there is none where an animal does the damage,
or where a tile falls. Again, if a child (¢nfans) does the damage,
the same rule applies. Ifa boy under age (iémpubes) does it, then,
according to Labeo, seeing that he would be liable for theft, he is
liable under the lea Aquilia too, and this I should say is true, if
he has reached sufficient intelligence to commit a legal offence.
3, If an instructor wounds or kills a slave in the course of teaching »
him, will he be liable under the lea Aquilia, on the ground that
he did unlawful damage? Julianus tells us that a man was held
liable under the lex Agquilia who, in the course of giving instruc-
tion, blinded his pupil of an eye ; much more, therefore, must the
same be held if he kills him. We find the following case given by
him. A shoemaker, he says, when a boy whom he was instructing,
a freeborn jilius familias, executed rather badly what he gave him
to do, hit him on the neck with a last, with the result that his
eye was destroyed. Here Julianus says that there is no right of
action for ¢njuri@, because the man did not strike the blow with
the intention of committing any ¢xjuria, but in order to correct


ATTY) EL} On the lex Aquilia 119


and instruct; but he hesitates to say there is no action on the
contract, because a person who gives instruction is only allowed to
chastise his pupil to a moderate extent ; however I have no doubt
that an action can be brought on the lex Aquilia,


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) as excessive brutality on the part
of a teacher is counted for negligence.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) In this action, according to
Julianus, the father will get an amount equivalent to the falling
off in the gains he makes from his son’s services occasioned by the
destruction of his eye, besides the cost the father incurs for medical
attendance. 1. The word “slay” must be taken to apply whether
the party took a sword or, it may be, a stick or some other weapon
or used his hands ; as, for instance, where he strangled the man or
killed him by a kick or by butting at him with his head or in any
way whatever. 2. If a man who is carrying a burden which is too
heavy for him throws it down and kills a slave, the lex Aquilia
applies, as it was open to him to avoid taking so great a load: we
may observe that it is said by Pegasus that, if a man falls and
crushes someone else’s slave with a load which he is bearing, he is
not liable under the lea Aquilia, unless he either loaded himself
more heavily than he ought to have done or walked in a slippery
place without taking proper care. 3. Similarly where a man does
damage in consequence of someone else pushing him, Proculus
tells us that neither the man who pushed is liable, because he did
not kill, nor the man who was pushed, because he did not do
wrongful damage ; from which it follows that an action 7m factwm
must be allowed against the man who pushed. 4. If one man kills
another in a wrestling match or in the pancratium or in a trial of
strength between two boxers, if the man is killed, the lex Aquilia
does not apply, because the damage must be held to be done for
the sake of distinction and prowess, and not with any wrongful
intent. But this rule has no application in the case of a slave, as
the practice is that only freeborn persons contend ; it does apply
where a jilius familias is wounded. Of course, where a man injures
someone who is trying to get out of the way, the lex Aquilia
applies, or where he kills a slave without there being any contest,
unless it takes place in a case where the owner set the slave on ;
there the /ea would not apply. 5. If a person gives a slight blow
to a sick slave, and the man dies, then, as Labeo truly says, he is
liable under the lex Aquilia, as a blow that will kill one man very
often will not kill another. 6. Celsus says that it makes a great


120 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


deal of difference whether the party kills or furnishes the cause of
death, one who furnishes the cause of death not being liable under
the lex Aquilia but to an action in factum ; and, in this connexion
he mentions the case of a man who gave poison by way of a medical
drug, who, he says, furnished the cause of death, just like one who
puts a sword in the hand of a lunatic; this latter, he says, like
the first, not being liable under the lex Aquilia, but in factum.
7. But when a man throws someone off a bridge, whether the
latter is killed by the shock itself, or is at once drowned or is over-
powered by the force of the current and dies from exhaustion, the
offender, according to Celsus, is liable under the lea Aquilia, just
as he would be if he had dashed a boy against arock. 8. Proculus
says that if a surgeon operates on a slave unskilfully, there is
a good right of action, either on the contract or under the lex
Aquilia.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) The same rule applies
where a doctor makes a wrong use of a drug ; but, in fact, where a man
operates properly, but omits further treatment, he will not get off
free, but is held guilty of negligence. Again, where a mule-
driver, through want of experience, is unable to hold in his mules
as they rush off, if they run over someone else’s slave, the driver
is commonly said to be liable on the ground of negligence. The
law is the same where he is unable to hold the mules in because
he is not strong enough ; and it cannot be held unjust that want
of strength should bear out a charge of negligence, because no one
ought to undertake a task in which he knows or is bound to know
that his want of strength will be a source of peril to others. The
same law holds in the case of a man who from want of experience
or from want of strength cannot keep in a horse on which he is
riding.

ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) Again, where a midwife gives
a drug to a woman who dies in consequence, Labeo makes this
distinction : if she administered the drug with her own hands, she
must be held to have killed the woman ; but if she gave it to the
woman for her to take it herself, there must be an action allowed
in factum ; and this is a sound opinion, as in this case the midwife
furnished the cause of death rather than killed. 1. Where a man,
either by force or suasion, administers a drug to any person, either
as a draught or by injection, or rubs him with some poisonous
preparation, he is liable under the lex Aquilia, just as the midwife
is who gets a woman to swallow a drug. 2. Where a man starves


10


et


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 121


a slave to death, according to Neratius, he is liable to an action in
Jactum. 3. If my slave is riding on horseback, and you frighten
the horse, and so cause the man to be thrown into the river, and
he is drowned, then, as we read in Ofilius, it is a case for an action
in factum ; just as it would be if my slave were inveigled into an
ambush by one man and killed by another. 4. ***! But if persons
are hurling spears by way of sport and a slave is killed, the lex
Aquilia applies ; (though if, when a number of persons were
hurling spears on the exercise ground, the slave passed that way,
the statute does not apply, because the slave had no business
making his way at an improper time across the ground used for
hurling spears ; at the same time [even then] anyone who should
deliberately aim at the slave would certainly be liable under the
statute ;)


PauLus (on the Edict 22) because the practice of a
mischievous sport is a piece of negligence.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) Again, Mela says this :—If
several persons are playing at ball, one of whom gives the ball
rather a hard stroke and so drives it against the hand of a barber,
and thereby a slave whom the barber has in his hands has his
throat cut, in consequence of the razor being knocked against it,
whichever party was guilty of negligence is liable on the lex
Aquilia. Proculus says the negligence is the barber’s; and
certainly, if he was carrying on his trade on a spot where the sport
above mentioned was usually practised, or where people were
constantly passing, he is to some extent accountable, though, on
the other hand, there is some sense in the remark that where a man
puts himself in the hands of a barber who has set up his stool in
a dangerous place, he has himself to blame. 1. If one man held
a slave and another killed him, the one who held him you may say
furnished the cause of death and consequently he is liable to an
action in factum. 2. But if a number of persons struck him, it is
a point to consider whether all are not liable, as having all killed
him. As to this, if it is known who struck the fatal blow, that one
is liable, as having killed him; but, if it is not known, then,
according to Julianus, all are liable, as having slain, and if an
action is brought against one, this does not release the others,
because, under the lea Aquilia, payment by one man is no


1 Probably words referring to an accident occurring in the course of regular
drill are omitted by an oversight. Cf. J. 4.3.4: eM.


12


13


122 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


discharge to another, as it is a case of penal damages. 3. Celsus
tells us that if one man gives [a slave| a mortal wound, and, after
that, another kills him outright, the former is not liable for slaying
but for wounding, because the slave died from a different wound ;
but the latter is liable for slaying. Marcellus takes the same view,
and it is the more reasonable opinion. 4. If a number of persons
let fall a piece of timber and crush a slave, the old lawyers hold
that they are all equally liable under the lex Aquilia. 5. Again,
Proculus gave the opinion that there was an action on the statute
against a man who set his dog at someone and made it bite him,
though he was not holding the dog ; but Julianus says that a man
would be liable under the statute only where he held the dog and
so caused it to bite someone; whereas, if he did not hold it, the
action must be in factum. 6. The right of action under the fea
Aquilia belongs to the “erus,” that is the owner. 7. If wrongful
damage is done in the case of a slave whom I was going to restore
to you by way of “redhibition,” then, according to Julianus, I have
a good right of action under the lex Aquilia, and, when i proceed
to make the redhibition, | must assign it over to you. 8. Suppose,
however, the slave is held to service in good faith by someone
[who is not his owner], will the latter have the right of action?
Here, on the whole, the action to be allowed is in factum. 9. Where
clothes have been lent to a person, according to Julianus, if they
should be torn, the borrower cannot bring an action on the /ex
Aquila; the right of action is with the owner. 10. Julianus
discusses the question whether a usufructuary or a usuary has an
action on the lex Aquilia ; my own opinion is that in such a case
what will have to be allowed is an wtelis actio.


PauLus (on Sabinus 10) We may add that if the bare
proprietor wounds or kills a slave in whom I have the usufruct, I
have a right to have an action allowed me against him on the
analogy of the lex Aquilia, the damages to be in proportion to
the value of my usufruct, and, in assessing such damages, that part
of the year is to be included in the account which was anterior to
my usufruct.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) A free man has an utilis actio
on the lew Aqulia; he has not the direct action, as no one can be
called owner of his own limbs. The owner can sue on account of
a runaway slave. 1. Julianus says that if a free man acts as a
bona fide slave to me, he is liable towards me in his own person
under the lew Aquilia. 2. Where a slave is killed who is part of


14


15


16


‘17


TIT. It] On the lex Aquilia 123


the assets of a deceased person, the question may be asked who
can bring the action, as there is no owner of such a slave? Celsus
says that the statute requires that damage should always be made
good to the owner; so here the inheritance will be deemed the
owner ; consequently, when the heir enters on the inheritance, he
can take the requisite proceedings. 3. Where a slave who was
left as a legacy is killed after entry on the inheritance, the right of
action on the lew Aquilia is in the legatee, unless! it was only after
the death of the slave that he accepted the legacy ; if he declined
it, then, according to Julianus, it follows that we must say that the
right of action goes to the heir.


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) But if the heir kills the slave
himself, the view has been maintained that the legatee must be
allowed an action against him.


ULPIANUs (on the Edict 18) — It would follow from the passage
[in Julianus] that the rule is that if the slave bequeathed is killed
before entry is made on the inheritance, the right of action on the
lex Aquilia remains with the heir, having come to him through
the inheritance: but if the slave was wounded before the entry, then
the right of action remained part of the inheritance, but the heir
is bound to assign it to the legatee. 1. Where a slave receives a
mortal wound and then is killed by the fall of a house or by ship-
wreck or by a blow of any kind sooner than he would have died of
the wound, there can be no action for killing him [against the man
who first wounded him], but only one for wounding him ; but if he
was manumitted or disposed of to someone else and after that died
of the wound, in that case, according to Julianus, an action can be
brought as for killing him. The reason of the above discrimination
is that it is a fact that he was killed by you at the moment when
you wounded him, though it was made manifest only when he died,
but, in the first mentioned case, the fall of the house made it impos-
sible to ascertain whether he was killed or not. Where your slave
is mortally wounded, and you [in your testament] make him free
and appoint him your heir, and after that he dies, your heir cannot
sue on the lex Aquilia,


MARCIANUS (Rules 4) because the matter is brought into a
position in which the right could not have arisen.


ULPIANus (on the Edict 18) If an owner kills his own slave,


' For non M. is inclined to read vel; which gives “even if” instead of “unless.”


18


19


20


21


22


23


124 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


he will be liable to an action in factum at the hands of a bond fide
possessor or one who held the slave as pledgee.


PauLus (on Sabinus10) We may add that if the pledgee kills
or wounds the slave, he can be sued under the lex Aquilia and by
the action on the pledge, but the plaintiff is bound to be content
with one or other of the two actions.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) But if aman kills a slave whom
he owns in common with someone else, according to Celsus he is


liable on the fea Aquilia ; and the rule is the same if he wounds
him :


THE SAME (on Sabinus 42) he is liable, that is, in respect of
such share in the slave as belongs to the plaintiff.


THE SAME (on the Edict 18) The words of the statute are :—
“whatever was the greatest value of the slave in that year.” This
clause prescribes a valuation of the amount of damage done.
1. The year is to be reckoned back from the day when the slave was
killed ; but if he was only mortally wounded and died after a long
interval of time, then, according to Julianus, we must reckon the
year from the time when he was wounded, though Celsus gives a
different rule. 2. Do. we however merely estimate the intrinsic
value borne by the slave himself when he was killed, or do we not
rather consider the interest his owner had in his not being killed ?
According to the present practice what is estimated is the interest
mentioned.


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) Accordingly, if you have killed a
slave whom I had engaged to deliver to someone else under a
penalty, the difference it makes to me is a relevant consideration
in the case. 1. Indirect elements of value (cause) attached to the
particular individual must be brought into the account too ; for
instance, where a man kills one slave out of a troop of players or
singers, or one of twins, or one horse out of a team, or one animal,
male or female, of a pair of mules ; as in such cases a value must
not be set only on the individual killed, but account must be further
taken of the extent to which the others are depreciated.


Uupianus (on the Edict 18) On this principle Neratius
tells us that if a slave is killed who is appointed heir [by a stranger],
the value of the inheritance itself will be considered in assessing
damages. 1. Julianus says that if a slave is killed who had been
manumitted by testament and appointed heir [by his owner],


TEwiT | On the lex Aquilia 125


neither the substituted heir nor the statutable heir can by means
of an action on the lex Aquila recover the amount of a value set
on the inheritance, such inheritance not having been open to the
slave ; and this opinion is sound. Accordingly, he says, the only
thing to be estimated is the market value of the slave, as that is
all in which the substitute can be held to have any interest: but
my own opinion is that even the market value will not be con-
sidered, because, if the slave had been heir, he would have been
free too. 2. Julianus says further that if [ am appointed heir on
condition that I manumit Stichus, and then Stichus is killed after
the testator’s death, the assessed amount that I shall get will
include the value of the inheritance, because the act of killing
prevented the fulfilment of the condition ; but if the slave is killed
in the testator’s lifetime, the value of the inheritance will not be
taken into account, because the question is put retrospectively
what was the greatest value the slave bore. 3. Again Julianus
says that the valuation of the slave is made with reference to the
time at which he was worth most in that year ; it follows that, if
there is some valuable painter whose thumb is cut off, and within
a year’s time after this injury he is killed, his owner can sue on
the lex Aquilia, and the painter must be valued at such a sum as
he was worth before he lost his thumb and with it his power of
painting. 4. Again, if a slave of mine should be killed who had
been guilty of extensive falsification in my accounts, and accord-
ingly it was my intention to examine him by torture, in order to
extract from him the names of his accomplices, Labeo says very
properly that the value which ought to be put on the slave is one
representing the interest I had in the frauds! committed through
him being detected, not the amount of direct loss occasioned by
the man himself. 5. If a well-conducted slave should change his
character and then be killed within the year, the value to be taken
in assessing the damages will be what he was worth before such
change. 6. In short, the rule is that any advantages which
enhanced the value of the slave at any time within the year ending
at the moment when he was killed form an element in the valua-
tion to be put on him. 7. If an infant is killed which is not a
year old, the better opinion is that this action will meet the case,
the valuation being referred to the portion of the year during
which the infant existed. 8. It is settled that the action is
allowed to the heir and to all other successors ; but it will not be
allowed against the heir or other successors [of the wrongdoer ], as


1 del. servi. M.


24


25


26


27


126 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


it is a penal action, unless such heir chance to have become the
richer by the damage done. 9. Where a slave is killed with
malice, it is settled that the owner can proceed on the lea
Cornelia too ; and if he brings an action on the lex Aquilia, this
ought not to bar the action under the Cornelia. 10. The right of
action is for simple damages, where the defendant admits his guilt,
and for twofold where he denies it. 11. If a person confesses
falsely that he killed a slave who is really living, and afterwards
he is prepared to show that the man is alive, then, as we learn
from Julianus, no action lies under the lex Aquila, though the
party has confessed that he killed ; because, where the action is
founded on a confession, all that the plaintiff is excused thereupon
is the necessity of proving that the person who killed the man is
the defendant, but it is still necessary that the man should have
been killed by someone or other.


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) This comes out more clearly
where a slave is [alleged to be] wounded ; if the defendant con-
fesses that he wounded him, but the man was not wounded, what
wound is to afford the basis of the valuation, or what day are we
to go back to?


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) Accordingly, if the slave was
not killed, but still is dead, the better opinion is that the party is
not liable in respect of the slave so dead, in spite of his confession.
1. If an agent or a guardian or a curator or anyone else confesses
that the absent principal [or the ward or the minor] wounded a
slave, an utilis actio founded on confession must be allowed against
the party so confessing. 2. It should be observed that in the
action which is allowed against a party who confesses, the judge
is appointed not for the purpose of deciding the question but of
assessing the damages, there is nothing to be done in the way of
deciding the question against those who confess.


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) Suppose, for instance, that the
party who is sued should confess that he killed the slave and
should be prepared to pay the sum assessed, but the plaintiff puts
the matter in question at a very high figure.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) If a slave should carry off
another slave belonging to a different owner and kill him, then,
according to both Julianus and Celsus, there is a right of action for
theft and one for wrongful damage too. 1. Ifa slave who is owned
in common, say by you and me, should kill another slave belonging


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 127


to me, the lex Aquilia will apply against you, if the man acted
with your consent ; and this, so we learn from Urseius, was the
opinion of Proculus. If, he added, the slave did it without your
consent, there is no noxal action, lest it should be in the power of
the slave to make himself the property of one of us only!; and this,
I should say, is sound. 2. Again, if a slave owned in common by
you and me should be killed by a slave belonging to Titius, Celsus
says that if one of us two sues, either he will get a part of the
damages assessed corresponding to his share in the slave, or else there
will be an order that the slave be surrendered to him for nowa
absolutely, as such delivery does not admit of division. 3. The
person bound in respect of the slave who killed is the owner ;
a person whom he is serving as slave in good faith is not bound.
Whether a man whose slave has run away is bound in respect of
him, if he is sued on the lex Aquilia, is a question asked; Julianus
says that he is bound, and this is perfectly sound, as Marcellus too
is of the same opinion. 4. The second chapter of the statute has gone
out of use. 5. In the third chapter the lex Aquilia continues
thus :—“ In respect of all other things besides slaves or cattle killed,
where anyone does damage to another by wrongful burning,
breaking or breaking up, whatever was the worth of the property?
in the last thirty days, the offender must be ordered to give that
sum of money to the owner.” 6. If therefore a man should, in the
case of a slave or an animal, not kill, but burn, break, or break up,
there is no doubt that the action must be brought under the above
words. Accordingly, if you throw a torch at my slave and scorch
him, you will be liable to an action at my hands. 7. Again, if you
set fire to my plantation or my country-house, I shall have an
action under the statute. 8. Ifa man’s object is to burn down my?
block of chambers, but the fire spreads to the neighbour’s block
too, he will be liable to an action under the lex Aquilia at the
hands of the neighbour as well, and he will still be answerable to
the tenants too for the burning of their moveable goods. 9. Where
a tenant has a slave whose duty it is to look after a furnace, but
the man goes to sleep at the fireside and the house is burnt down,
Neratius tells us that, if an action is brought against the tenant on


1 Meaning apparently “my property.” The text says “your property,” ¢éb7 : but
this is probably a bad case of shifting the pronoun. M. however proposes utri
instead of wt tibi.

* quanti ea res erit: perhaps “whatever is the estimate of the damage, if
assumed to have been done on the day when it would have been greatest.”

3 Perhaps del. meam, and read here “his ” for “my.” Cf. Collatio.


14


128 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


his lease, he is bound to make it good, if he was negligent in the
selection of men to do the work ; if, however, one man lit the fire
in the furnace, and another was negligent in attending to it, will the
man who lit the fire be liable? The fact is that the one who had
to attend to the fire did nothing at all, and the one who lit the fire
in the proper way did nothing wrong. What is the upshot? I
should say that there is an wtilis actio both against the man who
went to sleep beside the furnace and the man who was negligent in
looking after the fire ; and no one ought to say, in the case of the
man going to sleep, that he was overtaken by a natural human
weakness, as his duty was either to put the fire out or else to guard
it in some way that would prevent it from spreading. 10. If you
have an oven against a wall belonging to you and your neighbour,
will you be liable for wrongful damage? Proculus says no such
action can be brought, because none can be brought even against a
man who has an [ordinary] hearth ; accordingly, it would, I think,
be fairest that an action should be allowed in factwm, supposing,
that is, that the wall is burnt, but if you have so far done me no
damage, but you have simply got your fire in such a position that
I apprehend that you will do damage, then I think that the case
would be met by the undertaking against damnum infectum.
11. According to Proculus, where the slaves of a tenant have
burnt down the residence, the tenant is liable, either on the
contract of lease or else under the lex Aquilia, it being open to the
tenant to surrender the slaves for noxa, and if the case has been
decided in one of the two actions, no further proceedings can be
taken in the other. Thisis always provided there was no negligence -
in the tenant; but if he had slaves given to such offences, he is
liable to an action for wrongful damage for having such slaves.
A similar rule, he says, must be observed as to persons who are
lodgers in a building, and there is much to be said for this view.
12. If my bees fly off to join your bees, and you fire them,
according to Celsus I have a good right of action on the lex
Aquilia. 13. The statute says ruperit (breaks up). This word is
understood by nearly all the old lawyers to be equivalent to
corruperitt (destroys). 14. Accordingly Celsus gives this [answer
to a] question [on the subject] ;—If you sow tares or wild oats in
the middle of your neighbour’s corn so as to spoil his crop, then
not only can the landowner, or, if the land is let, the tenant, take
proceedings by way of Interdict quod vi aut clam, but there is an
action in factum too, and, if the tenant brings it, he is bound to
give an undertaking that no further action shall be brought, the


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 129


object being that the owner shall give no further trouble ; as it is
one kind of damage to destroy or spoil something in itself, and so
give ground for an action on the lex Aquilia, but quite another
case where, without affecting the thing in itself, you mix something
else with it which it would cost trouble to get rid of. 15. Where
a man contaminates wine, or spills it, or makes it turn sour, or
spoils it in any other way, according to Celsus, an action can be
brought on the lex Aquilia, as the term “corrumpere” (destroy)
extends to spilling wine or making it turn sour. 16. The same
writer agrees that breaking and burning are included in the term
destroying, but there is nothing new, he says, in a_ statute
enumerating certain things specifically and then adding some
general term which comprises the specific things; and this is
a sound remark. 17. We must certainly hold that the word
“rumpere” applies where a man wounds a slave or strikes him
with a rod or a thong, or his fist, or a weapon, or anything
whatever, so as to draw blood or cause a bruise ; but only so far as
it is a case of wrongful damage to property ; where the party does
not lower the value of the slave to any extent or make him less
serviceable, the lea Aquilia does not apply, and there will only be
an action for injuric (insult etc.), as the statute deals with those
cases of “breaking up” which occasion loss. Hence, even if the slave
is none the worse as a matter of market value, but expense has
been incurred to have him cured and made sound, it must be held
that I (the owner) am so far damnified, and consequently that
proceedings can be taken under the lex Aquilia. 18. Wherea
man tears or befouls someone's clothes, he is liable as though he
had “broken up.” 19. Again, if a man throws my millet or corn
into a river, an action on the lex Aquzlia will meet the case.
20. Also where a man mixes sand or anything else with my corn,
so that it is difficult to get rid of it, an action can be brought as it
were for spoiling. 21. If anyone knocks coins out of my hand,
there is,as Sabinus holds, an action for wrongful damage, supposing
the coins are lost in such wise that they do not come into anybody’s
hands ; for instance, by falling into a river, or the sea, or a drain ;
but, where they come into someone’s hands, the action must be
for theft aided and encouraged ; this was held by the old lawyers
themselves. 22. If you hit a female slave with your fist or strike
a mare and the result is a premature birth, you are liable, accord-
ing to Brutus, under the lex Aquilia, as it were for “breaking.”
23. He adds that if a man overloads a mule and ruptures any part
of its body, the statute will apply. 24. Where a man scuttles a
M. J, II. 9


130 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK Ix


merchant ship carrying a cargo, Vivianus tells us there is a right
of action under the lex Aquilia, as it were for breaking. 25. If
a man picks unripe olives, or cuts an unripe crop of corn, or gathers
grapes before the proper time, he will be liable under the lex
Aquilia ; if the fruit is ripe, the statute does not apply, as there is
no wrong done; in fact the man makes you a present of the cost
which would have to be incurred for the purpose of gathering the
particular kind of crop; but, if he abstracts the crop which has
been so gathered, he is liable for theft. Octavenus adds, as to the
case of the grapes, the words—“ unless the party throws the grapes
on the ground so that they are scattered about.” 26. The same
writer (Vivianus) says with respect to the taking of coppice, that, if
the twigs are not mature, the party is liable under the lew Aquilia,
but, if he takes them when they are mature, he is liable for theft
and also for trees cut by stealth. 27. If you [cut and] carry away
a fully grown willow plantation, but do not injure the stocks, the
lex Aquilia does not apply. 28. If a man castrates a slave boy
and so raises his value, according to Vivianus, the lew Aquilia
does not apply, but the action must be for injuric (insult—to the
owner), either on the Edict of the Ediles or for fourfold. 29. If
you send anyone a cup to be pierced with holes, then, if he breaks
it through want of skill, he will be liable for wrongful damage ;
but if he breaks it through no want of skill, but the fact is that it
had cracks which spoilt it for the above treatment, he may well
get off. In consequence of this, it is a practice of workmen, when
articles of this kind are put in their hands, to make an agreement
that they shall not do the work at their own risk, and this bars any
right of action either on the contract or under the lea Aquilia.
30. A husband gives his wife a number of unstrung pearls to use;
should the wife thereupon, without the husband’s consent or
without his knowledge, perforate the pearls in order to wear them,
when so bored, on a thread, she is liable under the statute, whether
she is divorced or is still the man’s wife. 31. If a man breaks
down or breaks open the doors of a building belonging to me, or
demolishes the building itself, he is liable under the lea Aquila.
32. If a man demolishes a watercourse belonging to me, then,
although the materials which are thrown down are my property,
still, as the ground across which I conduct the water is not mine,
the best conclusion to come to is that an wtilis actio must be
allowed. 33. If a stone falls off a waggon and breaks to pieces or
fractures anything, it is held that the waggoner is liable on the
statute, if the reason the stones gave way was that he packed them


28


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 131


badly. 34. A man hires a slave to lead a mule and puts the
animal under his charge ; the slave thereupon ties the line by which
he is holding the mule to his thumb, and the mule breaks away,
tears the slave’s thumb off, and then throws itself over a height:
here Mela holds that if an unskilled slave was let out on the
understanding that he was a skilled one, an action on the contract
can be brought against the owner of the slave on account of the
mule being destroyed or disabled, but if the mule was excited by
being struck or frightened, then the owner, I mean the owner’ of
the mule, and the owner of the slave will have a right of action
under the lex Aquilia against the man who excited the mule. My
own opinion is that, even in the case in which there is a right of
action on the contract, there is a good right of action on the lex
Aquilia too. 35. Again, if you put a vat full of wine in the hands
of a plasterer, under an agreement that he shall do what is wanting
with it, and he knocks a hole in it, so that the wine runs out, Labeo
says that the proper action is an factum.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 10) Where persons make pits in order
to catch bears or deer, if they make them on a place where people
commonly pass and something falls in and is injured, such persons
incur lability under the lex Aquilia; but, if they dug in some
other place where pits are usually made, no liability is incurred.
1. However, the action is allowed only on special grounds, that is
to say, only where no warning was given and the owner had no
knowledge and was not able to take precautions. There are in facta
great many cases of this kind to be met with, in which an applicant
is refused relief if it was in his power to avoid the danger.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) The rule is like that applied in
a case in which you put snares on some spot where you had no
right to put them, and a neighbour's cattle have been caught in
the snares. 1. If you break down a projecting roof of mine which
I allowed to extend above your house without any right to do so,
then, as we learn from Proculus, I can bring an action against you
for wrongful damage; as your proper course was to bring an action
against me averring that I had no right to have a projecting roof ;
and it is not fair, Proculus proceeds to say, that I should have to
suffer damage by your breaking down my materials. There is a
rescript of the Emperor Severus which varies the rule: the Emperor,
where a watercourse was carried through a man’s house without any
right of servitude, told him by rescript that he was at liberty to
break it up without asking leave ; and this is quite sound,—the point

9—2


132 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK Ix


of difference is that in the former.case the party built the projecting
roof on his own property, but, in the latter, a man made a con-
struction on somebody else’s ground. 2. If your vessel comes into
collision with my boat, the question is asked what kind of action J
have. According to Proculus, if it was in the power of the persons
navigating the vessel to prevent the collision and it took place by
their negligence, there ought to be an action brought against them
under the lex Aquilia, as it makes but little difference whether you do
the damage by steering straight at the boat, or drawing the steering-
oar towards the ship, or do it with your own hands directly, as in
all these cases alike I suffer damage by your act; but if the ship
drifted against the boat because there was a rope broken or there
was no one at the helm, no action can be brought against the owner.
3. Again, Labeo says that where a ship is driven by the force of the
wind against cables which hold the anchors of another ship, and the
sailors [on board the former] cut the cables, then, if there was no
other way in which the first ship could get loose except by cutting
the cables, no action will be allowed. Jabeo and Proculus held the
same opinion with reference to fishermen’s nets in which a fishing-
boat belonging to others was entangled ; of course, if this happened
through the negligence of those navigating the fishing-boat, there
would be an action on the lea Aquilia. Where, however, an action is
brought for wrongful damage to nets, no account is taken of the fish
which the owner of the nets fails to catch in consequence, as it is a
matter of uncertainty whether any would have been caught or not,
and a similar rule is maintained in the case of hunters and fowlers.
4. If one ship collides with and disables another which is coming
in the opposite direction, according to Alfenus, there is a good
right of action against either the pilot or the skipper (dwcator) ;
but if the vessel was impelled with too strong an impetus to be
restrained, no action can be allowed against the owner (sic) ;
though, if the mischief took place through the negligence of the
sailors, I should say the action under the statute will meet the case.
5. Where a man cuts a rope by which a vessel is made fast, and the
vessel is lost, there can be an action in factum. 6. Under this
section of the statute the action can be brought for injury done to
any animals that are not “pecudes” (gregarious), for instance, to a
dog; and the same may be said of boars and lions, and of wild
beasts and birds generally. 7. Municipal magistrates, it is held,
can be held liable under the lex Aquila, if they do wrongful
damage: there is no doubt that, even if such a magistrate were to
take your cattle in execution, and then, by not letting you


30


TIT. 11} On the lex Aquilia 133


give them food, cause them to die of starvation, an action would
have to be allowed (tm factum). Again, where such an officer
thinks that he is levying an execution in accordance with the
statute, but he does not really do it in accordance with the statute,
and he allows the things taken to be worn and spoilt, it is said that
the lex Aquilia applies ; indeed the same thing may be said even
where the execution was in accordance with the statute. But if a
magistrate uses some violence against a man who resists, he will
not be liable under the statute; as, even in a case where a
magistrate took a slave in execution and the slave hanged himself,
no action was allowed. 8. The words “ whatever was the value in
the last thirty days” do not say expressly the greatest value ;
however, it is settled that they must be taken as if they did.


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) A man who kills someone else’s
slave whom he detects in the act of adultery [with his wife]
will not be liable under this statute. 1. If a slave is
killed who was pledged for debt, the debtor has a good right of
action. Whether the creditor himself has a right to an utelis actio,
because he may have an interest [in the slave’s life], on the ground
that the debtor is insolvent, or that he himself has lost his right of
action by lapse of time, is a question sometimes asked. However,
it is not fair that the offender should be liable to be sued both by
the owner and by the creditor: unless indeed anyone choose to
say that the debtor would not in that case suffer any wrong, as
[whatever the creditor receives] the debtor is credited with to
the extent of his debt, and anything paid in excess he can recover
from the creditor, or, at the outset, the debtor will be allowed an
action for so much of the damages as is in excess of the debt.
Accordingly, in those cases in which the creditor is allowed an
action [against the offender] because the debtor cannot pay, or
because he has lost his right of action [against the debtor], the
creditor will have an action under the lex Aquilia [against the
offender] to the extent of the debt, the debtor being credited with
the amount recovered, and the debtor himself has a good right of
action on the lea Aquilia, for the amount to which the statutable
damages exceed the debt. 2. If a man should consume wine or
corn belonging to someone else, he cannot be held to do wrongful
damage ; consequently an wfilis actio must be allowed. 3. In the
action arising on this section, as in the other, it is malice and
negligence that are penalized; consequently, if a man should set
fire to his stubble or his thorns, in order to burn them up, and the


31 =


32


134 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


flames increase and spread so as to injure the corn or vines of some
one else, we have to ask whether it took place through his negli-
gence or his want of skill. If he did it on a windy day, he is guilty
of negligence, as a man who gives an opening for damage to occur
is held to commit it, and he exposes himself to the same charge if
he did not take means to prevent the fire from spreading. But if
he took all proper precautions, or a sudden gust of wind caused
the spread of the fire, he is not guilty of negligence. 4. If a
slave is wounded, but not mortally, and he dies from neglect, an
action can be brought for wounding him, not for killing.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 10) If a pruner who throws down a
branch from a tree or a man on a scaffolding kills a passer-by,
he is liable only where the object thrown falls on a spot open to
the public, and he did not call out so that the person might be
able to get out of the way. Mucius, however, says that an action
could be brought on the ground of negligence, even if the same
thing should have happened on private property,—in fact, he said,
it is a case of negligence where a man fails to foresee what a diligent
person could have foreseen,—or notice should only have been given
when it was too late to avoid the danger. On this principle it
makes no great difference whether the party was going across public
or private ground, as it very often happens that numbers make their
way across private ground. If people do not pass there, a man
is answerable for malice only, being bound not to let anything fall
on one whom he sees going across ; he cannot be called to account
for negligence, as he cannot possibly guess whether anyone is going
to pass that way.


GaIus (on the provincial Edict 7) The following question
has been asked :—Is it necessary that the same rule should be
observed in an action for wrongful damage as is observed by the
proconsul in a case of theft committed by a gang of slaves, viz., the
rule that a demand for the whole damages is not to be allowed in
respect of every separate slave, but it will be enough for so much
to be paid as would have to be paid if the theft had been committed
by a single freeman? The view on the whole held is that the same
rule must be observed, and this is very reasonable; for the principle
being in the case of an action for theft that an owner ought not to
be deprived of his whole household of slaves in consequence of one
delict, and that principle applying equally to an action for wrongful
damage, it follows that the same kind of assessment should be made,
especially considering that not infrequently the case of a delict


33


34


35


36


vn. 11] On the lex Aquilia 135


such as we are discussing is less grave; for example, where the
damage is done by negligence and not maliciously. 1. If the
same man first wounds a slave and afterwards proceeds to kill him,
he will be held liable both for wounding and for killing, as there
are two offences committed. The case differs from that of a man
killing a slave by inflicting a number of wounds in the course of the
same attack, as there will then be one action only, viz. for killing.


PAULUS (on Plautius 2) If you kill my slave, I should say
that my personal feelings cannot be taken into account ; suppose,
for example, a man should kill a natural son of yours whom you
would be glad to buy at a high price [if he were another man’s
slave]; the question is what he would be worth to people in
general? Sextus Pedius agrees that the prices of things are not
determined by personal feelings or convenience, but by average
circumstances ; so that a man who has his own natural son in his
possession as a slave is none the richer for the fact that, if some-
one else had him, he would himself be ready to buy him for a very
large sum ; and a man who is in possession of someone else’s son
has not got an amount of wealth equivalent to what he could sell
such son for to his father. The fact is that under the lex Aquilia
people recover the amount to which they have suffered damage ;
and they will be held to have lost either gain that they were
prevented from making or expense that they were compelled to
incur. 1. In respect of damage which is not comprised in the lea
Aquilia the action allowed is an factum.


MARCELLUS (Digest 21) A testator bequeathed Stichus to
Titius and Seius ; while Seius was making up his mind, but after
Titius had brought a vindicatio for the legacy, Stichus was killed,
after which Seius declined the legacy. In this case Titius is in the
same position for suing the wrongdoer as if he had been sole
legatee,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) as he is held to have been full
owner by accrual by relation back ;


MARCELLUS (Digest 21) and just as, where a legatee declines
the legacy, the right of action is in the heir as if the slave had
never been bequeathed, so here the right of action is in Titius, as if
he had been sole legatee. 1. If the owner of the slave to whom
Titius gave a mortal wound orders in his will that he shall be free
and his heir, and, after that, Mzevius becomes heir to him (the
slave), Meevius will not have a right of action under the lew Aquilia


37


38


39


136 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


against Titius; not, that is, in the opinion of Sabinus; the point he
took being that no right of action would be transmitted to the heir
which could not have been possessed by the deceased ; and it
certainly would be an absurdity that an heir should get damages
representing the value of the person whose heir he was, on the
ground that that person was killed. If, however, the testator gave
the slave a share in the inheritance and gave him his liberty too,
then on the death of the manumitted man, his coheir can sue on
the lex Aquilia.


JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Cassius 14) If a free man has
committed wrong with his own hand by the order of another, an
action under the lex Aquilia can be brought against the person
who gave the order, provided he had had a lawful right of
command ; if he had not, the action must be brought against the
man who did the act. 1. Wherea right of action exists against a
man in respect of some fourfooted animal owned by him which has
done “pauperies” (damage), and the animal is killed by a third
person who is thereupon sued on the lex Aquilia, the damages
must be assessed, not by reference to the intrinsic value of the
animal, but to the legal implications which attach to it (causa jus),
which include the liability under an action for “pauperies” ; and
in the action on the lex Aquilia the person who killed will be
ordered to pay a sum representing the extent to which it would
have been in the interest of the plaintiff to dispose of the case
against him by surrendering the animal for “nova” rather than
paying the damages assessed.


THE SAME (Epistles 9) If, at a time when a slave belonging
to me of whom you are bond fide purchaser is acting in your
service, he is wounded by a slave of yours, it has been decided that
I have in any case a full right to proceed against you under the /ex
Aquilia.

POMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 17) Quintus Mucius has
the following. A mare was turned out to graze on land that did
not belong to her owner, and, as the landowner was driving her off,
she slipped her foal ; the question was asked whether the owner of
the mare could bring an action on the lew Aquilia against the man
who drove her off, for injuring her when he struck her?? It was held
that, if the party struck her or deliberately drove her too violently,
the owner could bring an action. 1. POMPONIUS. Even where
a man finds another's cattle on his own land, he is bound to drive


1 in iciendo : M suggests in ejiciendo, “through the above mishap.”


40


41


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 137


them away in the same way as he would if the cattle he found
were his own, because, if he has suffered any damage by their being
there, he has the appropriate right of action. Consequently, where
a man finds someone else’s cattle on his own land, he has no right
to impound them, and he is not allowed to drive them in any other
way than, as above mentioned, as if they were his own; he must
either drive them away without causing any loss to the owner or
call upon the owner to fetch his cattle off.


PAvuLus (on the Edict 3) Under the lex Aquilia, if I aver
that there has been an obliteration of a chirograph (note of hand)
of mine importing that a sum of money was owed me on a condition,
and I am able at the time to prove this by the testimony of
witnesses as well, who may, however, be unable to bear witness at
the time when the condition comes to pass, whereupon I make
a short statement of the facts to the judge, and convince him of
the truth of my story,—I ought to win my case; still the money
to be paid me by the terms of the order made in my favour can be
demanded only when the condition on which the original debt was
owing comes to pass ; and, if it fails altogether, the order will fall
to the ground.


Uupianus (on Sabinus 41) Where a man_ obliterates
a testament, let us consider whether there is not an action for
wrongful damage. As to this, Marcellus says (Dzg. 5), on con-
sideration, that there is no such right of action ; in fact, he says,
what can you go upon to assess the damages? I made a note
myself to Marcellus’s work to the effect that this is quite true as
far as the testator is concerned, as no vaiuation can be made of his
interest ; but with reference to an heir or to legatees the case is
different, as for them a testament is almost equivalent to a note
of hand ; [and] Marcellus himself tells us in the same passage that,
if a note of hand is obliterated, there is a good right of action under
the lex Aquilia. We may add that if a man should obliterate
a testament left in his charge, or should read it out before a number
of persons, the .best plan is for an action to be brought in factum
and also for injurie, assuming that the party published the secret
dispositions of a man’s will with intent to commit a legal wrong
(injuria). 1. Pomponius makes the discriminating remark that
it sometimes happens that a man who obliterates a written
document does not thereby become liable for theft, but only for
wrongful damage, for example, where he did not obliterate with
the intention of committing theft, but only of doing damage; in


138 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


such a case, he says, he will not be liable for theft, as theft requires
not only the act of thieving but the intention thereof.


42 JULIANUS (Digest 48) Where a man so obliterates a written ‘|
testament left in his charge or any written document of title that
it is impossible to read it, he is liable to an action on depositum
and also to one ad exhibendum (for production), on the ground that
he returned or produced the thing entrusted to him in a spoilt |
condition. There is also in the same case a good right of action |
on the lex Aquilia ; even where a man falsifies a document he is |
very properly said to have spoilt it. .

|
i
|


43 PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 19) Where damage was done to |
property left by a deceased person before you entered on the
inheritance as heir, you have a right of action on the lea Agquilia, |


although’ the mischief was done after the death of the person
whose heir you are; as the lew Aquilia by the term owner does
not mean simply the person who was owner when the damage was |
done ; indeed, if it did, it would follow that, even where a man if
succeeds someone as heir, the right of action in question could not
pass to him from the deceased ; and, similarly, that if you had been
in the hands of the enemy and came back by postliminium, you
would not be able to sue in respect of a wrong which was done i]
during your absence ; and no other rule than the above can be
laid down save at the cost of great injustice to posthumous children }
who eventually become heirs to their fathers. A similar observation ;
applies equally to the case of trees being cut by stealth during the |
same period ; and I should say that the rule will also apply to the I)


Interdict? quod vi aut clam, assuming that either the party
committed the trespass after being warned not to do so, or it is
shown that he was bound to know that he would have been
warned by the persons who had a right to the inheritance, if they
had been aware of his intention.


44 Ubpianus (on Sabinus 42) Under the lex Aquilia the ||
smallest negligence counts. 1. Whenever a slave wounds or kills |
with the knowledge of his owner, there is no doubt that the owner |
is liable under the statute. |


45 PAULUS (on Sabinus 10) Knowledge [on the part of the |
owner | is understood to mean sufferance, so that, where the owner |
1 For quod read guamvis. Cf. M. :


2 Hor hac actione read or understand Jnterdicto. Of. M. Ci


46


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 139


is able to prevent the offence, he is liable if he does not do so.
1. An action can be brought on the lex Aquilia even though the
slave wounded should be cured. 2. If you kill my slave believing
him to be a free man, you will be liable under the lex Aquilia.
3. Two slaves try to leap over a heap of burning straw, they come
into collision, both fall and one of the two is burnt to death ; here
no action can be brought for what happens as long as it is not
ascertained which of the two was upset by the other. 4. Where
persons cause a certain amount! of damage because they have no
other means of protecting themselves, they are free from guilt ; ail
statutes and all rules of law allow people to repel force by force.
But if, in throwing a stone at my adversary by way of defending
myself, I miss him, but hit a passer-by, I shall be liable under the
lex Aquilia, as you are only allowed to strike the party who commits
the assault, and even him only when you do it in self-defence, not
where your object is revenge. 5. A man who removes a service-
able wall is liable to the owner thereof for wrongful damage.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 50) If an action has been brought
under the lex Aquilia where a slave is wounded, and after that the
slave dies of the wound, there is nothing to prevent an action under
the statute [for the death].


JULIANUS (Digest 86) Still, if a valuation was made in the
first action, and subsequently to that, the slave being dead, the
owner takes proceedings for the killing, then, if the defendant raises
the exceptio of dolus malus, care will be taken that the plaintiff
shall not get more damages by the two actions than he would have
had a right to get if his action had been at the first for the slave
being killed.


PauULus (on the Edict 39) If, before entry made on some
inheritance, a slave does damage to property forming part of the
inheritance, and, having been set free, he does further damage to
the same property, he will be liable to both the consequent actions,
as the two matters depend on two distinct acts respectively.


UxPrianus (Disputations 9) Where a man by raising smoke
drives away or say even kills someone else’s bees, he must be held to
have not so much killed as furnished the cause of death; con-
sequently he will be liable to an action in factum. 1. With regard
to the saying, that the Aquilian action deals with damage wrongfully


1 For culpam read quiddam. Of. M.


50


51


140 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


done, we must hold in applying these words that damage is done
wrongfully when it inflicts wrong in addition to the damage ; [which
can hardly fail to be the case1,| unless the act was done under the
stress of urgent physical danger, as in the case we read in Celsus
of a man who broke to pieces an adjoining house in order to keep
off a fire ; there, Celsus says, there would be no action under the lex
Aquilia, because the party broke down the adjoining house under
the influence of reasonable alarm lest the fire should extend to
where he was himself ; and he holds that whether the fire reached
him or was extinguished before it got so far, the action on the lex
Aquilia will not lie.


ULPIANUS (Opinions 6) Where a man demolishes another
man’s house without the leave of the owner and erects baths on the
spot, then, to say nothing of the rule of natural law to the effect
that the surface belongs to the owner of the soil, the offender is
exposed to an action on the mere ground of damage done.


JULIANUS (Digest 86) A slave was so badly wounded that
he was sure to die of the injury inflicted ; but in the interval of
time before his death he was appointed heir, and afterwards died
of a wound inflicted by another assailant ; I wish to know whether
an action for slaying can be brought under the lex Aquilia against
both offenders? The answer was:—A man is commonly held to slay
where he furnishes the cause of death in any way whatever ; but,
under the lex Aquilia, the only person who is held to be liable is
the one who furnished the cause by direct violence, and, so to
speak, with his own hands, the interpretation of the word “occidere”’
(slay) being got at by taking the meaning of the words ceedere and
ceedes. On the other hand, the persons who are held to be liable
under the lex Aquilia are not only those who may have wounded
a slave so severely as at once to deprive him of life, but those are
included who inflict such a wound as to make it certain that the
man will die. Consequently where one man inflicts a mortal wound
on a slave, and then after a while another man gives the same slave
a stroke which puts an end to him sooner than he would have died
from the first wound, the rule to lay down is that both assailants
are liable under the lex Aquilia. 1. This is in keeping with the
view handed down from the old lawyers, who, where the same slave
was wounded by several persons under such circumstances that it
did not appear by whose hand it was that he died, came to the con-


Cf M. ®


52


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquilia 141


clusion that they were all liable under the lex Aquilia. 2. The
damages assessed for killing the man will not be the same for both
assailants in the above case; as the one who first wounded him will
have to pay a sum representing the best value the man bore in the
year then last past, and this is found by counting back three
hundred and sixty-five days from the day of the wound; the later
assailant will be liable for a sum amounting to the utmost that the
man would have fetched in the year immediately preceding the day
when his life ended, and this will take in the value of the in-
heritance. Accordingly one man will pay a larger sum and another
a smaller by way of damages for killing the same slave ; but there
is nothing strange in this, seeing that the two offenders are
understood to have killed the man in different ways and at different
times. If anyone should think this an absurd decision for us to
come to, let him reflect that it would be a much more absurd
decision still if we held that neither of them was liable under the
lex Aquilia or that one was more liable than the other, seeing that,
on the one hand, misdeeds ought not to go unpunished, and, on the
other hand, it is not at all easy to decide which of the two is more
plainly hit by the statute. The fact is that it can be shown by
innumerable instances that a great many rules have been adopted
in the civil law in the general interest which are contrary to strict
logic ; I shall content myself at present with mentioning one of
them. Where several persons carry off a piece of timber belonging
to someone else with intent to steal it, but no individual of them
all could have carried it by himself, every one is held to be liable
to an action for theft, although it may be said, upon a nice view of
the matter, that not one of them is liable, as it certainly is the fact
that not one carried the timber off.


ALFENUS (Digest 2) Where a slave dies from blows inflicted
on him [by a stranger], and this result is not attributable to the
medical attendant’s want of skill or to neglect on the part of the
owner, an action may properly be brought for his death as fora
case of unlawful killing. 1. A shopman had set down his lantern
at night on a stone by the wayside, some one who was passing by
took it away, the shopman went after him and asked him to give
the lantern up, and, as the man tried to run off, held him back.
Thereupon the man took a whip which he had in his hand, a lash
with which would inflict severe pain, and began belabouring the
shopman to make him let go. This gave rise to a serious scuffle,
in the course of which the shopman knocked out the eye of the


142 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


man who had taken his lantern ; and upon these facts he asked
for an opinion as to whether he could not be held to have done no
unlawful damage, seeing that he had been first struck with the
whip. My answer was that, unless he knocked the man’s eye out of
set purpose, he could not be held to have done unlawful damage,
because the fault remained with the party who first struck him with
the whip ; but that if he, the shopman, had not been first beaten,
but had fought with the other in trying to get the lantern out of
his hands, the act in question must be held to be his own fault.
2. Two loaded waggons were being dragged by mules up the
Capitoline steep, and, the foremost being tilted over, the drivers
were pushing it behind so as to make it easier for the mules to
drag it; at the same time! the upper waggon began to go back, and
the drivers, who were between the two waggons, having thereupon
come out from that position, the hindmost waggon was struck by
the one in front, and so was driven back, thereby crushing a slave-
~ boy, the property of someone or other. The owner of the boy
consulted me on the question whom he should bring an action
against. My answer was that the law depended on the circum-
stances of the case: if, I said, the drivers who were supporting the
front waggon got out of the way without necessity, and it was in
consequence of this that the mules could not hold up the waggon
and so were dragged back by the mere weight of the load, then no
action could be brought against the owner of the mules, but there
was a good right of action under the lex Aqwilia against the men
who had been supporting the waggon when it came to be tilted
over ; because, I said, if a man deliberately let go something which
he was supporting and thereupon it struck someone, in that case
the damage done was none the less his own act; in the same way
as if anyone were to be driving an ass and did not hold it in, he
would be just as much doing unlawful damage as if he were to
discharge a weapon or anything else out of his hand. But if, I said,
the mules [backed?] because they were frightened at something,
and thereupon the drivers left the waggon in desperate fear lest
they should be crushed, then there could be no action brought
against the men, but there could be one against the owner of the
mules. If, lastly, neither the mules nor the men were the cause of
the mishap, but the mules could not sustain the weight, or, in the
course of struggling to do so they slipped and fell, and so the


' M. would omit inter : we may perhaps read interea.
2 Cf. M.


53


54


55


TIT. 11] On the lex Aquila 143


waggon had gone back, and the men had been unable to support
the weight as the waggon was tilted over, then no action could be
brought against either the owner of the mules or the men. One
thing, I said, I could affirm, viz. that however the matter were,
there could be no action against the owner of the mules that drew
the hindmost waggon, since they did not go back of their own
motion, but because they were struck. 3. A man sold some oxen,
it being a term in the agreement that he should let the purchaser
have them on trial ; accordingly he handed them over to be tried ;
and a slave of the purchaser in the course of the trial was gored
by one of the oxen: the question was asked whether the vendor
was bound to make good the damage to the purchaser. My answer
was, that if the purchaser had got the oxen in pursuance of the
terms of the purchase, the vendor was not bound to make good the
damage ; but, if he had not got them on that footing, then, if it was
through the man’s own negligence that he was gored by the ox, the
damage would not have to be made good, but if it was through the
vice of the ox, it must. 4. A number of persons were playing at
ball, and as a small boy, a slave, was attempting to pick up the ball,
one of the players pushed him, whereupon the slave fell and broke
his leg. ‘The question was asked whether the owner of the boy
could bring an action under the lex Aquilia against the man who
pushed him and so made him fall? My answer was No, as the
thing appeared to have happened by accident rather than
negligence.


NERAtTIuS (Membranes 1) You drove another man’s oxen
into a confined spot, and the result was that they fell over a
precipice: an action im /actum will be allowed against you
modelled on that under the lex Aquilia.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 37) A debtor [who is bound as such
to deliver an animal] has a good right of action under the lex
Aquilia where the party who has stipulated for the delivery wounds
the animal promised before the debtor is in fault ; and the case is
the same if he kills it. But if the party who stipulated kills the
animal after the promisor’s default, the debtor, no doubt, is
discharged ; but in this case he will not have a right to take
proceedings under the lex A quilia, as the creditor must be held to
have done the wrong to himself rather than to anyone else.


PAULUS (Questions 22) I promised Titius to give him
either Stichus or Pamphilus, Stichus being worth ten thousand and


56


57


144 On the lex Aquilia [BOOK IX


Pamphilus twenty [thousand]; the promisee killed Stichus before
there was any default on my part: an opinion was asked as to the
action on the lex Aquilia. I answered :—“It being a fact in the
case that Titius killed the less valuable slave of the two, the
creditor [ae. Titius] for the purpose of this inquiry is in exactly
the same position as any third person.” Then what is to be the
measure of damages? is it ten thousand, the value of the slave
killed, or is it the amount which the slave is worth whom I must
needs hand over, in other words, the amount representing the
difference which the act makes to me? Again, what are we to say
if Pamphilus himself should die without there being any default
on my part? will the sum to be paid for Stichus be thereupon the
less on the ground that the promisor is discharged? As to this, it
will be enough to say that Stichus was worth the higher value when
he was killed, or had been worth it within the year ; and, on this
principle, Stichus must be held to have been of the higher value
even if he was killed after the death of Pamphilus, but within the
year.


THE SAME (Sentences 2) If a wife does damage to her
husband’s property, she can be sued in accordance with the terms
of the lex Aqulia.


JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Labeo’s Posteriores 6) I lent
you a horse; as you were riding it, and several other persons were
riding in your company, one of these rode against the horse you
were on and threw you off, the result of the incident being that
the horse’s legs were broken. Labeo says that there is no right of
action against you; but if the thing happened through the negligence
of the horseman, there is one against him; it is certain, he adds,
that there can be none against the owner [as such] of the horse
which he rode. With this I agree.


Il.
ON THE CASE OF PERSONS POURING OUT OR THROWING OUT.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) The Praetor Jays down the
following as to persons who throw out or pour out anything :—“ If
anything should be thrown out or poured out from any place on a
spot where people commonly pass or where they stand, I will allow
an action for twofold the damage caused or done thereby to be


TIT. IIT | On pouring out or throwing down 145


brought against the person who lives in that place. If it is averred
that a free man was killed when struck by anything so falling, I
will allow an action for fifty awret. If he [the person struck] is
living, and it is averred that he is injured, I will allow an action
for whatever sum it shall seem fair to the judge that the party
against whom proceedings are taken should be ordered to pay. If
it is averred that a slave did the act in question without his
owner’s knowledge, I will add to the terms of the prayer the words
‘or surrender the slave for noxa'.” 1. No one will deny that the
‘above Edict of the Preetor is highly beneficial, as it is in the public
interest that people should move about where they lawfully may
without fear or danger. 2. It must be treated as a matter of
small account whether the spot [where mischief is done] is public
ground or private, so long as people commonly pass there, as the
object of the Edict is to protect persons who are pursuing their
way, and there was no thought of maintaining public roads; and
any places over which people commonly pass ought to be at all
times equally safe. If, however, in the case of such a road, there
was once a time during which people in general did not pass that
way, and then something was thrown down or poured out, while the
spot was still closed, but, after that, it began to be used as a place
of passage, there will be no liability incurred under this Edict.
3. Where a thing falls down while it is being hung up, it is on the
whole regarded as thrown down, but, even where a thing falls
down after it has been hung up, the better opinion is that it is to
be regarded as thrown down. Similarly, if something is poured
out of a suspended vessel, though the pouring of it out is not the
act of anyone, we must still hold that the Edict applies. 4. The
above action in factum is allowed to be brought against whoever
occupies the house when the matter is thrown down or poured out,
and not against the owner of the house ; because the negligence is
on the part of the former. The Edict does not go on to mention
negligence or the case of the defendant denying the fact, so as to
give a right of action for double damages, though, in the action for
damnum injuria (unlawful damage), both these things are declared
to be grounds of charge. 5. Where a free man is killed, there
is no assessment of damages for the mischief at double the amount,
because, in the case of a free man, no valuation of his person can
be made at all; but the order will be for payment of fifty awrez.
6. The words “if he is living and it is averred that he is injured”


1 For noxam read noxe. Cf. M.


Mens. TT: 10


146 On the case of persons [ BOOK IX


do not refer to any damage done in respect of the property of a
free man, for example, where his clothes or anything else belonging
to him should be torn or spoilt, but only to the infliction of bodily
hurt. 7. If a filius familias has a hired upper room and some-
thing is thrown down or poured out therefrom, there is no action
de peculio allowed against his father, because there is no claim
made on the ground of contract, accordingly the right of action is
against the son himself. 8. If the person who occupies the house
is a slave, will a noxal action be the one to be allowed, seeing
that there is none on negotia gesta? Or will there be an action de
peculio, as no claim is made on the ground of the slave’s delict ?
Of course we cannot properly speak of noxa (damage) on the part
of the slave, where the slave himself did no harm. However, for
my own part, I think that the slave ought not to be unpunished,
but he should be corrected on motion (officio judicis) under the
extraordinary power of the Court. 9. A man may be said to
occupy a house whether it is his own or is let to him or he is there
by favour. A guest will certainly not be liable, because he does
not occupy, but is only entertained; the party liable is the one who
gives the entertainment; there is as much difference between an
occupier and a guest as between a person who is at home on the
spot and one who comes from a distance. 10. If a number of
persons occupy the same lodging (cenaculwm), and something is
thrown down from it, the action is admissible against any one of
them,


Galus (on the provincial Edict 6) as it is quite impossible
to know which person threw out or poured out anything ;


ULPIANUS (0n the Edict 23) and the action will be for the
whole penal sum, but, where it has been brought against one
person, the rest will be discharged ;


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) that is, when the money is received
[by the plaintiff], not merely on joinder of issue; the others being
compellable by an actio socvetatis to contribute their share in
[what is due for] the damage to the one who paid.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) But if a number of persons
occupy separate divisions of a lodging, the action is allowed only
against the person who occupied the particular part from which
the pouring out took place. 1. If a person gives free occupation
to his own or his wife’s freedmen and clients, then, according to
Trebatius, he is liable on their account, and this is true. The law


TIT, 11] pouring out or throwing down 147


is the same where a man accommodates a number of friends with
quarters to lodge in on a small scale, as where one who carries on
the business of letting out lodgings occupies the greater part of
the lodging himself, he will be the only person liable, but if! he
reserves only very limited quarters for his own use and lets out
the rest to a number of different persons, they will all be liable, on
the ground that they occupy the lodging from which the matter
was thrown down or poured out. 2. In some cases, however, so
long as it involves no injustice to the plaintiff, the Preetor ought,
on principles of fair dealing, rather to allow the action against the
person from whose sleeping-place or recess the matter was thrown
down, even though there should be a number of persons living in
the same lodging, but if something should be thrown from the
middle of the apartment, the sounder view is that all are bound.
3. If the person by whom something is thrown is a warehouseman
or a man who has hired a store-room or has hired a place for
the sole purpose of carrying on some work or for seeing pupils,
there will be ground for an action in factum, [and the rule is the
same] even though it should be one of the workmen or one of the
pupils who threw down or poured out. 4. When, however, a man
has suffered adverse judgment in an action under the lex Aquilia
(sic) on the ground that his guest or anyone else threw some-
thing from his lodging, it is a reasonable thing, in the opinion
of Labeo, that? he should have an [action] tm factum allowed
him against the party who threw it, and this is perfectly
true. No doubt, if he had let the room to the person who threw
the matter down, he has a right of action on his contract too.
5. The action which the law allows for things poured out and
thrown down cannot be barred by lapse of time, and it is open to the
heir [of the party injured], but it is not allowed against the heir
[of the wrongdoer]; but the one which can be brought on the
ground that a free man, as it is alleged, has been killed is available
for a year only, and it is not allowed against the heir nor on the
part of heirs and successors generally, as it is a penal action and
one which anyone may bring (popularis) ; it being always borne
in mind that where a number of persons all wish to bring the
action, it ought to be allowed by preference to one who has an
interest in the matter, or who was connected with the deceased by
marriage or blood. If, lastly, [the action is founded on the fact


1 Omit guis cenaculariam exercens where it occurs the second time. M.
2 Omit gui ob hoc and transpose merito et and quod hospes...dejecit.


10—2


148 On the case of persons [BOOK Ix


that] a free man was injured, he has a right of action himself which
is not liable to be barred, but if any other person chooses to bring
the action, the right to bring it will expire in a year; it is not
open to the heirs of the party wronged as a matter of hereditary
right, the rule being that where any injury is done to the body of
a free person, no claim passes by hereditary right to his successors,
as it is not a case of pecuniary loss, but the action is founded on
principles of justice and fairness. 6. The Preetor says, “No one is
to keep anything placed on an eave or a projecting roof over a
spot where people commonly pass or collect which would injure
anyone if it fell. Whoever transgresses this regulation, I shall
allow an action in factum against him for ten solida. If it is
alleged that a slave did it without the knowledge of his owner, I
will order that [either the above sum be paid’] or else the slave be
surrendered for noxa.’ 7. This pronouncement is a portion of
the Edict already mentioned; it was in keeping with what preceded
that the Preetor should provide for this case too, so that, if anything
should be in a dangerous position in any part of the house named,
it might do no harm. 8. The Preetor’s words are :—“ No one ete.
on an eave or a projecting roof.” The words “no one” apply to
persons of every kind, whether they live in the house or not, so
long as they have something placed in the position described.
9. “Anything placed over a spot where people commonly pass or
collect.” We must take the word “placed” to apply whether [the
roof is?] of a private room or lodging or, say, a warehouse or any
other building. 10. A man may be said to keep a thing placed
even if he did not place it himself, but suffers it to remain where —
somebody else placed it; accordingly, if a slave places it, and the
owner allows it to remain as placed, he, the owner, will be held
responsible, not by liability to a noxal action, but directly.
11. The words are further “which might injure anybody if it fell.”
It is clear from these words that the Preetor takes measures to
prevent harm being done, not by everything which is placed [in
the position described], but everything which is so placed [there]
that there is a possibility of its doing harm; moreover the law does
not wait till the harm is done, the Edict applies at once if the harm
is possible; and the party who kept the thing placed is punished,
whether the thing so placed has actually done harm or not.
12. If the thing that was placed falls down and does harm, the
action is admissible against the person who placed and not against


1 Ins. after fecisse dicetur the words aut idem dari. M.
2 Ins. after edificti the word protecto. M.


TIT. 111] pouring out or throwing down 149


the one who occupies the house, on the ground that this action is
not enough, as the person who placed the object cannot as a
matter of course be said to have kept it placed, unless he was
either owner or occupier of the house’. Thus, where a painter had
a shield or a picture exhibited in a booth, which fell and did some?
hurt to a passer-by, Servius laid down that an action ought to be
allowed framed on the analogy of the present one; the present one
itself, he said, clearly was not available, as the picture had not
been placed on an eave or a projecting roof. The same rule he
declared should be observed where a jar which was suspended in
a net had fallen and done harm; as there was no statutable or
preetorian action. 13. The action under discussion can be brought
by anyone and is open to the heir of the party and successors
generally, but it is not open against the heir of the party liable,
because it is penal.


PauLus (on the Edict 19) This Edict does not refer only to
cities and villages, but applies equally to any roads where people
commonly pass. 1. Labeo says that it applies only where some-
thing is thrown down in the daytime, not by night ; however there
are places where people pass even by night. 2. The occupier is
bound to make good his own negligence and that of his family. If
the matter is thrown out of a ship, there will be an wtzlis actio
allowed against the person in charge of the ship.


GaIus (on the provincial Edict 6) Where bodily hurt is
inflicted on a free man by something which is thrown down or
poured out, the judge takes into account the cost of medical
attendance as well as any other expense incurred for his cure, and
he reckons in besides these the value of any employment which he


‘has lost or will have to lose in consequence of being disabied ; but


no estimate is made of scars or disfigurement, as the body of a free
man cannot be made the subject of any valuation.


1 The above follows the text. Cujas would transpose poswerit and habitaverit,
—that is “placed” and “occupies the house.” M. is inclined to follow him, and also
to add some such words as “accordingly an utilis actio must be allowed against
the one who placed”; inferring this, no doubt, from what follows.

2 Ins. guid after damni. M.


150 On Noxal Actions [ BOOK IX


IV.
On Noxat ACTIONS.


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 2) Actions are called noxal
which are put in force against people not in connexion with any
contract, but in consequence of some “noxa” (damage) or
misfeasance committed by a slave ; and the force and effect of such
actions is that, if judgment is given against the defendant, it is
open to him to avoid having to pay the damages assessed by
surrender of the individual who committed the wrong.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 18) If a slave has killed with the
knowledge of his owner, this makes the owner liable for full
damages, as the owner himself must be held to have killed ; but if
it was done without the owner’s knowledge, the action is noxal, as
it was not right that the owner should incur liability from the
misfeasance of his slave, except so far as this, that he should have
to surrender him for nova. 1. If an owner did nothing to prevent
the act, then, whether he remains owner or ceases to be owner, he
is liable to this action ; it is enough that he was owner at the time
when he declined preventing the act, so much so that Celsus holds
that, if the slave should come to be disposed of, in whole or in part,
or should be manumitted, the nowa does not follow the individual,
as in fact the slave committed no wrong, having obeyed his owner’s
order. This may, no doubt, be said, if the owner did so order ; but
if he simply failed to prevent, how can we say that there is no
guilt in the slave? Celsus, however, makes a distinction between
the lex Aquilia and the statute of the Twelve Tables ; under the
old statute, he says, where a slave has committed a theft or
been guilty of any other noxa with the knowledge of his owner,
there is a noxal action on the slave’s account, and the owner is not
liable on his own account ; but under the lew Aquilia the owner
is liable on his own account, and not on account of the slave. He
proceeds to give the principle of each of the two statutes ; that of
the Twelve Tables being, he says, that the law desired that, where
such a case arose, slaves should refuse to obey their owners,
whereas that of the lex Aquilia was that the statute excused
a slave who obeyed his owner, as he would have lost his life if he
did not do as he was ordered. But if we must take for law what
Julianus says (b. 86), that the words “if a slave commits theft or


TIT. Iv | On Noxai Actions 151


is guilty of mischief” etc. are to be applied in connexion with
subsequent statutes too, the inference will be that [besides the
direct action] there can be noxal proceedings taken against an
owner on his slave’s account; so that the fact that an Aquilian
action is allowed against the owner does not exonerate the slave, it
simply is a burden on the owner. For my own part I have come to
a conclusion agreeing with that of Julianus; his view is in
accordance with principle, and is upheld by Marcellus, as Julianus
himself informs us.


THE SAME (on the Edict 3) In all noxal actions, where
knowledge on the part of the owner is required, the word
“knowledge” must be taken to imply that the owner was able
to prevent [the wrong being done] and failed to do so ; there is, of
course, a difference between instigating a slave to the commission of
a delict and simply suffering him to commit one.


PAULUS (on the Edict 3) In the case of the delicts of slaves,
what are we to understand by the expression “the owner's
knowledge”? does it imply guilty intention? does it apply if the
owner simply sees the deed done, although he is unable to prevent
it? Suppose, for example, a slave who is taking proceedings
to assert his freedom at law commits an offence with his owner’s
knowledge, or take the case of his disregarding his owner ; again,
suppose the slave is at the further side of a river, and commits
some injurious act under his owner’s eyes, but against his will. On
the whole it is better to say that we must take knowledge to mean
that of a person who is able to prevent the act ; and this must be
understood throughout the whole Edict, wherever the word
“knowledge” occurs. 1. Where the slave of a stranger commits an
offence with my knowledge, and I purchase him, a noxal action will
be allowed against me ; the man cannot be held [as against me] to
have acted with the knowledge of his owner, since at the time
of the offence I was not his owner. 2. Where the owner is held
liable in virtue of his knowledge, it may be fairly asked whether an
action will not be allowed in respect of the slave himself as well ;
unless indeed the Preetor intended that the owner should be called
upon to pay one penalty only. Then is the slave’s malicious
behaviour to go altogether unpunished? That would be unjust :
the rule rather is that the owner is to be held liable in both ways,
but still, when one penalty is paid, namely, whichever the plaintiff
chooses, the other is not demandable. 3. If nothing is said as to
surrender for nowa, and the action is brought against the owner as


152 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


being privy to the offence, but in fact the owner was not really
privy to it, then, if the case is dismissed and the trial ended,
the plaintiff will be barred by an exceptio of res judicata (plea of
“judgment given’), if, after that, he attempts further proceedings in
which he gives the defendant the option of surrender for nowxa ;
because the matter was brought to an issue in the previous trial
and has been disposed of. But so long as the first trial is going on,
it is open to the plaintiff, if he would rather give up the attempt to
prove knowledge on the part of the owner, to alter his procedure
and make it a noxal action. Conversely too, if he has carried
through an action against an owner who really had knowledge and
given him therein the option of surrender, he will not then
be allowed to take further proceedings against such owner in which
he omits the alternative of surrender for nova; but if, in the
course of the trial, he chooses to go on to establish the owner’s
knowledge, he must be allowed to do so.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 3) If a slave belonging to several
persons in common commits a delict of which all the co-owners are
ignorant, a noxal action will be allowed against any one of them ;
but, if they all knew, then any one of them may be held liable
without the alternative being given of surrender for noxa, just as
if they had all committed the offence ; and proceedings against one
[of two such co-owners | will not release the other. If however one
knew and the other did not know, the one who knew will be sued
without the alternative of surrender, and the one who did not know
with that alternative. 1. What distinguishes these two cases from
one another is not merely the fact that the owner who knows
is liable for the absolute amount, it has to be added that, in the
case of the one who knows, if he should dispose of the slave, or
should manumit him or the slave should die, the owner in question


remains liable ; though, if such owner himself dies, his heir is not
liable.


THE SAME (on the Edict 18) However, the slave himself, if
manumitted, will be liable too ;


THE SAME (on the Edict 3) but a noxal action is not allowed
[as against me], unless the slave is in my hands, and, if he is in
my hands, though he was not so at the time when he committed
the delict, I am liable, and my heir will be liable [after my death],
if the guilty slave is living. 1. Pomponius says that, if a purchaser
of the slave is sued in a noxal action, the vendor who had


TIT. IV | On Noxal Actions 153


knowledge of the act when it was done is no longer liable to
be sued.


THE SAME (on the Edict 37) If a slave who belongs to
several co-owners commits a theft, any one of the co-owners is
liable to a noxal action for the whole amount, and this is the
present practice. But the one who is sued cannot avoid paying the
damages assessed except by surrendering for noxa the whole
undivided property in the slave, and, if he is ready to surrender a
share only, he is not to be indulged. It is true that, if, in
consequence of the fact that the other co-owners are not prepared
to surrender the slave, he should be ordered to pay the whole
damages, he can proceed against them by an action commune
dividundo or familie erciscunde. No doubt, before issue is
joined in the noxal action, he can procure immunity by assigning
[to the injured person] his share in the slave, so as not to be under
the necessity of sustaining the action; although it might be
maintained that, when a share is once assigned! to the person in
question, he loses his right of action, as when he has become owner
of a share he cannot proceed by way of noxal action against
a fellow-owner. Perhaps indeed he could not even bring an action
communi dividundo against a fellow-owner on the ground of an
offence which was committed before the co-ownership began. If he
really cannot, he will suffer a plain legal wrong ; but the better
rule is that he has a right to an action communi dividundo.


Pauwus (on the Edict 39) Where a gang of slaves or
a single slave, belonging in either case to co-owners, commits a theft
with the knowledge of one of them, the party who knows will
be liable in the name of both?, and, if he is sued, it is a discharge to
the other, and he will have no right to any contribution from
his fellow-owner, as he incurred the penalty on account of his own
act. But if the one who had no knowledge pays double damages,
he will get simple damages from his fellow-owner.


THE SAME (on the Edict 22) We may add that a man can
bring an action against his fellow-owner on the ground that he
brought down the value of a slave owned in common, just as
he might against anyone else who brought down the value of
a piece of common property. However, if, after the slave has been


1 For eive data read ei cedatur. Cf. M.
2 omnium: but the text, by an apparent slip, confuses the cases of two and
several.


11


12


13


14


154 On Noxal Actions [BOOK Ix


surrendered for noxa, there is nothing else remaining which he
owns in common, there can be an action pro socio (partnership
action), or, if the parties were not partners, an action im factum.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 7) The bona fide possessor of a
slave will be liable for theft on the slave’s account, and the owner
is not liable. It is, of course, true that he cannot, by surrender for
noxa, pass the property in the slave to the plaintiff; still, if
the owner brings a vindicatio to recover the slave, he will be barred
by an exceptio of dolus, or [the defendant] can procure that he
shall be saved harmless by motion to the judge.


PAULUS (on the Edict 6) If a bona fide possessor gets rid of
the slave so possessed, in order to avoid the possibility of an action
against him on noxal grounds, he is liable to the action which
is allowed against all such as have a slave in their power or have
taken fraudulent means to avoid having him, the rule being that, in
this last case, they are deemed to be still in possession.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 13) Noxal actions are
allowed, not only against bona jide possessors, but also against
those who possess mala fide; in fact it is deemed an absurdity
that persons who are in possession in good faith should have to
stand an action and mere plunderers be safe.


ULPIANUS (0n the Edict 18) If a man should be sued by a
number of persons owing to the offence of one slave, or by one
person only on the ground of several distinct offences, then the fact
that he cannot surrender the slave to all the plaintiffs does not put
him under the necessity of offering the amount of damages assessed
to those to whom he cannot make surrender. Then how does the
matter stand, where he is sued by several persons? If one of them
has got before the others, will that one be in a better position, and
the surrender thereupon be made to him alone, or is the answer
this, that either the slave must be surrendered to them ali or else
the defendant must give an undertaking that the one to whom he
is surrendered shall be defended against the other plaintiffs? To
this the truer answer is that the one who comes first is in the better
position. The slave will therefore be surrendered, not to the
plaintiff who first sued, but to the one who first got judgment in
his favour; and accordingly the rule is that action on the judgment
is refused to anyone who wins his suit later on. 1. We may add
that if the slave is a statuliber, and, before the surrender, the
condition is fulfilled [on which he is to become free], or, again,


15


17


TIT. Iv | On Noxal Actions 155


before surrender, liberty is given in pursuance of a trust, or a
condition is fulfilled subject to which the man was left as a legacy,
and thereupon the property in him is transferred to the legatee,
the defendant must by the judges order be dismissed from the
action ; besides which it will be a thing for the judge to order on
motion that he should guarantee the surrenderee against the man
being recovered by superior title owing to any act of the defendant’.


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 6) The Preetor ought to
order that the proceedings against the [late] owner should be
transferred so as to be carried on against the [late] statuliber; but
if, at the time when the case comes on, the siave’s liberation is still
in expectancy, then, in the opinion of Sabinus and Cassius, the heir
is discharged from liability by delivering the slave, as, by so doing,
he would assign all his own rights; and this is a sound view.


JULIANUS (Dig. 22) Should the heir contrive maliciously to
avoid having the statwliber in his power, and the result be that he
joins issue in an action which does not give the option of surrender
for noxa, judgment ought to be given against him, even if the con-
dition on which the man was to become free should have come to
pass, just as it would be if the slave were to die.


PAULUS (on the Edict 22) Where a slave who belongs to
two persons commits an offence with the knowledge of one of his
owners, but without the knowledge of the other, whereupon an
action is brought against the one who was ignorant and he sur-
renders the slave for noxa, it is not right that the other co-owner
should be discharged by the surrender of some utterly worthless
slave ; accordingly proceedings will be taken against such other as
well; and, if the action to make good the damage brings in
anything over and above, the plaintiff will get the balance after
giving credit for the value of the slave surrendered for noxa. But
the co-owners themselves should compound their mutual claims on
an action communi dividundo as follows :—If the one who was
privy to the act of the slave pays the damages, he will not be
credited with a proportion of the whole payment so made,
but with his proportion of the amount which the slave is
worth; and, if the other [who was ignorant] pays anything,
he will be credited with a share on the same principle [viz.
everything except his own proportion of the value of the


1 Section 15, in the opinion of M., was meant to carry on the sense from the
point where the above words in italics begin.


18


19


156 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


slave]. What would be quite unjust is that the one who ordered
the slave to commit the offence should get anything from his
fellow-owner, seeing that the loss which he suffers is owing to his
own misfeasance. 1. If a number of different persons wish to
bring a noxal action against me in respect of the same slave, or
one person sues in a number of different actions in respect of the
same slave, the slave being one in whom you have the usufruct and
I have the bare property, it will fall within the duty of the judge,
when I surrender the slave for noxa, to see that I give the plaintiff
the usufruct as well; at the same time, I, the bare proprietor, can,
by application to the Preetor, procure that the Praetor himself shall
compel you either to contribute towards the whole assessed value
an amount proportional to the value set on the usufruct, or else to
assign the usufruct, if this is more convenient. On the other hand,
if I, the bare proprietor, do not choose to defend the action brought
in respect of the slave, you must yourself be allowed to defend it,
and if you should hand over the slave in pursuance of the order of
the Court, you will have nothing to fear from me.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 18) A person who has the usufruct
in a slave has a right of action for theft against the bare proprietor,
just as much as if he were any third person ;—though there can be
no action against him [for a theft committed by the slave], al-
though the man is in his service ;—accordingly, if judgment is given
against the bare proprietor, he can get off by surrender for noxa
to the usufructuary.


Pauuus (on the Edict 22) If a slave belonging to Titius
does damage to property which you and I have in common, then,
if we both wish to sue Titius, there is ground for a noxal action on
the lea Aquilia, but not with the result that, if we get judgment
against him, he can be compelled to surrender the slave in undivided
ownership to each of us separately. It may however be said, on
the analogy of the case in which the damage is suffered by one
only and one claim for redress is acquired, that either the money
should be offered to both jointly, or else, on motion made to that
effect (ex officio judicis), the slave should be surrendered to both
of us at once; still, even if the slave is surrendered for noxa to
either of us in undivided ownership, and thereby the owner is quit
as regards both of us, it is maintained quite correctly that the one
to whom the surrender was made can be sued by the other in an
action communt dividundo, to compel him to give up a share in
the slave surrendered, as this is a case in which something has


20


21


TIT. IV | On Noxal Actions 157


come to the hands of a co-owner through the property owned in
common. 1. Where the bare proprietor of a slave in whom some-
one else has a usufruct hires the services of the slave, the very
terms [of the Edict ?] import that judgment given against him will
be with the option of surrender for nowa. 2. If your slave is
exercitor of a ship, and his underslave, being a sailor belonging to
the ship, does damage on board, an action must be allowed against
you, just as if the exercitor were free and the underslave were his
slave, so that you will be ordered to surrender the underslave for
noxa out of the peculiwm of your slave; though, at the same time,
if the underslave did the damage by the order of your slave or
with his knowledge and sufferance, there ought to be a noxal action
against you in respect of your slave. The same will also be the
case if your slave orders any sailor to do the damage.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 7) If a man brings actions
at different times on the ground of several distinct offences
[committed by the same slave], then, if he acquires ownership in
the slave in consequence of some one offence, he will have no
further right of action against the previous owner, because a noxal
action follows the delinquent subject; still, if the owner at the
time of the offence preferred paying the damages assessed when
sued in the first action, there is nothing to prevent him from being
liable at the suit of the same plaintiff or of anyone else, if he brings
an action on some other offence.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) Whenever an owner is sued on
noxal grounds, if he does not choose to defend the action, the
position is such that he is bound to surrender for noxa the slave
in respect of whom he declines to defend the action; and, if he
will not surrender him, he is absolutely bound to defend the
action; at the same time, judgment will be given against him only
in case he has the slave in his power, or has contrived fraudulently
not to have him. 1. When proceedings are taken by way of noxal
action in respect of any slaves, it is received law that their case can
be defended even without their being present; but this is only
where they are the defendant’s own property; should they belong
to anyone else, they must be present, and the same is the case if
there is any doubt whether they belong to the defendant or to
another. We must, I think, take this rule subject to the proviso
that even if it is ascertained that they are serving the defendant
only as bona fide slaves, their case can still be defended without
their presence. 2. The Preetor’s words are :—“If the party in


22


158 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


whose power the slave is said to be denies that he has him in his
power, I shall either order him to swear that the man is not in his
power and that he did not contrive fraudulently that he should not
be, or else I will grant an action without the alternative of
surrender for noxa: whichever of these two things the plaintiff
prefers.” 3. By the words “in his power” we must understand
to be meant the case of the defendant having the means and power
of producing the slave ; of course, if the slave should be on his
flight or abroad, he cannot be held to be in the defendant's power.
4. If the defendant refuses to swear, he is in the same position as
one who will neither defend the case of an absent slave nor yet
produce him ; and such persons suffer adverse Judgment as con-
tumacious. 5. If there is a guardian or cwrator, he is bound to
swear that the slave is not in the power of his owner; in the case
of [the defendant being] a procurator, the owner himself must
swear. 6. If the plaintiff has required the defendant to swear
and the latter has sworn, and after that the plaintiff chooses to
proceed by a noxal action, we may consider whether there ought
not to be an exceptio of “oath sworn” allowed in bar of the action.
Sabinus holds that no such excepéio will be allowed, on the ground
that the oath was on a different question, in other words, the
defendant swore that the slave was not in his power at that time;
now however, the slave being discovered to be in his power, an
action can be brought for what he did. Neratius himself laid down
that, after the oath has been required, the plaintiff can sue without
giving the option of surrender for noxa, provided, that is, his -
contention is that it was only after taking the oath that the
defendant came to have the slave in his power.


PAvLuSs (on the Edict 18) If the slave is in someone’s hands
on the footing of deposit or loan, a noxal action can be brought
against the owner, as the slave is regarded as being in his service,
and, as far as this Edict is concerned, he is in his power, especially
if the owner can easily get him back. 1. A person who has taken
a slave in pledge or who has leave to hold him at the will of the
owner (precario) is not liable on a noxal action ; persons in either
situation, however true it may be that they are in lawful possession,
still are not in possession in the belief that they are owners ; accord-
ingly, even then the slaves are regarded as in the power of their
owners, if the owners have the means of recovering them. 2. What
is meant by having the means of recovering them? It means that
they have the amount of ready money required to enable them


23


24


TIT. Iv | On Noxal Actions 159


to extricate themselves from their position ; of course the owner
cannot be compelled to sell his effects so as to pay the money and
ask for the return of the slave. 3. An owner who confesses that
he has a slave in his power is bound either to produce him or to
defend the case in respect of him, though the slave is absent ; and,
if he will not do either, he is punished in the same way as if the
slave were present, but he declined to surrender him. 4. If the
owner declares that the slave is not in his power, the Preetor allows
the plaintiff to choose whether he would prefer to settle the matter
by tendering an oath or to proceed by action without offering the
alternative of surrender for nowa, and, if he does the latter, he will
win his case, if he proves that the slave is in the defendant’s power,
or that the defendant has fraudulently contrived that he should not
be; but a plaintiff who cannot prove that the slave is in his
opponent's power loses his case ;


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 6) at the same time, if his
opponent should come to acquire possession of the slave at some
subsequent time, he is liable on the ground of fresh possession and
the exceptio is refused him.


PauLus (on the Hdict 18) A point to be considered is
whether the action! is admissible only against one who fraudulently
contrives not to have the slave in his power,—supposing that it
happens through his fraud that a noxal action cannot be brought,
for example, where he orders the slave to take to flight,—or
whether proceedings can still be taken against some other party


~ just as well, as in fact they might be if the slave were manumitted


or disposed of. This latter is the sounder view ; and, that being
the case, the plaintiff has the choice which party he will sue.
Julianus, we know, says that if the manumitted man is prepared
to defend his own case, the party who manumitted ought to be
allowed an eaceptio; and Labeo says the same thing.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 6) The same rule holds if
the new owner of the slave is made defendant in the action.


PAULUS (on the Edict 18) The election of one as defendant
is a release to the other; as the Preetor introduced the right of
election in order to prevent the plaintiff being baulked, but not in
order to enable him to make a positive profit ; consequently, if he


1 The text has actio noxalis: I have followed Cujas in omitting this last word.
Cf. M.


160 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


brings the other action, he will be barred. 1. It is a further
application of the same principle that if a number of persons
fraudulently contrive to avoid having the slave in their power, the
plaintiff is bound to choose which of them he prefers to sue.
2. Moreover, if, among several co-owners, some fraudulently contrive
to cease to be in possession of their respective shares, the plaintiff
will have a right to elect whether he will bring a direct action
against the party who is in possession or a preetorian action against
the one who has ceased to be in possession. 3. If aman confesses
before the Preetor (in jure) that some slave is his who in fact
belongs to another, then, if either of the two pays, the other is
discharged. 4. If a slave whom you have put out of your
possession with a fraudulent intent should die before you are sued
in this action’, you will be thereupon discharged, because this
action takes the place of the direct action; the rule would be
different if it were through your default that issue was not joined
sooner. 5. No action will be allowed to an heir”, nor against an
heir, on the ground that the deceased said what was not true, nor
yet against the person originally liable himself, simply at any
distance of time ; as it ought to be open to a party who takes up
the defence of an absent slave to avoid the penalty imposed by this
Edict, that is to say, the liability to be sued without the alternative
of surrender for noxa. Accordingly, if you should declare that
the slave is not in your power, you may afterwards declare that
he is, unless the case against you has already got so far as joinder
of issue; after that your confession will not be heard, so Labeo says ;
Octavenus, however, holds that you will get relief even after issue
has been joined, on cause shown, at any rate if your years are such
that you have a claim to indulgence. 6. If the slave is carried off
in the absence of his owner, or even in his presence, and the
circumstances of his case are not changed, so that a restitutio in
integrum is admissible, leave is given to defend the case in respect
of the slave so taken ; as, if an application is made for his production
for the purposes of the defence, the Preetor ought to accede to it.
The same relief ought to be given to a usufructuary or to one to
whom the slave was pledged for debt, in cases where the owner is
present and declines to take up the defence, so as to avoid one
man’s malice or indifference injuring another. The same must be
allowed in the case of a slave belonging to two co-owners, if one
of them is present and declines to defend. It should be added that


1 Meaning apparently before joinder of issue.
2 The words neque heredi can hardly be Paulus’s. M.


27


TIT. TV.| On Noxal Actions 161


relief ought in these cases to be given to the plaintiff too, because
the law is that the acquisition of ownership in the slave puts an end
to the right of action, the fact being that when he is once taken off
by the order of the Preetor, the property in him passes to the party
who took him.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 6) If proceedings are taken
by way of noxal action in respect of a slave who is held by some-
one as security for debt or of a slave in whom some other person
has a usufruct, it must be borne in mind that if the creditor or the
usufructuary is present and declines to undertake the defence, the
proconsul will intervene, and will refuse to allow proceedings to be
taken to realise the security or an action on the usufruct to be
brought. In which case it may be said that the security is at once
released (in fact a security on which no proceedings can be taken
is no security at all), but a usufruct continues as a matter of course
(tpso jure), even if proceedings are not allowed to be taken in
pursuance of it, until the regular period has elapsed and it is lost
by non-user. 1. From what has just been said as to a slave whom
someone holds as a security, or a statuliber, or a slave in whom
someone has a usufruct, it is clear that when a defendant declares
before the Przetor that a slave is his who really belongs to someone
else, then, although he is! liable to a noxal action, still he cannot
as a matter of course be discharged of liability by surrender for
noxa, because, not being owner himself, he cannot transfer any
ownership to the plaintiff. It is true, however, that, when a slave
has been handed over under these circumstances, if the owner
afterwards brings an action to recover him, but does not offer the
damages assessed in the action, he can be met by an exceptio of
dolus malus.


AFRICANUS (Questions 6) And, to give a general rule, if
I sue you in a noxal action, in respect of a slave who belongs
to a third person, but is serving you as a bond fide slave (justam
servitutem), and you surrender him to me for nowxa, then, if lam in
possession and the true owner brings an action to recover him from
me, I can bar him by an exceptio of dolus malus uniess he offers
the damages assessed ; but should the owner be in possession him-
self, I am allowed the Publician action, and if the defendant raises
the eaceptio expressed in the words “unless the defendant is
owner,” there will be a good replicatio of dolus malus in my
favour. From this it follows that I can acquire the ownership by


1 The text has they are, ete.
Mi. JU; 11


29


30


31


162 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


usus, although I am in possession of another man’s property with
knowledge of the fact; indeed, if the law were laid down
otherwise, the result would be that a bond fide possessor would
suffer extreme injustice, because, whereas in plain law the only
right of action against him was noxal, he nevertheless would be
put under the necessity of submitting to payment of the value
assessed. The rule is the same where the same person (@e. the
owner) declines to defend the case in respect of the slave and
I carry him off in pursuance of the Przetor’s order, as, in that case
too, I have a lawful ground of possession.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 6) Not only is a person free
to decline the noxal action when he has not got the man in his
power, but, even where he has him in his power, it is open to him
to avoid the action, if he chooses to leave the case of that particular
person undefended; but in that case he is bound to transfer his own
rights to the plaintiff, just as if the case had been decided against
him.


THE SAME (on the Edict of the Preetor, tit. de damno infecto)
In the case of noxal actions the rights of persons who are absent
bond fide are not interfered with, as when they return they are
allowed full liberty of defending the case on principles of justice
and fairness, whether they are owners or persons who have some
partial rights over the property in question, such as creditors and
usufructuaries.


PAvuLuS (on Plautius 7) With reference to the pronounce-
ment of the Practor, to the effect that, when a gang of siaves
commits a theft, he will allow an action of such scope only that the
plaintiff will get the same relief as he would have got if the offence
had been committed by a free man, the question has been asked
whether this refers to the payment of pecuniary damages or
includes surrender for noxa; so that, for example, if double
damages are made up out of the sum of the values of the slaves
who are surrendered, no further action is allowed. Sabinus and
Cassius hold that the defendant ought to be credited with the
values of the slaves surrendered for noxa as well [as with money
paid], which is approved of by Pomponius, and this is in fact true;
indeed, even where a slave is taken off [by the plaintiff] because he
is undefended, the owner must be credited with the value. No
doubt Julianus holds that we must take into account not only the
double damages but the value recoverable on a condictio. With


TIT. IV On Noxal Actions 163


regard to the casein which a gang of slaves commits theft, we
must, he holds, look at the time when the theft was committed
in order to answer the question whether they were of the same gang,
as the Edict does not apply in a case where slaves who belong to
different owners come afterwards to be the property of one only.


32 CALLISTRATUS (Monitorian Edict 2) If a slave who is in
the power of someone who is not his owner is alleged to have
committed an offence, then, if he is undefended, he is taken off, and,
if the owner is present, he ought to deliver him over and give an
undertaking against dolus malus.


33 Pompontus (on Sabinus 14) Nobody can be compelled
against his will to defend anyone else in a noxal action ; a man
must, however, go without anyone whom he declines to defend,
if such person is his slave ; but if the person subject to potestas is
a free man, he ought to be allowed to make his own defence with-
out further question ;


34. JULIANUS (on Urseius Ferox 4) as wherever no one is found
to take up the defence of a jilius familias in the matter of a delict,
an action is allowed against the jiliws familias himself,


:
|
i
35 ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 41) and, if judgment is given
against him, the jidius familias ought to obey the order, as he
is bound by the decision. Moreover this must be remembered,
that the father himself can be sued in an action de peculio, but
| only after judgment has been given against the son.


debt and then stolen by the debtor and someone purchases him
from the debtor, the purchaser will be liable in respect of the theft
after he has acquired the property in the slave, and this in spite of
the fact that the slave can be recovered from him by the Servian
j action. The rule is similar in the case of such as purchase from
one who is under twenty-five years of age, or in fraud of the
| vendor’s creditors ; as, although such persons may be deprived


36 THE SAME (on the Edict 37) | Where a slave is pledged for
|


of the property in what they have purchased, nevertheless in the
meantime, they can legally be sued [for damages].


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 15) If a slave belonging to
another steals my goods and afterwards I acquire the property in
him, the right of action for theft which was open to me is at an


1 Words equivalent to those in italics seem to have been omitted by a slip.
Cf. M.


11—2


38


39


164 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


end, if it has not yet been brought to an issue ; and if, after that, I
should dispose of tie slave, having bought him before joinder of
issue, the action for theft will not be set up again; but if I only
bought the slave after joinder of issue, the vendor is liable to be
ordered to pay,


ULPIAN (on the Edict 37) just as he would be if he had
sold him to someone else; in fact, it makes very little difference
who it is to whom he sells him, whether it is to the plaintiff in the
suit or to some other person, and it will be his own fault that
he has to submit to pay the damages assessed, as, by selling him, he
put it out of his own power to surrender him for nowa.
1. Julianus, however, says (Dig. 22) that, if I abandon a slave
who stole your goods, I am discharged from responsibility, on the
ground that the slave at once ceased to belong to me, so that, were
it not for this rule, there would be an action for theft in respect of
a slave whom nobody owned. 2. If my slave steals your goods
and sells them, and you forcibly take from him money which he has
in his hands which was part of the price, there will be ground for
an action of theft on both sides; as you can bring a noxal action
against me in respect of the slave, and I can bring an action against
you in respect of the money. 3. Again, if I pay money to a slave
of my creditor, for him to give it to his owner, there will equally be
ground for an action of theft if the slave embezzles the money he
received.


JULIANUS (Digest 9) If a slave belonging to several
co-owners commits a theft, and all the co-owners contrive fraudu-
lently to avoid having him in their power, the Preetor ought to
follow the model of the action which is open in the civil law
and allow the honorary action which he offers in such circum-
stances against whichever owner the plaintiff selects, as he ought
not to give the plaintiff any further advantage than this, that
he should be able to bring an action, without giving the defendant
the option of surrender for nowa, against whomsoever he would
have been able to sue in a noxal action, if the slave had been
produced. 1. Where a man confesses that a slave is his own who
in fact belongs to someone else, then, although he is liable to
a noxal action, nevertheless, on due cause shown, he is compellable
to give security, but a man who is sued on account of a slave of his
own ought not to be burdened with security, as he is not offering
himself as defendant on behalf of another man’s slave. 2. If
anyone should allege that the owner of a slave has fraudulently


40


41


42


TIT. IV | On Noxal Actions 165


contrived to avoid having him in his possession [and should sue
such owner accordingly], but the owner should contend that the
action ought to be defended by someone else, who would give
security, this is a case for an exceptio of dolus malus. 3. Even if
issue is joined with the owner and, after that, the slave comes
forward, and, not being defended, he is carried off, the owner will
be discharged if he raises an exceptio of dolus malus. 4. We may
add that if the slave dies before joinder of issue, the owner
will escape all liability on this action.


THE SAME (Digest 22) If a slave who is left by way of
legacy should, before the inheritance is entered upon, steal the
goods of the future heir, the latter can bring an action for theft
against the legatee, if he accepts the legacy; but, if the same
slave misappropriated something which is part of the inheritance,
there will be no action for theft, because there can be no theft
committed of such things ; but there is a good right of action to
have the thing produced.


THE SAME (on Urseius Ferox 2) If a slave who belongs to
two co-owners does unlawful damage to one of them, there is no
right of action under the lex Aquilia; for the reason that, if he
had done the damage to a stranger, proceedings could have been
taken under the statute for the whole amount claimed against the
other co-owner ; just as, when a slave owned in common commits
theft [against one owner], there cannot be an action for theft
brought against the other owner, but there can be an action
communt dividundo.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 37) If a man in respect of whom
issue has been joined in a noxal action claims his liberty, the action
ought to be stayed until judgment is given on the question of
status ; accordingly, if he is pronounced a slave, the noxal action
will proceed, but if he is pronounced free, it will clearly be to no
purpose. 1. If one undertakes to defend a noxal action in respect
of aslave who is dead, where he is unaware of the fact, the case
ought to be dismissed, as it has ceased to be true that it is his duty
to hand over anything on account of the slave. 2. These rights of
action are not subject to lapse, and there is good ground for
bringing them so long as it is in the power of a proposed defendant
to surrender the slave; moreover they are available not only for
the party injured, but for his successors too, and also against the


43


166 On Noxal Actions [BOOK IX


successors of the party originally liable, not however as succeeding
to his obligation, but because they are owners. On the same
principle, if it is a fact in the case that a slave has come to the
hands of someone else, the new owner, as being owner, can be sued
in a noxal action.


Pompontius (Epistles 8) Slaves in whose case the noxa
follows the delinquent subject must be defended in the place in
which it is averred that they committed the delict, accordingly the
owner is bound to produce such slaves in the same place as that in
which they are alleged to have done the act of violence, and he
may have to lose his property in all of them, if he declines to defend
them.


1


TENTH BOOK.


I.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) The action for settling boundaries
(jinium regundorum) is in personam, although it is an action for
recovering a thing as owner (pro vindicatione ret).


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) This action deals with “rustic
estates” though there should be buildings between them ; in fact, it
makes very little difference whether a man plants trees on the
boundary or places buildings there. 1. The judge in a case of
determining boundaries is at liberty, if he cannot settle’ the
boundary, to settle! the dispute by a vesting order, and, if the
judge chooses, by way of getting rid of a doubt of long standing,
to draw the line of demarcation in a fresh direction, he can do so
by means of a vesting order and an order [on the party acquiring
thereby | to pay money.


GaIus (on the provincial Edict 7) In any case in which it is
requisite that an order should be made assigning a portion of the
land of one party to the other party, the” one in whose favour such
order is made must be directed to pay a sum of money in con-
sideration of the land assigned to him.


Pauwus (on the Edict 23) We may add that, where the
dispute is as to a single plot of ground, the property can still be
divided up into distinct portions by vesting orders, corresponding
to the proprietorial rights which the judge finds that the respective
parties have. ‘1. In a suit for settling boundaries, the court takes
into account any incidental advantage enjoyed (éd quod interest).


1 dirimere—dirimat. 2 del. guo nomine. M.


168 On Setiling Boundaries [BOOK X


Suppose, for instance, one of the parties was deriving some benefit
from a piece of ground which turns out to belong to another; there
would be no injustice in an order for payment which took such
benefit into account. Again, suppose a surveyor had been engaged
by one of the parties to measure the land, an order for payment of
part of the remuneration for the service rendered ought to be made
on the party who did not join in the engagement. 2. After joinder
of issue, profits will be taken into account in a case of this kind ;
in fact, from that moment, malice and negligence can be charged ;
but profits realized before joinder will not as a matter of course be
included ; either the party took them in good faith, and then he
ought to be allowed, if he has consumed them, to make a clear
gain by them, or else he took them in bad faith, and then they
must be recovered by a condictio (express personal action).
3. Moreover where a party refuses to obey the order of the court
as to cutting down a tree or pulling down a building which is
placed on the boundary or some portion of it, he can be ordered
to pay money. 4. Where boundary marks are averred to be
removed by throwing anything down or digging it up, the judge
who hears the charge can entertain an application for settling the
boundary as well. 5. If one estate belongs to two persons and
the other to three, the judge can assign by order the particular
plot about which the question arises to one of the two sides,
though such side comprises several owners, as, in fact, an order
settling boundaries is regarded as made in favour of an estate
rather than a person ; in such a case, however, though the order is.
in favour of several persons, each person will take the same
fractional share which he has in the original estate ; (6) and as for
the persons who have such undivided shares in the common estate,
no order will be made on any one of them in favour of another, as
among these persons themselves no judicial contention was raised.
7. If you and I are part-owners in common of an estate, and [ am
sole owner of an adjoining estate, can there be judicial proceedings
between us for settling boundaries? Pomponius says that there
cannot ; my co-owner and | cannot be opposite parties in such an
action, but are counted as one person. Pomponius also says that
even an utilis actio cannot be allowed, as it is open to the one who
has property in severalty to dispose either of his share or of the
part which he holds in severalty and then take proceedings.
8. There can be an action brought for settling boundaries not
merely between two estates, but even among three or more ;
suppose, for instance, cases in which one estate abuts on several


7


TIT. 1] On Setiling Boundaries 169


estates, say on three or four. 9. A right of action for settling
boundaries may be good even in respect of lands let on perpetual
lease (agri vectigales), or between parties who have usufructs in the
respective lands, or between a usufructuary and a bare proprietor of
adjacent land, or between parties who are in possession in virtue of
a pledge made as a security for money. 10. This kind of action
is applicable where the boundary runs between “rustic estates,” it
has not been held admissible between “urban estates”; in the case
of the latter the parties are not said to be owners with a common
boundary (confines), but neighbours (vicinz), and their properties
are, for the most part, separated from one another by common
walls. Accordingly, where buildings are contiguous, even in the
country, there is no room for this action; and, conversely, in
a town there may be an extent of garden ground, so that parties
can, in fact, have recourse to an action for settling boundaries.
11. Where a river or a high-road comes in there can be no such
thing as a common boundary; consequently no action can be
brought to settle boundaries,


THE SAME (on Sabinus 15) as what adjoins my land is
rather the high-road or the river than the land of my neighbour ;


THE SAME (on the Edict 23) but, if it is a private stream
that makes the division, there can be an action for settling
boundaries.


MopEsTINusS (Pandects 11) —Arbiters are appointed to ascer-
tain the dimensions of the land, and whoever is declared to have
the larger plot in the whole space is compelled to assign a distinct
portion to the others who have smaller plots; there is a rescript
to this effect.


ULPIANUS (Opinions 6) Where a river overflows, and so a
flood effaces the boundaries of a field, so as to afford certain persons
an opportunity of encroaching on land over which they have no legal
right, the governor of the province will order that they should
leave other people’s property alone, and that the true owner
should get back what belongs to him, and the boundary marks
should be made clear by the surveyor. 1. It is part of the duty
of the judge in a case of boundaries to send surveyors, and through
them to settle the actual question of the boundary line in the way
required by justice, and with the place before his eyes, if the
occasion requires it.


10


11


12


13


170 On Settling Boundaries [BOOK X


JULIANUS (Digest 8) The case for settling boundaries can
still be tried, though the part-owners should have brought an
action for partition, or should have disposed of the land.


THE SAME (Digest 51) The action for partition among co-
owners, or division among heirs, or settlement of boundaries is such
that in it each party stands in the twofold legal position of plaintiff
and defendant to the action.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 2) In inquiries into boundaries, in
default of! old memorials, the parties must be guided by the
authority of the census last made before the proceedings were
begun, provided that there is nothing to show that since that
time, owing to frequent changes of ownership on death and the
deliberate acts of persons in possession, portions of land have
been added or taken away and the boundaries have consequently
been disturbed.


PAULUS (Responsa 3) In connexion with an inquiry into
ownership, those boundary lines ought to be maintained which
were pointed out by someone who owned both estates on the
occasion of his selling one of the two; as it is not required that
those boundaries should be observed which used to divide the
different plots, but the indications given as.to who are adjoining
owners must be held to lay down a fresh boundary between the
estates.


Garus (Law of the Twelve Tables 4) | We must bear in mind
that in the action for settling boundaries we ought to follow the
rule which was set down, so to speak, after the model of that law
which Solon is said to have passed at Athens. The words of it are
as follows:—If a man makes? a rough wall® close to another
person’s land, he must not go beyond the boundary; if it is
a mortared wall‘, he must leave a foot clear; and if it is a house,
two feet. If he digs a grave or a trench, he must leave a clear
space as broad as the depth; if it is a well, space to the extent of
a fathom. Olives and fig-trees he must plant nine feet from the
adjoining property, all other trees five feet.


1 After monumenta read ubi deficiunt, proximi. M.
2 Gr. opvyn. 3 aipacia. Cf. Roby, &.P.L. 1, 451. 4 Cf. Roby.


a


TIT. It] On Dividing an Inheritance 172


LI.
On DivipInG AN INHERITANCE (familie erciscunde).


Gatus (on the provincial Edict 7) This action is derived
from the Law of the Twelve Tables, the fact being that it was
deemed necessary that, where co-heirs were desirous of giving up
ownership in common, some form of action should be provided by
means of which the assets might be divided among them. 1. At
the same time the action is open, in direct law, even to a man
who is not in possession of his share; but if the heir who is in
possession avers that the plaintiff is not a co-heir with him, he can
bar the action by an exceptio worded thus :—“ provided that the
question of heirship is not prejudged in connexion with the matter
which the action is about.” If the applicant is in possession of his
share, then, even though it should be averred that he is not
a co-heir, the above exceptio will be no bar; the consequence of
which is that, in that case, the judge himself who tries the action
entertains the question whether the applicant is a co-heir or not ;
in fact, if he is not a co-heir, no vesting order will be made in his
favour, nor will his opponent be ordered to pay him anything.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) By the action familic ercis-
cundee an inheritance can be divided, whether it is testamentary or
on intestacy, and whether it is given by the Twelve Tables, or by
some other! statute, or by a decree of the Senate, or even by an
Imperial enactment; and, as a rule, the only persons whose in-
heritance can be divided are those on whose decease there can be
a petitio hereditatis (action to recover the inheritance). 1. If there
is a quarter share coming by law to someone who was arrogated
in pursuance of the enactment of the Divine Pius, then, as such
a person does not become either heir or bonorwm possessor, an
utilis actio familie erciscunde will be required. 2. Again, if the
estate is the [castrense| peculium of a son under potestas who was
a soldier, there is good ground for maintaining that there is an
inheritance created by Imperial enactments, consequently this”
action will be applicable. 3. In an action familie erciscunde,
each of the heirs acts the part of both defendant and _ plaintiff.
4, It is also beyond question that the action is admissible even
where the parties are a few heirs out of a larger number. 5. True


1 For aliqua read alia. Of. M. 2 Read huwic for hoc. Cf. M.


172 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


as it is that claims against debtors are not taken into account in
this action, still, if stipulations have been made as to the division
of any such, it being understood that such division is to be adhered
to and each party has to assign rights of action to the other and
make him procurator on his own behalf, the parties must abide by
the division.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 7) No doubt it is often
a matter within the competence of the judge to assign different
debts and demands in their entirety to different heirs respectively,
as it often happens that the business both of discharging and
getting in shares is attended with no small inconvenience. But it
must always be understood that the result of an assignment of this
kind is not that any single heir owes the whole debt or has a right
to realize the whole demand, but only this, that, if an action is to
be brought, the heir brings it partly in his own name and partly as
procurator [for his co-heirs]; and, again, if an action has to be
defended, he is sued partly in his own name and partly as pro-
curator. The creditors, no doubt, are still fully entitled! to take
proceedings against any heir separately; at the same time the
heirs themselves are equally empowered to put in their own places
those persons to whom the brunt of the action has been assigned
by the judge’s discretion.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) Accordingly, everything, setting
aside pecuniary demands, is taken into account in this action.
But if a pecuniary demand is bequeathed to some one of the heirs
in particular, such heir will get it by the action familie erciscunde.
1. Noxious drugs and poisons are included in the action ; but the
judge ought not to offer to have anything to do with things of that
kind, as his duty is to discharge the office of a good and inoffensive
person. He ought to act in the same way in respect of books
which it is objectionable to read, for example, such as deal with
magic arts or any similar books ; everything of that kind ought to
be at once destroyed. 2. Again, where anything turns out to have
been acquired by embezzling public money ( pecudatus) or sacrilege,
or violence or robbery or acts of brigandage, it will not be divided.
3. It may be added that the judge ought to order that the testa-
ment itself either should be left in the hands of whoever is heir for
the largest share or should be deposited in a temple. Labeo
himself says that on a sale of the inheritance a copy of the


1 del. esse after potestas. M.


Pree Te] On Dividing an Inheritance 173


testament ought to be deposited ; the heir, he says, ought to hand
over a copy, but the original testament he should keep in his own
custody, or else deposit in a temple.


Gatus (on the provincial Edict 5) If there are among the
assets any heritable bonds (cautiones hereditarie), the judge should
take means to make sure that they shall remain in the hands of
the person who is heir for the largest share,—the others are
to have a copy made and verified',j—an undertaking being
given by such heir that, when the occasion arises, the originals
will be produced. If all the heirs take equal shares, and they do
not come to any agreement on the question with whom the
documents are to be left, they ought to draw lots, or some friend
must be chosen by agreement or vote with whom they can
be placed, or else they should be deposited in a consecrated
temple ;


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) _ the plan of settling the question
by competitive offers, so that the highest bidder shall have the
custody of the heritable papers, does not commend itself either to
me or to Pomponius.


VENULEIUS (Stipulations 7) —_ If one particular heir, in a case
where another heir either was added on some condition, or is In
the hands of the enemy, should declare that he is himself the heir
and should succeed in proceedings taken thereupon, and, after
that, the conditional event should take place on which the other
becomes entitled, or the other should return by postliminium, will
the former be bound to let the latter share the fruits of his
successful application? There is, of course, no doubt at all that he
has an undivided right to an action on the judgment. Here the
co-heir [who was added] ought to be allowed to elect, that is to
say, either he must have a share given him in the inheritance or
he must be enabled to take proceedings, the fact being that he is
a man who became heir himself—or returned to the city—
subsequently to the judgment given in favour of his present co-heir.
The same rule will hold where a posthumous child is born after the
death of the testator. That these persons failed to apply before
is no ground of objection, considering that they only acquired
the inheritance after the other heir had been successful.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) Pomponius tells us that, if the
account books are bequeathed (prelegate) to some one of the heirs
in particular, they ought not to be handed over to him until his

1 Text in bad Latin, probably interpolated.


10


ial


12


174 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


co-heirs have copied them. Suppose, he says, the bequest is of some
slave who was a bailiff, the man need not be handed over until he has
brought in his accounts. It may fairly be asked whether there ought
not in fact to be an undertaking given that whenever the accounts,


‘or the bailiff bequeathed as above, should be required, they should


respectively be forthcoming ; as very often it is necessary to have
the original accounts—or the actual bailiff'—before you, in order
to elucidate points which subsequently crop up and which bear on
the question of the man’s knowledge ; and it is in fact necessary
that the co-heirs should have an undertaking given them on the
subject by the heir first mentioned. 1. Pomponius says further
that pigeons which are habitually allowed to leave the pigeon-house
come within the scope of the action familie erciscunde, because
they belong to their original owner so long as they keep up the
habit of returning to his premises ; accordingly, if anyone should
take them, the owner has an action for theft. The same rule
applies to bees, as they are reckoned a subject of property.
2. Again, if one out of a man’s cattle should be carried off by
a wild beast, the same writer holds that if it escapes from the beast
it is included in the action familie erciscunde; the better opinion,
he says, is that a creature which is carried off by a wolf or some
other wild animal does not cease to be a piece of property so long
as it is not devoured.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) The action includes things which
the heirs have acquired by user, in cases where they were delivered
to the deceased, also things which were delivered to the heirs, but ©
which had been purchased by the deceased,


_ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) also lands which are held in
ownership and, besides these, land let on perpetual lease, and
rights to surfaces (preedia vectigalia and superficiaria) ; the rule
applies equally to things of which the deceased had possession
in good faith, though they were the property of another.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) The child of a female slave, if
born after entry on the inheritance,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) or even after joinder of issue,
can, so Sabinus tells us, be reached by the action familie erciscunde
and be assigned by the order. 1. The same is the case as to
anything given by a stranger to slaves which are part of the estate.


1 For actori read actorve. Cf. M.


13


14


su 0G) On Dividing an Inheritance 175


2. Anything bequeathed subject to a condition is the property of
the heirs in the meantime, consequently it is included in the action,
and it can be assigned by the order, subject, that is, to the liabilities
attaching to it (cwm sua causa), so that, if the condition comes to
pass, it will be taken away from the heir to whom it was assigned,
and, if the condition fails, it will revert to the heirs at whose charge
it was left. The same principle applies in the case of a statuliber ;
he is for the time the property of the heirs, but, if the condition
comes to pass, he acquires his liberty :


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) as the transfers of property which
are forbidden to be made after issue is joined are only such as are
voluntary, and not those which were required in virtue of some
antecedent ground and have a legal origin which acts with
compulsory force.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) But if, on the other hand, the
period for acquiring a thing by user should have begun to run
before joinder of issue in favour of someone who was not heir,
and should be completed afterwards, this takes the thing out of the
scope of the action. 1. It has been a matter of question whether
a usufruct comes within the scope of the action ; suppose, for
instance, land was bequeathed away from the heirs, the usufruct
being reserved :


Pavu.us (on the Edict 23) or a usufruct was bequeathed to
a slave who is part of the assets: it should be remembered that
a usufruct cannot shift from the holder without terminating
altogether.


Uxpianus (on the Edict 19) My own view is that it is
part of the duty of the judge that, if the heirs wish to break
up their part-ownership of the usufruct, he should comply with
their wish, making them give mutual undertakings. 1. Julianus
says that, if the judge vests the land in one heir and the usufruct
therein in another, this does not make the usufruct common
property. 2. A usufruct can be assigned by the order from and
after a given time, or until a given time, or for alternate years.
3. Land which a river adds to some estate by alluvion after
joinder of issue is fully included in the action. 4. If, moreover,
anything should be done by one of the heirs by malice or negligence
so as to impair the [ value of the] usufruct, this too Pomponius says
is included in the action ; as, in fact, anything whatever that the
heir does to the injury of the inheritance by malice or negligence


flrs


18


176 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


will be taken into account in the action familice erciscunde,
provided always that he does it as heir. Accordingly, if one of the
heirs took away money in the lifetime of the testator, this money
does not come within the scope of the action, because at that time
the party was not yet heir; but where he did it as heir (quasz
heres) then, although the party complaining should have some
other right of action as well, still, as Julianus tells us, he is liable
to the action familie erciscunde. 5. Lastly, he says that if one
of the heirs should obliterate or falsify the amounts of the testator’s
estate, he is liable under the lex Agquilia on the ground of
destruction ; but nevertheless he is liable to the action familie
erciscunde too. 6. Again, if a slave who is part of the estate
steals something belonging to one of the heirs, Ofilius says that
there are the actions familie erciscunde and communi dividundo,
and there is no action for theft ; and, accordingly, if the heir brings
the familie erciscunde, he will either get an order vesting the
slave in him or else one to the effect that the damages assessed in
the case shall be given him, that is, simple damages.


GAIuS (on the provincial Edict 7) Where damage is com-
mitted by a single heir, the rule which meets the case is that the
simple amount should be taken into account in the action familie
erciscunde.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) In keeping with this is what is
said by Julianus :—If there are several heirs, and a legacy is made
to one of them simply of a slave, in general terms, with liberty of
option, whereupon the [other] heirs declare that Stichus has
falsified the testament or badly damaged it, their object in giving
this information being to prevent that slave being chosen, but, after
that, he is chosen, and then an action is brought to recover him,
they can, if they are defendants in the action, have recourse to an
exceptio of dolus malus and examine the slave by torture. 1. The
question has been asked whether in an action’ familie erciscunde
the heirs have a right to examine by torture with reference to the
death of the testator or his wife or his children; as to which
Pomponius says very properly that these matters have nothing to
do with the division of the testator’s assets. 2. The same writer
holds? that where a person directs by testament that a slave shall
be sold in order that he may be taken away, it is within the
duty of the judge to see that the will of the deceased shall

1 Wor judicium read judicio. Cf. M.
2 In the text, “asks.”


20


TTP, 12] On Dividing an Inheritance sg


not fall through. Again, in a case where the testator directs that
a monument should be set up, there can be an action familie
erciscunde to have it done. He suggests, however, besides this,
that, inasmuch as the heirs have an interest in the matter, seeing
that they acquire a right over the monument, any one of them can
have an action in special terms (preescriptis verbis) to have the
monument erected. 3. Where one of the heirs goes to expense
in good faith, he can get interest from a co-heir from the date of
default [on the part of the latter], according to a rescript of the
Emperors Severus and Antoninus. 4. Celsus goes so far as to add
the following discriminating remark, viz. that a co-heir, even where
he does not pay a debt himself, still has a right to an action
Familie erciscunde to compel his co-heir to pay, on the ground
that the creditor will not relinquish some piece of property until
he is paid in full. 5. Where a jilius familias was heir to his
father to the extent of a share and is sued by creditors who have
a claim on his peculiwm, he being ready to pay the whole debt, he
can, by means of an exceptio doli, make the creditors assign to him
their rights of action; but, besides this, he has a good action
Jamie erciscunde against his co-heirs. 6. Where one of the
heirs has paid a legacy to a legatee who had got an order putting
him in possession in order to preserve legacies, Papinianus holds,
and so the law is, that he has a good action familie erciscunde
against his co-heirs, because the legatee would never relinquish
possession which he had once taken as being equivalent to security
for his debt, until the whole of his legacy was paid him. 7. Again,
if an heir should pay Titius a debt to prevent a pledge being
sold, Neratius says that he can proceed by an action familie
erciscundee.


(Garus on the provincial Edict 7) Conversely also, the judge
ought to take care in the same way that where one of the heirs has
made some gain out of part of the assets or acquired a claim by
stipulation at the expense of the estate, this shall not be for his
exclusive benefit. The judge will secure these objects by either
taking debtor and creditor accounts among the different heirs, or
compelling them to give undertakings to one another by means of
which both profits and liabilities may be shared equally among
them.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) Where a married daughter
[being one of the heirs of her father,] was bound to bring her dos


M. J. IL 12


178 On Dividing an Inheritance —_—s[BooK x


into hotchpot (dotem conferre), and, through a mistake on the part
of her co-heirs, she gave an undertaking to the effect that she
would pay them in proportion to their respective shares in the
inheritance whatever she recovered from her husband, Papinianus
has it that, in spite of this, the arbiter in the action familie
erciscunde must rule that, even if the wife herself should depart
this life without the married state having ended, the dos must still
be brought in ; no inadvertency, he says, on the part of the co-heirs
can make any difference as to the course which the legal proceedings
will have to take. 1. If a son under potestas has incurred an
obligation at his father’s request, he must retain the amount out
of the assets ; indeed, if he spent money in his father’s interest,
the same rule applies ; and, if [the right of action was!] de peculio,
the son will retain his peculiwm [to the extent of the amount of
the debt]. All this was laid down by rescript by the present
Emperor. 2. Besides this, where a son under pofestas is appointed
heir, he can retain his wife’s dos ; and this is reasonable, as it is he
who has to bear the expense entailed by the married state.
Accordingly, he can retain the whole dos, and he must give an
undertaking to his co-heirs, who are liable to an action on stipu-
lation, that the action shall be defended on their behalf. A similar
rule holds where a stranger gave the dos and made a stipulation.
[The rule applies to] not only the dos of the son’s own wife, but
to that of his son’s wife, on the ground that this too is an expense
entailed by the married state which falls on him, as he is obliged
to answer for the expense which will be incurred by his son and his
daughter-in-law. According to Marcellus, the son will retain the
dos not only where it was given to his father, but where it was
given to himself, such son ; so far, that is, where it was given to
himself, as his peculium covers it, or as it was spent in his father’s
interest. 3. Where a father divides his property among his sons
without any writing and apportions the burden of his debts among
them according to what they respectively get, this, Papinianus says,
is not to be treated as a mere gift, but rather as a distribution in
virtue of a man’s last will. Of course, he says, if the creditors bring
actions against them for amounts corresponding to their respective
shares in the inheritance, and one of them declines to be bound
by the terms of the arrangement, an action can be brought against
him prescriptis verbis, on the ground that they made an exchange


1 After peculio ins. sit actio. M.
2 Before peculium ins. eatenus. M.


rT. 1 On Dividing an Inheritance 179


on definite terms, provided, that is, all the property was included in
the division. 4. The action familie erciscunde cannot be brought
more than once, save on special cause shown ; and, if there are
some things left undistributed, in respect of these there can be an
action communi dividundo. 5. Papinianus says that if the duty
of paying a debt is laid on one of the heirs without its being done
by way of a legacy [to the creditor], then, in virtue of the office of
the judge who hears the case on familie erciscunde, the heir is
compelled to undertake the payment—though not to the extent of
more than three-quarters of his share, in order that he may have
one clear quarter ; accordingly, he will have to undertake to save
his co-heirs harmless. 6. The same writer says further that where
a son is liable on a balance of accounts in respect of public offices
which his father consented to his exercising, and is then appointed
heir to the extent of a share, he will have a right to retain the
amount of his liability, because this was one of the debts owed by
his father; but, as for any offices which he undertook after his
father’s death, the father’s heirs are not liable in respect of them.
7. There is, however, an opinion given by Neratius to this effect.
A man, he says, who had several sons offered that one of them
should undertake an agonothesia (superintendence of public
games), and, before the son had discharged the office, the father
died, having appointed heirs all his sons ; whereupon the question
was asked whether the son first mentioned could, by an action
Samilice erciscunde, recover the amount he had expended in the
matter ; to which, he said, his reply was that there was no action
by which he’ could recover it. This is, very properly, not
admitted; so that the expense in question must be held to be
within the scope of the action familic erciscunde. 8. Again,
Papinianus says that, if a husband directs one of his two heirs
to bear the burden of paying the dos, where the same is due in
pursuance of a stipulation, but the widow brings her action for dos
against both, the heir who was directed to undertake the burden
must defend his co-heir in an action so brought. But, if legacies
are left at the charge of both heirs to take the place of the dos
and, in consequence of the widow electing to be paid the dos as
such, they are retained by the heirs, such retention ought not to
profit the co-heir who is relieved of the payment of the debt; [that
is, the dos ;] the intention being that the co-heir who undertook
the burden of the debt, should, by the exercise of the judge's office,


1 For idem read id eum. Cuj.


21


22


180 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


get the legacy [charged on the other]. All this is perfectly correct,
unless the testator directed otherwise. 9. The same writer says
that where a statuliber pays money to one of several co-heirs out
of his pecaulium, by way of fulfillmg the condition on which he is
to become free, the money is not included in this action, and it
need not be shared.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) | The same rule holds in the action
communi dividundo.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) Again, Labeo tells us that, if
one of the heirs digs up a concealed hoard which the testator left
as it was, he is liable in an action familie erciscunde, even
though he should have divided the hoard with a stranger who was
aware of the facts. 1. The Judge in the action familie erciscunde
can assign property in the same thing to several persons in those
cases only in which either the right of retainer was left [by the
deceased] to several persons in respect of the same thing—where,
indeed, as Pomponius says, the necessity of the case requires that
the assignment should be to a number of persons—or else he [the
judge] apportions definite shares in the thing to the different
respective co-heirs. He can however, if he chooses, let the thing
be bid for and vest it by an order in one single heir; 2. again, it
will not be disputed that he can divide the land into so many
distinct portions and assign these by order to the various persons
respectively according to the division so made. 3. Moreover, when
he makes such assignments he can impose a servitude, so as to
make one plot among those which he assigns serve another plot ;
still, if he once gives a plot to any heir in absolute terms, he
cannot, after that, in giving another, proceed to make the former
subject to a servitude attaching to the latter. 4. Proceedings in
the action familie erciscunde deal with two kinds of subject-
matter, questions of property and questions of transfer, the latter
being matters in personam'. 5. Papinianus finds fault with
Marcellus with reference to property in the hands of an enemy, in
regard that the latter does not hold that? transfers of such property
as is in the hands of an enemy are embraced by the action famelie
erciscunde. How, indeed, can there be any objection to the action
embracing acts which may be required with reference to any kind
of property where it embraces that very property itself,


1 del. actiones. M. 2 del. in. M.


23


24


25


TIT. It] On Dividing an Inheritance 181


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) in virtue of the possibility of
postlimimium? Of course an undertaking would have to be given,
as it is possible that the party should not return; unless,
indeed, there was simply a valuation put on the chance itself as
an expectancy.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) Indeed, even where a thing
has ceased to exist at all, the question of transfer may still come
within the scope of the action ; I agree with Papinianus as to this.
1, The action familie erciscunde applies among bonorum
possessores, also as between a person to whom the inheritance was
handed over in pursuance of the Trebellian decree of the Senate,
and all other Preetorian successors.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) The heirs of one who died in the
enemy’s hands can proceed by way of this action. 1. If a soldier
makes one person heir to his castrensian property and another to
everything else, there is no occasion herein for an action jfamilice
erciscunde, because, in such a case, the property is divided between
the two successors in virtue of imperial enactments ; just as the
action is not available where there is no corporeal property at all,
but the inheritance consists entirely of debts owing to the estate,
2. In connexion with the question whether a man is qualified to
undertake to defend the action familie erciscunde, it makes no
difference whether he is in possession of his inheritance or not.
3. Where a number of different inheritances are held by several
persons in common by different titles, they can have one action
familie erciscunde in respect of them all. 4. If you and I have
Titius’s inheritance in common and you and I and Titius (szc) have
that of Seius, Pomponius tells us that a single action may be had
to which three persons are parties [embracing both cases].
5. Again, if several inheritances belong to you and me in common,
we can take proceedings by way of an action familie erciscunde
as to one of them by itself. 6. If a testator had property in
common with a stranger, or bequeathed to anyone a share in
property of his own, or his heir, before meeting an action familice
erciscunde, disposed of his own share, it falls within the duty of
the judge to order that the share which was the property of the
testator should be made over to some one person. 7. Where
a co-heir is in possession of anything as purchaser or, say, as donee,
according to Pomponius, it is not embraced by the action familie
erciscunde. 8. The same writer has the following :—You and
I having become heirs to Titius, if you sue Sempronius to recover


182 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


part of an estate the whole of which you declare is included in the
inheritance, and you are defeated, and I thereupon purchase the
part in question from Sempronius and take delivery of it, then, if
you bring the action familie erciscunde, this will not only fail to
embrace what I possess as heir, but will not reach even what I
have as purchaser!; in fact, as it was made clear by the previous
judgment that the whole estate lay outside the inheritance, how
can it come within the scope of the action familie erciscunde ?
9. It is a matter of doubt whether the action will include
a stipulation such as gives each separate heir a right of action for
the whole ; for example, where a man dies after stipulating for
a roadway, pathway or drive’, the fact being that such a stipulation
is by the Twelve Tables not allowed to be divided, as indeed it
cannot be. However, the better opinion is that the action does
not embrace this stipulation, but every heir has a right of action
for the whole, and if the roadway is not furnished, the order made
on the defendant should be for damages proportional to the
plaintiff’s share in the inheritance. 10. Conversely, where the
man who promised a roadway dies, having appointed several heirs,
the obligation is not divided, and there is no doubt that it continues
to hold good, seeing that a roadway can be promised even by a man
who has no land. Since therefore each separate heir is liable for the
whole, undertakings should be called for, in exercise of the judge’s
office, in order that if any one of the heirs should be sued and
should thereupon pay the damages assessed, he may recover part
of the amount from the others. 11. The rule is the same where
the testator bequeaths a roadway. 12. In the case of another
stipulation also, viz. where the testator’s promise was that nothing
should be done by him or by his heir to prevent the promisee from
being able to walk or drive—seeing that, if a single co-heir impedes
access, the stipulation can be sued upon for the whole sum—
provision has to be made on behalf of the co-heirs, to prevent the
act of one of them being injurious to the others. 13. A similar rule
holds in the case of a sum of money promised by the testator, if it
was promised under a penalty; it is true that, in that case, the
obligation is divided by the Statute of the Twelve Tables, still,
inasmuch as the fact of one co-heir paying his share will be of no
avail to prevent the penalty being incurred, [it follows that,] if, on
the one hand, the debt has not yet been paid nor become
demandable, the case must be met by an undertaking [to which all


1 The Basifica transpose “purchaser” and “ heir.”
2 Read actum for actus.


TIT. 11] On Dividing an Inheritance 183


are parties!], so that [either] the one by whose fault it eventually
happens that the money is not all paid engages to keep the rest
harmless, or else [each”] engages that he will make good a portion
to whoever pays the whole ; while, if, on the other hand, the whole
sum which was promised by the testator has been paid by one of
the co-heirs, in order to prevent the penalty being demandable, he
will be able to recover from his co-heirs their respective shares by
the action familie erciscunde. 14. A similar rule is observed
with reference to the redemption of pledges; unless there is
a tender of the whole sum due, the pledgee can lawfully sell the thing
pledged. 15. If one of several co-heirs defends a noxal action in
respect of a slave who is part of the estate and tenders the damages
assessed, where that is the best course to take, he can by means of
this action recover a portion of the money. The rule is the same
where one co-heir gives an undertaking in respect of legacies to
prevent the legatees getting an order to be put in possession. And,
to give a general rule, wherever a matter cannot be disposed of by
partial performance, if one party should, under pressure of necessity,
discharge the whole, there is room for an action familie erciscunde.
16. A co-heir is bound to answer not only for malice but for
negligence too in respect of property which is part of the estate,
seeing that a person has not contracted with a co-heir but has
simply chanced upon him ; but the co-heir is not bound to answer
for as much diligence as is a diligent paterfamilias, since, in this
case, the co-heir had good reason for acting in the matter on
account of his own share, and he consequently has no right of
action on negotia gesta (voluntary agency); accordingly he is
bound to use the same amount of diligence that he does in his own
affairs®. The same may be said where a thing is bequeathed to two
legatees ; in their case too, what brought them into co-ownership


1 Cf. Bas. “the co-heirs must give an undertaking to one another.” This appears
to me to make better sense. (See Bas. 42. 3. 25. 9. 7. ro mAdros.)

2 T put “each” in place of “he” to avoid a contradiction, again following the
Basilica. See Bas. 42. 3. 25. 9 (sic, not 13).

3 The above follows the text, but the text cannot be what Ulpian wrote, as the
conclusion from the fact mentioned would be to the opposite effect. M. proposes
a version in which a number of words are transposed and which may be Englished
as follows :—“but, seeing that a person does not contract with a co-heir but
chances upon him, he is not bound to answer for as much diligence as a diligent
paterfamilias; for since, in this case, the co-heir had good reason for acting in the
matter, on account of his own share, he consequently has no right of action on
negotia gesta” ete. This is founded on the Basilica, but, in M.’s opinion, it implies
a deliberate emendation on the part of the Greek writer.


26


27


184 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


was not their own agreement but the circumstances of the case.
17. Where there is a bequest of a slave who is not expressly
specified, and afterwards, the legatee dying, one of his heirs, by
refusing to concur [in the choice of a slave], obstructs the discharge
of the legacy, the party so obstructing can, by means of this action,
be ordered to pay the others the amounts of their respective
interests. A similar rule holds where, to take the converse case,
one of several heirs at whose charge a bequest has been made in
general terms of such slave as they shall themselves choose, refuses
to agree to the particular slave being handed over whom it would
be advantageous to all of them to have transferred, and thereupon
the heirs are sued at law by the legatee and ordered to pay something
over and above. 18. Again, a man is liable on the ground of negligence
who, having entered on an inheritance before others [entitled along
with him], has allowed servitudes which attached to land included
in the estate to be lost by non-user. 19. Where a son who defends
an action on behalf of his father suffers adverse judgment and
thereupon pays, either in his father’s lifetime or after his death,
the fairest rule to give is that he hasa right to sue to recover [part]
from his co-heir in an action familie erciscunde. 20. The judge
in the action familie erciscunde ought not to leave anything
undivided. 21. He ought also to see that an undertaking is given
to the persons in whom he vests the property to secure them against
its being recovered by superior title. 22. If money which was not
left in the house is bequeathed [to one of the heirs] per
preceptionem (to be taken by retainer), it is a matter of question
whether the co-heirs ought to pay the whole amount or only pay
in proportion to their shares in the inheritance, just as if the
money had been left so as to be found among the other assets; but
on the whole the proper view is that the amount which must be
paid is what would be paid if the money had been found.


Garus (on the provincial Edict 7) But it is within the
competence of the judge to order that something or several
things included in the estate shouid be sold, and that the money
arising from the sale should be paid to any legatee to whom such
money was bequeathed.


Pauus (on the Edict 23) In this action an order must be
made or the application dismissed with reference to every party ;
consequently, if the order is omitted in the case of any party,
there will be no validity in anything done by the judge with
reference to the remaining parties, as it is impossible for a decision


28


29


30


TIT, 11] On Dividing an Inheritance 185


pronounced in some one case to be in force with reference to part
of the matter in question and not with reference to another part.


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 7) If a testator should
bequeath per preeceptionem something which he has pledged for
debt, it is open to the judge to order that the pledge should be
redeemed out of the common funds and that the party to whom
the thing was bequeathed as above should have it.


Pauwus (on the Edict 23) If a thing was given to the
deceased by way of pledge, we must hold that it will be included
in the action familie erciscunde ; but the person to whom it is
assigned by the judge in this action must be ordered to pay his
co-heir for it in proportion to the latter’s share in the inheritance ;
moreover he (the latter!) need not give his co-heir any undertaking
that he shall be kept harmless in the case of an action [to redeem |
on the part of the pledgor, as things will be in the same kind of
position as if a hypothecarian or Servian action had been brought
and the assessed amount at stake had been tendered [by a stranger |,
where the person [so] offering the money would thereupon have a
right to be protected by an exceptio against the owner [pledgor], if
the latter brought an action to recover the property. We may add,
on the other hand, that if the heir to whom the thing pledged has
been assigned wishes to restore the whole, he will get a hearing,
even if the pledgor should object. Where the creditor (¢.e. one
heir) buys the thing pledged [from his co-heir], the rule is not the
same, because assignment by the Court takes effect compulsorily,
but purchase is a matter of choice ; unless indeed, [in the case of
the assignment,]| the creditor should be charged with bidding for
the possession of the thing greedily. The reason why the above
is taken into consideration is that what the creditor did is to be
treated as if the debtor had done it through an agent, and any
expense that such creditor was obliged to incur he can recover by
an original action.


MopEstiInus (Responsa 6) 1 have a piece of land in common
with a girl sai juris who is under age and co-heir with me ; in the
same land human remains are buried to which veneration is due
on the part of both?, in fact, the girl’s own parents are buried there.
Her guardians, however, wish to sell the land, to which I do not


1 This is assumed without comment, and must be correct. See Bas. and
Pothier ; but we miss the word dle.
* Read partibus for patribus. Glick.


31


32


33


34


186 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


consent, preferring, as I do, to keep in my hands my own portion,
as I cannot afford to buy the whole piece of land, and I should
like to discharge the duty which we owe to the dead (jus religionis)
at my own pleasure. I wish to know whether my proper course is
to ask for an arbiter by an action communi dividundo to partition
the piece of land in question, or the same arbiter as is appointed
for the purposes of the action familie erciscunde can discharge the
office as well, and so divide this property too between us in
accordance with our respective rights apart from the rest of the
assets. Herennius Modestinus replied that there was nothing in
the facts stated to prevent the person who was appointed arbiter
in the action familie erciscunde from extending the exercise of
his function to the business of dividing the piece of land in
question ; at the same time “religious” spots could not be brought
within the scope of the action, and rights over them appertained
to each separate heir in respect of the whole.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) If a slave who is pledged for
debt is redeemed by one of the heirs, then, even though after that
the slave should die, still the arbiter’s official position in respect of
him will continue ; there is sufficient ground for this furnished by
the fact of common ownership which was previously existing and
would be continuing at this day if the property had not perished.


THE SAME (Responsa 2) Such things as a father has not
divided among his children, after! giving them rights of action by
way of making a division, belong to the children in proportion to
their respective shares in the inheritance ; provided always he did
not bestow them under one general description on a single child,
and they are not accessory to the things given.


THE SAME (Responsa 7) Where a father, in bequeathing
different parcels of land to his respective heirs, desired to execute a
partition as if he were an arbiter, one co-heir will not be compelled
to hand over his share save on the terms of getting in return a
share which is free from the burden of a pledge.


THE SAME (Responsa 8) Where slaves were valued as
between co-heirs at the time of partition, it is held that prices are
put upon them not with a view to purchase but to division ;
consequently, if any die while a condition is still pending [on

1M. would insert after datas the words res et collatas; making the whole


equivalent to “after making over property and giving rights,” etc. He refers to
20. 3 above.


35


36


TIT. 11] On Dividing an Inheritance 187


which they were to go to someone in pursuance of a testamentary
trust], the loss is held to fall on both the heir and the fidei-
commissary.


THE SAME (Responsa 12) Pomponius Philadelphus delivered
certain plots of ground by way of dos to a daughter whom he
had under his potestas, and requested that the rents and profits of
the same should be handed over to his son-in-law [her husband] ;
the question was asked whether the daughter could retain the land
for herself on the father appointing all his children (filios) heirs.
My answer was that the daughter had good ground to retain the
possession ; as the father desired the lands in question to go for
dos, and the married state had continued even after the father’s
death ; the fact being, I said, that the case being defended
was that of a daughter who remained in de facto possession,
as though in virtue of a dos which she was capable of taking.


PAULUS (Questions 2) Being of opinion that you were my
co-heir, whereas the fact was not so, I brought an action familice
erciscunde against you, and vesting orders and orders to pay were
made by the judge on both of us: I wish to know whether, on the
real facts being discovered, there are mutual rights of action for
reconveyance or actions on claims of ownership ; also whether one
rule applies in the case of the party who is heir and another in the
case of the party who is not heir? My answer was as follows :—If
a man is sole heir, and, under the idea that Titius is co-heir along
with him, he joins issue in proceedings familie erciscunde
between them, and, on orders for payment being made, pays
accordingly, then, seeing that he paid in pursuance of a judgment
of the Court, he cannot sue to have the money back. But your
point seems to be that no action familie erciscunde can be
entertained save between co-heirs ; still, even if the proceeding is
no [legal] action, nevertheless it is a sufficient obstacle to the action
to recover what was handed over that the party believed himself
to be [legally] ordered to pay it. If, on the other hand, neither
party was heir, but they join issue in the action familie erciscunde
as if they were heirs, the rule as to recovering the property just
laid down in respect of one party will apply to both. No doubt, if
they divided the property without applying to a judge, then it may
be said that there is a good right even to bring a personal action
for redelivery of those things which went to the party whom the


_ actual heir took to be his co-heir ; it cannot be held, where the


37


38


39


188 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


heir [only] thought that the other was his co-heir, that the matter
was compounded between them.


SCAVOLA (Questions 12) A man who takes proceedings by
way of action familie erciscunde admits! that the other party is
his co-heir.


PAULUS (Responsa 3) Lucius and Titia, brother and sister,
being emancipated by their father, had, when adult, curators
appointed them, and these supplied both of them separately with
money which was their common property, being derived from rents
and profits. They afterwards divided the whole property between
them, and, this being done, Titia, the sister, began proceedings
against her brother Lucius on the alleged ground that he had
received more than she had. Now as Lucius the brother did not
get more than his proper portion, indeed got less than half the
whole estate, I wish to ask whether Titia has a good right of action
against her brother. Paulus replied :—‘“ Upon the facts stated, if
Lucius did not receive from the rents and profits of the lands
owned in common more than what he had a right to in virtue of
his share in the inheritance, I should say that his sister has no
right of action against him.” He gave a similar answer in a case
where it was maintained that an alimentary provision having been
ordered by the Preetor, a brother had received more than his
sister, but not more than half the whole.


SCAVOLA (Responsa 1) A man who was appointed heir in
respect of a share defended an action relative to the whole estate,
the action being against all the heirs and founded on the alleged
fact of their not having avenged [the testator’s”] death,—and he
got judgment ; hereupon a co-heir brought an action to recover
his share from the heir above mentioned, but declined to pay his
portion of the expense incurred in defending the [previous] action.
The question was asked whether the co-heir’s action would be
barred by an eaceptio of dolus. My answer was that if additional
expense had been incurred [by the present defendant] in conse-
quence of a defence which he had made in the interest of [the
present plaintiff | himself [as well as his own], such expense ought
to be taken into account ; and even if the present defendant did
not raise the exceptio of dolus, he could bring an action to be


1 Omit non, M.: who follows the Basilica, and relies on the logical bearing of
the affirmative on s. 36.
2 My


TIT. IT] On Dividing an Inheritance 189


reimbursed a portion of the expenditure incurred. 1. A man
who died intestate made codicils in which he divided all his landed
estates and other property between his [two] children in such a
way as to leave a great deal more to his son than to his daughter ;
the question was asked whether the sister was bound to bring her
dos into hotchpot for the benefit of her brother. My answer was
that, upon the facts as stated, if the deceased left no property
undivided, the more correct view was that the right to ask to have
the dos brought into hotchpot was taken away by the deceased’s
own wish. 2. A testator gave a slave of the age of fifteen years
his freedom when he should reach the age of thirty, and also
signified his wish that there should be given him from the day of
his own death for the rest of the slave's life ten denarii [a
month?!?] for his food and twenty-five denarii [a year! ?] for his
clothing. Stichus [the slave in question] having died before the
day when he was to be free, the question was asked whether the
legacy providing food and clothing was valid, and also whether, in
case it were not valid, the heir who had paid it could recover it
from his co-heir in whose house the slave had been living. My
answer was that the money had not been due and payable, but
still, if what was given had been spent on aliment, that it could not
be recovered. 3. A man cannot charge his brother in proportion
to the share of the latter in the inheritance of their father with
debts owing to the municipality which he himself contracted after
the father’s death, unless the two brothers were partners in respect
of their whole property ; even though they possessed their father’s
estate in common and the father before his death had discharged
a magistracy in his municipality on behalf of his other son. 4. A
man named his two sons heirs, and bequeathed to each of them by
way of prelegatum certain specified slaves, including, in the case
of one of the sons, a slave named Stephanus, with his pecauliwm.
This slave was manumitted and died in the lifetime of the testator,
then the father died ; and the question was asked whether what
Stephanus had in his pecudiwm before he was manumitted belonged
to both sons, or only to the one to whom Stephanus was bequeathed
by way of prelegatum with his peculiwm. My answer was that,
on the facts as stated, it belonged to both. 5. A father divided
his property amongst his sons, and confirmed the division by
testament, providing further that whatever debt any one of his
sons had incurred or should incur he should remain liable for the
whole of it; after this, on one of the sons borrowing money, the
1 Cf. M. and D. 34. 1. 18. pr.


40


41


42


43


44


190 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


father came forward, and, with his consent, the land which he had
assigned to the son was pledged [as a security for the money].
After the death of the father, the same son was in possession of the
land and paid interest on the debt ; I wish to know, supposing the
creditor sells the land given in pledge, whether anything will have
to be paid to this son by a co-heir which could be realised by an
action familie erciscunde. My answer was that, taking the facts
as stated, nothing need be paid.


GaAtlus (Fideicommissa 2) If a person who is appointed sole
heir is requested to hand over a particular portion to me, for
example, half, an wtilis actio familie erciscunde can properly be
brought between us.


PAULUS (Decrees 1) A woman appealed from the decision
of a judge on the ground, as she alleged, that, in an action familie
erciscunde between her and a co-heir, he had divided not only the
property but the freedmen too, and also the [liability to pay an]
alimentary provision which the testator had ordered to be given to
particular freedmen ; this, she said, he had no right to do. It was
replied on the other hand that both parties had agreed to the
division and had paid the alimentary provision for a great number
of years in accordance with the terms agreed upon. The decision
was that they must abide by the alimentary provision; but the
judge added that the division of freedmen was of no force.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 6) If a legacy is made to one of
the heirs as follows :—“let him retain out of his share what he
owes me,” it comes within the duty of the judge of the action
Jamilic erciscunde to forbid the co-heirs from demanding from
the heir in question payment of the debt ; as, even where one heir
is told to retain what is owed by another, rights of action ought, in
pursuance of the duty of the judge, to be assigned to him in
proportion to the share of a co-heir.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinas 30) An arbiter may be asked for in
the action familice erciscunde even by one party only, as it is
well known that an appeal to the judge may be made even by
a single heir ; consequently a single heir can ask for an arbiter,
even though the others are present and refuse their consent to the
application.


PauLus (on Sabinus 6) Among co-heirs there may be
proceedings taken communi dividundo in such wise that the only


TPE, 1] On Dwiding an Inheritance 191


things embraced by the action are such things as belong to the
parties in common, and questions which can be raised in respect of
these things, the right of action familiw erciscunde being left
untouched with reference to everything else. 1. If an action
Samilie, erciscunde or communi dividundo has been carried
through, the Preetor allows exceptions or actions so as to maintain
any assignments made by the Court. 2. If co-heirs have sold
property in the absence of one of their number, and have therein
fraudulently contrived that they should get more than their share,
they can be called upon to make good the loss to the one who was
absent by means of either an action familie erciscunde or a petitio
hereditatis. 3. Any produce which an heir takes before entry on
the inheritance from land included in the deceased's estate he does
not, according to Julianus, have to give up pursuant to an action
Jamilie erciscunde, save where he took it with knowledge of the
fact that the land was part of the deceased’s estate. 4. Persons
who bring the actions familie erciscunde, or communi dividundo,
or finium regundorum are both plaintiffs and defendants ; conse-
quently they are bound to swear that they do not take contentious
proceedings vexatiously nor deny their liability vexatiously.
5. Wherever a single co-heir, in pursuance of a promise on
stipulation binding the heirs, makes a payment incurred through
his own act, he cannot recover it from his co-heir; for example,
where the deceased promised that no malicious act (dolus malus)
should be committed by himself or his heir or that nothing should
be done by himself or his heir which should prevent some specified
person from using a footpath or a drive. Indeed, even where the
other heirs incur liability through the act of one, on the ground
that the condition mentioned in a stipulation binding the heirs has
come to pass, they will have a good right of action familie
erciscunde. against the one through whom it happened that an
action could be brought on the stipulation. 6. Where a man
stipulates that Titius and his heir shall ratify some act of his, and
Titius dies leaving several heirs, [it is held] that the heir who failed
to ratify is alone liable ; and [similarly, in case the promisee dies’, |
that, of the promisee’s heirs, the one against whom proceedings
have been taken can alone enforce the liability. 7. Where a man
bequeaths a usufruct to his widow till such time as her dos shall be
duly made over to her, then, according to Cassius, by order of the
arbiter in the action familie erciscunde, anything that may have

1 M. suggests wterque instead of Titius, where the name occurs the second time:
i.e. “both die” instead of “ T. dies.”


45


46


47


192 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK X


been given by way of dos on behalf of a co-heir can be recovered!
[from him] and, on the other hand, a co-heir can be made to pay
[his proportion of] the dos; which is quite correct. 8. If two
co-heirs are ordered by testament to erect a statue, whereupon one
does nothing and the other sets up the statue, Julianus says
that there is no injustice in an action familie erciscunde being
allowed, so that a portion of the expense may be paid to be deter-
mined by the judgment of a reasonable arbitrator.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 13) — If you maintain that some part
of the inheritance of a deceased person is common to you and me
which I, on some other ground, declare to be my own in severalty,
the question does not come within the scope of the action familie
erciscunde. 1. Ul practice on the part of a slave of an heir is
not embraced by the action familie erciscunde, unless there was
so far negligence in the owner of the slave that he employed an
untrustworthy slave about the common property.


Pauuus (on Sabinus 7) If the husband is appointed heir by
his father subject to a condition, [the rule is] that in the meantime
the wife’s right of action for dos is suspended. No doubt, if
a divorce takes place after her father-in-law’s death, though at
a time when the condition on which her husband was to be heir is
still pending, the rule is that he has a right of retainer as to the
dos, because, on the death of the father, some things go with his
sons even before they become his heirs, such as [duties connected
with the expense entailed by] marriage or [with] children or
guardianship. Accordingly, a son who, after the death of his father,
bore the expense entailed by marriage has a right to retain the dos ;
and this was the opinion of our friend Sczevola himself.


PomPpontivus (on Sabinus 21) Inthe action familie erciscunde
or communi dividundo, if, while the matter is before the arbiter,
there is a dispute as to a servitude, the rule is that all those
amongst whom the arbiter has been appointed can bring actions or
make a “notification of novel structure” according to their re-
spective shares in the property; and, when vesting orders are made
by the arbiter, then, if the whole estate should be assigned to one
heir, undertakings ought to be given that anything that might be
won by means of the actions [brought in connexion with the
dispute] should be made over [to him], and any cost incurred in
them should be made good [by him] ; and, in case no action was
brought with reference to the land while the case was before the

1 Read reciperart for reciperare potest.


48


49


TIT. It] On Dividing an Inheritance 193


arbiter (in judicio), the original right of action should go with the
person to whom the whole piece of land is assigned by order of the
arbiter, or the right of action connected with whatever share it is
in respect of which the assignment is made. 1. Again, as to things
which are movable and which can be made the subject of the
actions in question, should any such things come to be stolen
while the case is proceeding, actions for theft can be brought by
those persons at whose risk the things were.


Pauus (on Sabinus 12) If proceedings are taken, either
Jamie erciscunde, or communi dividundo, or finium regundorum,
and one of the parties dies leaving several heirs, the case cannot be
split up into parts, but either all the heirs must accept the matter
as it stands or they must appoint some one person as procurator
against whom the case may proceed, as representing them all.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 2) A person was appointed heir
for a particular share, and was ordered by the Preetor to bury the
testator. Accordingly he sold a slave who had been given his
liberty by the testament, and gave the purchaser the promise of
twice the value [in case of recovery by superior title], after which,
being sued in pursuance of his engagement, he paid the money.
The question is asked whether he can get back by an action
Jamilice erciscunde the amount which he is out of pocket through
his promise of twice the value. As to this, let us first consider
whether he was bound to undertake to pay the double value. For
my own part I should say that he was not bound ; the only persons
who are bound to promise the double value are those who sell of
their own accord ; but if the party selling! is discharging a duty,
he ought not to be constrained to make the promise, any more than
a person who sells where the Preetor appointed him to carry out
a judgment ; even there the party is not in such a position that he
is compellable to do everything which is required of those who sell
at their own pleasure ; persons who undertake a duty and persons
who sell voluntarily? are in very different positions. Consequently
at the outset the party was not bound to make the promise for
the double value, but it is for the Preetor to rule that the
purchaser has a good right of action as such against the person
who becomes heir, if the thing sold should be recovered by a third
person. If however the heir has made the mistake and given the


1 For distrahentis read distrahens. Cf. M.
* Read suscipientes et voluntate distrahentes for suscipientis et voluntatem
distrahentis. Cf. M.


ME FeT. 13


50


51


194 On Dividing an Inheritance [BOOK x


undertaking, and, after that, the slave acquires his liberty, an
action may be brought on the stipulation, and, should it be
brought, it is only fair that the heir who sold should have an wézles
actio allowed him against his co-heir,—the direct action familie
erciscunde being inapplicable,—so as to prevent the heir from
having to abide by the loss. The fact is that, for a man to be in
a position to bring the action familie erciscunde, it is required
not merely that he should be heir, but that he should be a party,
either as plaintiff or defendant, in consequence of some matter
constituting an act or default on his part subsequent to his
becoming heir: otherwise the action famdlie erciscunde is not
applicable. The consequence is that if a man should do any act in
connexion with an inheritance before he knew that he was heir,
there is no room for an action familie erciscunde, because he
clearly did not do it with intent to act as heir ; so that a man who
has done anything before entry on the inheritance, for example,
buried the testator, has no action familie erciscunde ; but if he
did it after entry, it follows that we must hold that he can by
means of an action familie erciscunde get back the expenditure
which he made on the funeral.


THE SAME (Opinions 6) Where a father has furnished
assistance to an emancipated son who is spending his time abroad
with a view to study, if it should be shown that the father forwarded
the supplies in question not by way of a loan, but moved thereto
by natural feeling, justice will not allow them to be reckoned as
included in the portion of the goods of the deceased [father] which
come to the same son.


JULIANUS (Digest 8) Land having been delivered to the
father-in-law [of a bride] by way of dos, if such father-in-law
should appoimt his son [the husband] heir with respect to any
share in his inheritance, the land ought to be taken in advance
(preecipt) 1 pursuance of an order of the arbiter in an action
Jamie erciscundw, so as to make the legal position of the son the
same as! it would have been, if the dos had been bequeathed to be
taken in advance. Consequently produce realized after joinder of
issue must go to him, allowance being made for outlay ; but that
which is realized before joinder will belong to all the heirs equally.


1] venture to read que for in qua. M. suggests qua futurus instead of in
qua futura: the resulting English would, I suppose, be this :—‘‘so that it (ze. the
land) will belong to the son subject to the same implications as those to which it
would have been subject,” etc. On the whole the sense is the same.


52


53


TIT. 11] On Dividing an Inheritance 195


Outlay again must be allowed for, as no case can occur which would
stand in the way of an abatement on that score. 1. Should
I desire to bring a petitio hereditatis against you, and you to sue
me in an action familie erciscunde, we ought both to be gratified,
on sufficient cause shown ; as, when I am in possession of the whole
inheritance and admit that you are heir to the extent of half, but
I wish to give up the common ownership, I ought to have an
action familie erciscundee allowed me, because there is no other
way in which the inheritance can be divided between us. Again,
if you have a sufficient reason for desiring to settle the matter by
a petitio hereditatis, rather than an action familie erciscunde,
then you must yourself be allowed to bring a petitio hereditatis, as
some things are embraced in that form of procedure which have no
place in the other; suppose, for example, I am a debtor to the
estate, you will not recover by an action familie erciscunde my
debt to the deceased, but, by a petitio hereditatis, you will.


THE SAME (on Urseius Ferox 2) Meevius, who appointed
us heirs by his testament, had some property in co-ownership with
Attius ; supposing after that we bring an action communi
dividundo against Attius, and the above property is vested in us
by order of the judge, then, according to Proculus, it will be
embraced in an action familie erciscunde [between us]. 1. A
slave as to whom it is provided [by his owner’s testament} that he
shall be free and heir is compellable by an action familie erciscundee
to make good to his co-heirs any balance which he retains in his
hands from accounts which he kept for the deceased owner. 2. An
arbiter whom you and I took to be judge between us in an action
Jamilice erciscundee wished te assign some things to me and others
to you, and considered that with reference to these things each
party ought to be ordered to make a payment to the other ; but it
was asked whether it was not open to him to set off one amount
against the other and to make one order, confined to the party
who owed the larger sum, simply to pay the amount of the
excess. It was thereupon held that it was open to the arbiter
to take this course. 3. In proceedings familie erciscunde or
communi dividundo the valuation to be made is that of the whole
of the assets, not of the different shares in the specific things.


ULPIANUS (Responsa 2) A sum of money which was lent by
an emancipated son, on the understanding that it should be repaid
to his father, will, it was held, be reckoned part of the father’s


13—2


54


55


56


57


196 On Dwiding an Inheritance [BOOK X


inheritance only where the father had a good right of action against
the son in respect of the same sum.


NERATIUS (Membrana 3) You and I being heirs in common
to Lucius Titius, I disposed of my share in a piece of land forming
part of the assets, and, after that, an action familie erciscunde
was taken between us. Hereupon no account will be taken in
the trial of the share which once was mine, seeing that, when it
was disposed of, it ceased to be part of the inheritance, nor will
any be taken of your share, because, however true it is that it is
still held by its old title and is part of the inheritance, still, by the
disposition made of my part, it is taken out of the common
ownership. Whether one heir only forbears to dispose of his
portion or more than one do the same is a matter of no importance,
so long as there is some portion or other which is disposed of by
one of the heirs, and consequently has ceased to be part of the
inheritance.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 2) If an action familie erciscunde
or communi dividundo is brought and the business of division is
so difficult as apparently to be almost impossible, it is open to the
judge to make the whole decree in favour of one person and to
vest [in him] the whole of the assets.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) Not merely in an action jinium
regundorum, but in one familie erciscunde. too, arrears of produce.
will be included along with present produce.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 2) Even after an arbiter has been
accepted, brothers who divide by agreement a common inheritance
are discharging a duty enjoined by family affection, and the
division’ ought not to be given up, even if, when the hearing is
ended, the arbiter should deliver no judgment; provided there is
no case for giving relief on the ground of immature age.


1 Ins. divisionem after quam. M.


1


2


3


4


TIT. I] Partition of Common Property 197


Il.


PARTITION OF COMMON PROPERTY.


PAULUS (on the Edict 23) The action communi dividundo
(for partition of common property) is one that was required for the
reason that the action pro socio rather deals with personal renders
and transfers on both sides than with the division of common
property. Of course the action for partition cannot be brought
where there is no property held in common.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict7) But it makes no difference
whether it is with partnership or without partnership that property
is held among sundry persons in common, as the action communi
dividundo is applicable in both cases. Common property occurs
with partnership where, for example, the parties are persons who
have jointly purchased the same thing ; it occurs without partner-
ship where, say, they are persons to whom the same thing was
bequeathed by testament. 1. In respect of the three double actions,
viz. familie erciscunde, communi dividundo and jfinium regun-
dorum, the question has been raised which party is to be regarded
as plaintiff, as all parties seem to be in the same position; however
the view on the whole adopted is that the person that must be held
to be the plaintiff is the one who challenged the others to legal
proceedings.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 30) Inan action communi dividundo
nothing is admitted save the question of the division of the actual
things which are owned in common and that of any damage caused
or done to any of these things or of any loss or expenditure being
incurred by one of the co-owners or of anything coming to his hands
out of the common property. 1. If the parties themselves have
made any mutual agreement in good faith, the judge in the action
Familice erciscunde or communi dividundo is bound to maintain
it in the first place.


THE SAME (on the Edict 19) By means of this action
a division is made of corporeal things, these being such as persons
are owners of; it does not go on to give any partition of an
inheritance. 1. The question has been raised whether there can
be an action communi dividundo brought with reference to a well;
to which Mela says that it can only be where the soil in which the


198 Partition ef Common Property [BOOK X


well is sunk is owned in common. 2. The action is bona fide ;
consequently, if some one thing should be left undivided, both the
partition of all the rest will be perfectly valid and further
proceedings communi dividundo can be taken in respect of the
thing which remained undivided. 3. As the partition of an actual
thing may be made the subject of an action communi dividundo,
so also may renders and payments ; accordingly, where a co-owner
has laid out money, he can recover [a portion of ] it; moreover, even
if his action is not against an actual fellow-owner, but against the
heir of a fellow-owner, Labeo holds very properly that both
expense [incurred] and produce realized by the deceased are
brought into account. No doubt produce realized before the
property was owned in common and outlay made before the same
date are not embraced by the action communi dividundo. 4. Ac-
cordingly Julianus tells us that, if you and I get an order putting
us into interim possession for damnum infectum, and, before the
final order to take possession, I shore up the building, I cannot
reeover the cost of doing so by an action communi dividundo.


JULIANUS (on Urseius Ferox 2) But if no defence was made
and accordingly we have got a final order from the Przetor for
possession of the house and in pursuance of it we have become
owners, it is laid down by Proculus that by means of an action
communi dividundo 1 can recover a part of the expense which I
incurred.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 19) If a man believes that he owns
a piece of land in common with Titius, whereas he really owns it In ~
common with someone else, and thereupon he takes produce from
it or makes an outlay on it, proceedings can be taken by way of an
utilis actio communi dividundo*. 1. Consequently, even if he?
should dispose of [his share in} the land, then, although thereupon
an action communi dividundo would be inadmissible, because the
ownership in common is broken up, still it is held that it is a case
for an wfilis actio, such an action being allowed in respect of
[previous] payments, where [the property] has ceased to be owned
incommon. 2. But where a co-owner makes any profit out of the
land owned in common, either by letting it or by cultivating it, he
can be sued in an action communi dividundo, and, if he was acting
on behalf of the co-owners in general, he ought not to make [the
whole] gain or bear [the whole] loss, but, if he did not act on behalf

1 See note at the end of this title.


1 The text has Titius, but M. following Cujas, would omit this name, and so
attribute the disposition to the other party. This seems necessary.


TIT. 111] Partition of Common Property 199


of the co-owners, but with a view to his own exclusive gain, it is,
on the whole, right that loss should fall on him. The reason why
he has to account for his gains in an action communi dividundo is
that it is recognized that he could not have found it an easy matter
to let his own share. However an action communi dividundo, as
Papinianus himself tells us, will be in place only where he did no
more than what was indispensable for properly managing his own
share ; if he did more than that, he can bring an action for negotia
gesta and he is liable to a similar action himself. 3. If any outlay
should be made after joinder of issue in an action communi
dividundo, Nerva is very properly of opinion that this will be
included as well. 4. We may add that Sabinus and Atilicinus lay
it down that children of a female slave are included in like
manner. 5. Moreover, the same authors held that the scope of
this action lends itself to accessions or reductions. 6. If a man
buries a body in common ground, a question to consider is
whether he makes the ground “religious.” As to this, there
is no doubt that each co-owner has the full right of burying in
a place of sepulture, but one of the two by himself cannot make
ordinary ground religious. But Trebatius and Labeo, though
they hold that the place is not made religious, are still of opinion
that there is a right of action im jfactum. 7. If you give an
undertaking in respect of a house against damnum infectum for
the full amount, Labeo says that you have no right of action
communi dividundo, because you were not obliged to give the
undertaking for the full amount, but it was enough’ to give it for
an amount proportional to your share; and this view is correct.
8. If you and I have a piece of land in common, but it [ze. my
share] is pledged by me for debt, it will be embraced by the action
communi dividundo, but the creditor's right as pledgee will remain
unaffected, even though the land should have been assigned by the
Court, as, in fact, the security would be unaffected even if one
co-owner had delivered his share to the other. But the arbiter in
the action communi dividundo is bound, according to Julianus, to
value the share at so much the less in consideration of the fact that
the creditor is able to sell that particular subject-matter in
pursuance of the agreement to that effect. 9. Julianus also tells
us that if a man with whom I had a slave in common pledges his
share to me and thereupon proceeds to bring an action communi
dividundo, he could be barred by an exceptio of pledge ; should I
however not raise this exceptio, it will then be the duty of the judge,
1 Read szufficeret for sufficere. Cf. M.


200 Partition of Common Property [BOOK X


after assigning the undivided slave to the debtor, to order him to
pay me the estimated value of my share, as my right as pledgee
remains unaffected ; but if the judge assigns the slave to me, then
he can only order me to pay a sum equal to the excess of the value
of the property pledged over the money that I lent, and he must
order that the debtor be discharged of his debt to me. 10. It is
within the attributions of the judge that the order made should be
one which vests the land in one party and a usufruct therein in the
other. 11. The remaining points are the same as we have dealt
with in connexion with the action familie erciscunde. 12. Ac-
cording to Urseius, where a neighbour has given the “notification
against executing any works” in respect of a building which two
persons own in common, then, if an order is made on one of the
co-owners in pursuance thereof, he can recover the damages paid
from his fellow-owner to the extent of the share [of the latter] ;
but Julianus observes quite correctly that this is true only where
it was beneficial to the house that the thing should be done.


THE SAME (on the Edict 20) An action communi dividundo
will lie even in respect of land let on perpetual lease (ager
vectigalis). Whether such land can be divided into distinct
plots is a question to consider; but, on the whole, the judge
ought to avoid making a division of that kind, otherwise the
perpetual rent will get into confusion. 1. Neratius tells us
that where the arbiter, after dividing an estate not leased in
perpetuity into [two] distinct plots, assigns them to two persons
respectively, he can impose servitudes, just as if there were two
separate estates. 2. Persons who are in a position to bring the
Publician action in rem can equally take proceedings communi
dividundo. 3. There are some cases in which, though’ there may
be no right of action to recover property as owner, still, if there is
good ground for holding possession, an wtilis actio communi
dividundo® is open; for example, suppose a case where property
is in someone’s possession in pursuance of a payment made where
none was due®, 4. The action is not available ,among mere
plunderers, nor will it lie where persons are in possession on


1 Ins. ubi before vindicatio. M.

2 See note at the end of this title.

3 This translates the text, but M., following Keller, would read debiti for
indebiti. This would make it “in pursuance of payment off of the money owed” ;
the case supposed is that of a mortgagor who pays the mortgage debt without
taking a reconveyance and remains in possession, the mortgage being of the old-
fashioned kind by jiducia. Of. Gaius, 2. 60.


TIT. 111] Partition of Common Property 201


precarium (on request, at will) or by stealth; in the case first
mentioned the possession is simply wrongful, in the case of
precarium it is legal, no doubt, but it is not substantial enough to
give ground for an action. 5. Julianus tells us that if one possessor
challenges a division, but the other alleges that the applicant is in
possession by force, this action ought not to be allowed, in fact, not
even after the lapse of a year, because the law is that even after the
year an interdict will be granted against a person who turned
another out by force. Even, he adds, where the allegation is that
the party applying is in possession on precarium, this action is still
out of place, because an interdict is equally allowed in a case of
precarium. Again, if the applicant is alleged to be in possession
by stealth, the proper rule, he says, is that the action cannot be
brought, since the interdict, as he informs us, is obtainable where
the possession is by stealth. 6. If there are two persons who have
taken property in pledge as a security for a debt, it is, he holds,
perfectly fair that they should be allowed an utilis actio communi
dividundo'. 7. Similarly, if there is a dispute between two persons
with reference to a usufruct, the same action ought to be allowed.
8. Again, where two persons are put in possession by order of the
Preetor to preserve legacies, the rule is the same ; there is a good
ground of possession in regard of the custody to be exercised.
Consequently, where there are two unborn children, the rule still
holds, and this is reasonable. 9. No doubt, where a man who is
put in possession on the ground of apprehended damage has already
got a final order to possess, there will be no room for the wtzlis
actio' on his behalf, as he is in a position to bring a vindicatio
(action to recover as owner). 10. Where an action communi
dividundo is brought in respect of a usufruct, the office of the
judge may be exercised in any one of the following ways :—he may
allow the parties to exercise usufructs in distinct portions
respectively, or he can let the usufruct [in the whole] to one of them,
or he can let it to some third person, so as to enable the parties to
draw the rents and have no further dispute, or, if the property is
movable, he can do this,—he can make the parties come to an
agreement and give mutual undertakings that they will enjoy the
use and produce for limited periods, that is to say, that the usufruct
is to go to the two alternately, each taking it for a specified time.
11. The action is not available for agricultural tenants nor for
persons who have taken property on deposit, though in both cases
the parties have natural possession. 12. Where persons have taken
1 See note at the end of this title.


202 Partition of Common Property [BOOK X


something in common as a pledge for debt, the division which
ought to be made among them is one in which a share is not
estimated at its real value, but only in respect of the amount of
debt secured on that particular share, and the property pledged is
assigned to one of the creditors, but the debtor is left at full liberty
to tender the amount of his debt and so to redeem his pledge. The
same principle is applied where the debtor brings an actio
prgneratitia’ (action to redeem) in rem, and the person who is in
possession of the property offers to pay him the amount assessed.
13. Ifa debtor has pledged his share in a plot of ground which he
has in common with another, and his creditor, being called upon
[to make a partition] either by the owner of the other share or by
another creditor, viz. one of another debtor, outbids his rival [in
an auction for the property pledged and so takes an assignment of
the whole plot], after which the debtor of the man to whom the plot
has been [so] assigned, .e. the debtor first mentioned, | desires to get
back his share of the plot on payment of his own debt, it is held,
in accordance with strict principle, that he will not get a hearing
unless he is prepared to take in addition the share which his
creditor bought under the assignment. In fact, even if you sell
a share in something, and, before you have delivered it to the
purchaser, you are sued in an action communi dividundo, and an
order is made vesting in you the other share [too], there is
a corresponding rule, to the effect that there can be no action
brought in pursuance of the purchase, unless the plaintiff is
prepared to take the whole property, because the additional share
came to the vendor through the first share ; and not only so, but
the purchaser can be himself sued in pursuance of the sale to make
him take the whole; the only point to make sure of is whether there
is any fraud in the case on the part of the vendor. On the other
hand, if, after selling your share, you should yourself be outbidden,
and [have to] resign [to your fellow-owner the share which you sold],
you will be liable on a similar principle to an action by the
purchaser to make you refund the purchase-money. The same rule
applies to the case of mandatum and other actions arising under
circumstances of this kind.


PAULUS (on the Hdict 23) And if it is not the whole number
of co-owners but only some of them in particular who wish to have
a partition, this action may be had amongst them. 1. Should it be
uncertain whether the lex Falcidia applies as between a legatee


1 Read pigneratitia for pigneratitiam. Cf. M.


10


Tar oe Partition of Common Property 203


and the heir, there can be an action communi dividundo, or
a vindicatio is allowed for an unascertained share. The like is the
case where there is a legacy of a peculium, because it is un-
certain how far a debt to the owner reduces the contents of the
peculium. 2. The action communi dividundo includes the case of
a co-owner spoiling a piece of common property, as, for example,
by wounding a slave or corrupting his character, or by cutting
down trees on the land. 3. If a man pays on behalf of a slave
owned in common a larger sum by way of damages for the slave’s
misfeasance [than he need have paid], a value will be set on the
slave and he will get part of it [from his fellow-owner]. 4. Again,
if one co-owner is sued de peculio for the whole of a debt and
judgment is given against him, he has an action communi
dividundo against his fellow-owner by which he can recover part
of the peculium.


AFRICANUS (Questions 7) But where one co-owner has been
ordered, in pursuance of an action de peculio brought in respect of
a slave owned in common, to pay the whole debt, then, if things
which are contained in the peculiwm are lost in [such] co-owner’s
hands, there will still be an utilis actio communi dividundo' to
recover part of the money paid ; because it would be an injustice
if the whole matter operated to the loss of the man who sustained
the action, considering that the risk, as to things contained in the
peculium, ought to fall on both the owners. It will be remembered
that where a man takes up the defence of a slave at his owner’s
request, he will be indemnified as to all outlay he makes in good
faith, although the peculiwm should afterwards be lost. This is on
the assumption that no negligence occurs in the case on the side of
either party ; as our authority held that, if the owner who is sued
in the action de peculio is prepared to cede the contents of the
peculium to the plaintiff, his application will be entertained on
sufficient cause shown, provided, that is, he would cede without any
fraudulent or vexatious intention.


Pauwus (on the Edict 23) Moreover, although the action
on the lex Aquilia is not available against the heir, nevertheless in
the action under consideration the heir of a fellow-owner must
make good any damage done by the deceased to the common
property for which there is a good right of action created under the
lex Aquilia. 1. Where a man has only an wsus, a thing which


1 See note at the end of this title.


11


12


13


14


204 Partition of Common Property [BOOK X


cannot be either sold or let, let us consider how a partition can be
made in an action communi dividundo. However, as to this, the
Preetor interposes and brings the matter into shape, the under-
standing being that if the judge vests the actual uses in one, it will
not be held that the other, who accepts a value, is not exercising
usus, on the alleged ground that the one who is seen to be in actual
enjoyment goes further than the other; the fact being that that
state of things is a necessity of the case. 2. In an action communi
dividundo the judge is bound to value the property at its true
worth, and security will have to be given against recovery in virtue
of superior title.


GAIuS (on the provincial Edict 7) We must remember
generally that if, after the destruction of the common property,
a party who has a right to receive something on the ground of
common ownership wishes to bring an action in pursuance thereof,
he is allowed an utilis actio communi dividundo'. Suppose, for
example, the plaintiff went to some expense on the common
property, or his fellow-owner got the whole benefit of something
derived from the property, such as the services of a slave or money
paid for his hire, there is an account taken in this action of every
such case.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 71) If there is a house owned in
common or a common wall and it is necessary to repair the wall or
to pull it down or to let something into it, the proper course will
be to bring an action communi dividundo, or proceedings can be
taken by way of an interdict ute possidetis.


THE SAME (on the Edict 75) An action communi dividundo
includes everything, save where anything is expressly excepted by
common agreement in order to prevent it from being included.


PauuLus (on Plautius 3) This action includes whatever
has been done on the common behalf or ought to have been
done by a man who knew that he had a fellow-owner. 1. With
regard however to any outlay which I made under the impres-
sion that the land was all my own, and the amount of which,
in short, in case a vindicatio were brought to recover a share in
the land, I should be in a position to retain by raising an ea-
ceptio of dolus, it is a matter for consideration whether, if I am
sued in an action communi dividundo, I cannot still retain it
in virtue of the equitable character of the action itself. On


1 See note at the end of this title.


TIT, IT | Partition of Common Property 205


the whole, I should say that I can, because the action com-
muni dividundo is a bona fide action ; but this is only so where
it is against me that proceedings are taken. Should I, on the
other hand, dispose of my share, there will be nothing out of
which I can retain the amount. Let us see however whether
the purchaser from me has not the right to retain it; there
is no doubt that, if a vindicatio were brought to recover a
share from him, he would be in a position to exercise a right
of retention on the ground of the outlay made by me, just as
I should myself, and the better opinion is that in this case too
the outlay can be retained; and, this being so, it is very
properly held further that I ought to be allowed an utilis actio
against my fellow-owner on the ground of outlay, even if the
common ownership still continues’. It is a different thing
where I spend money on property, treating it as my own, when it
is really another’s, or is common to me and another ; in such a case
as that, where I spend money on a thing as if it were my own,
I have only a right of retention, because it was not my desire
to impose an obligation upon anyone. But where I believe a thing
to belong to Titius which really belongs to Meevius, or to be owned
by me in common with someone who is not my real fellow-owner,
my object is to put another person under an obligation towards me,
and, just as an action on negotia gesta is allowed me against a party
on whose behalf I acted as a voluntary agent under the impression
that I was acting on behalf of someone else, so too is it in the
case which we are considering. Consequently, even if I convey
away the plot of land to another, still, as the state of things
was such that I could claim to have an action allowed me, I ought,
as Julianus himself says, to be allowed one on negotia gesta.
2. Should the parties agree that no partition at all shall be made,
it is perfectly clear that such an agreement has no force, but
should it be that none shall be made within a specified time, and
this tends to improve the character of the property itself, it
is a valid agreement. 3. If it should be agreed by co-owners that


1 The clause in italics has given some trouble. Mommsen in a note offers a
version which, as it appears to be meant for an emendation, I proceed to give in
English. “It is very properly held further that in that case” (that is, as M. adds,
where the party knows that he has a fellow-owner, but does not know who he is,
as in 14. pr.) “I ought to be allowed an wttlis actio against my fellow-owner on
the ground of outlay, even if the common ownership should not continue.” The
English words in italics represent M.’s insertions, but, in reading “not,” he
follows Cujas.


15


16


ii


18


19


206 Partition of Common Property [BOOK X


the co-ownership should not be broken up within a specified time,
there is no doubt that one who is bound by such an agreement is
free to sell ; accordingly even a purchaser from him who should
bring an action communt dividundo will be barred by the same
exceptio by which his vendor would have been barred. 4. If
a co-owner agrees not to sue for his share, this practically puts an
end to the co-ownership.


THE SAME (on Plautius 5) If a co-owner is sued in respect
of a slave who is owned in common, and judgment is given against
him, he will have a good right of action communi dividundo even
before he complies with the judgment, as, if proceedings are taken
against one co-owner by way of noxal action, he can at once
sue his fellow-owner to have the [defendant’s} share delivered te
him, giving an undertaking at the same time that, if he does
not hand over the slave, he will give the share back.


THE SAME (on Plautius 6) Where co-owners break up
(diwidunt) the co-ownership, the practice is to give undertakings
with regard to any debt which should be owing on a condition.


MopgestTiInus (Rules 9) Where a man is one of several
co-heirs, if he purchases from a creditor of his testator a plot of
land which the testator had given such creditor by way of pledge,
he is not liable to be sued in an action communi dividundo by his
co-heirs.


JAVOLENUS (Epistles 2) The arbiter cannot order that land
which is part of the estate of a deceased person should be subject
to a servitude attached to land which is not part of the estate ; as
the powers of the judge cannot extend beyond the matter which is
the subject of the trial.


PauLus (on Sabinus 6) A tree which grows on a
boundary and similarly a stone which lies over two plots, as
long as they adhere to the land, belong to the respective
owners so far as they are vertically over their territories, and
they are not included in the action communi dividundo; but
as soon as the stone is taken up or the tree is rooted up or
cut down, it becomes common property in undivided shares, and
it will be included in the action communi dividundo; im short,
what was a thing of distinct portions now becomes indiscriminate.


TIT. 11] Partition of Common Property 207


On the same principle, where two masses of stuff, belonging
to two respective owners, are fused together, the whole mass
is common property, even though some portion of the stuff, as
it was originally, should remain unmixed with the rest; and
so too, when a tree or a stone is detached from the soil, the
proprietary rights over it are no longer distinct. 1. An arbiter
for the purpose of partition ought not to be appointed in
the case of a common entrance court (vestibulwm) to two houses
against the will of either owner, because, where a man is com-
pelled to bid for such a court, he may sometimes have to offer a
price for the whole house, if he has no other means of approach.
2. If two persons have a right of way over the same spot, and one
has made an outlay on the road, it is rather a hard saying of
Pomponius that there can be an action communi dividundo or pro
socio ; how is it, in fact, possible to recognize such a thing as
co-ownership in an easement which each uses separately’? The
proper action is rather that on negotia gesta. 3. The judge in
the action communi dividundo, as also familie erciscunde, in the
case of a slave who has taken to flight, ought to call upon the
persons who are parties in the case before him to bid, and then he
should make an order vesting the slave in the person? who made
the last offer; and there will be no danger lest the penalty
laid down by the lex Fabia should be incurred in pursuance of the
decree of the Senate. 4. A watercourse, according to Labeo, is
not included in the action commune dividundo: either it is
attached to the plot of land itself, and consequently does not
come in question in the action, or else it is separated from the plot,
but is divided in respect of amount or times of user. However,
servitudes may sometimes be separated from the plot and yet not
divided in respect of amount or times, for example where the
person to whom they belonged left several heirs ; and, when this
occurs, it is consistent therewith that they too should be taken
account of in an action familve erciscunde ; to which Pomponius
adds that he does not see why they should not be as much
included in a case of communi dividundo as in one of familice
erciscundee. Accordingly, in cases of this kind, it comes to pass,
even in an action communi dividundo, that the servitudes are
divided in respect of amount or times of user.


1 communio juris separatim. I read separati: cf. M.
2 Insert ez after ewm. M.


20


21


22


23


24


208 Partition of Common Property [BOOK X


Pompontus (on Sabinus 13) If a man with whom you have
a plot of land in common fails to answer to a charge of tort!, and
thereupon, by the action of the judge, the house is demolished
or the plantations cut down, the damage can be made good to you
by an action communi dividundo, as that action embraces every
loss incurred by the fault of a co-owner.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 30) It is a good principle that the
judge in a question of dividing plots of land should be guided by
consideration of what is most beneficial to all who are concerned or
what the parties prefer.


POMPONIUS (on? Sabinus 33) If I build a wali on behalf of
my neighbour and myself, either on the understanding that f can
recover the expense from him in proportion to his share, or by way
of making him a present, the wall will be common property.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 32) If you and your fellow-owner
agree that you may take the produce in alternate years, and
your fellow-owner refuses to allow you to take that which
appertains to your year, it is worth considering whether your
proper action is ex conducto (on a contract of hiring) or communz
dividundo. This question arises equally where a co-owner who
agreed that he should enjoy the produce of every second year turns
in his cattle and so causes the crop for the next year to be spoilt
which his fellow-owner ought to get. I should say on the whole
myself that:the action communi dividundo applies rather than the
action ea conducto,—how can there, in fact, be a contract of letting
if there is no rent in the case ?—or, at any rate, that there ought to
be a civil action allowed for unliquidated damages.


JULIANUS (Digest 8) If a slave owned by two persons
makes any acquisition through the property of one of the co-
owners, what is acquired will still be owned in common ; but the
one on whose property the acquisition is founded can get the
amount by means of an action communi dividundo, because it is in
keeping with the principles of good faith that every one should
have a claim in advance to any acquisition which a slave makes
through his property. 1. I am on the point of bringing an action
communi dividundo, when you dispose of your share to Titius, in
order to change the conditions of the trial; upon this you


1 Some would read delectum, call to military service: contra Florentine MS
and Basilica, in which the word is taken to be delictum.


25


26


27


28


TIT. UT] Partition of Common Property 209


are liable to a Praetorian action at my hands, on the ground
that you took measures to prevent an action communi dividundo
being brought against you.


THE SAME (Digest 12) Stichus, a slave owned by you and me
in common, has an underslave Pamphilus who is worth ten awre?,
and an action de peculio is brought against me in which I suffer
judgment and pay ten; in this case, though Pamphilus should
afterwards die, still, if I sue you in an action communi dividundo or
pro socio, you will have to pay me! five, because I have freed you
from that amount of debt. Much more should I recover this sum,
if Stichus, after the death of Pamphilus, had got another under-
slave.


ALFENUS VarRuS (Digest 2) A slave owned in common,
being in the hands of one of the co-owners, broke his leg in
the course of some work he was doimg; the question was asked
what sort of action the other owner had against the person
in whose employment the slave had been. My answer was :—if the
common property was in any respect injured by the negligence
of the owner last mentioned rather than by chance, damages can
be recovered through the arbiter by an action communi dividundo


PAuLus (Epitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 3) A single co-owner
is not at liberty in law to examine by torture a slave owned
in common, except in reference to some matter in which all the
co-owners are concerned.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 7) Sabinus declares that no co-
owner can legally make any structure on common property against
the will of the other. It is plain from this that the other has a right
to stop him ; where parties are on the same footing, the position of
the one who objects is unquestionably superior. Still, although
where the property is common, one co-owner may be prevented by
another from constructing anything, he cannot be compelled to take
down anything which he has once set up, supposing the other omitted
to stop him when he was able to do so; consequently the mischief
can be made good [only] by an action communi dividundo. If
however the party [who could have objected] consented to the
other man’s act, he cannot bring an action, even for positive
damage. On the other hand, if the man erected something to the
injury of his co-owner while the latter was absent, he can even be
compelled to take down what he set up.

1 For milia read mihi. Bas.: cf. M.
Mi d..1f. 14


29


30


31


210 Partition of Common Property [BOOK X


PAULUS (Questions 2) If a man who is co-owner of a plot
of ground in common with Titius lays out money upon it under the
impression that he is co-owner with Meevius, it is said, very
correctly, that the simple action communi dividundo is all that he
requires ;—this in fact holds where I know that the land is owned in
common, but do not know in common with whom ;—as the fact is
that I am not volunteering to act on behalf of a fellow-owner but
am looking after my own property, and the action depends rather
on the subject-matter on which the money is laid out than on the
person of the co-owner. It may be added here that this is the
action to which, in our opinion, a ward will be liable, if the object
is to get him to make good some outlay, by application in that
behalf to the judge. A man is in a different position where
he thinks he is spending money on his own property, when
the property is really owned in common; in that case he has
no right to the action communi dividundo, nor will an utilis actio
be allowed him either ; of course a man who knows property to be
owned in common or to belong to another’ acts with the intention
of subjecting someone else to an obligation, and is mistaken about
the person. 1. Pomponius tells us that any one of the co-owners
can call for a judge; but that, even where one of the co-owners
takes no step, an action communi dividundo may very properly be
brought against him.


SCAHIVOLA (Responsa 1) An action communi dividundo can
be properly brought both where neither of the parties is in
possession of the estate and where one party is out of possession.


PAULUS (Responsa 15) Where two slaves had by order
of the Preetor been reserved out of an inheritance to wait
upon each of so many wards, children of the deceased, it was held
that no division of property was made, but the slaves remained
common to all?


1 For aliena read alienam. M.

2 Note. Ihave written utilis actio where the original is utile judicium; the
word judicium is in fact always used of the proceeding under discussion in this
title. Both expressions are untranslatable, but I have treated the word actio,
in an English sentence, as bearing a somewhat more general rather than an
opposed sense.


TIT. IV | Action for Production 211


IV.
ACTION FOR PRODUCTION.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) This is an absolutely necessary
action and recourse is had to its agency every day; it was
introduced chiefly with a view to aid proceedings for recovery
of property (vindicationes).


PAULUS (on the Edict 21) To produce (exhibere) is to put
a thing! at a person’s command in a public place, so as to enable
him to have ample facility for bringing a matter to a trial.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) In this action the plaintiff
is bound to know and to mention all the evidence identifying
the thing which is the subject of the application. 1. A man who
brings an action for production does not, as a matter of course,
allege that he is owner, and need not prove ownership, as there are
many different grounds on which the action may be brought.
2. A further observation to be made as to the action is that, with
a contumacious defendant, an order may be made upon him
founded on the plaintiff’s oath as to the matter in issue, the
amount being determined by the judge. 3. This action is
personal, and the right to bring it is given to anyone who intends
to bring an action 7m rem, no matter what the nature of that
action may be, eg: the Servian action on a pledge, or the
hypothecarian action, these being open to creditors. 4. According
to Pomponius, where a man intends to sue for a usufruct he has
a good right of action ad exhibendum. 5. We may add _ that,
if he asks to have a thing produced with a view to moving for an
interdict, his application will be entertained. 6. Again, if I wish
to choose a slave or any other piece of property out of a number
in pursuance of a bequest giving me the option, there is no doubt
that I can have an action ad exhibendum, so that, when the things
are produced, I can bring a vindicatio. 7. If a man _ wishes
to take proceedings by way of noxal action, he requires an action
ad exhibendum ; indeed, what is to be said, if the owner of the
slave wishes to defend the action, but the plaintiff cannot fix on
the man unless they are all there, either because he does not
recollect the particular slave, or he has not got his name? Is
it not the fairest plan that the whole number should be produced


1 After facere ins. rev. M.
14—2


212 Action for Production [BOOK X


before him, so that he may recognize the guilty individual ?
Accordingly, this must be ordered, on due cause shown, so that the
particular man in respect of whom the noxal action is being
brought may be pointed out, a view of the slaves being had for the
purpose. 8 If anyone other than the heir desires that the
actual testament, or the codicils, or anything else connected with a
testament should be produced, the rule to lay down is that
proceedings ought not to be taken by way of the action under con-
sideration, as the party needs no more than the interdicts which
are available for the above purpose ; this we find in Pomponius.
9. It must be understood however that the action ad exhibendum
is open not only to the persons above mentioned, but equally so to
anyone who has an interest in the production being made ;
accordingly the judge ought to decide on a general view of the
facts whether the party applying has an interest, not whether
the thing is his property, and thereupon either order production or
else decline to make the order because the applicant has no
interest. 10. Julianus goes further; even, he says, if I have
no right to sue to recover a thing as owner, I may have an
immediate right to production because I have an interest in such
production being made ; suppose, for instance, a bequest is made
to me of a slave to be chosen by Titius, this is a case where
I should have a good right of action ad exhibendum, because
I have an interest in production being made in order that Titius
may choose and I may thereupon have my action to recover,
although I have no right myself to choose a slave who is produced.
ll. If an action ad exhibendum is brought against me, I have no
right to bring a similar action on the mere ground that I have been
sued in the action in question; though it should be held that I
have an interest in virtue of the fact that I am liable to have to
hand over the slave. But this is not a sufficient ground ; other-
wise, even where a man fraudulently contrived to be out of
possession, he might bring an action ad exhibendum, though he
should not mean to bring a vindicatio or to apply for an interdict ;
indeed a thief or a robber might do the same thing ; but this is far
from being the case. Accordingly, there is a sound discrimination
in the rule laid down by Neratius, that the judge in a case of
production must carry his enquiry so far as to ascertain whether
the party has a lawful and reasonable ground of action on the
strength of which he asks to have production made. 12. Pom-
ponius tells us that a number of different persons may very well
have an action for production in respect of the same slave : suppose,


TIT. IV] Action for Production 213


for example, some slave should be the property of the first applicant,
the second should have a usufruct in him, the third should maintain
that he is in his possession and the fourth should declare that
he was pledged to him as security for debt ; in such a case all have
good rights of action for production, because all are interested in
the slave being produced. 13. The same writer proceeds to
say that the judge, in pursuance of the judicial power with which
he is entrusted through this action, is further bound to weigh any
exceptio raised by the party in possession, and, if any one that is
offered should be so clear as to be a plain bar to the plaintiff, that
the party in possession should be dismissed from the action ;
but should it be somewhat doubtful or involve a larger question,
the point must be reserved for the actual trial, production of the
thing being in the meantime ordered: there are some pleas
however which the arbiter who is judge in the action for production
ought to deal with himself without more; for example, one
founded on subsequent agreement, on malicious contrivance, on
an oath, on a previous decision. 14. In some cases the justice of
the claim for production is such that although a party cannot
have any action ad exhibendum, an action is nevertheless allowed
in factum. This point is discussed by Julianus. A slave, he says,
who belonged to my wife kept my accounts, these accounts are in
your possession and I desire to have them produced. According to
Julianus, if the accounts are written on my paper, the action will
lie, because then I have a right to proceed to recover them ;
if I own the paper, I must needs own what is written upon it ; but,
if the paper is not mine, then, inasmuch as I cannot sue to recover
the paper, I cannot take proceedings for production either ;
consequently I have a good right of action in factum. 15. It
should be borne in mind that in these proceedings the action may
be brought not merely against a man who has civil possession, but
equally well against one who occupies by way of natural possession.
Lastly it is held that a creditor who has taken property by way of
pledge for debt is compellable to make production :


Pompontius (on Sabinus 6) in fact, the action can be
brought even where a thing is deposited with a man, or lent him
or let to him.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) Celsus has the following:
if a man, after contracting to carry away goods, deposited them in
a warehouse, an action for production can be brought against the
party who so contracted ; if he is dead, but has left an heir, it can


214 Action for Production [BOOK X


be brought against the heir, but, if there is no heir, it must be
brought against the warehouseman ; for (, Celsus proceeds to say,)
if the goods are possessed by no one [else], then it is a plain fact
that either the warehouseman possesses them or else, at any rate,
he is the person who is able to produce them. The same writer
asks :—how can a man, however, be said to possess goods which he
contracted to carry? is it because he has a lien on them? The
whole case shows that the mere fact that a man has it in his power
to produce goods makes him liable to an action to produce them.
1. Julianus however tells us that on this principle a man is liable
to an action to produce when he is in possession in order to
preserve property or legacies, and equally so when he has some-
thing in his hands in virtue of a usufruct, though in this case too
he certainly does not possess. Here Julianus asks the question
what the production amounts to which these persons are re-
spectively bound to make ; to which he says that the former must
make it in such wise that the plaintiff will have the possession, but
the party against whom the action is brought will be in possession
for the purpose of preserving the property ; whilst the person who
has the usufruct should make it so that the plaintiff should possess
the property, but the party against whom the action is brought
should use and enjoy. 2.. Again, Julianus tells us that a purchaser
who fails to give back loose timber and minerals (ruta cosa)
is liable to an action to produce, the damages being measured
by my (¢.¢. the applicant’s) oath as to the value at stake; but he
immediately goes on to say “if the purchaser possesses or has used
fraudulent means to avoid possessing.” 3. Celsus says further that
if you have heaped up dung on vacant ground of mine, you can by
an action for production get an order to allow you to take it away,
on condition however that you take away the whole; but you
cannot get it on any other terms. 4. Again, if a boat should be
carried by the force of a stream on to the field of a stranger, then,
so Neratius tells us, the stranger can be sued for production.
Hereupon Neratius asks the question whether the plaintiff must
give the owner of the field an undertaking in respect of future
damage only or of past damage as well, and he says it ought
to be given for past damage as well. 5. Again, if, on a
building falling down, something is thrown on your ground or into


your house, you will be compellable to produce it, though you do |


not possess it. 6. Moreover, where the party has not got it in his
power to hand a thing over, then, though he should possess it, still
he will not be liable to an action for production ; suppose, for


TIT. IV | Action for Production 215


example, a slave should have taken to flight; no doubt his
liability will go as far as this, but no further, that he must give an
undertaking to produce the slave, if he should ever come to be in
his power. Even if your slave has not taken to flight, but you have
given him leave to live where he likes, or you have sent him
on a journey, or he is employed on your estates, you will only
be compellable to give the undertaking.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 14) A jewel which is inserted in the
gold of a different owner or a statuette attached to another
person’s candlestick cannot be claimed in an action on the ground
of ownership, but an action for production can be brought to have
them detached. The case of material built into a house is different,
as to this, there is not even a right of action for production, because
the Twelve Tables forbid the material being detached, but, by the
same statute, there can be an action brought de tigno juncto (for
the act of affixing material) for double the amount.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) By the word tignum is under-
stood in the Twelve Tables every kind of material, as some hold,
and this opinion is correct. 1. But if you affix my wheel to your
carriage, you will be compellable to produce it, (and this we are
told by Pomponius,) even though in that case you should not in
strict law possess it. 2. The same holds where you attach my
plank to your chest or to your ship, so as to make it part thereof,
or attach my handle to your bowl, or my inlaid work to your cup,
or work my purple into your garment, or join to your statue an
arm which belongs to me. 3. Again, a municipal body (municipes)
can be sued for production, as it is in its power to hand the thing
over ; it is recognized law that it can possess and can acquire by
user. The same rule must equally be applied to guilds (collegia)
and other corporate bodies. 4. If the defendant does not possess
at the time of joinder of issue, but comes to possess subsequently
before the decision, it is held that the proper rule is that judgment
should be given against him, unless he hands over the property.
5. Should the defendant possess at the time of joinder of issue
and afterwards cease to possess, but without fraudulent intent on
his part, the action ought to be dismissed ; although, as Pomponius
remarks, he is to some extent chargeable for not handing the thing
over at once instead of allowing issue to be joined against him.
6. The same writer says that where a defendant possesses at the
time of joinder of issue, but subsequently ceases to possess, and
then comes into possession once more, whether it be in virtue of


216 Action jor Production [BOOK X


his old title or a new one, the order ought to be made on him,
unless he hands the thing over. 7. In the same place Pomponius
adds reasonably enough that the person who sues for production
ought to have an interest at both times in the property being
handed over to him, that is, both when issue is joined and when
the order is made ; and Labeo takes the same view.


JULIANUS (Digest 9) Where an action for production is
brought against a man who neither possesses nor has used fraudu-
lent means to avoid possessing, after which he dies and his heir
possesses the property, the heir can be compelled to produce it.
We know that if I sue to recover a plot of land or a slave and the
heir of the defendant comes into possession of the property in
virtue of his predecessor's title, he will be compelled to hand
it over.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) Julianus has this :—if a man
should kill a slave who was in his possession or should transfer the
possession to someone else, or should spoil property to such an
extent that it could not be kept, he will be liable to the action for
production, because he used malicious means to avoid possessing.
On the same principle, if he should spill or destroy wine or any-
thing else, he will be liable to the action for production. 1. Mast
falls from your tree on my ground and I turn on my cattle and let
them feed upon the mast ; to what action am [| liable? Pomponius
says that there is a good right of action for production against me
if I turned the cattle on maliciously for them to eat the mast ; as,
in fact, even if the mast were still there, and I’ refused to let you?
take it, I’ should be liable to the action, just as if 1* were to
prevent someone* from taking away materials belonging to him
which had been laid on my ground; and Pomponius’s opinion
meets with general approval, whether the mast is still on the
ground or has been consumed. We may add that, if it is there
still, I [being owner of the tree] can have an interdict de
glande legenda (for gathering mast), so as to enable me to
collect the mast every third day, giving the undertaking against
any damage to ensue. 2. Where a man has caused the property
to come to the hands of another he may be held to have taken
fraudulent means to avoid possessing, provided, that is, he really
acted with craft. 3. Where a man produces the property in
a worse condition than it was in before, he still remains liable to


1 In text “you.” 7? Intext “me”  +* In text “someone.” ‘ In text “me.”


TIT. IV] Action for Production 217


the action for production, according to Sabinus. This is, no doubt,
true where the thing is transformed maliciously into a different
kind of object, for instance, where a bowl is reduced to a rude
mass of metal; here, even if the defendant produces the mass, he
is liable to the action for production, as, by changing the form of
the thing, he almost destroys the actual substance. 4. Marcellus
has the following :—ten pieces of money are bequeathed to you on
a condition, and the usufruct of [the same] ten to me in absolute
terms ; whereupon the heir, while the condition is still pending,
pays me, the usufructuary, the aforesaid ten pieces, without calling
upon me to give the [regular] undertaking ; in this case the heir
is liable to an action for production, on the ground that he took
fraudulent means to avoid possessing, the fraud consisting in the
fact that he omitted to call for the undertaking on the part of the
usufructuary, with the result that your legacy was lost, as you
were no longer able to bring a vindicatio for the pieces of money.
Of course the action for production will only lie in case the con-
dition of the legacy comes to pass. You might however have
taken measures to protect yourself by stipulating for payment of
the legacies, and, if you have done that, you will not require the
action for production. But if the heir failed to make the usu-
fructuary give the undertaking, because he did not know of your
legacy, then, according to Marcellus, the action for production
cannot be brought, on the ground that there was no fraud on the
part of the heir; but the legatee will, he says, get relief by an
action im factum against the usufructuary. 5. To produce, as far
as the action for production is concerned, is to present a thing in
the same legal plight as it was in when issue was joined, so that
the party, having full access to the thing, can proceed with the
action! which he desired to bring, without his case’ being made at
all the worse after he brought it to an issue, although the object of
the action was not to have the thing handed over, but to have it
produced. 6. Accordingly, if, when the defendant produces the
thing, it has become his property by user since joinder of issue, he
cannot be held to have produced it at all, as the plaintiff has made
nothing of his action, consequently the defendant cannot be dis-
charged, unless he is prepared to meet the demand as referred
back to the original day, mesne profits to be thereupon valued


1 Read actionem for actione and causa postquam for casu quam. Cf. M. The
text translated by the words in italics is “in nullo casu quam intendit lesa,”
which is plainly corrupt. The general sense is clear, but the words in which it
was expressed cannot be recovered.


10


11


218 Action for Production [BOOK X


according to the statute. 7. As however in this action the plaintiff
gets the benefit of legal accessions, Sabinus held that the child of
a female slave should be handed over too, and that, whether the
mother had been with child at the time [of joinder of issue] or
had conceived afterwards ; and with this view Pomponius agrees.
8. Besides this, the judge ought in his estimate to take account of
any dependent advantage that may have been lost owing to the
thing not being produced or being produced too late ; accordingly
Neratius holds that the subject-matter of the valuation is the use
which the thing would have been of to the plaintiff, not its actual
value, and that use, he adds, will sometimes be of less value than
that which the thing itself bears.


PAULUS (on the Edict 26) Where a person has been given
a right of option to be exercised by a given day, and the trial has
dragged on for so long a time that production is of no use, the
plaintiff’s interest must not be lost sight of!; but, if it was not the
heir’s fault that he did not produce the thing at the time when
he joined issue, he must be dismissed from the action.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 11) We may add that if, owing to
a slave not being produced, an inheritance should be lost, it is
thoroughly fair that, in exercise of the judge’s powers, the injury
so done (damnum hereditatis) should be taken into account in
assessing damages. 1. We may next consider in what place the
production should be made and at whose expense. According to
Labeo it ought to be the place where the property was when issue
was joined, but the property should be brought or conducted to
the place where the proceedings were had, at the risk and expense
of the plaintiff. A slave must, he says, no doubt be provided with
food and clothing and taken care of by the person who possesses
him. My own opinion however is that in some cases the plaintiff
ought to undertake this too, as, for instance, where the slave
usually maintained himself by means of his services or by a handi-
craft, but is at present compelled to be idle. Similarly if the slave
is lodged with the officers of the Court (apud officitwm) with a view
to his production, the person who applied for production will have
to answer for his board, assuming that the one who possessed him
was not in the habit of finding him food, but, if he was, then, as he


1 utilitas petitoris conservetur. These words are no doubt corrupt. The
real text must have told the reader that the plaintiff would get damages corre-
sponding to the loss he suffered, and M. accordingly suggests a reading which
would convey that meaning.


12


TIT. Iv | Action for Production 219


finds him food, he may as well make no difficulty about paying for
his board. In some cases the party in possession is bound to
make production on the spot at his own expense ; for example, it
may be a case where he had deliberately put things away in some
secret place so as to make it all the more troublesome for the
plaintiff to procure production ; in such a case as this he will be
bound to produce at his own risk and expense at the place where
the proceedings are had, so that he may derive no benefit from his
own underhand dealing. 2. Where a man is sued in respect of a
number of different things, and, at the time of joinder of issue, he
was in possession of all of them, then, even if he should sub-
sequently, without any fraudulent contrivance, cease to possess


some of them, judgment must be given against him, unless he


produces all that he can.


PauLus (on the Edict 26) This action may well lie where
the object is to procure the production of a man whom the plaintiff
desires to have judicially declared free (tv libertatem vindicare).
1. A son under potestas is liable to this action, so long as he has it
in his power to produce the thing. 2. If a man brings several
actions for production [of the same thing], then, where a later
action is brought on the same ground as an earlier one, according
to Julianus, there will be a good exceptio ; but where a man brings
a vindicatio, and, after joinder of issue, he takes a transfer of the
thing! from some person, this constitutes a fresh ground of action,
and consequently the exceptio is no bar. A similar rule holds
where a man intends to sue for theft and, with a view thereto,
applies for production, and the property is stolen again. Lastly, if
a man applies for production for the purpose of exercising an
option, and, after joinder of issue, an option is given him by the
testament of some other person, he can have another action for
production. 3. If a man makes must from my grapes or oil from
my olives or garments from my wool, knowing that these materials
are the property of another, he will be liable to an action for pro-
duction in respect of both [the things used and the resulting
product], as the sound view is that whatever is made out of a
person’s property belongs to that person. 4. If, after joinder of
issue, the slave dies, though it should be without any malice or
negligence on the part of the possessor, still he must sometimes be
ordered to pay a sum of money equivalent to the advantage which
it would have been to the plaintiff that nothing should be done by


1 Read rem after or for eam. Cf. M.


13


14


15


220 Action for Production [BOOK X


the defendant to prevent the slave being produced at the time
when issue was joined ; especially if it should appear that he died
owing to some circumstance which would not have taken place if
he had been then produced. 5. If, on some reasonable ground, it
is impossible for the property to be produced at once, the defendant
will have, on the judge’s command, to give an undertaking that he
will produce on a day named. 6. The heir is able to make use of
the action in question not as heir but on his own personal account ;
and similarly the heir of the possessor is liable on his own personal
account ; consequently it is beside the question to inquire whether
the right of action is allowed to the heir or against the heir. It is
true that, in the case of malice on the defendant’s part, the action
must be allowed against the heir [as such], in case the inheritance
has become the richer through it, for example, where the heir has
received the price paid for the property.


Galus (on the Edict of the Pretor Urbanus: Tit. “On liberty
cases ”’) Where it is alleged that someone is detaining a free
man in confinement, an interdict can be had against the man who
is alleged to detain to make him produce the other ; the action for
production in such a case is held to be useless, as such an action is
treated as only open to one who has a pecuniary interest.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 14) Where a husband has received
a gift of money from his wife, and, knowing that the property in
the money did not pass, he gives it away in payment for something
that he has bought, he maliciously contrives not to possess it, and
is consequently liable to an action ad exhibendum.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 18) Treasure belonging to me is
buried in your land and you decline to allow me to dig it up. So
long as you leave it where it is, | cannot properly, according to
Labeo, have an action for theft or for production in respect of it,
because you neither possess it nor have used fraudulent means to
avoid possessing it, as it is in fact possible that you do not know
that the treasure is within your land at all. There is however, he
says, no injustice, if I swear that I do not make the demand with a
vexatious intent, in my being allowed either an interdict or an
action to procure that you shall not use force against me to prevent
my digging up, taking up and carrying away the treasure in ques-
tion, provided there is nothing done on my part to prevent the
proper security being given you in connexion with my operations
against apprehended damage. But if the treasure in question is
so much actual stolen goods, I can have an action for theft.


16


17


18


19


TIT. IV | Action for Production 221


PAULUS (on Sabinus 10) If a slave has anything in his
hands, his owner is liable to a direct action for production, but if
the slave, without the knowledge of his owner, has used fraudulent
means to avoid having the thing, a noxal action ought to be allowed,
either for theft or for malicious fraud in respect of the slave, but
no utils actio for production can be put in force.


ULPIANUS (on all the Courts 9) If a man produces a slave
crippled or blinded, as far as the action for production goes, he
ought to be discharged; he has produced the slave and there is
nothing in a production such as described to prevent the main
action ; still the applicant can bring an action under the lex
Aquilia for the damage in question.


THE SAME (Opinions 6) When a note of hand is made of no
account by payment and pledges given are released, there is still
nothing to prevent the creditor suing for production of the docu-
ments connected with the debt by some other person than the
debtor.


PauLus (Epitomes of Alfenus 4) An action for production
can be brought by anyone who has an interest in bringing it. A
man however asked for an opinion as to whether this action would
enable him to procure the production of his opponent’s accounts,
which he said he had a great interest in having produced. The,
answer was that the law of the land ought not to be used vexa-
tiously and words ought not to be captiously interpreted ; the
proper course being to consider the intention of anything that was
said. Indeed, on the principle contended for, a man who was
anxious to study some branch of learning might say that he had
an interest in the production of such and such books, because, if
they were produced, he might become a more learned and a better
man by reading them.


ULPIANUS (Rules 2) In cases of delicts committed by slaves,
an action for production can be had with a view to examination
by torture to compel the disclosure! of their accomplices.


1 Read indicandos for vindicandos, Of. M.


ELEVENTH BOOK.


i


ON ADMINISTERING INTERROGATORIES BEFORE THE MAGISTRATE
AND ON INTERROGATORY ACTIONS.


CALLISTRATUS (Monitorian Edict 2) The heir should
always be interrogated before the magistrate (tm jure) as to what
fraction of the estate it is for which he is heir, whenever legal pro-
ceedings are being taken against him and the plaintiff is uncertain
what the fraction is for which the person whom he proposes to sue
is heir. The case in which an interrogatory is necessary is where
the action is in personam and [even then] only where the subject
of the suit is a liquidated demand, as otherwise the plaintiff, not
‘being aware what the fraction is for which the opposite party is
heir to the deceased, may on some occasion make a demand in
excess and so suffer some loss. 1. At the present day however
interrogatory actions are not employed, as no one is compellable to
answer any questions before the trial as to his legal position, and
consequently people have less recourse to such actions and they
have fallen into disuse. Only statements which are made by the
other side in the course of a trial are available as evidence on
behalf of those engaged in litigation, whether it be in cases of
succession or of other matters which come in question in legal
proceedings.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) The reason why the Pretor
propounded his Edict on the subject of interrogatories was that he
knew that it is difficult for a person who sues an heir or bonorum
possessor to prove anyone to be heir or bonorum possessor ;


PauLus (on the Edict 17) as it is often hard to show that
entry has been made on the inheritance.


TIT. 1] On Interrogatories 223


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) The Preetor desired to bind the
person who is being sued by his own answer as given at the trial,
so that, whether he confesses the truth or tells a lie, he may take
the consequences on his own shoulders, and at the same time that
he may be informed’ by means of the interrogatory what is
the fraction of the estate in respect of which any given person is
heir. 1. With regard to the words in the Edict :—<A man who
answers an interrogatory ‘in jure,” this must be understood to
mean answers before a magistrate of the Roman people or a
governor of a province or any other judge ; jus, he says, meaning
simply the place where the judge has placed himself for the
purpose of exercising jurisdiction or giving judgment, including
the case of his doing so at his own home or while on his way.


Gaius (on the Provincial Edict 3) When a man is inter-
rogated as to whether he is heir or in respect of what fraction of
the estate he is so, or whether he exercises potestas over someone
on whose account a noxal action is brought, he ought to procure
an order for further time to consider his answer, because, if he
should make a wrong declaration, he is put at a disadvantage ;


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) besides which, as it is in the
interest of deceased persons (sic) that they should have someone
to succeed them, so also is it in the interest of those who are living
that they should not be hurried, so long as they are reasonably
considering the question [of taking up the succession]. 1. Some-
times a man who is asked whether he is heir is not compelled to
answer, for instance, where he is made defendant to an action in
which his heirship is the matter in dispute ; this was laid down by
the Divine Hadrian ; because otherwise, if the defendant denied
that he was heir, he might be prejudicing his own case, or, if he
said that he was heir, he might find himself entangled even if he
should lose the inheritance.


THE SAME (on the Edict 18) If a man, on being interrogated
before the magistrate as to whether a four-footed animal which
has done pauperies is his, should reply [in the affirmative*], he is
liable.


Pau us (on the Edict 22) If a man, on being interrogated
as to a slaye who has done damage, replies that the slave is his, he


_ 1M. would like to read certioremur for certioretur, on the ground, no doubt,
that the person to be informed must be the plaintiff.
2M.


224 On Interrogatories [BOOK XI


will be liable under the lea Aquilia as owner, and, if the action is
brought against the man so answering, the real owner is freed from
liability to the action.


ULPIANUS (on the Hdict 22) If a man declares that he is
heir, without any interrogation being addressed to him, he is treated
as though he had been interrogated. 1. When we speak of a man
being interrogated, we must understand this to mean not only by
the Preetor but by the other party equally well. 2. But if a slave
is interrogated, this is no interrogatory at all, any more than if a
slave should interrogate. 3. One person must not be compelled to
answer for another to the question whether the latter is heir; a
man ought in a trial to be examined about his own case, that is, if
he is defendant in the action. 4. Celsus tells us (Dig. 5) that ifa
person who defends an action on behalf of another, on being inter-
rogated in the trial as to whether the person whose defence he is
carrying on is heir, or for what fraction he is so, makes an untrue
answer, he, such volunteer defendant, will be responsible to the
plaintiff, but this will not prejudice the case of the person whose
defence he has undertaken ; nor is there any doubt that Celsus’s
opinion is sound. This being the case, it is worth considering, if
he declines to answer, whether he is defending the action; and
it certainly is only consistent to say that he is not, as he is not
defending it fully. 5. When a man, in answer to an interrogation,
replies that he is heir, without adding in respect of what fraction,
he must be taken to have replied that he is heir to the whole,
unless the question asked was, for example, whether he was heir
in respect of half the estate and he answered “I am heir” ; as, in
that case, I should rather hold that he answered in the sense of
the question asked. 6. A point which is raised is this :—Is a man
compellable to answer whether he is heir by testament [or ab
intestato'|, or whether the inheritance came to him directly or
through persons who are subject to his potestas, or through some
one to whom he is heir? As to all this, the Preetor must form a
conclusion in a general way, when such a question is asked, as to
whether the party is bound to answer in what right he is heir, so
that, if he should find that it is of great importance to the plaintiff,
he may order that a fuller answer be given. This will apply in
the case not merely of heirs but of successors by Preetorian title.
7, Add to the above that we have it from Julianus that a man to
whom an inheritance has been (? was to be) handed over [in pur-


1M.


TIT. I] On Interrogatories 225


suance of a testamentary trust] is bound to say, if interrogated
before the magistrate, whether the inheritance has been so handed
over. 8. In the case of an action de peculio [it is held that] the
father or owner cannot be called upon to answer whether he has
the son or the slave in his potestas, as the only question asked is
whether the peculiwm is in the hands of the person against whom
the action is brought.


10 Pavuwus (on the Edict 48) It is not beside the purpose
that, when people wish to make a stipulation with a man against
damnum infectum, they should interrogate him before the magis-
trate as to whether the house or the place from which the mischief
is apprehended belongs to him, and to what extent, so that, in case
he should say that the tenement is not his and decline to give the
undertaking, he may be compelled either to give it up, or, if! he
chooses to resist, to hand it over on the ground that his behaviour
is fraudulent.


741 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) Sometimes too a man will be
compellable to answer an inquiry as to his age. 1. If a man, not
being heir, should on being interrogated, answer that he is heir as
to a part, he may thereupon be sued as if he were heir as to that
part ; in fact credit will be given him against himself. 2. Where

a man who is heir as to a quarter, or, say, is not heir at all, answers

! that he is heir to the whole, he may be sued in an action framed

| on the view that he is heir to the whole. 3. Where a man who is

| heir as to half says that he is heir as to a quarter, the punishment

) to which he will have to submit for his untruth is that he will be

sued in an action for the whole; he had no right to tell a lie by

) declaring himself to be heir for a smaller portion [of the estate

than he really inherited]. It may happen however that he believes

on reasonable grounds that he is heir for a smaller part than he
really is; for example, what if he acquired a share by accrual
without knowing it, or he was appointed heir for an uncertain
portion? why should he in such a case suffer by his answer?

4, Again, where a man in the Preetor’s Court gives no answer,

what he incurs is that, if an action is set on foot, he can be

sued for the whole, just as if he had declared that he was not heir ;

a man who declines to answer at all is contumacious, and the

penalty which he will have to suffer for his contumacy is that of

being sued for the whole, just as he would have been if he had
declared that he was not heir; the fact is that he is treated as
1 Ins. st before resistendum. M.


M. J. 11. 15


226 On Interrogatories [BOOK XI


guilty of contempt of the Pretor. 5. With regard to the Preetor’s
expression—“ declines to answer at all,” later authorities took his
words in the following sense,—a man, they said, is held to decline
to answer at all who does not answer the precise question he is
asked, that is word for word. 6. Where a man is interrogated as
to whether he is sole heir and replies that he is heir in part, then,
if he is really heir as to half, the law is that he shall not suffer by
this answer; this is an indulgent rule to apply. 7. It makes no
difference, when a man is interrogated, whether he gives a negative
answer or no answer at all, or gives an obscure answer so as to leave
the interrogator in doubt. 8. There is no question that when
a man answers an interrogatory he will be relieved on express
cause shown ; thus, if a man is asked whether he is heir to his
father and he answers that he is}, and, after that, a testament is
produced by which it turns out that he was disinherited, it is quite
proper that he should be relieved. This indeed is maintained by
Celsus, who puts it on a different principle, viz. that facts which
were unknown at the time but are discovered afterwards afford
good ground for relief; for instance, testamentary papers might be
hidden or taken to a distance and be afterwards discovered ; why
should this prejudice a man who stated in his answer what appeared
to him to be true at the time”? I should apply the same principle
to a case where a man answers that he is heir, but subsequently the
testament is pronounced to be a forgery or inofficious or void ; in
such a case the answer was given honestly, but the party answering
was misled by the document. 9. When a man answers an interro-
gatory, it puts him on the same footing of liability as he would
be on if he were bound by a contract on which he can be taken to
task, assuming that he is interrogated by a litigating party ; but
even if it is the Preetor who interrogates him, nothing turns on
the authority of the Przetor ; what is to the point is the answer of
the party, or, [let us say,| his untrue statement. 10. Where aman
declares that he is not heir in consequence of a reasonable mistake
which he fell under, allowance ought to be made for him. 11. Even
where a man gives an untrue answer without any intention to
deceive, but still through negligence, the proper rule is that he
should not be held liable, unless the negligence comes very near
malice. 12. Celsus tells us that a man is allowed to revoke his
answer, if the revocation does not put the plaintiff at a disadvan-
tage ; and this I should say is perfectly sound, especially where
1 Ins. esse before responderit.
2 preesentia verum for presentiarum.


12


TIT.’ 1] On Interrogatories 227


a man does something of this kind in consequence of fuller
information subsequently received, being, for example, better
advised as to his legal position by means of documents or of letters
written by his friends.


PauLus (on the Edict 17) If a son declines his father’s
inheritance, and then, in answer to an interrogatory before the
magistrate declares that he is heir, he will be held liable ; the very
answer is deemed equivalent to acting as heir. But if a son, after
declining the inheritance, gives no answer at all to the interrogatory,
he must be protected, as the Preetor does not treat as heir a person
who has really declined the inheritance. 1. Any exceptio which
can be used in bar of an action put in train before the judex
against [ordinary | defendants can equally be used by a man who is
sued on his answer to an interrogatory, eg. the exceptio of [subse-
quent] informal agreement, previous decision, and so on.


THE SAME (on Plautius 2) Persons who confess falsely by
way of answer are only bound thereupon in cases where there
is a good right of action existing against someone or other in
virtue of the matter about which they were interrogated, as the
rule is that where some other person would be liable to the action,
supposing he were owner, the parties who make the confession
thereby take the liability upon themselves. Accordingly, if some-
one is under the potestas of his own father, and I [in answer to
an interrogatory] declare that he is my son, [the law is] that I am
only held liable where his age is such that he might possibly be
my son; as false confessions[, to be taken into account,| must
accord with the facts of nature. A consequence of this would be
that if I answer on behalf of the paterfamilias, I am not liable’.
1. A man who answers that someone who is really a pater-
familias is his slave is not liable to a noxal action ; and, even if
I am having in good faith the services of a free man, no noxal
action can be brought against me; moreover, if such an action
should be brought, full right will still remain to proceed against
the man who actually committed the offence.


JAVOLENUS (Extracts from Cassius 9) Where issue has
been joined in a noxal action, and, while the case is proceeding, the
man in respect of whose act it was brought is judicially declared to be
a free man, the case must be dismissed, and the plaintiff will take


1 In Ms opinion this clause has got into the text by mistake, and was really
an annotation relating to what follows.


15—2


15


16


17


228 On Interrogatories [BOOK XI


no advantage by any interrogation before the magistrate that he
may have made, because, [true as it is that,] when a man has
a right of action against another in respect of some individual, he
may be able to transfer the liability [arising from the act] of that
individual to the person who confesses before the magistrate
that the individual in question is his slave, for instance, who
makes such a confession with reference to the slave of another
man ; still, there being no right of action at all against a third
person in respect of a free man, it follows that no liability can be
transferred to anyone by means of any interrogatory or confession.
This being the case, the result will be that no action can ever have
been rightly brought in respect of a free man against a person who
made a confession [in virtue thereof]. 1. The general rule is that
confessions are upheld only in cases in which the matter confessed
is something consistent with law and nature.


Pompontius (on Sabinus 18) If, before some inheritance is
entered upon, I declare on interrogation that a slave who is part
of the estate belongs to me, I am liable, as an inheritance is treated
as an owner. 1. If a person confesses on interrogation before the
magistrate that some slave is his own, and then the slave dies, the
person who so answered is not liable, just as, if the slave had really
been his, he would not have been liable for him after his death,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 37) If a slave is taken prisoner by
the enemy, and some person on interrogation before the magistrate
answers with reference to him that he is in his potestas, however
much ground for hesitation there may be founded on the rules of
law as to postliminium, still I do not think there is any room for a
noxal action, as slaves in such a case are not in their old owners’
potestas. 1. Although the law goes as far as this, that a man may
become liable even by confessing another person’s slave to be his
own, nevertheless it is very properly held that a man is only liable
in this way where it was possible that he should have been owner,
but, if he was incapable of acquiring such ownership, he is not
liable.


THE SAME (on the Edict 38) If the slave is not the property
of one sole owner, but of several, and they all have declared falsely
that he is not in their potestas, or some of them have done so, or
they have used fraudulent means to avoid having him in their
potestas, each of them will be liable for the whole damages,
just as each would be liable, if they really had the slave in their


18


19


TEREST | On Interrogatories 229


potestas ; but a single owner who uses no fraudulent means to
avoid having the slave in his potestas, or makes no false declaration,
will not be liable.


JULIANUS (on Urseius Ferox 4) A man who was heir to the
extent of half the estate of a deceased person desired to defend an
action on behalf of his fellow-heir in his absence, and in order to be
able to avoid the burden of giving security [for the other], declared
that he was sole heir, and judgment was pronounced against him.
The plaintiff asked whether, seeing that this person was insolvent,
he could have an order rescinding the previous judgment and
allowing him an action against the actual co-heir. Proculus replied
that the judgment might be rescinded and the action brought, and
this is correct.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 8) If a son who appears on behalf
of his father declines to answer when interrogated, the case must
proceed in all respects as if he had not been interrogated.


PAULUS (Questions 2) Where a man answers that a slave
who belongs to another is his own, then, if he is sued in a noxal
action, the real owner is thereby discharged. This case differs
from that of a man who confesses that he killed a slave who was
really killed by someone else, or who declares [falsely] that he is
heir ; in this case the man who did the deed—or the real heir—is
not discharged. There is no inconsistency in the above; in the
former case there are two persons liable through the act of the
slave in the way in which there are two held to be liable in the
case of a slave owned in common, in which, if one is sued, the
other is discharged ; but a man who confesses that he killed or
wounded is liable on his own account, and yet the offence of the
man who did the deed ought not to go unpunished because of the
liability of the one who confessed, unless the latter was taking up
the defence on behalf of the man who did the deed or his heir and
met the action on that footing ; in that case an exceptio is allowed
and the action will be barred, because the defendant can get back
whatever he paid by an action of negotia gesta or mandatum.
The same rule applies to a man who declares himself heir at the
request of the real heir or who for any other reason desires to
defend the action on his behalf. 1, If a man is asked before the
magistrate whether he possesses a given fundus, I wish to know
whether he can be compelled to give in his answer the exact share
in respect of which he is in possession. The answer was :—We


21


22


230 On Interrogatories [BOOK XI


read in Javolenus that the possessor of an estate is compellable to
declare the exact share for which he possesses it, so that, if he is
in possession in respect of a small share, the plaintiff may be put
in possession of the land for the remaining share in respect of
which there is no defence offered. 2. A similar rule holds where
people give an undertaking as to damnum imfectum; this is
another case in which the party ought to declare what is the extent
of his share in the tenement, so as to enable the applicant to frame
the stipulation accordingly; here the penalty for refusing to give
the assurance is that the applicant assumes possession, so that this
is a reason why it is requisite to know whether the other party is
in possession.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) Wherever equitable considera-
tions move the judge to allow it, there can be no doubt that it is
also right that an interrogatory should be had.


Sc@VOLA (Digest 4) In answer to the Imperial Procurator
who was interrogating in a matter relating to a debt due to the
fiscus from a person deceased, one of the sons, who had not got an
order for bonorum possessio and was not heir, declared that he
was heir; is he liable at the suit of other creditors as having
answered to an interrogatory? The answer was that a man cannot
be sued upon his answer by persons who had not interrogated him
before the magistrate.


Il.
WHEN VARIOUS MATTERS ARE HEARD BY THE SAME JUDGE.


POoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 13) If an action familice erciscunde
is brought among several parties and an action de communi divi-
dundo or finium regundorum among the same, they ought to
choose the same judge [for both actions]; and besides that, in
order that the co-heirs or co-owners may be the better able to meet,
they ought all to attend at the same place.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 2) | When one out of several tutors is
sued because the others are not substantial persons, on the appli-
cation of that one, they may all be ordered to appear before the
same judge. This is laid down in Imperial rescripts.


a ee


a


1


TIT. 111] On Corrupting a Slave 231


IIL.
ON CORRUPTING A SLAVE.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) The Preetor says :—“ Where
a man is alleged to have harboured a slave of either sex belonging
to another or induced him or her maliciously to act in any way
with intent to deteriorate his or her character, I will allow an
action against him for twice what the matter comes to.” 1. Aman
who is a bona fide purchaser of the slave will not be liable under
this Edict, nor‘ can he himself bring an action for corrupting the
slave, as he has no interest in the slave not being corrupted ; in
fact, it is clear that, if his right to sue were admitted, two persons
would have a good right of action for corruption of the slave,
which is absurd. It may be added that, according to the received
opinion, the action cannot be brought by one who has bona fide
the services of a free man. 2. With regard to the word “har-
boured” (vecepisse), as used by the Preetor, what this is taken
to refer to is the case of a man taking in another man’s slave at
his own place of abode; “harbouring ” is, strictly speaking, afford-
ing a slave a refuge with a view to concealing him, whether it be
on the party’s own ground or in a place or building belonging to
another. 3. To induce (persuadere) is to compel and constrain
a person to obey you” ; but “induce” is a kind of neutral term, as
the incitement may be applied by giving good advice as well as
bad ; accordingly the Preetor adds the words “maliciously” and
“with intent to deteriorate the slave’s character.” So that one who
solicits a slave to do or to plan something objectionable must be
the kind of person who is held up to observation in this Kdict.
4, Is a man, however, liable only where he has driven a well-
conducted slave to commit an offence, or is he equally so where he
instigates a bad slave, or shows a bad slave the way to commit it ?
The truer view is that even where he shows a bad slave how to
commit an offence he is liable. Indeed, if the slave had made up
his mind independently to run away or to commit a theft, and the


1 del. guia. M.

2 The Latin text here is “persuadere autem est plus quam compelli atque
cogi sibi parere.” These words having no meaning, I have ventured to follow
a note in the Basilica and substitute the clause I have given in italics; in other
words to omit plus quam and turn the two passive infinitives into the active.


IS: On Corrupting a Slave [BOOK XI


party in question is shown to have applauded his design, he
is liable; the slave's bad disposition ought not to be made
worse still by approbation. Accordingly, whether a man makes
a good slave bad or makes a bad slave worse, he will be held
to corrupt him. 5. A person too makes a slave worse who
induces him to commit wrongful damage or theft or to run
away or to instigate a slave belonging to some other person to
commit such offences, or to make his pecauliwm undistinguishable,
or to go after girls, or to loiter about, or to give himself up to
magical arts, or to spend too much time at public shows, or to
engage in riots, or again who induces [a slave who is] a bailiff,
either by words or bribes, to mutilate [or] falsify his master’s
accounts or even to confuse an account put in his hands,


PAuLus (on the Edict 19) or who encourages a slave to live
expensively, or to be insubordinate, or induces him to submit to
stuprum.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) By adding the expression
“maliciously” the Preetor stigmatizes craft on the part of the
person who induces; whereas if a man deteriorates a slave's
character without wrongful intention he incurs no stigma; and
he is not liable where he does it for a practical joke. 1. Hence
arises this question : suppose a man incites the slave of another to
climb on a roof or to go down a well, and the slave accordingly
climbs up or goes down, and so falls and breaks his leg or breaks
any limb or is killed, will the party be liable? The answer is that,
if he did it without malice, he is not liable, but, if it was done
maliciously, he is ;


Pauwus (on the Edict 19) but the more convenient plan
is to hold him liable to an wétlis [acto framed on the] lea Aquilia.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) The word “ maliciously ” must
be applied equally in the case of one who harbours a slave, so that
a man is not liable unless he harbours maliciously ; if he harboured
the slave with a view to keeping him safely on his owner’s behoof
or from motives of humanity or out of pity or on some other
approved and lawful ground, he is not liable. 1. If anyone
maliciously induces a slave whom he took for a free man to do any-
thing, I should say that he ought to be held liable, as one who
corrupts a slave whom he believes to be free commits a still greater
offence [than if he knew him to be a slave], consequently, if the
man really is a slave, the party will be liable. 2. The action is for


SE Ce tS—S—tS


we ee eee
ee an a
a EE


—————


TIT. 111] On Corrupting a Slave 233


twofold damages, even where the defendant admits his guilt, though
the Aquilian action only inflicts that penalty on one who denies.
3. Where the offender is a slave of either sex, the action is allowed
with the option of surrender for nova. 4. The action relates to
the date at which the slave was corrupted or harboured, and not
the date of the application, so that if the slave should be dead or
have been disposed of or manumitted, the action may none the less
be brought, and, the right to bring it having once accrued, it is
not lost by manumission,


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) as, for the purposes of this action,
an estimate is made of elements of value existing in past time!;


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) as, of course, bad slaves may
chance to get their freedom, besides which very often something
may occur afterwards which furnishes a good ground for manu-
mission.


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) The heir of the party whose slave
was corrupted has the same right to bring this action, and that not
only where the slave is still included in the estate of the deceased,
but even where he has been taken out of it, for example, where he
was left by way of legacy.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) Where a man corrupts a slave
which he and I have in common, the question is raised in Julianus
(Dig. 9) whether he can be held liable to this action ; and that
writer says that he is liable to the action at the hands of his
co-owner, moreover he can be sued in an action communi di-
vidundo, or pro socio, so Julianus holds, if the co-owners are
partners. We may however ask why it is that Julianus puts a co-
owner in a worse position when he sues another co-owner than he
is in when he sues a stranger. In the case of an action against
a stranger the right of action is equally good, whether the de-
fendant harboured the slave or corrupted him, but, if it is against
a co-owner, it is only good where the defendant corrupted the slave,
the alternative ground [viz. that of harbouring] is not admitted.
It may be however that Julianus thought that the other ground
could not apply as against a fellow-owner, as no one can harbour
his own slave; still, if he took him in in order to conceal him, it may
be argued that he is liable. 1. If I have the usufruct in a slave


and you have the bare property, then, if the slave is deteriorated


1 Paulus’s words are applicable only to the last remark but one preceding.
Of. M.


10


11


234 On Corrupting a Slave [BOOK XI


by me, you can take proceedings against me, if the deterioration
is your doing, I can bring an wttlis actio ; as this action is available
in all cases of corruption, and the usufructuary clearly has an
interest in the slave in whom he has the usufruct being well
conducted. An utilis actio is similarly open to the usufructuary
if some other person than the bare proprietor harbours or corrupts
the slave. 2. The action is allowed for double what the case
amounts to; 3. but it is open to question whether, in determining
the amount, an estimate should be made of such damage only as is
done to the slave in body or character, in short, of the extent to
which the value of the slave is diminished, or whether other things
should be considered as well. Neratius holds that the person who
corrupted should be ordered to pay damages equivalent to the
extent to which the slave’s value is diminished by the fact that
he was corrupted!.


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) The damages to be recovered
include the value of things which the slave took away with
him, as all loss is multiplied by two, and it makes no difference
whether the things were brought to the defendant or to another
or even consumed; as it is more in accordance with justice
that the original author of the offence should be held liable than
that inquiry should be made for the party to whom the things
were brought.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) Neratius holds that thefts
committed subsequently form no item in the assessment. This view —
I believe to be sound ; the very words of the Edict—“ what that
matter comes to”—comprise all the mischief done. 1. I induce
a slave to deface notes of hand given by his master’s debtors. No
doubt I am liable to the action ; but if, having got into the habit
of committing such offences, he proceeds to purloin, falsify or efface
accounts or other similar documents, the proper rule is that the
party who corrupted him is not liable on the ground of these acts.
2. Although however there is a good right of action for corrupting
a slave in respect of things which are purloined, still there is an
action for theft allowed as well, as the things must be held to be
taken away with the aid and encouragement of the party inciting ;
and the plaintiff does not exhaust his means of redress by bringing
one of the two actions, as the one leaves the other still open.
Julianus lays down a similar rule as to a man who harbours a slave


+ | have substituted corruptus for subpertus. This last word is not Latin at all.


ee ——_rer errr


- ows OT AOE
ce a


SE ON


RRR a OO LO TL a


12


13


14


TIT. 111 | On Corrupting a Slave 235


and so conceals him and deteriorates his character [besides in-
ducing him to steal] ; the offence of thieving is distinct from that
of deteriorating the character of a slave ; and, besides being ex-
posed to an action on these two heads, he is also liable to be sued
in a condictio (personal action to recover the stolen goods), as
even though the party injured should have recovered the slave
by a condictio, and penal damages by an action for theft, still he
has a good right to indemnification by an action for corruption
of a slave,


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) _ since the defendant is still subject
to this obligation, even after the property is restored.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) This action can be brought at
any distance of time, there is no limitation, and it is open to the
heir and to successors of every kind; but it will not be allowed
against the heir of the offender, as it is a penal action. 1. A man
is equally liable to the action if he corrupts a slave who is part of
the unclaimed estate of a deceased person; and he can also be
sued as a plunderer in a “ petition to recover an inheritance,”


PAULUS (on the Edict 9) so that the petition for recovery
of an inheritance may have as wide a scope as this action. 1. There
is no provision under this Edict for the case of a son or a daughter
under potestas being corrupted, as the action established is one for
corrupting a slave who is part of a man’s property, and for a case in
which! the proprietor can show that his means are reduced, though
the honour and good name of his family are unaffected ; but there
isa good right to an wtilis actio for an amount which the judge
can be called upon to determine, as everybody has an interest in
the character of his children not being corrupted. 2. If a slave
which you and I have in common corrupts a slave who belongs to
me in severalty, Sabinus holds that there is no right of action
against a co-owner, any more than if my own slave had corrupted
a fellow-slave. Again, if a slave owned by two in common corrupts
the slave of a third person, it is a fair question whether there has
to be one action against both co-owners, or each may equally well
be sued separately, as in the case of other offences committed by
slaves ; but the better opinion is that each owner is liable for the
whole, but, if one pays, the other is discharged. 3. If a slave in
whom I have a usufruct corrupts a slave who belongs to me, I have
a right to sue the bare proprietor. 4. A person who has pledged
a slave for debt can bring this action in respect of him. 5. In this

1 Ins. wbt before pauperiorem.


15


16


236 On Corrupting a Slave [BOOK XI


action the twofold damages are not something over and above the
recovery of property (ze. of the slave); what is doubled is the
amount of loss incurred. 6. This being the case, the rule follows
thereupon that if you induce my slave to commit a theft on Titius,
you not only are liable for the amount to which the slave’s character
is deteriorated, but also for whatever I shall have to give Titius.
7. Moreover you are liable to be sued by me not only if the slave
does me a mischief at your instigation, but even if he does it
to a stranger, on the ground, that is, that I have to answer for
it under the dex Aquilia ; or, again, if I am liable to an action
on a contract of hiring at the hands of someone because I let out
a slave to him and the slave was deteriorated by your act, you will
be liable on this ground, and so with any similar cases. 8. The
measuré of damages in this action is the extent to which the slave's
value is reduced, and that the judge may be called upon to deter-
mine. 9. Sometimes indeed the slave becomes! of no value at all,
so that it is not worth while having such a slave. In such a case,
then, does it follow that the instigator is compellable to pay the
whole value the slave bore and the owner has the slave over and
above ; or ought the owner to be compelled to hand over the slave
and accept what he is worth? The true rule is that the owner
must be allowed to elect whether he would like best to retain the
slave and to accept damages equivalent to double the extent to
which the slave is deteriorated, or to hand over the slave, if he is
in a position to do so, and take his value, and, if he is not in
a position to do so, still to take his value, and to assign to the
instigator his rights of action for recovery of the slave, so that the
latter can sue at his own risk. Of course what is said as to
handing over the slave only applies where the slave is alive when
the proceedings are brought. Suppose however the slave was
manumitted before the proceedings were brought. It will not lie
in the defendant’s mouth to say in open court that the reason why
he manumitted the slave was that he did not wish to have him
in his house, his abject being to get the money and to have a
freedman too.


GAIUS (provincial Edict 6) It is a complete case of cor-
rupting a slave’s character if he is induced to treat his owner with
contempt.


ALFENUS VARUS (Digest 2) The owner of a slave who had
used the slave as steward manumitted him; after this he made
1 Read jit for sit. Cf. M.


17


TIT, 111] On Corrupting a Slave 237


him produce his accounts, which the man was not able to make
good, and his patron found that he had spent the money in the
company of some woman of no character ; the question was asked
whether the patron could sue this woman for corrupting a slave,
the slave being by this time free. The answer was that he could,
and that so he might for theft too in respect of any money which
the slave had put in her hands.


MARCELLUS (Rules 4) A husband is allowed an action against
his wife on the ground of corrupting a slave, even while the
married state still lasts, but only for the simple value, in con-
sideration of matrimony.


IV.
ON FUGITIVE SLAVES.


ULpPIANnus (on the Edict 1) A man who has concealed a
fugitive slave is a thief. 1. The Senate laid down that fugitive
slaves are not to be admitted into parks nor to be sheltered by the
overseers or agents of landowners, and it prescribed a fine ; but
if any persons should within twenty days have either restored such
slaves to their owners or brought them up before the magistrates, it
excused their previous behaviour ; indeed, further on in the same
enactment, impunity is promised to anyone who hands over
fugitive slaves to their owners or to the magistrate within the
prescribed time after finding any such on his ground. 2. The
decree allowed both soldiers and civilians a right of entry on the
estates of Senators or private persons for the purpose of following
up a runaway slave, in fact the lea Fabia and a decree of the Senate
passed in the consulship of Modestus were enacted with a similar
object. It was further laid down that persons who wished to
search for fugitive slaves should have letters given them addressed
to the magistrates, a fine of a hundred solidi being prescribed at
the same time to be payable by the latter, if, on receiving such
letters they declined to assist the persons engaged in the search ;
and a similar penalty was imposed on anyone who refused to allow
a search to be made on his ground. Moreover there is a rescript
of the Divine Marcus and Commodus of general application by
which it is expressly laid down that governors, magistrates and


238 On Fugitive Slaves [BOOK XI


police are bound to assist any owner in! seeking out runaway slaves
and that they must give them up if they find them, also that persons
on whose ground the slaves are in hiding are to be punished if any
unlawful behaviour is brought home to them. 3. Every person
whatever who apprehends a runaway slave is bound to bring him
forward publicly, 4. and the magistrates are very properly
enjoined to keep any such slaves carefully in custody, so as to
prevent their escape. 5. Under the term “fugitive” must be
included a slave who is given to roving. But, according to Labeo
(on the Edict 1), the term does not comprise a slave who is simply
born of a runaway mother. 6. A slave is deemed to be brought
forward publicly if he is handed over to the municipal magistrates
or government officers. 7. Careful custody will allow putting the
slave in irons. 8. The custody is continued until the time when
the slaves are brought before the Prefect of the Watch or the
Governor. 8a. The magistrates must be informed of the names
and marks of the fugitive slaves and as to who it is to whom any
one of them professes to belong, so that they may be the more
easily identified and secured ; and the term “mark” will ‘include
scars. This direction applies equally where the case is advertised
by means of a written notice in a public place or in a consecrated
temple’.


CALLISTRATUS (Hearings 6) Slaves who are simply runa-
ways should be restored to their owners ; but, where they affect
the station of free men, the practice is to inflict severe punishment.


ULPIANUS (on the office of Proconsul7) The Divine Pius laid
down by rescript that, where a man desires to search for a runaway
slave in someone else’s ground, he may apply to the Governor, who
must give him a letter, and, if the case requires it, an officer, so
that he can get permission to enter and make a search, and that
the Governor can in addition inflict a penalty on anyone who
should refuse to allow the search to be made. Moreover the
Divine Marcus delivered an oration before the Senate by which he
authorized those who desire to search for fugitives and to examine*
the sleeping-places or any traces of those who concealed them to
enter on land of the Emperor or of Senators or private persons.

PAULUS (Sentences 1) Harbour-masters and police-officers,
if any fugitive slaves are apprehended, do well to keep them in

1 Ins. in before inguirendis. Cf. M.


2 For e@des read cde sacra. Cf. M.
3 Read scrutand? for scrutart. Of. M.


TIT. Iv] On Fugitive Slaves 239


custody. Municipal magistrates, on arrest of such slaves, send them
on securely to the office of the governor of the province or the
proconsul.


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 1) If a fugitive slave gives
himself up to fight in the amphitheatre, he cannot, even by exposing
himself to the risk thereby incurred, which only amounts to peril
of death, escape from the legal control of his owner ; there being a
rescript of the Divine Pius enjoining that such slaves should
without further consideration be restored to their owners, either
before or after a combat with beasts ; as very often they have either
misappropriated money or committed some more serious offence,
and they would rather give themselves up to fight in the arena, so
as to avoid inquiry or lawful punishment ; accordingly they must
be surrendered.


i
On GAMBLERS.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 23) The Preetor says :—if anyone
. beats a man in whose house it appears that a game with dice has
been carried on or damages his property, or, on a similar occasion,
something has been taken out of his house! by anyone, I will not
allow an action. Where a man uses violence for the purpose of a
game with dice I will punish the offender as the particular case may
require, 1. If parties to the game rob one another, an action will
not be refused for vz bona rapta (goods taken with violence), it is
only the entertainer that the Przetor says shall not be protected, not
the gamesters as well, though indeed these too may well be thought
unworthy of consideration. 2. It should be observed further that
if an entertainer has been beaten or has suffered damage, the
Preetor refuses relief irrespective of the place or time at which it
happened, but [the rule about] theft is [that it is] committed with
impunity in the house where and at the time when the gambling
was carried on, and that although the person who commits any one
of the offences named? should himself not have been engaged in the
game. There is no doubt that by the word “house” we must
understand habitation and place of abode. 3. With regard to the


1 Read tempore e domo for tempore dolo. Cf. M.
2 guid eorum. The writer ought to have said furtwm, the theft, and left the
reader to infer the generalization, or else have recast the sentence altogether,


240 On Gamblers [BOOK XI


Preetor’s refusal to allow an action for theft, we may consider
whether this refers to the penal action only, or includes the case of
the party wishing to sue for production, or to bring a vindicatio or
condictio. It is maintained in Pomponius that it is the penal
action alone that is refused, but with this I do not agree, the
Preetor’s words simply are “if anything is misappropriated I will
not allow an action.” 4. He proceeds “ where a man uses violence
for the purpose of a game with dice, I will punish the offender
as the particular case may require.” This clause refers to punish-
ment to be inflicted on the person who compels anyone to play,
and requires that the party should be ordered to pay a fine or
should be sent to the Quarries or put in chains as a criminai,


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) as it is a well known occurrence
for people to coerce others to play, sometimes doing so from the
very first, and sometimes compelling the winner to continue
playing, where they have themselves lost. 1. A decree of the
Senate forbade playing for money, except where the contest is one
of throwing javelins or pikes, or running, leaping, wrestling or
fighting for the sake of winning distinction ;


Marcianus (Rules 5) where this is being done, the Titian, ~
Publician and Cornelian statutes in fact authorize wagering, but
there are others which prohibit this practice, where the contest is
not with a view to winning distinction.


Pauuus (on the Edict 19) Where eatables are put on the
table at a feast, it is allowable to gamble for them with dice’. 1. If
a slave or a filiusfamilias loses, the owner or father, as the case
may be, can recover what is paid thereupon. Conversely, if money
is paid to a slave, an action de peculio will be allowed against the
owner, not a noxal action, because it is founded on negotia gesta ;
but the defendant is not to be compelled to hand over more than
the amount which there is in the peculiwm in consequence of the
payment. 2. There is an wéilis actio founded on this Edict which
is allowed against a paterfamilias or a patron to recover money
paid on a loss in gaming.


1 Read alea for familia. Cf. M.


TIT. vi] Where a Surveyor makes a false Report 241


VI.


WHERE A SURVEYOR MAKES A FALSE REPORT AS TO
DIMENSIONS.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) The Preetor offers an action in
Jactum against a land surveyor. People must avoid being deceived
by surveyors, every one has an interest in getting a true report of
the dimensions of land, where, for instance, a dispute has arisen
about boundaries, or a vendor or purchaser wishes to know the
area of the land which is being sold. The ground on which the
Preetor promises this action is that the old lawyers did not regard
the agreement made with a person such as the one in question as a
contract of locatio and conductio, but held rather that his services
were given as a favour, for which the payment which he received
was a recompense and, for that reason, was called honorary ; indeed,
if an action is brought as upon a contract of locatio, it must be
held that the issue raised is beside the mark. 1. The only ground
for the action is positive malice (dolus malus), a surveyor was
deemed to be most amply kept in control, though he were liable to
be sued on the mere ground of positive malice, being a person who
came under no civil obligation. Accordingly, if he has acted with
a want of skill, the person who employed him has himself to blame
for it, indeed, if the surveyor was simply careless, he will still
incur no liability; no doubt gross negligence will be held
equivalent to malice. Even if he receives a remuneration, still
the wording of the Edict is such that he is not answerable for every
degree of negligence ; of course the Preetor is aware that such
persons sometimes give their services for pay. 2. It is only a
surveyor who makes a report who is liable to this action ; a man
must however be understood to make a report where he makes it
through another,


Pauuus (on the Hdict 25) or makes it in writing. If
however you are a surveyor, and I commission you to undertake
the survey of my land, whereupon you hand the matter over to
Titius, and he is guilty of some act of positive malice in carrying it
out, you will be liable ; as you acted with [what is equivalent to]
positive malice in relying on such a person.


Moe Er, 16


242 Where a Surveyor makes a false Report |BooK xt


Uupranus (on the Edict 24). If I commission two persons
and both are guilty of malice, each is liable to an action for
the whole amount, but if one is sued and complies with the
demand, leave to proceed against the other must be refused.
1. The person who has a right to bring the action is the one in whose
interest it was that there should not be a false report made of the
dimensions, in other words, the purchaser or the vendor, as the
case may be, who is prejudiced by the actual report. 2. We are
told however by Pomponius that if, in consequence of the report,
the purchaser gives the vendor too much, there can be no action
brought against the surveyor, because the party has an action
to recover what he paid in excess, in short the purchaser
has no interest, as he has the action just mentioned ;—unless
indeed the vendor is insolvent; in that case the surveyor is
liable. 3. If on the other hand the vendor is deceived by the
surveyor and so delivers a larger extent of land, Pomponius says,
on the same principle, that he has no action against the surveyor
because he has an action on the contract of sale against the
vurchaser, unless, again, the purchaser is insolvent. 4. According
to the same writer, if a surveyor is employed for the purposes
of a trial and he defrauds me in the report which he makes, he
is liable to an action, if the consequence is that | take less by the
judgment. It is true that where he is employed by the judge and
makes a report to my disadvantage maliciously, Pomponius is
doubtful whether I have a right to sue him, but on the whole
he thinks I have. 5. This action Pomponius says ought to be
allowed to the heir and successors generally ; but, as against the
heir and successors, it must be refused. 6. In respect of a slave
the right of action is noxal, he holds, rather than de peculio,
though a civil action given [in a similar case] is de peculio.


Pauus (on the Edict 25) This right of action is perpetual,
as the origin to which the matter is referred is not the fraud
practised but the engagement to undertake the business.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) If the surveyor does not report
the dimensions falsely, but delays reporting at all, and the conse-
quence is that the vendor is discharged after promising to assign
the premises by a given day, this action is not admissible; and,
according to Pomponius, there will be no wéil¢s actio allowed either ;
consequently recourse must be had to an action de dolo. 1. Ifa
false report is made, and thereupon the purchaser sues the vendor
on his contract, he can sue the surveyor too, but if he has no


TIT. VI] Where a Surveyor makes a false Report 243


interest in doing so, no order will be made on the surveyor. If he
does not sue the vendor for the whole deficiency, but only for
something less, then, as Pomponius says, and quite consistently,
there is a right of action against the surveyor for the residue.
2. The Preetor extended the application of these proceedings ; there
is the same right of action where an appraiser appears to have
given a false report as to the dimensions of anything else ; so that,
where he deceived his employer in respect of the measurement of a
building or as to the quantity of corn or wine,


PAvuLus (on the Edict 24) or in a case where there is an
inquiry as to the breadth of a footpath or as to the existence of a
servitude of support or of an overhanging eave, or where he takes
the dimensions of a courtyard or measures the amount of materials
used in building or of a quantity of stone and makes a false report
thereon,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 24) or! he misstated the size of
anything else, he will in all cases be liable. 1. The action is
equally allowed where the deceit is on the part of one who
measures with the use of mechanical appliances. 2. In addition to
the above the remark is made by Pomponius that this action is open
against a man who is not a surveyor but who has made deceitful
statements as to dimensions. 3. On the same principle the action
ought to be allowed equally against an architect who has been
guilty of deceiving ; in fact the Divine Severus himself laid down
that actions should be allowed against an architect or a contractor.
4. I should say myself that an action must be allowed in the same
way against an accountant who reports a calculation deceitfully.


VAT.


On Tuincs RELIGIOUS AND FUNERAL EXPENSES AND
ON THE RIGHT TO CONDUCT FUNERALS.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 10) A man who spends anything
on a funeral is held to contract with the deceased and not with the
heir.


THE SAME (on the Edict 25)? Aristo says that a spot in which
a slave has been buried is religious. 1. A man who has laid a


1 This section seems to continue the sentence from s. 5.
2 M. thinks that pr. and 1. once followed 6.


16—2


244 On Things Religious and Funeral Hupenses [BOOK XI


dead body or caused one to be laid in another man’s ground is
liable to an action in factwm. By “another man’s ground” we
must understand fields and buildings to be meant equally ; but
these words give the right of action to the owner, not to the bona
Jide possessor ; where our authority says “another man’s ground,”
it is clear that he refers to the owner, that is the person to whom
the ground belongs. Even if it is a usufructuary who buries a
body, he may be sued by the owner of the bare property. Whether
a part-owner is liable, if he does the same without the knowledge
of his fellow-owner, is a point open to discussion ; but the better
opinion is that he can be sued in an action familie erciscunde or
commun dividundo. 2. The Pretor says:—“If a body or the
bones of a dead man are averred to have been carried to ordinary
ground or to a burial-place where the party had no right to bury”
etc. Whoever acts in this way is liable to an action 7m factwm and
will have to pay a pecuniary penalty. 3. The carrying which the
Pretor had in his mind was carrying such as is done for the pur-
pose of burying. 4. A spotis called ordinary (purus) which is neither
sacred nor under a sanction nor religious, being a spot to which
all these descriptions are held to be inapplicable. 5. A burial-place
(sepulchrum) is a place where human bodies or bones are put away.
Celsus adds that a place which is set apart for burial does not
become religious throughout, but only so far as it is occupied by
the corpse. 6. A monument is anything that has been set up in
order to preserve memory. 7. A person who has a usufruct cannot
make the ground religious. On the other hand, if one has the bare
property and another the usufruct, even the former cannot make
the ground religious, unless indeed he should bury in it the very
person who bequeathed the usufruct, it not being equally con-
venient that the body should be buried somewhere else: this is
stated by Julianus. No doubt, the rule is that the place cannot be
made religious without the consent of the usufructuary ; but, if the
latter do consent, the better opinion is that the place becomes
religious. 8. No one can make religious a place which is subject
to a servitude, except with the consent of the person who has a
right to the servitude. At the same time, if the party can enjoy
the servitude no less conveniently over some other part of the
ground, the burial cannot be held to be made with a design to
interfere with the servitude, and consequently the place becomes
religious: which no doubt is not unreasonable. 9. A man who has
pledged his land for debt will make the ground religious, if he


mT. vi] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 245


buries in it one? of his own family ; and, if he should be buried
there himself, the same thing follows ; but he cannot make over
the power to another.


3 PauLus (on the Edict 27) However, where all parties
concerned agree, it is more in accordance with public policy to
hold that the ground may be made religious ; and such is the rule
given by Pomponius.


4 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) Where one who is appointed
heir carries in the body of the deceased owner before he has made
entry on the inheritance, he thereby makes the ground religious ;
and it need not be held that by this very act he is behaving as
heir ; let us suppose that he is still in the course of making up his
mind as to making such entry. I should say myself that even
where it is not the heir that has carried in the body, but some
other person, whoever it be, the [one who is appointed] heir either
keeping aloof or being absent or being afraid lest he should be held
to be behaving as heir, still this person makes the ground religious ;
as a matter of fact, it is very common for the deceased to be buried
before anyone has become heir. The ground becomes religious only
where it was the property of the deceased ; as the place in which the
dead man is laid may be held, as a matter of common sense, to apper-
tain to him, especially where he is laid in a place which he had himself
chosen for the purpose. So much is this the case that, even where
the heir lays the body in a place which is bequeathed away as a
legacy, nevertheless the burial of the testator makes the spot
religious, assuming that the body could not as conveniently have
been buried somewhere else.


5 Gatus (on the Provincial Edict 19) “ Household burial-place”
is the expression used of a burial-place which a man appoints for
himself and his household; a burial-place is called “hereditary ”
where he appoints it for himself and his heirs,


6 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) ' or where the testator (pater-


Jamilias) had acquired it by right of hereditary succession. But
in both alike heirs and other successors of whatever kind may
lawfully be buried and may lawfully bury, even though they should
be heirs, whether by testament or upon intestacy, to a very small
extent, and their co-heirs should not consent. The same right is
allowed to children and remoter descendants of either sex and of


1 Ins. guem after suorum, M.


246 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses [Book X1


whatever degree’, even when emancipated, whether they have
become heirs or they decline the inheritance. As for disinherited
persons, they may be buried themselves, simply as a matter of
humanity, unless the testator has expressly forbidden it, moved
thereto by some reasonable antipathy, but they are not at liberty to
bury others, except their own issue. Freedmen cannot be buried,
nor can they themselves bury [in ground that was their patron’s],
unless they are heirs to their patron; though there have been
patrons who have recorded by inscription that they had set up
monuments for themselves and their freedmen. This has been
declared by. Papinianus, and the law has been often laid down to
the same effect. 1. So long as there is a mere (purwm) monument,
it may be sold or given away; if it becomes a cenotaphium (a
monument in memory of one who is not to be buried on the spot),
the proper rule is that it may be sold ; as the Divine Brothers laid
down by rescript that such a monument is not religious.


Galus (on the Provincial Edict 19) A man who buries a
body on another man’s ground can be compelled by an action in
Jactum either to take away the body which he buried or to pay the
price of the ground. The action can be brought by the heir, and
also against the heir of the wrongdoer, and the right to bring it is
not liable to be lost by lapse of time. 1. Where a man deposits a
dead body in a stone chest, the property of another, in which there
has been no body placed already, the proconsul allows an wéilis
actio in factum, as the party cannot exactly be said to have laid
the body in a burial-place or on ground belonging to another.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) Where some stranger has
buried bones or a body, it is matter of question whether the owner
of the ground can dig them up or throw them out without a decree
of the pontifices or an order from the Emperor ; and what Labeo
says is that the permission of the pontifices or the Emperor’s order
is required, without which the person who cast the remains out will
be liable to an action for injurie. 1. If ground that is religious is
averred to have been sold as profane, the Przetor allows an action
in factum to the person concerned in the matter against the
vendor ; the action is equally open against the [vendor’s] heir, as
it amounts virtually to an action on a contract of sale. 2. Ifa
man buries a body in ground dedicated to public use, the Preetor
allows an action against him, if the act was done deliberately (dolo),
and the party must be punished by the summary powers of the


1 del. filiis familie et. M.


11


mir. vi] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 247


Court, though the penalty to be inflicted is not excessive; if the act
was not done deliberately, the application must be dismissed. 3. In
connexion with this action, the expression “profane spot” (locus
purus) will be allowed to comprise buildings. 4. The right of
action is enjoyed not only by the owner, but by anyone who has a
usufruct in the ground in question, or has a servitude over it, such
persons having a right to forbid the act as well as the owner.
5. Where a man is prevented from burying in ground in which he has
a right to bury, he has a good right of action in factum and [he
can ask for] an interdict, even though the resistance be made not to
himself personally but to his agent, as, in such a case, it is held to
be, in a certain sense, to himself.


Galus (on the Provincial Edict 19) When a man is pre-
vented from burying the body or bones of a deceased person, it is
open to him either to have recourse at once to the interdict by which
forcible resistance is prohibited, or to bury the remains somewhere
else and then bring an action in factwm ; and by the latter he will
get damages equivalent to the interest he would have had in
meeting with no resistance ; this estimate will include the price of
ground which he buys or the rent of any that he hires, or the
value of his own ground, [this being a spot] which a man would not
have made religious without some constraining necessity. I wonder
indeed, considering the above, why it should be held to be
established law that the action mentioned should not continue
to be open in favour of the heir, nor yet against the heir of the
wrongdoer,—as the subject of it clearly is an account establishing
a claim for so much money ; in any case, as between the original
parties, the right of action will not lapse.


ULPIANus (on the Edict 25) Where a vendor of land
reserves a burial-place with a view to the interment therein of him-
self and his descendants, then, if he is prevented from using a road-
way for the purpose of burying one of his family, he can bring his
action ; it is in fact held that the bargain between the purchaser
and the vendor included a reservation of a right of way over the
land for the purpose of burial.


PAULUS (on the Edict 27) But if a site for a monument is
sold on the understanding that there is to be no burial there of
persons whom there was a right to bury, an informal agreement to
this effect is not enough, there must be an undertaking given
by stipulation.


12


248 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses [BOOK XI


Uupianus (on the Edict 25) Ifa man has a burial-place, but
no right of way to the burial-place, and the neighbouring owner
obstructs his access, then, according to a rescript of the Emperor
Antoninus and his father, the practice is for a pathway up to the
burial-place to be asked for as a concession and to be granted, so
that, in cases where there is no legal easement, the right may be
obtained by request from the owner of the adjacent land. Still this
rescript, which affords the means of obtaining the right by request,
does not authorize a civil action ; an application will be made to
the Governor in virtue of his summary powers of jurisdiction (extra
ordinem), and he is at once bound to require that means of access
should be conferred upon the party for a reasonable consideration,
subject always to this, that the judge should consider the suitability
of the site, so as to prevent any great detriment being occasioned
to the neighbouring landowner. 1. It is provided by a decree of the
Senate that the use of a burial-place is not to be profaned by causing
it to be varied, in short, the burial-place is not to be made subser-
vient to uses involving the resort of strangers. 2. The Preetor
says :—“ As for any expense incurred! for a funeral, I will allow an
action to recover it against the person therein concerned.” 3. This
pronouncement is made on very good grounds, so as to enable a
person who has conducted a funeral to sue for what he expended ;
as the result is to secure that bodies shall not lie unburied, and on
the other hand that a person’s funeral shall not be conducted at the
cost of a stranger. 4. The person who is bound to conduct the
funeral is the one chosen by the deceased ; still, should he omit to
conduct it, no penalty is provided for the case, unless some valuable
consideration was left him for the purpose ; if this should be the
case, and he still declines to comply with the will of the deceased,
he is debarred the legacy. But, if the deceased made no such pro-
vision, and the duty has not been transferred to anyone, the matter
falls upon those appointed heirs, and, if there is no one appointed, on
the statutable successors or the cognates, these to be taken in the
order in which they would succeed. 5. The amount of the funeral
expenses is determined according to the means or the rank in life of
the deceased. 6. The Preetor or the municipal magistrate is bound
to order the expense required for the funeral to be paid, if the
assets include money, out of such money ; but if not, he must order
a sale of such things as would perish by lapse of time, which it
would impoverish the inheritance to keep ; failing these, he must


1 Read factum for fuctus. Cf. M.


13


14


TIT. viI] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 249


order a sale or a pledge of gold and silver, if there is any such, so
as to raise the amount required,


Galus (on the Provincial Edict 19) _ or [he may get the
money | from debtors to the estate, if this can be easily done ;


ULPIANuUS (on the Edict 25) and if anyone should obstruct
the purchaser, so as to prevent any such property being delivered
to him, the Preetor is bound to intervene and to uphold whichever
of the above measures was employed’, 1. If the deceased was a
tenant or a lodger and no source can be found from which to pay
for the funeral, then, as Pomponius tells us, the expense must be
defrayed from the things “borne in and brought in” (invecta
illata), and if any portion of them remains over and above, it
will be available for arrears of rent. Add? to this that if the
testator whose funeral is in question left any property by way of
legacy, and there is no fund from which to pay for his funeral,
recourse must be had to this property too ; it is of more importance
that the testator’s funeral should be paid for out of his own assets
than that some particular legatees should receive their legacies.
Should the inheritance however only be entered upon after [a sale
has taken place], the property sold must not be taken away from
the purchaser, as a man who has purchased under the authority of
the court is a bona fide possessor and has the ownership*®. Still a
legatee ought not to go without his legacy, if he can be preserved
from loss by the heir ; but, if he cannot, it is better that the legatee
should be disappointed of gain than that the purchaser should
suffer loss. 2. It is said by Mela that if a testator commissions
someone to see to his funeral, and this person receives money, but
omits to conduct the funeral, an action for dolws must be allowed
against him; I am of opinion however that the Preetor ought, in
exercise of his summary powers, to compel him to conduct the
funeral. 3. The only expense which can be held to be incurred on
account of a funeral is expense’ without which the funeral could
not be had; for example, any cost incurred for carrying out the
body of the deceased ; besides this, however, if money was spent on
[the preparation of] the place where the body was to be buried,
this expenditure, so Labeo tells us, must be held to have been
made on account of the funeral, as the spot must needs be made

1 del. si quid impediat etc.: the leading supposition is repeated by mis-
take. M.

2 After sed ins. e¢. M.

3 Four words doubtless interpolated. Cf. M. and D. 50. 17. 137.

4 del. gui ideo fuit ut funus ducatur. M.


250 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses | B0OK XI


ready in which the body is to be laid. 4. An outlay which has
been made for the sake of bringing home the body of one who died
abroad is included among funeral expenses, though, so far, no
funeral should have taken place; and a similar remark may be
made as to a case in which anything has been done as to keeping
watch over a body, or even for cleansing it', or to provide marble
[for a monument] or dispose vestments. 5. But it is not right that
along with the bodies there should be any ornaments placed or
anything else of that kind in the way practised by the simpler sort.
6. This action, which is called the actio funeraria, is founded on
consideration of what is just and reasonable ; and it deals only with
outlay made about a funeral, it does not include other expenses.
The word reasonable must be interpreted by reference to the
position in life of the person whose funeral is in question, to the
circumstances of the case, to the time of the funeral, to the question
of good faith, so that there must not be more charged in the way
of funeral expenses than was really spent, nor even as much as
was spent, if the cost incurred was immoderate in amount; as
account should be taken of the means of the person whose funeral
was the subject of the outlay, and of the actual property [out of
which the payment is to come], where there is an excessive
consumption of it without sufficient grounds. It may be asked—
How if the cost was incurred in accordance with the testator’s own
wish? The answer to this is that even his own wish ought not to
be followed, if the result would be to go beyond the proper grounds
of expenditure; the outlay, so the rule is, should be in proportion
to the means of the deceased. 7. There are cases in which a man
who has gone to expense on a funeral cannot recover the amount,
as where he was moved by a feeling of duty towards the deceased,
and did not act with the expectation of recovering what he
expended. This was in fact laid down by rescript by. the present
Emperor. Accordingly an arbiter will have to take into account
and weigh thoroughly the question what was the intent with which
the expense was incurred; does the party volunteer to act on
behalf of the deceased or his heir, or in discharge of the duty laid
on him by principles of humanity, or is he deferring to a charitable
motive or one of family duty or private affection? Moreover we
may go on to distinguish the degree of charitable concern felt so as
to treat the charity or feeling of duty on the part of the person
who held the funeral as being such that he simply buried the
deceased in order that he should not lie unburied, without


1 [ read commundandum for commendandum: but see Cujas, Obs. 2. 17.


T1r. vil] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 251


intending to go so far as to do this at his own expense!; and, if the
judge is convinced of this, he ought not to dismiss the defendant
from the action ; how can a man, indeed, ever bury the body of
one with whom he had nothing to do, without being actuated by
some feeling of duty? The proper course will therefore be for him
to make a formal attestation stating who it is that buries and what
is his motive, so as to avoid being afterwards examined on the
subject. 8. When sons conduct the funeral of their father, or
other persons act who could have been appointed heirs to the
deceased, then, true as it is that this bare fact does not justify the
assumption that they are acting as heirs or making entry on the
inheritance, still, lest heirs by compulsion should be held to have
intermeddled with the assets or other persons to have acted as
heirs, it is the common practice for them to make an attestation
that in holding the funeral they are moved by feelings of duty.
Should this be done without occasion, their object will be held to
be to protect themselves against being supposed to have inter-
meddled, but not to recover their outlay ; their very assertion is to
the effect that they held the funeral in virtue of a feeling of duty ;
accordingly, if, besides this, they wish to recover their outlay, they
must make the attestation go into further detail. 9. Here some-
one may possibly say that there are cases in which a certain amount
of the expense incurred can be recovered, and so the party incur
the expense partly as a voluntary agent for another and partly in
deference to a feeling of duty. This is, on the whole, true ; and in
such a case he will recover some part of an outlay which he did not
intend to bestow gratuitously. 10. The judge who hears applica-
tions founded on equitable grounds of the above nature ought in some
cases not to allow an expenditure made at a low figure, where, for
instance, the deceased had been a man of ample means and the
outlay on his funeral had been kept down to a small amount by
way of casting a slur upon his memory ; certainly the judge ought to
take no such expenditure into account, the case, that is, being that,
in giving the deceased such a funeral, the intention was to insult
his memory. 11. If a man holds a funeral over a deceased
proprietor whose heir he believes himself to be, he cannot bring
the action for funeral expenses, because he did not intend to act as
a voluntary agent for anyone else ; such is the opinion of Trebatius
and Proculus. Still, I should say myself that even so the action
should be allowed him on sufficient cause shown. 12. Labeo says
that, where a man has some other kind of action for recovering the


1 For fecerit read faceret.


252 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses [BooK XI


cost of a funeral, he cannot bring the actvo funeraria, and that,
consequently, if he has the actio familie erciseunde, he cannot
bring the funeraria, though, no doubt, if the proceedings by way of
Jamilice erciscunde have already been taken, the other action can
be brought. 13. Labeo says further that if you conduct the
funeral of the testator in spite of the heir’s prohibition, the actio
JSuneraria is open to you on good cause shown ; for instance, the
person whom the heir forbade to act might be the testator’s son ;
no doubt, in such a case, the plaintiff can be met with the reply—
“then you must have held the funeral out of a feeling of filial
duty” ;—suppose however you! made the attestation: you’ will
then, he says, have the right to bring the actio funeraria, as it is
best, in fact, that funeral expenses should come out of the estate
of the deceased. Again, how if the testator requested you! to hold
the funeral, but the heir prohibits it, in spite of which you hold it,
must you! not, as a matter of fairness, have a good right to bring
the action? J should say that, as a rule, a judge who does his duty
does not simply follow the action of negotia gesta, but applies
equitable principles more liberally, this being something which the
very nature of the action allows him to do. 14. However the
Divine Marcus declared by rescript that any heir who should
prevent the funeral being held by the person chosen by the testator
would indeed do ill, but that there is no penalty provided by law
to meet the case. 15. Where a man held a funeral at some other
person’s request, he cannot bring the actio fumeraria, this is open
only to the one that made the request, whether he paid the expense
to the person to whom he made such request or still owes it. Ifa
ward made the request without the concurrence of his guardian, an
utilis actio funeraria against the heir ought to be allowed the
person who made the outlay, as it would be unfair that the
heir should be saved the expense. Where however a ward on
whom the duty of holding the funeral falls makes the request
without the authority of his guardian, my opinion is that the action
ought to be allowed against him, if he is himself fully heir to the
person whose funeral was held and the estate is solvent. On the
other hand, if a person holds the funeral at the heir’s request, then,
according to Labeo, he cannot bring the actio funeraria, because
he has the action on mandatum. 16. If he held the funeral as a
voluntary agent for the heir, then, even if the latter declines to
ratify, still, so Labeo tells us, he can bring the actio fumeraria.
17. The action is allowed against the person, whoever it is, on whom


1 In text put in the first person.


15


16


17


18


19


20


TIT. VIT] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 253


the duty of holding the funeral falls, for example, the heir or the
bonorwm possessor or any other successor.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) A patron too is chargeable with
the cost of a funeral, where he applies for bonoruwm possessio contra


tabulas.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) Where anything comes to a man
under the head of dos, the Preetor allows an actio funeraria
against him ; as it was held by those of old time to be most agree-
able to justice that the funeral expenses of women should be
defrayed out of their dowers, as though such were their own
property, and that the man who on the death of the woman is the
richer by the dos, whether father or husband of the deceased, ought
to contribute to the funeral expenses.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 3) But if the father has not yet
recovered the dos, the husband alone can be sued, and he can
charge the father with whatever he pays under the head in
question.


JULIANUS (Digest 10) In fact, funeral expenses are a debt
incurred by the dos ;


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 15) consequently the dos itself has
to bear this debt.


THE SAME (on the Edict 25) —=Neratius asks this question :—
Where a man who gave a dos for a woman stipulated that two
thirds of it should be returned to him, and the other third should
remain with the husband, and! afterwards agreed that the husband
should not have to contribute anything to the funeral expenses,
will the husband be liable to the actto funeraria? To this he says
that, if the stipulator himself conducted the woman’s funeral, the
agreement will take effect and he will get nothing by the actio
Suneraria ; but, if someone else conducted it, that person can sue
the husband, as the agreement in question must not bar the law of
the land. Suppose however a person gives dos for a woman on the
understanding that it is to revert to him if the woman should die
while still under coverture, or the married life should come to an
end in any other way,—would he not in this case have to contribute
to the funeral expenses? As to this, seeing that the dos returns to
him by the woman’s death, it may be said that he must contribute.


1 del. est after stipulatus. M.


21


22


23


24


25


26
27


254 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses [BOOK XI


1. If the husband is the richer by the amount of the dos, he will be
liable to the actio funeraria, and not the father. Still, in regard
to this case, I should say that, if the dos is a very small one and sc
will not bear the cost of the funeral, an action ought to be allowed
against the father for the unpaid balance. 2. If a woman who is
not under potestas dies and her estate is insolvent, her funeral
expenses are chargeable on the dos alone. We find this in
Celsus.


PavuLus (on the Edict 27) Where the person whose funeral
has been held was subject to potestas, the right to bring an actzo
Juneraria exists against the paterfamilias, according to his position
and means.


ULPIANuS (on the Edict .25) We read in Celsus :—on the
death of a married woman, the funeral expenses should always be a
charge on the dos remaining in the hands of the husband and on
the general property of the deceased, in proportion to their
respective values.


Pavuuus (on the Edict 27) For example, if the dos is worth a
hundred and the estate of the deceased two hundred, the heir
must contribute two thirds of the expense and the husband one
third ;


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) —_and this, according to Julianus,
without deducting legacies,


Pautus (on the Edict 27) or the value of slaves who are
manumitted,

PomPpontus (on Sabinus 15) or deducting debts.

ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) In this way the husband and


the heir have to contribute to the funeral in proportion [to the
amounts they receive]. 1. There can be no actio funeraria against
the husband, if he handed over the dos to his wife during the
coverture, so Marcellus tells us, and this is a sound opinion,—that
is to say, in those cases in which the statutes allow the husband
to act in the way described. 2. I may add that in my opinion a
husband can be compelled to pay by means of the actio funeraria
only to the extent of his means ; the fact is that he is the richer by
the amount which he would have had to hand over to his wife if
she had sued him.


7:


29


TIT. vit] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 255


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 15) Should there be no dos, then,
according to Atilicinus, the whole expense ought to be paid by the
father ; or else by the heirs of the woman, supposing, that is, she
should be emancipated. Should the woman have left no heirs,
and the father be insolvent, the husband, he says, can be sued to the
extent of his means, with the object of preventing its being set
down to his misconduct that his late wife was left unburied.


Galus (on the Provincial Edict 19) If a woman who is
divorced marries another man and then dies, Fulcinius holds that
the first husband is not chargeable with funeral expenses, although
he is the richer by the amount of the dos. 1. A man who holds
the funeral of a married woman who was under potestas has a good
right to sue the husband, so long as the dos is not restored to the
woman's father; if it has been restored, his claim will be against
the father ; but, in any case, where the husband has been sued, he
need hand over the less to the woman’s father by the amount
[which he has paid the plaintiff in the action].


PomMPponius (on Sabinus 15) Conversely, whatever the
father disbursed for the funeral of his [married] daughter or hands
over in consequence of an actio funeraria brought against him by
another, he can recover from her husband in an action de dote.
1. But if a married woman who has been emancipated dies during
coverture, her heirs or bonorum possessores will have to contribute,
and so will the father in proportion to the amount of the dos
which he has received, and the husband in proportion to the
amount of it by which he is the richer.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 25) Where a son under potestas is
a soldier and possesses castrense peculium, I should say that the
successors to his estate are liable in the first instance, and, after
that, recourse must be had to the paterfamilias. 1. A man who
buries a slave of either sex belonging to another can bring an actio
Suneraria against the owner. 2. This action is not barred by the
lapse of a year, but is perpetual ; it is allowed to the heirs and to
successors in general, also against successors [of the deceased
owner].


PAULUS (on the Edict 27) If one who is in possession of
an inheritance holds the funeral, but, after that, being adjudged to
be disentitled, omits, in handing over the estate, to deduct the
amount of the expense which he incurred, he will have an wéélis
actio funeraria. 1. If husband and wife should both die at the


33


34


35


36


37


38


256 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses [Book X1


same moment of time, then, according to Labeo, this action ought
to be allowed against the heir of the husband in proportion to the
amount of the dos that comes to him, the fact being that this
liability passed to him as bound up with the dos.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 68) If a man was once heir, but
was afterwards deprived of the inheritance as being unworthy, the
better opinion is that his rights in connexion with burial (jura
sepulchrorum) remain as they were.


PAULUS (on the Edict 64) Where a site is left by way of
legacy on a condition, and the heir buries the deceased while the
condition is pending, this does not make the spot religious.


MARCELLUS (Digest 5) Our forefathers held that a man who
came forward to ruin his country and to slay his parents and
children was by no means one whose death need be mourned ; so
that, if a son killed such a father or a father such a son, they all
held that it were no wickedness ; nay, that the deer should receive
a reward.


PomMpontus (on Q. Mucius 26) When a place is taken by
the enemy, everything religious or sacred loses its character, just as
free men pass into slavery. But when places so taken are released
from this calamitous situation, they recover the condition which
they had originally, reverting to it by something like a kind of
postliminium.


MACER (on the jive per cent. succession duty Statute1) Under
the expression “funeral expenses” we must understand anything
that is spent on the body itself, for example, in the purchase of
ointments, also the price of the ground in which the deceased is
interred, or any rent that may have to be paid, and the price of the
sarcophagus, also the hire of carriages; and, besides these, I should
say that the cost of the funeral includes whatever is consumed in
connexion with the dead body before it is buried. 1. A sepulchral
monument (according to a rescript of the Divine Hadrian) is what-
ever is constructed by way of a muniment’, in other words, in order
to protect the spot where the body is laid ; so that, if the testator
ordered any extensive building to be made, as, for instance, a series
of porticoes in a ring, such expense is not incurred for the funeral.


Unpranus (on all the Courts 9) It is the duty of the
Governor of the province to see that the bodies and bones of the
1 Read munimenti for monumenti.


39


40


41


TIT. vi] On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses 257


dead are not detained or shaken about or so dealt with as to
prevent their being conveyed on the public highway or buried.


MARCIANUS (Institutes 3) The Divine Brothers ordered that
a body which was once disposed of in the way of lawful burial, that
is to say, laid in the ground, should not be disturbed ; and a body
is deemed to be laid in the ground if it is laid in a chest with the
intention that it shall not be taken out again and put somewhere
else. But it is not open to dispute that the chest itself may be
lawfully moved to some more convenient place, if circumstances
require :


PAULUS (Questions 3) for if a person has carried in a body
with the sole intention of afterwards removing it to some other place,
and so wished merely to leave it deposited where it was for a time
rather than to carry out the regular burial or provide, so to speak,
a lasting resting-place, the spot will remain profane.


CALLISTRATUS (Institutes 2) If the place where a body is
brought for burial belongs to several co-owners, all will have to
consent to the burial, if the deceased was a stranger ; as to such
owners themselves, there is no doubt that any one of them may be
properly buried there, even though the others should not agree,
especially if there is no other place in which the body could be
buried.


FLORENTINUS (Institutes 7) A monument is, speaking in
general terms, a thing handed down to posterity as a memorial ;
and if a body or remains should be laid inside it, it becomes a
sepulchre (sepulchrum), but if nothing of the kind is laid in it, it is
simply a monument which is made by way of a memorial, such as
the Greeks call a cevotdaduop.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 8) Some persons there are who,
although they cannot make a spot religious, can still sue to good
purpose for an interdict de mortuo inferendo ; for instance, a bare
proprietor who buries a dead body in land in which someone has
a usufruct, or who attempts to do so; as, if he buries the body, he
will not make the spot a lawful sepulchre, but, if he is interfered
with, he can very well apply for the interdict in pursuance of
which! an inquiry is held as to the ownership. Similar rules apply
to the case of a co-owner who attempts to bury a body without the
consent of a fellow-owner in the common land. The reason of this


1 Read guo for gut.
M. J. IL. li


45


46


258 On Things Religious and Funeral Expenses | B0oK X1


is that, in the public interest, in order to prevent human remains
lying unburied, the strict principle is set aside, and, in fact, in
practice it is occasionally disregarded in doubtful questions
connected with ‘religion’ ; the really highest principle of all being
held to be the one which makes for religion.


PAULUS (Questions 3) Where burial has been made in [two |
different places, the religious character does not attach to both, as
there cannot be two sepulchres in consequence of the burial of one
person ; but, as I should say, the place that is religious is the one
where the principal part of the body is laid, namely the head, the
part of which a likeness is made, the part by which’ people are
recognized. But when leave is obtained for removal of the remains
from one spot to another, the place ceases to be religious.


MarciANus (Fideicommissa 8) Funeral expenses are always
debited to the deceased’s estate, moreover the practice is that they
rank before all other debts, if the estate is insolvent.


SCAIVOLA (Questions 2) If a man had a number of pieces of
land and left the usufruct in every one of them separately by way
of legacy, his body may be buried in one of them, the heir being at
liberty to select the one and thus able to favour the other owners ;
however, the usufructuary fixed upon must be allowed an utilis
actio against the heir to enable him to recover an amount repre-
senting the extent to which the usufruct is depreciated by the
selection made. 1. If the heir of a woman buries the body of the
deceased in land which is part of her estate, he can recover from
her husband, where the latter is bound to contribute towards the
cost of the funeral, an amount depending on the value of the
ground used. 2. Where wearing apparel is left to a man, but he
disposes of it with a view to the [testator’s] funeral expenses, the
present law is that he should be allowed an uttlis actio against the
heir, and that with the preferential claim.


1 Read unde for inde. Cf. M.


— ee


TIT. VI] On Carrying in a Dead Body 259


WEEE:


On CARRYING IN A DEAD Bopy AND BUILDING
A SEPULCHRAL MONUMENT.


1 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 68) The Preetor says :—“ Whither
and wheresoever such a one has a right to carry in a dead body
without your leave, I forbid the use of force to prevent him from
being free to take the body thereto and there to bury it.”
1. Where a man has a right to bury, he is not [to be] hindered
from doing so, and it is held that he is so hindered when either
he is prevented from taking the body on to the ground in question
or his approach to it is obstructed. 2. The bare proprietor of the
piece of ground can have recourse to the interdict as to carrying in
a body ; in fact it is equally available in respect of ordinary land.
3. Again, if I have a right of way to a plot of ground, and I wish to
carry in a body to that plot, but my approach is hindered, the law
is that I can take proceedings by way of this interdict, inasmuch as,
being hindered from using the right of way, I am hindered from
carrying in the body, and asimilar rule must be held to apply where
I have any other servitude. 4. That this is a prohibitory interdict
is plain on the face of it. 5. The Pretor says :—“ Wheresoever
such a one has a right to carry in a body without your leave, I
forbid force being used to prevent him from being free to erect on
the spot a sepulchral monument, he doing the same without
malicious intent.’ 6. The reason why this interdict is offered is
that the construction and ornamentation of monuments is desirable
in the interests of religion. 7. No one is to be hindered from
making a tomb or a monument on a spot where he has a right to do
so. 8. A man is held to hinder the making of a structure even
where he prevents the materials being brought to the spot which
are required for purposes of construction. On the same principle,
if a man prevents the necessary workmen from coming to the spot,
the interdict will apply, also if he hinders the fixing of apparatus,
assuming that he does so on a spot which is subject to the
servitude ; but, of course, if you attempt to set up your appliances
on my ground, I shall not be liable to the interdict, if, in exercise
of my rights, I decline to allow you to proceed. 9. A man must be
understood to construct not only when he undertakes some fresh
work of his own, but equally so when his object is to execute


17—2


260 On Carrying in a Dead Body [BOOK XI


repairs. 10. A man who takes measures to make a sepulchral
structure fall over is exposed to this interdict.


MARCELLUS (Digest 28) One of the “Royai Statutes” lays
down that, on the death of a woman with child, she will not be
buried until the unborn infant is extracted ; anyone who trans-
gresses this rule may be said to have taken away the prospect of
the living child in disposing of the body of the pregnant woman.


PomMpPontus (on Sabinus 9) If a man is erecting a sepulchral
monument close to your house, you can serve on him a “ notification
of novel structure,” but, when the work is finished, the only right
of action you will have is that for an interdict quod vw aué clam.
1. If a body is once carried in close to the house of a stranger, that
is over the statutable limits, the owner of the house cannot after
that prevent the person [who does it] from carrying in another
body to the same place, or from constructing a monument, if the
act was originally done with the knowledge of such owner.


ULPIANUS (Responsa 2) The right to a burial-place is not
acquired by long possession by one to whom it does not legally
belong.


THE SAME (Opinions 1) If human remains are laid within
some structure which is averred to be incomplete, there is no
reason, so far, why it should not be completed. 1. But, if the place
is already made religious, the pontifices ought to decide how far it
is possible to meet the need of putting the structure in proper
condition with due regard to religion.


TWELFTH BOOK.


I.


On THINGS GIVEN IN CREDIT WHERE A SPECIFIC DEMAND IS TO
BE MADE AND ON THE CoNDICTIO.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) It will be to the purpose,
before we come to explanation of the text, to say a few words as
to the meaning of the above title itself. 1. The Preetor gives
under this title a number of rules of law dealing with contracts
of various kinds, and it is for that reason he begins with the title
called that of “things given in credit,” as this comprises! every
kind of contract which people make in reliance on the good faith
of others ; in fact, as Celsus says (Questions, b. 1), the term credere
(to give in credit) is of general application, so that under this head
the edict of the Preetor deals with the subjects of loan for return
and of pledge. Asa matter of fact, whenever people agree to any
arrangement in reliance on the good faith of others, and are
thereafter to receive something, they are said, in virtue of the
contract, to give credit. The word “thing” too (ves) was chosen
by the Preetor as being one of general application.


PAULUS (on the Edict 28) People give a matuum when they
are to receive in return not the identical thing which they gave—
or else it would be a case of commodatum or depositum,—but some-
thing of the same kind; were it to be of a different kind, as where
a man is to get back wine for corn, it would not be a matwwm.
1. A gift of mautuwm deals with subject-matter determined by
weight, tale or measure, as people can contract a credit by a
gift of such things as? admit of the contract being performed by
payment in kind instead of return in specie ; you cannot contract
the credit with respect to other things, because it is impossible to
pay the creditor off by giving him one thing in exchange for


1 Perhaps “he includes.” 2 Read gue for guia. Of. M.


262 On Things given in Credit [BOOK XII


another of a different kind, without his consent. 2. A gift of
mutuum is so termed because the thing becomes yours instead
of mine (ea meo tuum); accordingly, if it should not become
yours, the obligation does not arise. 3. It follows then that
giving in credit differs from making a mutuum in the way in
which a genus differs from an individual thing ; there may be
a good gift in credit quite apart from things which are determined
by weight, tale and measure, so that, in fact, it is a case of a credit
where a person is to have the identical object returned. Again,
there can be no mutwum [of money] unless the money changes hands,
but there may well be a case of credit, even where nothing changes
hands, as, for example, where a dos is promised after marriage.
4. In a case of a gift of mutwum the giver ought to be owner, and
it is not inconsistent with this that sons under potestas or slaves
can impose a valid obligation by advancing money which is part of
their peculium ; it is the same thing as if you were to give money
at my request, that being a case in which I get the right of action,
though the money was not mine. 5. People can also give credit
by spoken words, where some positive act is added in order to create
an obligation, such as a stipulation!


PoMPoNIus (on Sabinus 27) When people give a mutuum,
even if they do not take any assurance to the effect that what is
returned shall be equally good, still the debtor has no right to give
in return a thing of the same kind but of inferior quality, as, for
instance, new wine in return for old; in making a contract the
intention of the parties is deemed equivalent to an express assur-
ance, and here the intention is held to be that the loan should be
discharged with something of the same kind and of the same degree
of goodness as that with which it was made.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 34) In a case where there is some
person who has no occasion for lending at interest nor intention to
do so, but you, having on hand a purchase of landed estate, require
to borrow money for the purpose, though you have no wish to take
up money on loan until you actually make the purchase, whereupon
the [aforesaid person who is the proposed] lender, having, let us
say, some pressing occasion to go to a distance, deposits the precise
sum required in your hands, on the understanding that, if you make
the purchase, you shall be liable accordingly as on a credit, [in


1 Veluti stipulatione. This last word is possibly in apposition to “words” in
the preceding line, in which case the translation would be “¢.g. by a stipulation.”
Contra Bas.


TIT. I] On Things given in Credit 263


such circumstances] the deposit described will be at the risk of
the party who undertook to hold it. We know that, where a man
receives some article in order that he may sell it and use the
purchase money for his own purposes, he will hold the article at
his own risk. 1. If a thing is given in pledge, it can, on payment
of the money advanced, be sued for by a condictio. Again, produce
taken on a ground which gives no lawful title should be sued for by
a condictio ; even if a tenant gathers produce after his term of five
years has expired, it can undoubtedly be recovered by a condictio,
assuming always that it was not gathered with the landowner’s
consent; if it was with his consent, then beyond all question there
is no condictio. 2. Things which have been carried on to the
ground by the force of a stream can be recovered in the same
way.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 22) If you are bound to hand
over something to me, and the thing is lost subsequently to
some act of yours which prevents you from handing it over, it
is recognized law that the loss falls on you. But when the
question arises whether the act was yours, it will have to be
considered not only whether the transfer was in your power or
not, or whether or not you took deliberate means to prevent its
being in your power at the time or at any time afterwards, but also
whether there was any sufficient ground existing in consequence of
which you were bound to know that you had to make the transfer.


PavuLus (on the Edict 28) A thing is called specific
(certum) when the object or the quantity which is the subject
of an obligation is expressly pointed out, either by name or by
some description which is equivalent to a name, and its nature
or amount is thereby ascertained. Indeed Pedius himself says
(Stipulations, b. 1) that it makes no difference whether a thing
is mentioned by its exact name or pointed out with the finger
or described in so many words, inasmuch as those methods are
interchangeable one of which is as effectual as another.


ULPpianus (on the Edict 26) Every term that can be in-
serted in a stipulation may be equally made part of [an agreement
connected with] an advance of money, consequently so may
conditions.


Pompontus (Hztracts from Plautius 6) Thus a loan on
mutuum is sometimes in suspense, so as to admit of being set
up by some subsequent matter; for instance, suppose I give


264 On Things given in Credit [BooK XII


you a sum of money on loan on the understanding that, if a
given condition comes to pass, the money shall become yours
and you shall be under an obligation to repay me. Similarly,
suppose the heir lends money which has been bequeathed to a
legatee, after which the legatee declines to have it ; as it is held
that, from the day of entry on the inheritance, the money was
the property of the heir, so that he can sue to recover the amount
which he lent. We are told by Julianus that, even where the heir
has delivered property [which had been bequeathed], the delivery
is referred to the time when entry was made on the inheritance,
in case the legacy or the gift to a co-heir is declined’.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) A specific condictio (condictio
certi) is open on every ground and in pursuance of every kind of
obligation in virtue of which a specific demand can be made,
whether the contract on which the demand arises is in its terms
specific or not specific ; as a man can lawfully bring a condictio for
something specific in pursuance of any kind of contract, provided
only there is an actual existing obligation; no doubt, if the
obligation is only to be binding on a future day or on the
occurrence of a given condition, no action can be brought
before the day arrives or the conditional event occurs. 1. This
action can be brought equally well in pursuance of a legacy
or on the lew Aquila; indeed the claim to recover can be
raised by means of this action even on the ground of theft.
Again, if proceedings are taken under a senatusconsultum, the
action is still open; for example, where the person who desires
to sue is one who has acquired an inheritance under a testa-
mentary trust. 2. A man may be properly sued in an action of
this kind, whether he contracted the obligation on his own
account or as agent for someone else. 3. Seeing then that
the specific condictio is admissible on every kind of contract,
whether the contract was made by act, or set words, or both
together, we may mention certain cases with reference to which
it may be fitly considered whether this action is suitable for the
respective demands involved. 4. I advanced you ten, and |
stipulated for repayment to someone else: which stipulation is


1 Cum repudiatum sit legatum aut adpositum. For the last word Cujas
reads adquisitum, acquired, Baro agnitum, accepted, Mommsen is inclined to
amissum, lost. Kellinghusen retains adpositum, as meaning a legacy to an heir,
and refers to D. 28. 5.17 pr. (Cf. Pothier.) It is impossible to feel confidence in
any one of these conjectures, but I have followed the last. Of course the contrast
is then between degatum and adpositum, not repudiatum and adpositum.


10


TIT. I] On Things given in Credit 265


null and void. Can I ask for ten by way of condictio by the
action under discussion, on the ground that there are two con-
tracts in the case, one made by act, that is by the advance,
and another by words, consequently to no purpose, since I could
not stipulate for another person? My own opinion is that I can.
5. It is a similar case if I take a promise by stipulation from a
ward without the concurrence of his guardian, having advanced
him the money with such concurrence; in this case, too, I shall
still have a condictio in virtue of the advance. 6. A similar!
question may be asked if we suppose that I have advanced you
money, and I stipulate for repayment of it on the occurrence
of some impossible conditional event; as, while the stipulation
is null and void, the condictio will remain open. 7. Again, if
I advance money to a man who is afterwards put under an
interdict as to his property, and then I make a stipulation with
him, I should say that his case is like that of a ward, as in fact
he can acquire [rights] by stipulation too. 8. If I advance my
own money on your behalf, as if it were yours, you being at
the time absent and unaware of the fact, Aristo tells us that the
condictio can be brought by you; Julianus, too, being consulted
on the point, says (b. 10) that Aristo’s opinion is sound, and that
there is no doubt that if I give my money on your behalf at your
request, you acquire the obligational claim, in fact, it happens
every day that a man who wishes to lend money requests someone
else to be lender in his name and so advance it to the person who
is to become his, the requesting party’s, debtor. 9. I deposited
with you the sum of ten, after which I allowed you to make use of
the money ; Nerva and Proculus hold that I can bring a condictio
for it against you, as on a mutuwwm, even before you have taken it
up, and this is perfectly sound, as Marcellus himself holds, in fact
you have” become possessor in virtue of your intention®. It follows
that the risk is transferred to the person who asked for the loan, and
he can be sued in a condictio.


THE SAME (on the Edict 2) If, on the other hand, I gave
you leave originally, on depositing the money with you, to make
use of it, if you wished, [the same authorities hold] that there is
no loan until you take up the money, as, before that, it is not
certain that any debt will be contracted.


1 For item read idem.
2 In the text “he has.” 3 In the text “his.”


ti


12


266 On Things given in Credit [BOOK XII


THE SAME (on the Edict 26) You request me to lend you
a sum of money. Not having it by me, I give you a dish or a
quantity of gold for you to sell it and make use of the money you
receive. If you sell it, I should say that there is a good loan of
the money. But if, before selling the dish or the gold, you lose
it without any negligence of yours, the question may be asked
whether the loss falls on you or on me. For my own part I
think the distinction made by Nerva is a very sound one, who
holds that it makes a great difference whether or not I had the
dish or the gold for sale, and that, if I had, the loss falls on me,
just as if I had put it in the hands of someone else for him
to sell it; but that, if it was not my intention to sell it, and
my only object with reference to the sale of it was to enable
you to use [the purchase-money], the loss falls on you, more
especially if I let you have it without charging you any interest.
1. If I give you ten on the understanding that you shall owe me
nine, Proculus says, and very rightly, that in law you are my
debtor for no more than nine. But if I give the ten for you to
owe me eleven, Proculus holds that there can be no action to
recover more than ten. 2. If a runaway slave lends you money,
the question is asked—can his owner bring a condictio to recover
it from you? As to this, if my slave, being one who is allowed
free management of his pecultwm, lends the money to you, this
is a good loan; but a runaway slave, or indeed any slave who
lends money against the will of his owner, does not thereby
pass the property in it. Then what is the upshot? The coins”
can be claimed at law, if they are to be found, on the other hand,
if you part with the possession of them maliciously, there can
be an action for production of them; but, if you have spent them
without fraudulent intent, I can bring a condictio for them.

Pompontus (Extracts from Plautius 6) If you accept money
by way of a loan from a person who is in fact a lunatic, but
you suppose him to be of sound mind, and the money is bestowed
in your interest, hereupon, according to Julianus, the lunatic
acquires a right of condictio; the law being that everything
which is a good ground of action for a man who is not aware
of the facts is equally so for a lunatic. Again, if a man who
made a loan to a slave [owned by another] becomes a lunatic,
and the slave thereupon spends the money in the interest of
his owner, there is a good right of condictto to recover it on
behalf of the lunatic; and if anyone advances by way of loan
money belonging to another, and after that he becomes a


13


rig 21] On Things given in Credit 267


lunatic, and the money is spent, a right to bring a condictio is
acquired by the lunatic.


ULPIANUS (0n the Edict 26) There is no doubt that, if a thief
advances you money by way of a loan, he does not pass you the
property in it; still, if the money is spent, a right of condictio
arises. 1. Hence Papinianus says (Questions, b. 8), “if I lend you
somebody else’s money, you are not liable to any action at my
hands until you spend the money.” He then asks the question
whether, if you spend the money portion by portion, I have a
right to sue for it portion by portion, and his answer is that I
have, if I have been informed that the money had not been mine
and I sued for a portion only because I had not yet discovered that
the whole was spent. 2. If a slave owned in common lends ten, I
should say that, whether the slave has been given the free disposal
of his peculiwm or not, if the money is spent, an action for
five is open to each co-owner; we are told by Papinianus
that, if I lend you a hundred pieces of money which I have in
common with another, I have a good condictio for fifty, even
where each separate coin was owned in common.


THE SAME (on the Edict 29) If a son under potestas borrows
money in contravention of the Senatusconsultwm [Macedonianum |
and repays it, whereupon his paterfamilias brings a vindicatio to
recover the pieces of money, no exceptio can be pleaded in bar
of his claim; but, if the money has been spent by the lender,
then, according to Marcellus, there is no right of condictio, as a
condictio is only allowed where the money was advanced under
circumstances such that there would have been a right of action,
if the property [in the coins] had passed to the person who re-
ceived them, but this is not the case in the present instance. We
may add that where money is lent in contravention of the Senatus-
consultum and is repaid by mistake, the better opinion is that
there is no right of action to recover it.


THE SAME (on the Edict 31) There are a number of special
rules of law observed as to loans of money. If I order my debtor
to hand to you the money which he owes me, you become answerable
to me, though the money you received was not mine. This being
acknowledged law in the case of two persons, a similar rule must
be applied where there is only one, so that, where you owe me
money on the ground of a mandate and you and I agree that you
shall keep it in your hands as upon a loan, the construction is


16


17


18


19


268 On Things given in Credit [BOOK XII


that the money was paid me and then passed from my hands
to yours.


PAauLus (on the Edict 32) If a co-owner of money advanced
money of his own by way of loan, there is no doubt that the
loan is complete though his fellow-owners refused to give their
consent ; but if he advanced money that was owned in common,
he does not effect a valid loan, unless the others give their con-
sent too, as he had no right to dispose of more than his own
share.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 1) Where a son under potestas
who was living at Rome in order to pursue his studies lent
money forming part of his travelling allowance, Sczevola ex-
pressed the opinion that he could get relief by means of pro-
ceedings extra ordinem.


THE SAME (Disputations 7) If I hand you money by way
of making you a gift, and you accept it by way of a loan, then,
as we read in Julianus, there is no gift made; but the question
whether there is a loan is a point to consider. My own opinion is
that there is no loan either, and on the whole I should say the
money does not become the property of the person who took it, as
his view of the transaction, when he took it, was not the same as
mine. Consequently, if he spends the money, however much he is
liable on a condictio, still he may very well plead dolus, by way of
exceptio, seeing that the money was spent in accordance with the
will of the giver. 1. If I hand you the money by way of deposit
and you take it by way of loan, there is neither a deposit nor
a loan; and we may say the same where one! gives the money by
way of a loan for consumption (muéuwm) and the other? takes it as
a loan for use, with the object of making a display with it ; but in
both cases alike, if the money is spent, there is good ground for a
condictio without any eaceptio founded on dolus.


JULIANUS (Digest 10) An advance of money does not, as a
matter of course, bind the man who takes it, it only does so where
the very object is that he should be bound at once. For instance,
a man who gives money by way of a donatio mortis causa no
doubt advances money, but this will not put the party receiving
under liability, except in a case where an occurrence takes place on
which such liability was made to depend, for example that of the
donor recovering from his illness or the donee dying first. Again,


1 Tn the text “you.” * In the text “I.”


20


21


TIT. I] On Things given in Credit 269


if money is given in order that something or other should be done,
then, as long as it is a matter of uncertainty whether it will be done
or not, there will be no liability ; but, as soon as it becomes certain
that it will not be done, the party who received the money will be
hable ; thus, if I give Titius ten on the understanding that he will
manumit Stichus by the first of the next month, then, before that
day, I shall have no right of action, but when it has passed I can
bring an action, provided always, that is, the slave has not been
manumitted. 1. If a ward, without the concurrence of his guardian,
lends money or hands it over in payment of a debt, then, if the
money is spent, he has a right of condictio, or is discharged of the
debt, [as the case may be,] and that on no other ground than this,
that the money appears to have come to the hands of the person
who received it by the act of the ward ; accordingly, if the person
who received the money in question as a loan or as payment of a
debt hands it on to someone else by way of loan or payment, then,
if the latter spends the money, the person first mentioned is liable
to repay the sum to the ward, or must hold the ward discharged of
his debt, as the case may be, and he will have a good claim against
the party to whom he gave the money, or will be discharged of his
debt to him. In short, the rule is that a man who hands over the
money of another by way of loan, will, if the recipient spends it,
have a good claim against him, and it is equally true that one who
gives money by way of paying a debt will be discharged from all
claim by the party who receives it.


THE SAME (Digest 18) If I make a gift of money to you for
you to lend me the same money, will this be a loan? My answer
was that where a case is put in such language as this, people do not
use their terms correctly, as a contract such as mentioned is neither
a gift nor a loan of money ; it is not a gift, because the intention in
giving the money is not that it shall remain in the hands of the party
receiving it at all events; and it is not a loan, because the money is
handed over rather by way of getting rid of a debt than of subject-
ing another party to an obligation. Accordingly, if a person who
received money [from me] on condition that he should lend me the
same does hand me the money so received, this will not be a
loan, as I ought rather to be held to have received what is
my own. This is the construction to give if we are to maintain the
strict meaning of the words used :—no doubt the more indulgent
rule is that both transactions are valid.


THE SAME (Digest 48) Some have held the opinion that a


22


23


24


25


26


270 On Things given in Credit [BOOK XI


man who sues for ten cannot be compelled to take five and carry -
on his action for the balance, and, on the other hand, if he asserts
that a given estate is his, that he can equally little be compelled to
confine his demand toa part of it ; still in both cases it is held that
the Pretor will be acting more indulgently if he compels the
plaintiff to accept what is offered him, seeing that it is part of
his official duty to keep down litigation.


THE SAME (Extracts from Minicius 4) A loan of wine was
made and legal proceedings were taken to recover it; and the
question arose to what time the valuation to be made of the wine
should refer, the time when it was handed over to the borrower, or
when he joined issue, or when judgment was given. Sabinus gave
the opinion that if it had been agreed at what time the wine should
be restored, the value assessed should be that which the wine bore
then; if no such agreement had been made, r¢ should be the value
it bore when' the action was brought. I asked to what locality
the valuation should refer. He replied that if it had been
agreed that restoration should be made at some particular place,
the valuation should follow the price at that place ; if this had not
been settled, it should be according to the place where the action
was brought.


AFRICANUS (Questions 2) If a slave is left by way of legacy
to you, and I thereupon take possession of him and sell him as if
he were left to me, then, according to Julianus, if he dies, you have
a good right of condictio against me for the purchase money, on
the ground that I have become the richer out of your property.


UxupPianus (Pandecte) If a man stipulates for a specific
thing, he does not acquire thereby the action ex stipulatu, he
must sue for it by the condictitious action by which a demand is
made for a specific thing.


THE SAME (on the Office of Consular Men) A lender who
advances money for the purpose of restoring buildings has a
preferential demand for repayment of the money lent.


THE SAME (Opinions 5) If a man who is procurator for
a soldier lends the soldier's money and takes a surety for re-
payment, the law is that a right of action is allowed to the soldier
to whom the money belonged, by analogy with the case of the
guardian of a boy or the curator of a young man who stipulates
for repayment of a loan of the money of either of them.
1 Supplied from Basilica. v. M.


27


28


29


TIT. I] On Things given in Credit 271


THE SAME (on the Edict 10) A town corporation (civitas)
can be bound in pursuance of a loan made to it, provided the
money is employed for its benefit ; otherwise the town will not
be liable, but only the individuals who were parties to the
contract.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 21) A lender who has taken
insufficient security does not on that account lose the right to de-
mand payment of so much of the debt as is in excess of the value
of the security.


PAULUS (on Plautius 4) Where a man employs his slave
as an agent in business (¢nstitor), it may be fairly maintained,
according to Julianus, that the employer is liable accordingly
to be sued in a condictio, the construction being that the slave's
contracts are made by the order of the person who appointed
him.


THE SAME (on Plautius 5) Where a man who intends to
take up a loan of money makes a formal promise to the person who
is to lend it that he will repay it, he has it in his power to avoid
liability by declining to accept it.


THE SAME (on Plautius 17) Where a condictio has been
brought to recover an estate or a slave, I believe the present law
is that after joinder of issue all accessions (causa) must be handed
over, that is to say, everything which the plaintiff would have had,
if the property had been given up at the moment when issue was
joined. 1. I made a bona-fide purchase of your slave from a man
who had stolen him, I not knowing the facts; the slave himself
bought a boy! with money which was part of the peculiwm which
he had with you, and the boy was delivered to me. Sabinus and
Cassius hold that you can sue me for the boy in a condictio; but
that, if Iam at all out of pocket by the transaction in which the
slave engaged, I have a right of action in my turn against you.
Which is quite correct ; Julianus himself says that he is inclined to
think that the owner [of the slave] has the whole right of action
founded on the purchase [of the boy], but the vendor can sue the
bona-fide purchaser in a condictio [to have the boy handed over].
With regard to the money which came out of the peculium, if the
coins are to be found, the owner of the slave can have a vindicatio
for them, though he is liable to an action de peculio at the hands
of the vendor for payment of the price; but, if they are spent,


1 hominem.


32


33


34


35


36


272 On Things gwen in Credit [BOOK XII


there is an end of the action de peculio. However Julianus should
have added that the vendor is liable to the owner of the slave, in an
action on the purchase [of the boy] only on the terms of such owner
paying him the whole price, as well as whatever would have been
owing to him, if he had made his bargain with a free man. The
same rule holds where I pay [the purchase money] to a bona-fide
possessor [instead of the thief], provided always I am ready to assign
to the true owner any right of action which I have against such
possessor.


CELSUS (Digest 5) If you ask Titius and me to lend you —


money, whereupon I order my debtor to promise you to advance it,
and you then make the stipulation under the impression that he is
debtor to Titius, are you bound to [repay] me? I hesitate to say
so, if you contracted no bargain with me, still I almost think that
you are bound ; not because I lent you money, as this cannot be
the case where there is no agreement between the parties, but
because money of mine came into your hands, and accordingly it is
right and just that you should restore it to me.


MopeEstinus (Pandecte 10) It is provided by imperial con-
stitutions that Governors of a province and members of their suites
should not enter into business or lend money or practise usury.


PAULUS (Sentences 2) The officials who attend the Governor
of a province, inasmuch as their office is permanent, are free to lend
money and to practise usury. The Governor of a province is
not forbidden to borrow money at interest.


MoDESTINUS (Responsa 3) The risk in respect of demands
on debtors falls on the person by whose negligence the risk itself
can be shown to have been intensified.


JAVOLENUS (Epistles 1) | You owed me a sum of money
unconditionally, and you have promised Attius, at my request, to
pay it to him, subject to a condition. So long as this condition
is pending, your liability to me is exactly what it would have been
if you had promised’ me the money subject to the alternative con-
dition ; and, that being the case, my question is—will an action on
my part while the condition is pending produce no result? The
answer was?:—I have no doubt that the? money for which I

1 For spopondisti read spopondisses. Cf. M.

2 The answer is put in the mouth of the interrogator as if it were his own


opinion.
3 For mea read ea. Cf. M.


37


TED ST] On Things gwen in Credit 273


stipulated unconditionally will remain on loan to you, even if
the condition has not come to pass in which Attius is concerned,
Attius having, with my consent, stipulated for payment of the same
sum, subject to a condition ; as the case is the same as if no stipu-
lation [on the part of Attius] had been made in the matter ; at the
same time, so long as the event of the condition is in suspense, I
cannot sue for the money, because, it being uncertain whether it may
not come to be owing in pursuance of the latter stipulation, my suit
must be held to be premature.


PAPINIANUS (Definitions 1) Where a condition refers to the
time at which the contract is made, the stipulation is not suspended,
and, if the conditional event is an actual fact, the stipulation is
binding, even though the parties to the contract should not be
aware that it is binding. For example, suppose the stipulation
should be—“ do you promise to give me a hundred if the king of
the Parthians is living?” The rule is the same even where the con-
dition refers to past time.


ScAHVOLA (Questions 1) In short, regard must be had to the
question whether, so far as human nature admits, it can be known!
that the money will be owing:


PAPINIANUS (Definitions 1) accordingly, the proviso only
acquires the force of a condition when it is referred to future
time.


PAULUS (Questions 3) There was read in the court of Aimilius
Papinianus, Prefect of the Preetorium and learned in the law, a
written promise such as follows :—‘“‘ I, Lucius Titius, have set down
in writing that I have received from Publius Meevius fifteen | azwre7]
as a loan paid down to me at the house of the same, and Publius
Meevius stipulated and I Lucius Titius promised that the said fifteen
in good money should be duly paid on the first day of the next
month (Kalendis futuris). If on the day above mentioned? the
[said] sum of money shall not have been given and paid to Publius
Meevius, or to whatever person shall have a right thereto, nor
security have been given in that behalf, then, for such time there-
after as I am in arrears with the payment, Publius Meevius stipulated
and I Lucius Titius promised that there shall be given by way of
penalty for every thirty days and for every hundred denarii one
denarius. And we have both agreed that to Publius Mevius out

1 For scire read sciri.
2 Ins. supra scripta after die. M.


WI. I. 18


41


274 On Things given in Credit [BOOK XII


of the sum above mentioned! I should be bound to repay every
month three hundred denarii out of the whole sum to him or to his
heir.” A question was asked as to the obligation to pay interest, as
the number of months which was allowed for payment had passed
by. My answer was as follows :—As a supplementary agreement
(pactum) which is made at once is regarded as part of the stipula-
tion, it follows that the present case may be treated as though the
promisee, after stipulating for a given sum of money to be paid every
month, had then made an additional agreement for interest in pro-
portion to the delay in paying the instalments ;, consequently, I said,
at the end of the first month interest on the first Instalment would
be due, and, in the same way, after the second and third periods, the
interest on the respective unpaid amounts due by way of instalment
would begin to mount up, but interest could not be demanded on
any unpaid principal before the time at which a demand could be
made of such principal itself. Some however maintained that the
added agreement referred only to the payment of principal, not of
interest too, the latter having been made the subject of a stipulation
in plain terms in the previous clause, and this agreement, they said,
would only furnish ground for an eaxceptio, so that, if the money were
not paid by the promised instalments, interest was due from the day
of the stipulation, just as if this had been expressed in so many
words. But the time to sue for the principal having been post-
poned, it follows that interest is due too as from the day when the
debtor began to be in default, and assuming, in accordance with the
last mentioned opinion, that the agreement would only lead to an
exceptio,—though this was not the view finally adopted,—still, as a
matter of strict law, the obligation to pay interest will not be en-
forceable, as a man is not in default where he has an excepitio
which is a good bar to a demand for the debt. Of course, people
do stipulate for some quantity to be furnished on the occurrence of
a conditional event, but one which is got together in the meantime,
as occurs in the case of the produce of land, [and] a similar provision
may be expressly made as to interest too, so that, if the money is not
paid by the day, what? is coming in the way of interest may be
payable as from the day when the stipulation was made.


AFRICANUS (Questions 8) A person having employed in one
of the provinces his slave Stichus as an accountant, his testament
was read at Rome, by which the same Stichus was given his freedom


1 For pro read Publio (cf. M.): but the words in italics are interpolated. M.
2 For guo read quod. Cf. M.


ar, ¥] On Things given in Credit 275


and appointed heir in respect of a share of the testator’s estate ; but
Stichus still collected debts due to the deceased and also lent money,
therewith on various occasions making stipulations for repayment
and taking security, without being aware of his change of status.
An opinion was asked as to how the law stood in the matter. The
view held was that any debtors who had paid him had a good
discharge, wherever they had themselves been unaware of the
decease of his [late] owner; but with regard to such sums of
money as had come to Stichus’s hands, his co-heirs had no right
to ask for an action familie erciscunde, but one of negotia gesta
only ought to be allowed. As to money which he had himself lent,
the property in this only passed to an extent proportional to the
share which he had in the inheritance ; seeing that, even if I hand
money to you for you to lend it to Stichus, [sic: quere Mevius 2)
and you give it him after my death, of which you are unaware,
you will not pass the property in it; as a matter of fact, however
much it may accord with acknowledged law that debtors who
pay Stichus get a good discharge, it is not established law that
he can pass the property in monies which he lends. If therefore
there were no stipulation for repayment in the case, the money
could not be sued for in respect of the share of a co-heir as money
lent, nor could the securities be retained. If however Stichus went
on to make a stipulation for repayment, an important question would
be in what form he made it; as, if, for example, he stipulated ex-
pressly in favour of his master Titius, then dead, the stipulation
would beyond all doubt be inoperative, but if he stipulated for re-
payment to himself, the proper view was that he acquired the
benefit of such stipulation for the inheritance; the rule being that
just as where free men or slaves of strangers are held to service in
good faith, any acquisition which they make through the property
of their reputed owners goes to these latter, so too acquisitions made
through anything which is part of the inheritance are made for the
inheritance itself. But after entry on the part of the co-heirs on the
inheritance, the above does not apply to its full extent, at any rate
where they know that Stichus was made co-heir along with them,
since in that case they cannot be regarded as bona-fide possessors,
as they have not so much as any intention of possessing at all.
If however the case put before us is that of the co-heirs being un-
aware of the facts, for instance because they were themselves in the
position of heirs by compulsion, the above answer may still be given,
in which case the matter will come to this, that, if the slave in


18—2


42


1


276 On Things gwen in Credit [BOOK XII


question has co-heirs of his own class, they will all be held to
service in good faith to one another reciprocally.


CELSUS (Digest 6) If I stipulate for ten from Titius and then
go on to stipulate from Seius for the amount by which what I can
get from Titius falls short of his debt, then, if I sue Titius for ten,
this is no discharge to Seius, or else Seius’s undertaking to me is of
no use ; but if Titius complies with the order of the Court, Seius’s
liability will be at an end. But if I sue Seius, then, whatever the
amount is by which what I can get from Titius at the time when issue
is joined between Seius and me falls short of his debt, so much the
less can I sue Titius for afterwards. 1. Labeo says as follows :—if
you stipulate that the promisor shall make sure that ten are given,
you cannot put in your statement of claim that the promisor is
bound to give ten, as he can still be discharged of his promise by
providing a more substantial debtor ; in short Labeo’s meaning is
that the promisor cannot be compelled to join issue if he offers to
find a substantial debtor.


Bh


ON SWEARING AN OATH, WHETHER VOLUNTARY,
COMPULSORY OR JUDICIAL.


Gatus (on the Provincial Edict 5) A very great resource has
come into use, in order to the despatching of cases before the
Courts, consisting of the religious feeling attached to an cath, by
means of which disputes are decided either in pursuance of an
agreement between the parties themselves or else on the authority
of the judge.


PAULus (on the Edict 18) The taking of an oath wears the
appearance of a compromise, and there is more weight attached to
it than to a judgment.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) The Preetor’s words are :—
“Where the party against whom proceedings are had takes an
oath, on such terms being offered” etc. By the party against whom
proceedings are had we must understand the defendant himself.
The additional words—“ such terms being offered ’—are not super-
fluous, as if the defendant should take the oath without anyone
tendering it to him, the Preetor will pay no heed to the oath so


SS


|
'
’
|


TIT. 11] On Swearing an Oath 277


taken, the party swears to himself; were it otherwise, anybody
who has no scruples about swearing! would betake himself
to the expedient of swearing an oath, though no one tendered
it, and so rid himself of the burden of meeting an action at
law. 1. Whatever kind of action it is in which a man is sued,
if he take the oath, he will get the benefit of it, whether the
proceedings are in personam or in rem or in factum or taken
by way of a penal or any other kind of action or for an interdict.
2. Add that if the subject of the oath is the status of anyone, the
Preetor will uphold the oath: suppose, for instance, I tender the
oath and you swear that you are not subject to my potestas,—your
oath must be regarded. 3. Accordingly, Marcellus has it that an
oath may even be sworn on such a point as whether such and such
a woman is with child or not, and the parties must abide by the
oath ; lastly he says that, where the inquiry is as to possession, the
oath must be decisive ; where, for instance, a woman claims to take
possession of property on the ground of pregnancy, and, the other
party repudiating her claim, either she swears that she is pregnant,
or the other side swears the contrary ; in which case, if she her-
self swears, she can take possession without misgiving, and if the
oath is in contradiction of her claim, she cannot do so, even though,
as a matter of fact, she should be pregnant ; and, so Marcellus
tells us, the woman who takes the oath will get the full benefit of
it, so as not to be subjected to proceedings on the ground that she
had taken possession as on behalf of an unborn child on a false
pretence, nor to be exposed to disturbance when in possession.
As to whether the oath avails to such an extent as to preclude
inquiry, after a child is born, into the question whether the person
whose child it is said to be is the father or not, this is a point
discussed by Marcellus ; who holds that there ought to be an
inquiry into the actual fact, because the oath does not benefit nor
prejudice any third person ; accordingly the oath of the mother
will not benefit the child, nor will any prejudice be occasioned if
the mother tenders the oath and it is thereupon asserted on oath
that she is not pregnant by such and such a man. 4. The oath
must be taken as tendered: there is no doubt that if I tender an
oath for you to swear by God, and you swear by your own head


Pauuus (on the Edict 18) or the heads of your sons,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) such an oath will not be held
good ; but if I required you to swear by your own salvation and


1 After guisque ins. ad jurandum. M.


9


278 On Swearing an Oath, whether [BOOK XII


you swear accordingly, we must abide by it. Every kind of oath
that is lawful at all which anyone desires to have taken for his
behoof is to the purpose, and if it be taken accordingly, the Preetor
will uphold it. 1. The Divine Pius laid down that if an oath were
Sworn in accordance with some private superstition the parties must
abide by it. 2. The oath being once taken, no other question is
asked than whether the party really swore, and the point whether
anything is owing is disregarded, this being treated as sufficiently
settled by the oath itself. 3. However, where a man tenders an
unlawful oath, I mean an oath pertaining to a religion subject to
State disapproval, it may fairly be asked whether the case should
not be treated as though no oath had been taken :—which on the
whole I should say is the right view. 4. If no oath is taken, and
the oath is not waived, the case must be treated as though the
matter had never been referred to decision by oath at all.
Accordingly, if the party is willing to take the oath on a subsequent
occasion, such an oath will not bestead him, as it is not taken in
pursuance of the tender.


PAULUS (on the Edict 19) A man is said to waive an oath
where he first tenders it, but, the other party being prepared to
swear, he dispenses with the oath, being satisfied with the willing-
ness which the other shows in accepting it; but if the party to
whom it was tendered did not accept it, then, even if he should
subsequently be prepared to swear, but the plaintiff should not
choose to tender the oath, it will not be held to be waived ; an
oath can only be waived if it has been accepted. ;


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) The Preetor’s words are :—
“For a thing as to which an oath has been tendered I will allow
no action either against the party himself or against the person to
whom the thing now belongs.” The word ‘thing’ must be understood
to apply whether an oath has been taken as to the whole property
at stake or only a portion of it ; what the Praetor promises is that
he will not allow an action about a matter as to which an oath has
been sworn, either against the party who swore or against those
who succeed to the position of the one to whom the oath was
tendered,


PauLus (on the Edict 18) even if they succeed to the
property :


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) the rule being that, after the


mr. | Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 279


oath is once sworn, leave to bring an action is refused; or, if there
is any dispute, that is, if it is contested whether or not the oath
was taken, the party has an exceptio. 1. The oath having been
taken or waived, the defendant will have gained a right of eaceptio
available on his own behalf and on that of some others, and the
plaintiff acquires a right of action in which the only point into
which inquiry is made is whether he swore that such and
such a thing ought in law to be given him or, whereas he was
prepared to swear, the oath was waived. 2. If judgment is
pronounced against a man after the oath is sworn, in a case
involving infamy, the better opinion is that infamy is incurred.
3. Where a man who was under a liability to me exposing him to
an action the right to which would expire by lapse of time tenders
the oath for me to swear that he is bound to pay, and I swear that
he is, he will not be discharged by expiration of the time, because,
after joinder of issue in the action against him, his liability becomes
perpetual. 4. If one under twenty-five tenders the oath, and
declares that advantage has been taken of him in respect of this
very fact, the eaceptio founded on the oath ought to be met on his
part with a replicatio ; so Pomponius says. However I should say
that such a replhcatio ought not to be allowed as a matter of
course ; [ think, in most cases, the Preetor ought himself to go
into the question whether advantage was taken of the minor, and
give [or withhold] restitution in integrum according to the result
of his inquiry ; it does not follow, when a party is a minor, that
simply by showing this fact he proves that he has been over-
reached. It should be added that the replication! or inquiry
referred to ought not to go beyond the prescribed time after the
minor’s twenth-fifth year is ended. 5. Again, if a man tenders an
oath to a debtor im fraud of his own creditors, and an exceptio
founded on the oath is pleaded to actions brought by the creditors,
the latter must be allowed a replication of fraud: moreover, if a
man, with fraudulent intent, tenders the oath to a creditor for the
latter to swear that he has a good demand for ten, and afterwards,
when his goods have been sold for insolvency, he wishes to bring
an action, either leave to bring the action must be refused or else
he can be met with the exceptio of its being a fraud on his creditors.
6. We are told by Julianus that where the oath is taken by an
agent for the defence, whether voluntary or appointed, the same
being tendered by the plaintiff, such oath is a valid defence and
will furnish a good exceptio to the principal. Accordingly a


1 In text exceptio.


10


ad


280 On Swearing an Oath, whether [Book Xt


similar rule holds where I appoint an agent to sue, and, on the
defendant tendering the oath, he swears that my demand is good,
as this gives me a right of action. This is a reasonable view.
7. If the claimant (petitor) has sworn, on the oath being tendered
by the possessor, that the property is his, as plaintiff (actor) he
will be allowed to bring an action ; but this is only against the
party who tendered the oath or those who have succeeded to his
position ; should he, on the other hand, desire to enjoy in an action
against anyone else the advantage acquired by swearing, his oath
will be of no use to him ;


PAULUS (on the Edict 18) as a transaction had between two
particular persons must not be allowed to prejudice a third
party.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) But if the oath is tendered to
a possessor, and he swears that the property does not belong to
the plaintiff, then, as long as he is in possession, he can, for the
purpose of meeting any action brought by the party who tendered
the oath, plead such oath by way of eaceptio ; but, if he should
lose the possession, he will have no right of action [on the same
oath], not even if the party who tendered the oath to him is in
possession : he never swore that the thing was his, but only that it
did not belong to the other. 1. Accordingly, if, when he was in
possession, the plaintiff tendered him the oath, and he swore that
the thing was his, the rule is, in keeping with the above, that, even
if he should lose possession, and thereupon the party who tendered
the oath should acquire it, he [the one who swore] will have a
right to an action in factum. Moreover it is held that the produce
derived from a thing which I have sworn to be mine ought to be
given up to me, and there is no doubt that children born from
female slaves and the young of cattle ought to be given up, after
the oath is tendered. 2. Similarly, if I take the oath to the effect
either that the usufruct in anything belongs to me or that it ought
to be conveyed to me, I continue to have a right of action for so
long time as the usufruct itself would last, if I were actually
enjoying it, but in those cases in which the usufruct would be lost,
I have no right of action. Again, if the party swears that he has
a usufruct or has a right to have one conveyed to him in things in
which no usufruct can be constituted, because it would consume
the whole substance, I hold the opinion that the legal operation of
the oath must be maintained, so that J] should say that even then
he must be held to have taken a valid oath, and that, in virtue of


12


13


tir.) Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 281


the same, he can demand the usufruct on offering the [regular]
undertaking. 3. If there is a dispute as to an inheritance between
you and me, and I swear that the inheritance is mine, I have a
right to whatever I should get if judgment had been given in my
favour in an action for the inheritance ; so that you are bound to
hand over not only the things which you had in your possession at
the time, but besides them any that came into your possession
afterwards, and as much account is to be made of the oath sworn
by me as if my case had been proved; accordingly, I have a
right to an wtilis actio. But if I were in possession in pursuance
of a title to the inheritance, and you took proceedings to recover it
from me, I ought, after taking the oath in answer to your claim, to
be allowed to plead such oath by way of exceptio. Of course, if
some third person takes proceedings against me to recover the
inheritance, then there is no doubt, as Julianus himself tells us,
that the oath will be of no use to me.


JULIANUS (Digest 9) A similar rule holds where I desire to
sue anyone else who is in possession of things which are part of
the inheritance, as, even if I had brought an action to recover the
inheritance against you and had proved that it was mine, never-
theless, if I sued anyone else, I should be obliged to prove the
same fact.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 22) Two men being both patrons
[of the same freedman], this latter, on one of the patrons tendering
the oath, swears that he is not his freedman : will the other of the
two have a right to the possession of the whole of the property to
which patrons are entitled or only to half of such property? The
answer given is:—if the one to whom the oath was sworn
was patron, the other has a right to the possession of his own
share in the goods [and no more], and he can derive no [legal]
advantage from the fact that the freedman took an oath against
the claim of the one first mentioned: still the patron in question
will derive a great deal of weight and authority, in any application
to the Court for the purpose of showing that he is the sole patron,
from the fact that the freedman swore that the other was not his
patron. 1. According to Julianus, a man who swears that an
estate is his will, after the time has elapsed for entitling him to a
plea of “long time,” have a right to an wtilis actio as well.
2. Julianus further holds that a man who swears that he did not
commit theft must be held to have sworn as to every ground of
action [in personam], and consequently he is not liable to be sued


14


282 On Swearing an Oath, whether [Book xm


either in the action for theft or in a “condictitious” action ;
such an action, he says, is one to which none is liable but a thief.
Must we say then that where a man swears that he committed no
theft at all, he will simply on that ground have a good exceptio, if
he is sued in a condictio? No doubt, if the party who brings the
condictio maintains that the ground of his action against the
present defendant is that he is heir to the thief, he cannot be
refused a hearing, and he ought to be allowed, so to speak, a
condictio with a special issue against the heir to the thief, in which
the judge must not allow him to proceed, as soon as he attempts to
show that the defendant is the actual thief. 3. Where a man
swears that I sold him something for a hundred, he can sue on the
contract of purchase for the performance of whatever follows
thereupon, that is, he can ask that the thing sold may be delivered
and an undertaking given warranting him against recovery on the
ground of superior title ; but it is a fair question whether he can
be sued on the contract of sale for recovery of the purchase-money.
However, as to this, if the oath comprehended this very fact that
the money was paid, no right of action for the money remains ; but
if the oath did not comprehend this, it follows that he is liable
for it still. 4. A similar rule holds where a man swears that he
entered into partnership, as he can be sued in an action pro
socio. 5. Marcellus proceeds to say that where a man swears
that he pledged his land as security for ten, he cannot bring an
action on the pledge without paying ten: he adds! however this,
that perhaps he can be sued for ten on the ground of his oath,
which view he on the whole approves of. Quintus Saturninus is of
the same opinion, and relies on the case of a man swearing that his
quondam wife gave him such and such property by way of dos,
whereupon, so he holds, the lady has a right to an wétlis actio for
dos: and I cannot say that this goes beyond what justice requires.
6. If, in a pecuniary matter, a man swears by the genius of the
Emperor that he is not bound to pay, or that he has a right to ask
for payment, and he swears falsely, or, again, if he swears that he
will pay within a given time, and he does not pay, here the present
Emperor and his father laid down that he must be sent off to be
beaten with rods, the following warning being addressed to him :— .
“To not be in a hurry to swear.”


PAULUS (on the Edict 3) Whenever the oath is to be taken
in regard of a thing [and not of a person], it cannot be waived in


1 Read adicit for adict.. Cf. M.


|
|


15


16


17


TIT. 1] Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 283


favour of one who is a paterfamilias or patron [to the party
tendering] ; and an oath is said to be taken in regard of a thing in
the case, for example, of a loan of money, where the plaintiff swears
that he has a legal right to payment, [not saying from whom] or
the defendant swears that he is not bound to pay ; [not saying to
whom ; | the same rule applies where an oath is required as to
money promised by constitutum.


THE SAME (on the Edict 6) In the case of persons of pre-
eminent rank or such as are confined to the house by ill health, an
agent must be sent to their place of abode to administer the
oath.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 10) If a patron marries his freed-
woman, he cannot be compelled to swear in an action for “ things
removed ” (theft from a wife). Furthermore, if he himself tenders
the oath to his freedwoman, he will not be obliged to swear that
his proceedings are not vexatious.


PAULUS (on the Edict 18) Where the oath is taken out of
Court, but in pursuance of an agreement, it cannot be tendered
back. 1. A ward ought to tender the oath with his guardian’s
concurrence ; if he tender it without such concurrence, there will,
no doubt, be a good eaxceptio, but it can be met with a replicatio,
as he is not legally competent to manage his own affairs. 2. If the
oath is tendered bya guardian who is acting as such or the curator
of a lunatic or prodigal, it ought to be upheld, as they are’ able to
pass the property in goods or to give a receipt for money paid, and
they can possess the Court of a case by taking proceedings. 3. A
tender by a procurator must also be upheld, wherever, that is, he
is entrusted with the management of all his principal’s property,
or he was expressly commissioned to act in the particular case or
he is procurator on his own behalf :


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) but, as a rule, a procurator
who desires to tender an oath ought not to be listened to, so
Julianus tells us (Dig. b. 10), or else, at some later time, a defendant
who has already sworn may be sued by the principal ; and he is
not much the better off for any understanding that may have been
given him that the principal would ratify ; because, if the principal
should sue him, the defendant will have to show the truth of what
he swore, assuming, that is, that he is met with a replicatio® [to the


1 After res read or understand possunt.
* In the text eaceptio. Cf. Pothier.


19


20


21


22


23


24


25


26


284 On Swearing an Oath, whether [BOOK XII


effect that the principal did not authorize the procurator to under-
take that he would? ratify], but if he should [being unable to do
this] sue [the procurator] on the undertaking that the principal
would ratify, this may compel him to show that his oath was false.


THE SAME (on the Edict 26) Accordingly, if the prosecutor
was commissioned to bring an action, and he tendered an oath, he
has done something different from what he was commissioned
to do.


PAULUS (on the Edict 18) When a slave tenders an oath or
takes one, it will be upheld if the slave had been allowed the
management of his peculiwmn ;


Gaius (on the Provincial Edict 5) as a slave in that
position can give a good receipt for money paid him in discharge
of a debt and he has been given the power to novate an obligation.


PauLus (on the Edict 18) Some indeed hold that if the
slave tenders an oath to a plaintiff, an action de peculio must be
allowed against his owner. Similar rules apply to a son under
potestas.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) If the slave swears that his
owner is not bound to pay, his owner can claim the benefit of an
exceptio and the other party has only himself to blame for tender-
ing the oath to the slave.


PAULUS (on the Hdict 28) Much more is it the case that a
father can derive advantage from the conscientiousness (2.¢. oath)
of his son, the latter being a person who might in fact be made
defendant to an action. But if such persons tender the oath back,
they do not expose those in whose potestas they are to any legal
disadvantage.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) Again, if an oath is tendered
to my slave originally or tendered back to him, and he swears that
some property belongs to his owner or ought to be given to him, I
ought to be allowed an action or an eaceptio on the ground of the
sanctity of an oath and in pursuance of the agreement.


PauLus (on the Edict 18) Whenever anyone is averred to
have sworn, it is immaterial what the person’s sex or age may be ;
the oath ought to be upheld absolutely, as against a party who was
willing to take the risk of it when he tendered it ; at the same time
a ward is never deemed guilty of perjury, as it is not held that he


27


28


mT. 1) Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 285


deceives knowingly. 1. If a father swears that his son is not
bound to pay, Cassius gave the opinion that father and son both
should be allowed to plead the oath by way of exceptio ; if the
father swears that there is nothing in the peculium, there can be an
action brought against the son, but the father can be sued too, on
the principle, that is, of taking into account peculiwm subsequently
acquired. 2. Putting a man on the terms of taking an oath is
perhaps a transaction of the same class as novating or transferring
a contract, as it is founded on an agreement, though it is
tantamount to a judgment too.


Gatus (on the Provincial Edict 5) An oath in fact takes the
place of payment of the debt.


PAULUS (on the Edict 18) In the case of two correal
creditors by stipulation, if one tenders the oath, it can be pleaded
to an action by the other also. 1. Where a principal debtor
swears, the surety gets the benefit of it too; and where an
oath has been obtained from a surety, according to Cassius
and Julianus, this benefits the principal debtor as well; the oath
operates in the same way as payment, and hence it must be treated
as doing so in this case too, always provided that recourse was had
to the oath in order to deal with the contract itself and the matter at
stake, and not merely with the position of the party swearing.
2. If a man has promised to produce my debtor before the Court,
and I tender him the oath, whereupon he swears that he never
promised to produce the person in question at all, this will be no
defence to my debtor ; but if what he swears is that he is not himself
under any liability to me, in that case a distinction must be! made,
and the pleadings can be mended by a replicatio, [the question
being] whether he swore as mentioned? on the ground that after his
promise he had actually produced the person in question or
because he had paid the debt; and a similar distinction can be
made with reference to a surety for a debt. 3. Of two correal
debtors of a sum of money one took the oath; this can be
pleaded by the other as well. 4. An oath can be pleaded by way
of exceptio not only where the plaintiff is suing in the action with
reference to which he got the oath taken, but even in a different
action, provided only the same matter of fact is material for the
purposes of the later suit ; as, for instance, where an oath has been
called for in connexion with an action on a mandate or a case of


1 For sit read est. Of. M. 2 Omit the first an.


286 On Swearing an Oath, whether [Book xm


voluntary agency or a partnership or with any other similar action,
and then a specific condictio is brought founded on the same facts ;
the truth is the one action disposes of the other. 5. If a man
swears that he did not commit a robbery, he cannot derive any
benefit from this oath in an action for theft or a condictio [ furtiva],
as theft is a distinct offence, being one which can in fact be com-
mitted secretly. 6. If an action is brought against a tenant on his
contract (ex locato), on the ground, it may be, of his having cut
down trees, and he swears that he did not cut any, then, if he is
sued afterwards on the Law of the Twelve Tables under the head of
trees cut down, or on the Lex Aquilia for wrongful damage, or by
application for an interdict quod vi et clam, he can make a good
defence by pleading his oath. 7. If a woman swears that she did
not remove her husband's goods in contemplation of a divorce, this
does not enable her to defend herself by the exceptio in case she is
sued in an action to recover the goods, so that if she maintains
that they are her own property, another oath is required ; on the
other hand, if what she swore [at the outset] was that the goods were
her own, this affords a defence to an action for removal. In short,
the general rule is that, even where it is a different action in which
the same inquiry takes place, an exceptio founded on the oath will
be to the purpose. 8. Accordingly, where a man swears that
judgment was never given against him, even though he is sued on
a judgment founded on a promise by stipulation that the order of
the Court should be obeyed, he will have a good exceptio. If, on
the other hand, he should be sued on the promise that the order
should be obeyed, and he thereupon swears that he was not bound
to pay, it does not follow that he has a good exceptio; as it is
possible that there is nothing payable on the [original] stipulation,
although judgment was pronounced [against him]: unless, indeed,
what he meant to swear to was that he was not even ordered to pay.
9. Again, Pomponius says that where a_ plaintiff swears that
a theft was committed of property of his, he does not thereupon
acquire good ground for a condictio as well [as an action for theft].
10. Add that seeing that, under this part [of the Edict], the oath
furnishes matter both for an action and an eaceptio, if the
defendant takes an oath out of court, on tender by the plaintiff,
that he is not bound to pay and then the plaintiff takes an oath,
on tender by the defendant, that he has a right to demand
payment, or the order is the inverse, the claim founded on the later
oath will be held to have the greater weight: but this will not
prejudge the question as to the other party having committed


29


30


TIT. 1) Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 287


perjury ; the subject of inquiry in the action not being whether the
defendant was under an obligation to pay, but whether the plaintiff
swore that he was.


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 6) Again, if I swear, on your
tendering the oath, that you did not swear that I was bound to pay
you, then, in answer to an wétlts actio on your part, in which the
question at issue is whether you swore that you had a right to
demand payment, I can plead by way of exceptio my own oath
which puts an end to the question at issue in the action.


PAULUS (on the Edict 18) According to Pedius, where a man
swears, in an action in which the amount claimable is increased
by the defendant's denial of liability, that something is owed him,
he acquires a right to ask for the simple amount only, and not for
twofold ; as itis amply sufficient for the plaintiff that he should be
relieved from the necessity of proving his case, since, setting aside
this part of the Edict, the right of action for twofold remains
unimpaired ; and it may very well be said that, in a case such as
the above, it is not the main question that is put in issue, but
simply the plaintiffs oath is allowed to take effect. 1. If I swear
that you are bound to hand over to me Stichus, there being no such
slave existing, you, the defendant, are not bound to give me even
so much as the man’s value, except it be on the ground of theft or
in consequence of default on your part ; in such cases the value has
to be given, even if the slave is already dead. 2. If a woman
swears that ten are owing to her for dos, that entire sum must be
given ; but, if she swears that she gave ten by way of dos, the inquiry
will leave alone the one point whether the sum was given, but it
will be treated as given, and such part of it as ought to be returned
to her will have to be handed over. 3. In an actio popularis
[where anyone who likes can sue| an oath which a party has been
made to swear will be available against a third person only where
it was called for in good faith, since, indeed, even where a man
takes the regular proceedings, this does not preclude an actio
publica {on behalf of the State], unless the proceedings were
collusive. 4. If a freedman, on his patron tendering the oath,
swears that he is not his freedman, the oath must be upheld, so
that no demand for services can be entertained, nor any order
made for bonorum possessio contra tabulas. 5. If I swear that I
have a right to have a usufruct conveyed to me, it ought to be
granted only on the terms of my giving an undertaking that | will


31


32


33


34


288 On Swearing an Oath, whether [B00K XII


enjoy it in accordance with the judgment of an impartial arbitrator,
and that, when the usufruct expires, I will make over the property..


GAIUS (on the Provincial Edict 30) We must bear in
mind that sometimes, even after the oath has been imposed, it is
still allowable, in pursuance of imperial enactments, to resort to the
regular proceedings, if the applicant alleges that he has found fresh
documentary evidence and intends to use thisonly. These enactments
however are held to be applicable only to a case in which the
defendant has had judgment given in his favour,—as a matter of
fact, a common practice is, in doubtful cases, for the judge to
require the oath to be taken and to pronounce in favour of the
party who swears ;—but, where the oath has been taken in
pursuance of a private arrangement between the parties, no
second hearing of tle old cause is allowed.


MopEsTINus (Differences, book —) A ward cannot dispense
with the oath.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 28) Where a man swears by his own
salvation, then, true as it is that he is held to swear by God, seeing
that this oath involves a reference to the Divinity, still, if the oath
has not been tendered to him in these express terms, he is not held
to have sworn at all ; accordingly he will have to take a fresh oath
in due form.


THE SAME (on the Edict 26) The oath may be used both in
pecuniary cases and in matters of any other kind, an oath may be
tendered even in an action for the render of services, and the
adverse party has no wrong to complain of, as he can tender the
oath back. How then, if the defendant should declare that he is
discharged on the ground that, whereas he promised to deliver
Stichus, that slave is, he believes, dead? In this case, he cannot
get off by tendering back, and accordingly, for this reason,
Marcellus holds, and very rightly, that either he should be excused


- the oath or else time should be allowed him so that he may inform


himself on the matter and then take the oath. 1. A man who takes
up the defence (defensor) of a municipality or of any corporate body
can tender the oath, if he has a mandate to do so. 2. An oath
cannot be tendered to a ward. 3. A procurator is not compelled
to swear, nor is a defensor, hence we read in Julianus (Dig. b. 10)
that a defensor is not compellable to swear and that he need do
no more with a view toa complete defence than be ready to join
issue in the action. 4. When a man tenders the oath, he ought


Tit. 1] Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 289


himself first to swear the oath as to vexatious proceedings, if called
upon to do so, and, that being done, the oath to be sworn to him
will be taken. The above oath as to vexatious proceedings is
one which is dispensed with in favour of both patrons and parents.
5. If the parties are not satisfied as to the sort of statement which
has to be sworn to, the terms of it are for the arbiter to direct who
decides the case. 6. The Preetor’s words are :—“the party who is
called upon to swear I will compel either to pay or else to swear” ;
accordingly, the defendant must choose one of the two, he must
either pay or swear ; if he declines to swear, he must be compelled
by the Preetor to pay. 7. However, there is another course open
to the defendant, viz. that of tendering the oath back, if he prefers
it; and if the plaintiff declines terms which involve his taking the
oath, the Preetor will not allow the action to proceed ; and such a
refusal on the Preetor’s part would be perfectly just, as one who
tenders an oath has no right to object to terms which consist in
a similar tender being made to himself. We may add that the
plaintiff cannot tender the oath denying vexatious proceedings to
the party who tenders the oath back, as it would be intolerable
that a plaintiff should expect an oath to be sworn him as_ to
the vexatious character of terms such as were tendered by himself.
8. It is however not invariably suitable that the oath tendered
back should be exactly such as was first tendered, as the diversity of
matters and persons may chance to be such that points present
themselves which give occasion for a difference between the two;
accordingly, if any such thing should happen, the precise form of
an oath of this kind must be settled by the judge on motion.
9. When the matter is left to be decided by oath, the judge
discharges a defendant who swears, he will listen to one who wishes
to tender the oath back, and, if the plaintiff swears, he must give
judgment against the defendant ; if the defendant declines to
swear, then, if he pays, he discharges him, and, if not, he gives
judgment against him ; if the plaintiff, on the oath being tendered
back, declines to take it, he discharges the defendant.


PauLus (on the Edict 28) —_ If the guardian of a ward tenders
the oath, in the absence of all other means of proof, his applica-
tion must be heard, as cases may arise in which the ward will be
refused an action. 1. Ifthe oath is tendered by a prodigal, he
will not be listened to, and the rule is the same in other cases
resembling his: as, whether the oath takes the place of a [fresh]
agreement or a performance of the obligation or a judgment, a


Me Jeo 1s 19


36


37


38


39


40


41


290 On Swearing an Oath, whether [Book xu


tender of it will not be sanctioned except when made by one who is
a fit person for those cases. 2. Those persons who are not com-
pellable to join issue in an action in Rome are equally free to
decline to take the oath there, for instance, provincial legates.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) If the plaintiff tenders the oath
with reference only to money assured by constitutwm, and the
defendant swears, the latter will have a good eaceptio, if he is sued
on the constitutwm : but if he is sued for the principal, that is sued
on the antecedent ground of claim, he cannot plead an exceptio,
unless he swore as to that ground of claim too, on the plaintiff
tendering the oath.


ULPIAN (on the Edict 33) If the oath has not been waived
by the person who tendered it, but no oath is taken by him in
disavowal of vexatious proceedings, it is a necessary result that his
action should be disallowed; a man has only himself to blame, if
he has gone so far as to tender the oath without first taking the
oath in disavowal of vexatious proceedings, so that he is in the same
position as if he had waived the oath which he tendered.


PAULUS (on the Edict 37) Where a man is not willing either to
swear or to tender the oath back, it is a case of plain dishonesty
and equivalent to an admission of liability.


JULIANUS (Digest 10) If a man agrees with his debtor that
no action shall be brought for the money, if the latter will swear
that he did not ascend the Capitol or that he did or did not do
anything else, it matters not what, and the debtor swears
accordingly, he must be allowed the eaceptio founded on the oath,
and, besides this, if he pays, he can sue to get it back; as where,
in respect of any ground of action, the parties put themselves on
the terms! of an oath being taken, this is a perfectly legal arrange-
ment for them to make.


THE SAME (Digest 13) | When an oath is taken from a debtor,
the result is that any pledge is released; the case is like that of a
formal release of the debt, and it certainly gives rise to a perpetual
eaxceptio. Hence, if the creditor sues for a penalty, he can still be
barred by an exceptio, and, if the money should be paid, there can
be an action to recover it; the fact being that, when the oath is
once taken, there is an end of all dispute.


Pompontius (Rules) Labeo expressed the opinion that the


1 Read condicionem for condicione. Cf. M.


TIT. 1] Voluntary, Compulsory or Judicial 291


oath may be dispensed with in favour of one who is absent or not
informed of the fact; indeed it may be dispensed with by letter.


THE SAME (Kpisiles 18) An oath being tendered by a
creditor who was proceeding against a ward for money lent, the
ward swore that he was not bound to pay; whereupon the creditor
demanded the money from a surety of the ward’s: will he be barred
by an exceptio founded on the oath? Let me have your opinion in
writing. Julianus goes into the question at some length. If, he
says, the question at issue between the creditor and the ward was
whether the ward ever received the loan at all, and they agreed
that the whole dispute! should be at an end if the ward took the
oath, whereupon he swore, [as above mentioned,] that he was not
bound to pay, the result of the arrangement must be to get rid of
the natural obligation, and [therefore] any money paid could be
recovered. But if the creditor contended that he had advanced
the loan, and the ward’s only defence was that his guardian had
not intervened, and thereupon the oath in question was taken,
the Pretor can in that case give no aid to the surety. If,
however, it cannot be conclusively proved what the understand-
ing between the parties was, and it is unknown, as indeed is
generally the case, whether the dispute between the creditor and
the ward was on a question of fact or a question of law, [the only
thing known being”] that the ward swore on the creditor tendering
the oath, we ought to take it that their intention was that, if he
swore that he was not bound to pay, they should abandon the
whole dispute!; the result of which is that, in the opinion we have
come to, any money paid can be recovered, and an exceptio ought
to be allowed to sureties. 1. If a surety swears that he is not
bound to pay, the promisor can protect himself by pleading the
oath, but if, on the other hand, the surety swore in terms
implying that he never was surety for that amount at all, the
promisor cannot derive any benefit from this oath. 2. Again, if, on
tender by the plaintiff, a voluntary agent on behalf of an absent or
[indeed a] present defendant swears that the person whom he is de-
fending is not bound to pay, the exceptio founded on the oath ought
to be allowed the person on whose behalf such oath was taken’.
This principle applies equally where the person who swears is one
who volunteered to take up the defence of a surety, as the principal


1 For condicione read contentione. Cf. M.
2 Some such words required. M.
3 Kor jurandum read juratum. Cf. M.


19—


bo


292 On Swearing to the Claim [BOOK XII


will be allowed the exceptio. 3. Similarly, if the principal swore,
his surety is protected, as, indeed, an actual decision in favour
of either of the two will avail the other as well.


III.
ON SWEARING TO THE CLAIM.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 51) When anything has been made
the subject of a lawsuit, we do not suppose its value to be the
greater because, by means of the oath to the claim, the order made
upon the defendant may come to be for a larger amount, owing to
his contumacy in not handing over the property ; as the thing does
not through this order become of greater value, but rather, through
the defendant’s contumacy, it is valued above its real worth.


PauLus (on Sabinus 13) Whether a man sues to recover
something which belongs to him or brings an action for production,
in some cases the only valuation made is that of the interest which
the plaintiff has in the suit, for example, where the object is to
punish the negligence of a defendant who omits to hand over
property or to produce it ; but when what is punished is fraudulent
intention or wilful nonfeasance in not handing over or producing,
the valuation is according to the plaintiff’s oath to the claim.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 30) In a case where pieces of
money have been deposited, the judge ought not to tender the oath
to the claim so as to let a person swear to the extent of his
interest, seeing that the value to be put on coins is fixed :—unless,
indeed, what the party swears to should be the amount of interest
he had in having the money repaid him on the proper day ;
suppose, for instance, he had to pay a sum of money under a
penalty, or money for which he had given a pledge where, owing to
the refusal to pay the money deposited, the pledge was sold.


THE SAME (on the Edict 36) Let us consider who it is that
can take the oath in a case of proceedings against a guardian, and
against whom he can take it. No doubt the ward himself cannot
take it, if under age ; this has been very often declared by rescript.
But the Divine Brothers laid down that the guardian himself can-
not be compelled to swear, or the mother of the ward be allowed
to do so, even if she should be prepared to do it, as it was held to


ii


TIT. 111 | On Swearing to the Claim 293


be going too far to allow that guardians should, without knowledge
of the facts and without their own consent, in a matter involving
gain for the benefit of another, encounter over and above the risks
of false swearing. It is also provided by rescripts of our Emperor
and his Divine Father that curators of a ward or minor (adolescens)
must not be compelled to swear to a claim. Still, if guardians or
curators desire to show so much regard to the wards or minors
under their care, the authority of the law need not stand in the way
of a termination of this kind being put to a trial to which such
parties are committed ; seeing that the valuation made by oath must
be considered from the point of view of the advantage not of the
party himself who swears, but of his principal, on whose behalf an
account of the guardianship is demanded. At the same time the
minor can take the oath if he likes. 1. The person who should
tender the oath is the judge ; certainly, if anyone else tenders it
or the oath is sworn without being tendered at all, the religious
sanction will not exist and there will be no oath; this is laid
down by enactments of the present Emperor and his Divine
Father. 2. There is no restriction as to the amount which may be
sworn to ; still, it is a question whether the judge may not set a
limit to the oath, so as to keep the terms of it within a certain
figure, for fear lest the party should seize the occasion offered him
and swear to a value beyond all bounds. It is certainly held to be
within the judge’s discretion to tender the oath or to refuse it ; and
it may well be asked whether one who has it in his power to decline
to tender the oath is not equally free to set limitations to the terms
of it; which, in fact, is within the discretion of a judge who acts in
good faith. 3. Again, we may consider whether the judge is not able,
after tendering the oath, to decline to follow it, and either to dismiss
the case altogether or even to order the defendant to pay a smaller
sum in the way of damages than was sworn to, and the better
opinion is that, on very special grounds, and on the discovery of
further evidence, this may be done. 4. Add that in a case of
negligence it is settled that the oath is not to be tendered, but a
valuation must be made by the judge.


MARCIANUS (Rules 4) An oath to the claim is taken in actions
in rem or for production and in bona jide proceedings. 1. But the
judge can lay down a fixed amount which is not to be exceeded in the
oath, since it was open to him at the outset to decline to tender the
oath at all. 2. Again, even if the oath is taken, it is open to him
either to dismiss the case or to order the defendant to pay a smaller


10


aly!


294 On Swearing to the Claim [BOOK XII


sum. 3. But, in all these cases, the oath to the claim can be taken for
deliberate wrong only and not for negligence as well, matters under
the last head are estimated by the judge. 4. No doubt, a party
sometimes swears to the claim even in an action of strict law, for
instance, where one who promised to deliver Stichus makes default
and then Stichus dies, as the judge cannot put a value on property
which has ceased to exist without tendering! the oath ;


PAULUS (on the Edict 26) though if proceedings are taken
on a stipulation or on a testament, it is not the practice to swear
to the claim.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 8) It is commonly held to be a
matter of course that it is only one who has the command of the
case (dominus litis) who can swear to the claim: in fact,
Papinianus says that no one can swear other than a party who has
joined issue in the case on his own behalf.


MARCELLUS (Digesé 8) A guardian who is in possession of
the property of one just come of age refuses to give it up to him:
I wish to know whether judgment should be given against him for
what the thing is worth or for the amount for which the plaintiff
swears to the claim. I replied :—It is not just that the measure of
damages should be the actual value, I mean the amount that is at
stake, seeing that contumacy itself has to be punished, and the
amount ought rather to be fixed at the discretion of the owner by
the power of swearing to the claim being allowed to the plaintiff.


JAVOLENUS (Hxtracts from Cassius 15) In the case of an
action for theft the terms of the oath to be taken are that the
thing was worth so much when the theft was committed, without
the additional words “or more,” because, given that a thing is
worth more, it is, at any rate, worth as much.


CALLISTRATUS (Questions 1) In a case where someone fails
to produce documents, the plaintiff is allowed to swear to the
claim, so as to procure that the defendant shall be ordered to pay
damages equivalent to the interest the plaintiff has in the docu-
ments being produced; this was laid down by the Divine ~
Commodus himself.

PAULUS (Responsa 3) The false swearing of one who swears
to a claim under compulsion of law is a thing as to which inquiry
is not lightly allowed.


1 Read delatione for relatione, Cf. M.


bo


mr, 1v]  Condictio where Consideration fails 95


IV.


ON THE CONDICTIO TO RECOVER A THING GIVEN FOR A
CONSIDERATION WHERE THE CONSIDERATION FAILS.


me «(C1 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) If money is given with a view
| to some unobjectionable act, as that a son should be emancipated
or a slave manumitted or an action at law abandoned, then, if the
act is executed, there is no right of action for return of the money.
1. If I give you ten by way of complying with a condition, and
then decline an inheritance or a legacy [given me subject to that
condition], I can sue to have the money returned.


2 HERMOGENIANUS (Epitomes of law 2) But we may add
that if the testament is pronounced to be forged or void for
inofficiousness, without fraud on the part of whoever gave the
money, the ten can be recovered by an action grounded on failure
of object.


3 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) I gave you so much money
on the understanding that we should not go to law; so I may be
said to have settled with you. Can I bring a condictio, if no
undertaking is given me that the case will not come into Court?
The truth is that it makes a great deal of difference whether the
only object that I had in view in giving the money was that we should
not go to law, or it was this as well, that in return I should have
an assurance given me that we should not do so; if it was the
latter, viz. that there should be the actual promise, I can bring
a condictio for the money, in case the promise is not made ; but if
the object was that we should not go to law, then there is no right
to bring a condictio so long as no proceedings are taken. 1. A
similar rule will hold if I give you money on the understanding
that you do not manumit Stichus ; as an action for the return of
the money will be admissible or will have to be disallowed, as the
case may be, in accordance with the distinction above mentioned.
2. But if I gave you the money on the understanding that you


1 Condictio causa data causa non secuta. The words causa data, or at least,
the word data, cannot pass unquestioned. The sense would be expressed by 0b
causam dati or perhaps causa dati and I have assumed that one of these two was
really written. See Roby, Rom. priv. law, U1. 77.


296 Condictio where Consideration fails [Book x1


would manumit Stichus ; then, if you omit to do it, I can bring a
condictio for the money, or, if I change my mind, I can do the same
thing. 3. Suppose however I gave it on the understanding that
you would manumit by a given day? In that case, if the day has
not yet arrived, an action on my part for return of the money
must be disallowed, unless I have changed my mind; but if the
time has passed, I can bring the condictio for it. If however
Stichus is dead, can the money that was given be recovered ?
According to Proculus, if he died after the time arrived at which
he could have been manumitted, the money can be recovered,
if not, no action can be brought. 4. In fact, it goes as far as this,
if I did not give you anything on the understanding that you should
manumit, but we had agreed that I should give something, you are
quite free to bring the action which results from such a contract,
that is the condictio [to compel payment], even though the slave is
dead. 5. If a free man who was serving me as a slave in good
faith should give me money on the understanding that I should
manumit him, and I do so, a question which is asked is whether,
supposing, after that, he should be shown to be free, he can sue me
to recover the money ; and as to this Julianus tells us (Dig. b. 12)
that the manumitted man has a good action to recover it.
Neratius, in fact, in his “ Book of Parchments” relates that one
Paris, a player, who had given Domitia, the daughter of Nero, ten,
as the price of his liberty, sued her at law for the money, and the
question was never asked whether Domitia had received the money
with the knowledge that he was a free man. 6. If aman gives me
ten, on the assumed ground that he is a statuliber, without having
been directed to give them, then, as Celsus has it, he can sue
to get the ten back. 7. Suppose however a slave as to whom it
was provided by testament that he should give the heir ten and
thereupon have his liberty is set free by a codicil unconditionally,
but, not being aware of this fact, he still gives the ten to the heir,
can he sue to get the money back? As to this, he informs us that
the opinion of Celsus, his own father, was that he could not ; but
he himself, Celsus [the son], in consideration of natural justice, holds
that the action can be brought. And this is the sounder view to
take, although there can be no doubt, as, in fact, he says himself,
that a man who gave money because he thought that he would get
some recompense from the person who received it, or that the
latter would be more of a friend to him, will not be able to get it
back on the ground that he was carried away by a false impression.
8. Besides the above he offers some nice considerations on another


vit. Iv] Condictio where Consideration fails 297


question, viz. whether one who thought he was a statuliber would
fail even to pass the property in money which he paid, because
he gave it to the heir treating it as the heir’s money instead of his
own, although, as a matter of fact, the coins were his own, seeing
that he received them subsequently to his acquisition of liberty
by testament. To this I should say that, if he paid the money
under the above idea it did not become the heir’s property ; as
even where, to take another case, I give you my money, regarding
it as your own, I do not thereby make it yours. How then
if the man in question should give it not to the heir but to some
other person to whom he thought he was ordered to give it? In
this case, if he gave money that was part of his pecauliwm, he
would not pass the property in it ; but if someone else gave it on
his behalf or he himself gave it after he had become free, the
property in it would pass. 9. It is true indeed that a statuliber is
at liberty even to give money which is part of his peculiwm, where
his object is to fulfil some condition, but, if the heir wishes to make
the money secure, he can forbid him to give it ; as by these means
it will come to pass that on the one hand the statuliber will get his
freedom, on the ground that the condition with which he was
forbidden to comply is however treated as fulfilled, and, on the
other hand, the money will not be lost. Still the person whom the
testator wished to get the money can bring an action in factum
against the heir so as to procure that the testator’s order shall be
carried out.


THE SAME (on the Edict 39) Where a man gives a formal
discharge to his debtor after an agreement being made that the
latter should furnish someone else who should promise to pay in
his place, but he fails to furnish him, we may say that the money
can be recovered by a condictio from the party to whom the formal
discharge was given.


THE SAME (Disputations 2) If money has been given to you
on the understanding that you would go to Capua, and, just as you
were ready to start, some accidental circumstance or your own
state of health put an obstacle in the way of your going, let us
see whether there is a right to bring a condictio for the money.
The truth is that, if the obstacle was none of your making, we
may say that the money cannot be recovered ; but, as it is open to
the person who gave it to change his mind, it is quite certain that
the money given can be sued for again, unless indeed you would
have been the better off for not receiving the money with the


298 Condictio where Consideration fails [Book XII


object in question ; as, if the state of things is such that, although
you have not yet started, still you have so arranged your plans
that you are obliged to go, or you have already made the necessary
outlay for going, so that it is clear, for example, that you have
spent more than you received, no condictio can be brought ;
but if you have spent less, the condictio will be open, subject to
this, that you must be indemnified in respect of whatever you
have expended. 1. If a man hands over a slave to another
on the understanding that he shall within a given time be manu-
mitted by him, then, if the one who handed over the slave should
change his mind and should inform the other of the fact, but the
slave is manumitted subsequently to this change of mind, still the
person who gave the slave has a good right of action on the
ground of change of mind. No doubt, if the other do not
manumit, the Imperial enactment takes effect and makes the
slave free, if the man who handed him over with a view to that
result has not by that time changed his mind. 2. Again, if a man
gives Titius ten for him to buy a slave with the money and
manumit him, but then he changes his mind, [the rule is that] if
the slave has not yet been bought, the party’s change of mind will
give him a right to a condictio for the money, provided he lets
Titius clearly know it, lest he should buy the slave afterwards
and so suffer a loss; but, if the slave is already purchased, the
change of mind will do no wrong to the one who bought him ;
merely, instead of the ten which he received, he will give up the
slave which he bought, or, if the supposition made is that by that
time the slave is dead, he need give nothing at all, if he did not
cause his death. If the slave has run away, and this took place
without the fault of the person who bought him, he need not give
anything : it is true that he will have to promise that, if he should
get him into his power, he will be handed over. 3. Let us
consider this point. Supposing Titius received money to manu-
mit a slave and the slave runs away before he is manumitted,
can the money received be asked back in a condictio? As to this,
if he had intended to sell the slave in question, but he omitted to
sell him for the reason that he had received money to manumit
him, he cannot be sued in a condictio ; of course he will have to
give an undertaking that, if the slave gets into his hands, he will
give back what he received, with a reservation representing the
diminution in the slave’s value consequent on his flight. No doubt,
if the man who gave the money still wishes the slave to be manu-
mitted, but the other desires not to do it, because he has conceived


Tir. Iv] Condictio where Consideration fails 299


a spite against him owing to his taking to flight, the latter must
restore the whole sum that he received ; but if the one who gave
the ten pieces elects to have the slave himself given him, in
that case either the slave must be given him or else the money
which he gave must be restored to him. But if, [to take the
alternative case to the one mentioned above,] 7%tius had not
intended to sell the slave, then the money which he received
must be given back, unless it so happen that, if he had not
received money to manumit him, he would have kept him more
carefully ; should that be the case, it would not be fair that he
should lose the slave and the whole price too. 4. Supposing he took
the money for the sake of the manumission, and then the slave died,
in this case, if he made default as to manumitting, it follows that
the proper thing to say is that he must repay what he received;
but, if he was not in default, the fact being that he had set out for
the [court of the] Governor of the province or whoever the
magistrate was before whom the manumission could be executed,
and the slave died on the way, the better opinion is that, if he had
intended to sell the slave or to use him for some purpose of his
own, we shall have to say that he need not repay anything ;
but, if he had had no intention such as mentioned, it must
still be to his loss that the slave died, as he would equally have
died if his master had never received the money to manumit
him,—unless, indeed, the very journey which was undertaken for
the purpose of manumission gave occasion to the slave’s death,
for example, he was killed, say, by robbers or he was crushed by a
stable falling in or run over by a carriage or was killed by some
similar accident which would not have happened to him had it not
been for the journey which he made in order to be manumitted.


THE SAME (Disputations 3) If a stranger gives a dos for a
woman and makes an agreement that, in whatever way the coverture
comes to an end, the dos is to be restored to him, but, after all, no
marriage takes place, then, seeing that the agreement made had
reference only to events which occur subsequently to marriage,
and no marriage ensued, the question may arise whether the
condictio is open to the woman or to the party who gave the dos.
However the probability is that the man who gave the dos had an
eye to his own interest in view of this case too; as a matter of
fact a man who gave in consideration of an expected marriage can,
if the marriage was not carried out, bring a condictio as if on
the ground that the consideration had failed, unless it should be


300 Condictio where Consideration fails [BOOK XII


the case that the woman shows by the most conclusive proofs that
his object in doing it was to benefit the woman rather than
himself. But even if a father gives the dos for his daughter and
the above agreement is made, then, unless the intention was clearly
different, according to Marcellus, the father has a right to bring
a condictio.


JULIANUS (Digest 16) A man who believed himself to owe a
sum of money to a woman promised her intended husband at her
request to pay it to him by way of dos and paid it accordingly ;
after which the marriage never took place: the question was asked
whether the man who paid the money or the woman herself was
the person entitled to bring an action for return of it. Nerva and
Atilicinus held that since the man believed that he owed the money,
but he could have protected himself [if he had been sued] by an
exceptio of dolus malus, he could bring the action himself. Had
he, they said, made the promise knowing that he owed the woman
nothing, the right of action would have been the woman’s, because
she would have a right to the money: but if he had really been
debtor and had paid by way of an antenuptial gift, and then no
marriage had taken place, he would have been entitled to bring the
condictio himself, and nothing would remain in regard of the
woman’s title to be paid the debt except this, that the man who
owed it would simply have been compellable to assign to her his
right to bring a condictitious action and would be under no further
liability. 1. When land is delivered by way of dos, then, if the
marriage does not take place, it can be demanded back by a
condictio ; produce too can be asked for in the same way. There
is a similar rule as to a female slave and children of the same.


NERATIUS (Parchments 2) With regard to what we read in
Servius’s book on dowers, namely, that if a marriage has taken
place between persons either of whom has not reached the proper
age for marriage, anything that has been already given by way of
dos can be recovered, we must understand this to mean that, if
a divorce takes place before both persons have reached the proper
age, the money can be recovered, but so long as the two parties
continue to cohabit as husband and wife, the money can as little
be demanded back as can property given by an unmarried woman
to her intended husband by way of dos, so long as the tie of
betrothal remains between them: the fact being that whenever
anything is given with that object before the marriage takes place,
then, seeing that it is given under such circumstances that it may


a


10


11


12


m1t.1v]  Condictio where Consideration fails 301


become a fully established dos, it cannot be asked back so long as
the possibility remains of its being so fully established.


PavuLus (on Plautius 17) If I was going to give [money |
to a woman [by way of dos], and, at her request, I paid it to her
intended husband, but no marriage took place, the woman can have
a condictio for the money. But if I contracted with the intended
husband and gave him the money in order that, if the marriage
ensued, the woman should get the dos, and, if it did not ensue,
the money should be returned to me, it is, as it were, given for
a purpose and, the purpose failing, I can have a condictio for
it against the intended husband. 1. If a man should, in con-
sequence of a mistake, promise a woman’s intended husband, at
her request, to pay him a sum of money which he did not really
owe her, and the marriage should take place, he cannot meet an
action by the husband with the plea of dolus malus; as the
husband is acting on his own account, he is guilty of no fraud,
and he ought not to be disappointed, as he would be if he
were compelled to have a wife who had no dos. Consequently the
promisor has a right to bring a condictio against the woman, by
which he can either ask that she should make good what he gave
the husband or else that he should be released, if he has not yet
paid. Should the husband sue for the money on dissolution of the
marriage, there ought to be a valid bar to the action in respect of
so much only as would have come to the woman.


JAVOLENUS (on Plautius 1) If a woman, intending to give
a dos to a man whom she was about to marry, gives him a formal
discharge as to a sum of money which he owes her, but the
marriage does not take place, she will have a good right of con-
dictio against him for the money; as it makes no difference,
where the money came to him without ground, whether it was
by direct payment or by formal discharge.


JULIANUS (Digest 10) If an heir should be ordered in a
decision expressed by a freedman to erect a monument at an
ascertained cost and should give the sum in question to the
freedman [himself], but the latter, having received the money,
should omit to erect the monument, he is liable to a condictvo for it.


Pauwus (on the Lex Julia et Papia 6) If a man brings a
condictio for the return of a donatio mortis causa on the donee’s:
recovery from his illness, he can ask at the same time for any


13


14


15


302 Condictio where Consideration fails [BOOK XII


produce of the things given, as well as the children of female
slaves and accessions in general.


MARCIANUS (Rules 3) Where a son [of one deceased | brings
anything into account for the benefit of his brother, as though he
were going to take up bonorum possessio, but he never takes it up,
then, according to what Marcellus tells us (Digest 5), he can have
an action to recover it.


PAULUS (on Sabinus 3) If a man pays to one who pretends
falsely to be procurator for someone else money which he did not
owe at all, the only case in which the money cannot be recovered
from the [pretended] procurator is that of the [alleged] principal
ratifying the agency, but [in this case], as Julianus tells us, such
[alleged] principal himself is liable. But if the latter should not
ratify, then, even if the money paid had been really owing, it can
be recovered from the [pretended] procurator himself; the fact
being that the action for return of the money is not put on the
ground of its being paid where it was not due, but on that of its
being paid for a purpose and the purpose failing in consequence of
there being no ratification ; or the action may be on the ground of
a theft committed by the pretended procurator, who, he says,
not only can be sued for theft but is liable to a condictio.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 22) A slave of yours being sus-
pected by one Attius of having stolen his property, you handed
him over to be put to the torture, with this understanding that,
if he should not be found to have behaved in the way above
mentioned, he should be returned to you; after which Attius
sent him on to the Prefect of Police as one who was caught
in the act, and the latter inflicted the extreme punishment. You
have a good right of action against Attius in which your allegation
will be that he is bound to transfer the slave, inasmuch as he
was really bound to hand him over before his death. According
to Labeo, you can in fact have an action for production, as Attius
contrived to avoid producing him. Proculus however says that,
for Attius to be bound to transfer the slave, it would be
necessary that you should have passed the property in him, and
that, in that case, you would not have a right of action for pro-
duction ; but that, if the slave had remained your property, you
would in fact have had a right to sue Attius for theft, on the ground


et re


16


rary


TIT. IV | Condictio where Consideration fails 303


that he used the property of another in a way such that he must
have known that his use of it was contrary to the will of the
owner, or that, if the owner had known of it, he would have
forbidden it.


CELSUS (Digest 3) I gave you money on the understanding
that you should give me Stichus. Is a contract of that kind to a
certain extent [?] one of purchase and sale, or is there no obligation
in the case beyond that arising from something being given for
a purpose and the purpose failing? I am inclined on the whole
to this last view ; and it follows that, if Stichus has died, I can
sue for the return of whatever I gave on the understanding that
you should give me Stichus. Let us suppose that Stichus belonged
to some third person, but that nevertheless you made delivery of
him [to me]; I shall have a right to recover the money from you,
on the ground that you did not pass the property in the slave
to the person who received him; and, to come back, if Stichus
belongs to you and you decline to guarantee the purchaser against
his being recovered by superior title, you will not be secure against
my bringing an action to have the money returned.


V.


ON THE CoNDICTIO ON THE GROUND OF AN IMMORAL OR
UNJUST CONSIDERATION.


Pautus (on Sabinus 10) Everything given is given either
with an object (ob rem) or for a consideration (ob causam), and the
object may be either immoral or honourable ; moreover, if it is
immoral, the immorality may be on the part of the giver and not
the receiver, or on the part of the receiver alone and not the giver,
or on the part of both. 1. If the gift is made for an honourable
object, there can be an action for the return of it only where the
object for which it was made is not realized. 2. But if the
position is immoral on the part of the receiver, there can be an
action for return of the gift even where the object is realized.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) Suppose, for instance, I gave
you something on the understanding that you would not commit
sacrilege or theft or not kill a man. As to this case, Julianus says
that if I give you the thing on the understanding that you will not


304 Condictio for an Immoral Consideration [Book xu


kill a man, there can be a condictio for the return of it. 1. Also if
I give it you on the understanding that you will restore to me
something which I deposited in your hands, or restore papers.
2. But if I made the gift on the understanding that the judge
should decide in my favour in a good case, it has, no doubt, been
said that a condictio may be brought, but a man who does this
himself commits a crime, as he is held to be corrupting the judge,
and, not very long ago, the present Emperor enacted that he should
lose his case.


PauLus (on Sabinus 10) But where it is a case of corrupt
behaviour on the part of both giver and receiver, the rule is that
no action can be brought to have the gift returned ; take the case,
for example, of money being given as an inducement to an unjust
judgment being pronounced.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 26) The same rule holds where
money is given as the price of lewdness, or where a man who is
detected in the act of adultery pays to be let go, as there is no
right of action to recover the money ; this is laid down by Sabinus
and Pegasus. 1. Again if a thief gives money to avoid being given
up, inasmuch as it is a case of immoral behaviour on the part of
both parties, there is no action to recover; 2. but, whenever the
immoral behaviour occurs on the part of the receiver alone,
according to Celsus, there may be an action for return of the
money ; for instance, where I give you money on the under-
standing that you will not do me wrong. 3. Still money given
to a harlot cannot be recovered at law, so Labeo and Marcellus
tell us; this however is on a different principle, as the point is
not that there is immoral behaviour on both sides, but on the part
of the giver only ; the woman acts immorally in being a harlot,
but, being one, she does not act immorally in taking the money.
4. If I pay you something as the price of information, viz. for
you to let me know where my runaway slave is, or some thief
who stole my property, there can be no action brought for return
of what I gave, as there was nothing immoral in your receiving it.
But if you take money from my runaway slave which he gives
to induce you not to give information about him, i can bring a
condictio for it as though you were a thief ; again, if the actual thief
or the companion of a thief or of a runaway slave received money
from me as the price of information, I should say that a condictio
can be brought.


TIT. v] Condictio jor an Immoral Consideration 305


5 JULIANUS (on Ursetus Ferox 3) If a man should receive
money from my slave as an inducement not to give information as
to a theft which the slave committed, then, whether he gives the
information or not, according to the opinion given by Proculus,
there is a good right of action for return of the money received.


6 ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) Sabinus invariably approved of
the view of the old lawyers, who held that when a thing is in
anyone’s hands on grounds insufficient in law, a condictio can
be brought for it; and of this opinion is Celsus too.


7 PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 22) If money has been taken in
pursuance of a stipulation which was extorted by violence, there
is no doubt that an action can be brought for a return of it.


8 PAULUS (Questions 3) If you promise Titius something for
an immoral consideration, then, although, if he sues for it, you can
bar his action with an exceptio either of dolus malus or in factum,
still, if you pay it, you cannot after that sue to have it back
again ; because, if the immediate determining circumstance, viz.
the stipulation, is taken away, as being made ineffectual by means
of the exceptio, still the original circumstance, that is the immo-

| rality, remains, and, besides that, if the position of both giver and
i receiver is that their behaviour is immoral, the advantage is with
the possessor, and consequently there is no action for return of the
money, although it was paid in pursuance of the stipulation.


9 THE SAME (on Plautius 5) If I lend you garments to make
use of, and after that I pay money to have them returned, it has
been laid down that I can properly proceed by a condictio,
because, true as it may be that the money was given for an
object and the object was realized, still the payment was improper
(turpiter datum). 1. If you receive money from me given as an
inducement to you to give up to me something that was let to
you [by me] or sold [to me] by you or entrusted to your care, I
shall have a right of action founded on letting or sale or mandate ;
but if my object in giving the money was to induce you to make
over to me something which you owed me in pursuance of a
testament or a stipulation, there will simply be a right of condictio
for return of the money which I gave with the object mentioned.
We read this in fact in Pomponius.


Me de Lhe 20


306 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book x


‘ae
ON THE CowDicTIO FOR MONEY [PAID] THAT WAS NOT DUE.


PAPINIANUS (on the Edict 26) We will now consider the
case of the payment of money that was not due. 1. To begin with,
where a man pays what he does not owe, in ignorance of the fact,
he can sue to recover it by this action ; but if he paid knowing
that he did not owe it, there is no right of action for the return
of it.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 16) If a man pays on the under-
standing that if it should prove not to be due, or it should turn
out to be a case where the lex Falcidia applies, the money should
be returned, an action for the return will be in place, as there is a
contract concluded between the parties. 1. If anything should be
paid in pursuance of a testament, but afterwards the testament
proves to be forged or inofficious or void or to have been avoided,
what was paid may be asked back, and [the same is the case] if,
after a long time, some debt owing from the estate should come
to light, or codicils which have been Jong undiscovered in which
there is a revocation of legacies which have been already paid,
or the legacies are reduced in amount by the fact that there
are other persons discovered to whom legacies were left. This
results from the rescript of the Divine Hadrian concerning forged
or inofficious testaments, to the effect that an action must be
allowed to the person in whose favour judgment should be given
as to the right to the inheritance.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 28) The case is the same if, after
the legacies are paid, some fresh and unexpected circumstance
takes away the inheritance, for instance, the birth of a postumous
son, whom the heir did not know to exist im venter sa mere’, or,
again, the return of a son who was a captive in the hands of
enemies, whom his father assumed erroneously to be dead; as
the Emperor Titus Antoninus laid down by rescript that an wtéls
actio must be allowed to a postumous son or to one to whom the
inheritance was adjudged against those persons who had received
legacies, on the principle that a possessor in good faith is liable to
the extent to which he is made the richer, and [thus] the risk
attending claims of this kind will not affect a person who pays
[the money away] without being guilty of negligence.

i del. prolati. M.
2 This expression is one of English law.


TIT. VI | that was not due 307


4 PAULUS (on Sabinus 3) The Divine Hadrian laid down the
same for a case in which another testament should be brought
forward :


5 ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 16) nor is it an unheard-of thing
that, where one man pays, another should have a right to ask
for return of the money. Where, for instance, a person under
twenty-five years of age makes entry on an inheritance without
due reflection and gets an order replacing him in his original
position (restitutio in imtegrum) after he has paid the legacies,
then, according to the rescript given to Arrius Titianus, the right
to sue to have the money returned does not pertain to him, but
to the person to whom the estate belongs.


6 Pau wus (on Sabinus 3) If your procurator pays what was
not due and you do not ratify the payment, then, according to
Labeo, in his books called Posteriores, there can be an action
for return of the money; but, if the money was due, according
to Celsus, it cannot: be recovered ; and the reason is that, where

a man appoints someone as procurator in his affairs, this may
| be held to imply that he commissions him to pay his creditor what
he owes him, and we have not after that to wait for him to ratify
what his agent does. 1. Labeo says further that, if money not due
is paid to a procurator, and his principal does not ratify, there can
be an action for the return of it. 2. Celsus says that one who pays
a procurator a real debt is at once discharged and no ratification is
thought of; but that, if the procwrator is paid what is not due,
ratification by the principal is required [to make this latter liable],
for the reason that he would be held to have given no instructions
as to the getting in of that particular claim, and consequently,
if the receipt of it is not ratified, any proceedings for the return
must be against the procurator. 3. Julianus says that neither
a guardian nor a procurator can ask for return of the money if
they have paid it, and that it makes no difference whether they
paid away their own money or money belonging to the ward or
the principal [as the case may be].


7  Pompontus (on Sabinus 9) When money which is not due
is paid by mistake, the action may be for the return of either the
very money paid or an equal amount.


18 Pauwus (on Sabinus 6) If any payment is made to a wife
by a third person on account of a husband who is unable to
20—2


10


at


12


13


14


15


308 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book xt


discharge his debts, the person so paying cannot sue to have it
returned, as at all events it ist a debt due to the wife.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 66) In fact, even the husband, if,
when completely insolvent, he gives his wife the dower, is so
placed that he cannot sue to have it back.


PauLus (on Sabinus 7) A man who is bound to pay by a
given day is so much a debtor that if he pays before the day
he cannot sue to have the money returned.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 35) If a man against whom an action
has been brought de peculio should inadvertently pay more than
there is in the pecalzwm, he cannot sue to recover it.


Pauus (on Sabinus 7) If I give you a usufruct in my land
under the false impression that I am legally bound to do so, but I
die without suing for the return of it, the right to bring the
condictio for it will pass to my heir.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 10) Even a slave may be under a
natural obligation; consequently, if anyone should pay a debt
on a slave’s account, or the slave himself should pay on being
manumitted, so Pomponius says, there will be no right of action
for return of the money, [even?] out of a peculiwm of which he
has the free management ; and for this reason any surety who
has been accepted for the slave will be held liable and a pledge
given on his behalf will be retained ; moreover, if the slave, having
the management of his peculiwm, should give something by way of
a pledge for his debt, he must be allowed an witilis actio to redeem.
1. Again, where a ward takes a loan without the concurrence of his
guardian and has become the richer for it, should he pay it after
reaching the age of puberty, he cannot sue for the return of it ;


Pompontus (on Sabinus 21) as it is only right, as a matter
of natural law, that no one should become richer to the injury of
another.


PauLus (on Sabinus 10) The right of condictro to recover
what has been given without being due is a matter of natural law,
and consequently the action will include any accession there may
be to the thing, for example, a child born of a female slave or soil
deposited by alluvion ; nay, we may add that it includes produce
which has been gathered in good faith by the person to whom the


1 Read est for esset. Cf. M. 2 vy. M.


16


47?


18


19


TIT. VI] that was not due 309


property was given. 1. Besides the above, if what was given was
money belonging to a third person, there will be a good condictio
to have the bare possession given back ; just as, if I should deliver
to you the possession of something or other in the erroneous belief
that I am legally bound to do so, I could bring a condictio for it.
Again, if I should have made the possession yours in such sort
that, if you raised the plea of long user, the thing could not be
taken from you, even then I could lawfully take proceedings
against you by way of a condictio for money paid that was not
due’, 2. And even if a usufruct in the thing handed over should
belong to a third person, I could sue you in a condictio, making
allowance for the usufruct.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 15) If a thing which is owing
subject to a condition is given through a mistake, then, so long
as the condition is still pending, there can be an action brought
for the return of it, but, if the condition has come to pass, it
cannot be sued for. Add that a thing which had to be given
on a day not yet ascertained cannot be recovered after the day
has arrived ;


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 2) thus, if I promise to give some-
thing at my death, and I discharge the debt in my lifetime,
according to Celsus, I cannot sue to have it returned ; and this
opinion is sound.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 47) But if the thing had to be given
on a condition which in any case must come to pass some time
or other, then, if it is once given, it cannot be recovered at
law, though, if the condition had been a different one, as to which
it was uncertain whether it would occur or not, an action might be
brought for the return of it, if it were handed over before the
condition occurred.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 22) If a debtor is released from his
debt by way of a penalty on the person to whom it is owing, the
natural obligation remains and, consequently, there can be no
action for return of the money if once paid. 1. Even where a man
receives payment of a real debt, still, if the party who pays gives
what he does not owe, there is a good right of action for the return
of it; suppose, for instance, a man believes erroneously that he is
heir or bonorum possessor to someone and pays a creditor of the


1 Kor indebitam read indebiti. Cf, M.
2 M. would inverse the order of 17 and 18.


20


21


22


310 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book XII


estate, here the real heir will not be discharged, and the other can
sue for the return of what he paid'. 2. If I believe erroneously
that I owe a sum of money, and I thereupon pay it in pieces of
which some belong to a stranger and the others to me, I can bring
a condictio for half the amount and not for half shares in the
separate pieces. 3. If I believe myself to be bound to give either
Stichus or Pamphilus, [whichever I please,| whereas I am really
bound to give Stichus, and I give Pamphilus, I can sue for the
return of Pamphilus, as being property given without being due ;
since I cannot be held to have made the transfer by way of dis-
charging my real debt. 4. If two debtors who owed ten should
join in paying twenty, according to Celsus, each can sue for the
return of five, because, whereas they owed ten, they paid twenty,
and the amount which the two paid in excess the two can sue to
have returned.


JULIANUS (Digest 10) If the debtor and the surety join in
payment of the debt, their position so far does not differ from that
of two promisors ; hence all that we have said as to these latter
may be applied to the others as well.


PAULUS (Questions 3) No doubt, if you suppose that there
are two debtors in respect of an obligation, not to pay one sum of
money, but to do something different, say to transfer Stichus or
Pamphilus, and thereupon two slaves are given jointly or, it may
be, a cloak or a thousand denarii, we cannot, as before, say, as to
the action for return of the thing given, that they can sue for
separate portions respectively, because they could not have paid in
that fashion at the outset. Accordingly, in such a case it is for the
creditor to choose to which of the two he will hand what he
received, so as to prevent an action being brought by the other.


Pompontius (on Sabinus 22) Again, if I believe myself to have
promised something to you or to Titius, whereas no [such] promise
was made to either or Titius was not personally included in the
stipulation, and I give it to Titius, I can sue Titius for the return of
it. 1. I by mistake conveyed a piece of land as subject to no
servitude where I ought to have reserved a right of way ; I havea
right to bring a condictio for an unascertained amount in order to
procure that a right of way be given to me.


1 Here follows “As even where a man” etc., 7.¢. the initial clause of the sub-
section is repeated word for word, by apparent inadvertency.


23


TIT. VI] that was not due 311


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 43) Pomponius raises the following
nice point. If a man suspects that a compromise has been made as
to some dispute by one to whom he is heir or by one to whom he
is procurator, and he hands over something in pursuance of the
supposed compromise, whereas none such was made,—is this, he
asks, a case for an action for repayment? To this he says that the
action can be brought, as the payment was made on grounds falsely
assumed to exist. The rule I should say is the same if some com-
promise fails to be concluded with a view to which payment was
made ; again, the same holds if the compromise was revoked. 1. If
a man agrees to a compromise after a judgment is given and pays
accordingly, he can sue for a return of the money, for the reason
that by the present law such a compromise is of no force; this
being what is laid down in a rescript of the Emperor Antoninus and
his Divine Father. Still anything which has been paid in pursuance
of such a compromise can be kept, and credit must be given for it
if an action is brought on the judgment. How then if there is an
appeal made, or if there should be an uncertainty on the very
question whether a decision was given at all or the judgment has
any force? In that case the better opinion is that the compromise
takes effect ; the proper view to take is that the above-mentioned
rescripts apply only where the compromise refers to an un-
doubted decision which it is useless to attempt to have amended.
2. Again, if the payment was made in pursuance of a composition
in the matter of an alimentary provision left by testament, it is
clear that an action can be brought for the return of what was
given, as the composition is avoided by a decree of the Senate.
3. If a man after agreeing to a compromise is nevertheless ordered
judicially to pay the debt, this is a deliberate wrong (do/us), but
still the judgment is valid. It was however in the party’s power,
if, that is, he agreed to the compromise before joinder of issue, in
case the plaintiff desired to join issue, to meet this with an eaceptio
of dolus, and, if the compromise was made after joinder, even
then he can use the exceptio of [for ?] subsequent dolus, as, where
a man proceeds in spite of a compromise, and still demands pay-
ment, his behaviour is of the nature of dolus, and, consequently, if
the defendant is ordered to pay, he can sue for the return of what-
ever he gave in pursuance of the compromise’. It is true that he
gave it for a consideration and when anything is given for a
consideration there cannot be an action brought for the return of


1 The reasoning in this sentence seems to be confused.


24


25


26


312 On the Condictio for Money paid [spook xm


it, if the consideration is carried out; but in this case it cannot
be said that the consideration is carried out, as the compromise is
not acted upon. If then it comes to an action for the return
of what was given, it is out of place to plead the compromise
by way of exceptio ; it is impossible for both to take effect, the
action for return [of what was paid] and the eaceptio [to the
action for payment]. 4. If any statute lays down at the outset
that there shall be a right of action for twofold or fourfold,
the rule is that an action may be brought for the return of money
paid in consequence of the statute being falsely supposed to apply.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 46) If a man who was able to
protect himself by a perpetual eaceptio should, with the knowledge
that he had this exceptio, promise to give something with a view to
getting a release from his obligation, he cannot bring a condictio.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 47) In a case where two persons
had become sureties for a debtor for the sum of ten, after which
the debtor paid three, and then the sureties paid each five, it was
held that the one who paid last might sue to have three returned ;
and this is perfectly just, as, on the debtor paying three, only
seven remained due, and, at the moment when those seven were
paid, there were three paid which were not due.


THE SAME (on the Edict 26) Where a man pays not principal
but interest which is not due, he cannot sue for the return of it, if
the principal was due on which the interest was paid ; should he
however pay over the statutable rate, then, according to a rescript
of the Divine Severus by which the present practice is regulated,
there is no action allowed for the return of the money, but it will
be held to be paid in discharge of the principal, and if after that
the debtor pays the principal, there will be an action allowed for
the return of such principal [to the proper amount], as not having
been due. Similarly, if the principal should have been paid
before, any interest paid over the statutable rate can be recovered
as if it were undue principal. How then if the party pay both
[principal and interest] at the same time? We may take it that
in that case too an action for return will lie. 1. Interest however,
whether simple or compound, cannot be made the subject of a
stipulation nor be demanded to the extent of more than double
[the original sum lent], and, if paid, it can be demanded back, just
as can interest on future interest. 2. Ifa man, under the mistaken
belief that he owes a principal sum, pays interest thereon, he can
bring a condictio for the return of it, and he is not held to have


TIT. VI] that was not due 313


paid knowingly what he did not owe. 3. The payment of money
is taken to be undue, not only where it is not owed at all, but also
where no action can be brought for it in consequence of some
perpetual excepto ; accordingly, in this case too, there can be an
action for return of the money paid, unless, when the party paid,
he knew that he was protected by an eaceptio. 4. If I owe a
hundred and, that being the case, I hand over an estate worth two
hundred, as if two hundred were the amount of my debt, then,
according to Marcellus (Dégest b. 20), I have a right to ask for a re-
turn of the estate, and the stipulation by which I promised to pay
a hundred remains in force ; because, although the law is that, if
a thing is handed over instead of a sum of money, this may be
a good discharge to the debtor, still, if, in consequence of a mistake
as to the amount of the debt, something is given of greater value,
a clear distinction is maintained between a share in the thing and
a sum of money, as no one is compelled to become a part-owner;
but a right of condictio remains for recovery of the whole thing,
and the obligation [as to the hundred] is unaffected. However
the land will be retained [by the creditor] until the money due is
paid. 5. Again, Marcellus says that if a man who owes money
hands over oil worth more than the amount of the debt, as though
he owed more than he really does, or, owing oil, he gives oil, but
as if he owed a greater quantity than he does, he can have an
action for the return of the excess, though not of the whole amount
given, and, that being the case, his obligation is at an end.
6. The same writer adds, that if I have a right to ask for a share
in a piece of land, and a valuation being made on the assumption
that I have a right to the whole estate, payment is made to me of
a sum representing the value of the whole, a return can be claimed
at law, not of the whole value, but of the value of so much of the
estate as [had no claim to. 7. So true is it that the existence of a
perpetual exceptio in bar of a demand confers a right of condictio
[for the return of money paid in satisfaction of the demand], as
Julianus has it (b. 10), that if the purchaser of a piece of land
orders his heir to release the vendor from the obligation incurred
by the sale, but, after that, the vendor, being unaware of this fact,
delivers the property, he can have a condictio for the return of the
land ; and it is a similar case, he says, if a man should order [his
heir] to release a debtor, and the latter, in ignorance thereof, should
pay the debt. 8. A man who is debtor to a jilius-familias in
respect of the latter’s pecudium and pays him the debt is discharged


thereof, if he was unaware of the fact that the pecudiwm had been


314 On the Condictio for Money paid [BooK xi


taken away ; but if he was aware of it and still paid, he has no
right of condictio, because he paid what was not due with know-
ledge of the fact. 9. If a son under potestas borrows money in
disregard of the Macedonian decree of the Senate, and pays it,
but afterwards becomes heir to his paterfamilias and desires to
sue to recover the pieces of money at law as owner, he can be
debarred by an exceptio from prosecuting the suit. 10. Ifa man
pays money under a mistake on the assumption of an award made
against him on an arbitration, he can sue to have it returned.
11. If money which is not due is paid to one who is either
heir or bonorum possessor to a deceased person, an action can
be brought for the return of the money, if the person to whom
it was paid maintains at law his right to the estate; but, if he
does not maintain such right, an action can be brought even
for the return of money paid that was due. 12. A freedman,
believing that he was bound to perform services to his patron,
performed them accordingly; here, as we read in Julianus (Digest
b. 10), he has no condictio, although he discharged the services
in the belief that he was under a legal obligation to do so ; as the
fact is that a freedman is bound by natural law to perform services
for his patron. Even where no such services were performed for
the patron, but on the latter calling upon the freedman to perform
some duty, he settled with him for the payment of a sum of money
and paid it accordingly, he cannot bring an action for the return
of it. If the services which he rendered to his patron were not of
the nature of personal duty, but industrial, for example in the way
of painting and so on, it being his belief that he was bound to
execute them, let us see whether he cannot have a condictio.
However, as to this, Celsus gives it as his opinion (Dzgest b. 6)
that the grounds on which services may be required are such that
the services vary as to their nature, and as to the persons who can
render them or to whom! they are rendered ; very often the
physical strength of the freedman? or the actual character of the -
occasion will alter the ground for demanding services, so that a
man may be unable to render them even though he should wish
to do so. However, this writer proceeds, the services admit of
a valuation in money ; and it may very well be that people furnish
one thing and bring a condictio for another; for instance, suppose
I have made over [to you] land which I was not bound to give,


1 M. suggests que for neque. This would give us: “as to the persons who
can render them, though they are rendered to the same person.”
2 del. wtas temporis. M.


TIT. VI| that was not due 315


and I bring a condictio for the produce; or a slave whom I was
not bound to give, and you, without any fraud, have sold him for
a small sum, in such a case all that you need return is so much of
the purchase money as you still have got; or say I raised the
value of some slave at my own expense; will not these be cases
for a valuation? ‘Similarly, he says, in the present case, there can
be a condictio brought for the amount which it would have cost
the patron‘ to hire the services. In Marcellus (Digest b. 20) the
question is asked [how the law is] in a case where the claim on a
freedman? for dutiful services has been assigned to a third person;
and what that writer says is that the freedman is not bound to
discharge it, unless the services are of the nature of a handicraft ;
such as these, no doubt, if the patron should so require, would
have to be performed for another ; but if the freedman, in the
case of an assignment, should perform dutiful services, he has no
right of condictio, he can neither sue the creditor for whom he
performed them,—such performance having been made in discharge
of a duty to another, and the creditor in question having received
what he had a right to,—nor can he sue his patron, because they
were owing to him by natural law. 13. If a man stipulates® with
me for “ten or Stichus,” and I give him five, the question may be
asked whether I can bring a condictio [for return of the five] ;
what gives rise to this is the doubt whether I am not discharged
of my debt to the extent of five ; as, if I am, I have no right of
condictio, but I have, if I am not discharged. However, the rule
is, as Celsus says (Digest b.6) and Marcellus (Digest b. 20), that an
obligational claim cannot be taken away as to half, so that, if a man*
[in my position] pays five, the question whether he is discharged
of his debt must be kept in suspense, and an action may be brought
against him for “the remaining five or Stichus,” whereupon, if he
pays the remaining five, it must be held that, even as to the first
five, he paid a real debt, but, if he hands over Stichus, then he can
sue to recover five as not having been owing. Accordingly, his
subsequent transfer will determine whether, when the first five
were paid, they were owing or not owing. But here Celsus asks this
further question: Suppose that, after the five were paid, Stichus was
handed over too, but I prefer to keep the five and return Stichus,


1 In the text “me.”

2 After operas ins. prestaturus or some such word: cf. M.

3 1 read stipulato for stipulatus: but stipulari does sometimes mean to
promise. The sense is clear.

4 For eum qui M. would read cum quis.


27


28


29


30


31


32


316 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book xt


shall I get a hearing? As to this, his own opinion is that by that
time there is once for all a good right of condictio for five, although,
if both payment and delivery of Stichus had been made at the
same time, I should have been allowed to choose which of the two
I should like to retain. 14. The same writer says further that if
the promisee leaves two heirs, you cannot give five to one of them
and give the other a share in Stichus, and a corresponding rule
holds if the promisor leaves two heirs. According to this, the debt
is not discharged unless either five or a share in Stichus is given to
each of the two.


PAULUS (on the Edict 28) Where a man believes that he is
bound to pay in some particular place and he pays [there] what is
not due at all, he can sue for return of the money in any place that
he likes ; the belief of the party who paid will not give rise to any
corresponding particularity in the action for return of the money.


THE SAME (on the Edict 32) If a judge dismisses an action
wrongfully, but the defendant thereby discharged pays of his own
accord, he cannot sue for return of the money.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 2) There are cases in which the
personal status of the party who paid affords ground for an action
for return of the money; for instance, where a ward has paid
without his guardian’s concurrence, or a lunatic, or one who was
restrained by order from dealing with his property ; for all such
cases it is an undoubted general rule that there is ground for
the action ; accordingly, if the pieces of money are to be found,
there can be a vindicatio brought to recover them, and, if they are
spent, it is a case for a condictio.


THE SAME (Disputations 10) When a man is both creditor
and debtor to the same person, and the case is one of those in
which there is no set off, [the rule is that,] if he pays the debt,
he has no right of condictio for the money on the ground that
payment was not due, he simply has the right to sue for his
own debt.


THE SAME (Opinions 1) A man who by a mistake under-
takes to pay a creditor [of a deceased person] a larger sum than his
own share in the inheritance admits of has a right of condictio to
recall a promise to give what was not due.


JULIANUS (Digest 10) If a man who is bound to give
Pamphilus or Stichus, [whichever he likes,| should hand over both


33


34


TIT. VI that was not due 317


together and, after that, either both or one of the two should cease
to exist, he cannot sue to have anything returned, as such property
as still exists will remain as given in discharge of the debt. 1. If
a surety makes an agreement that he shall not be sued for the
money which is owing, but through inadvertence he pays it, he can
bring a condictio against the promisee to get it back, the conse-
quence of which is that the principal debtor remains liable, but the
surety himself is protected by the exceptio founded on his agree-
ment. Whether it is the surety who pays or his heir is immaterial ;
should however the principal debtor become heir to the surety in
question and pay the debt, he cannot sue for the return of it, and
he will be discharged of the obligation. 2. If a woman’s idea of
her position should be such that she conceives herself to be bound
to make over property by way of dos, then, if she gives anything as
dos, she will be unable to sue for the return of it, as, independently
of the question of mistaken belief, there is still the fact of conjugal
duty, and what is given in pursuance of that cannot be recovered
at law. 3. A man who promises in general terms to give a slave is
in a similar position to that of one who is bound to give a slave or
ten [pieces], hence, if he hands over Stichus under the belief that
he promised to give Stichus in particular, he can bring a condictio
to have him returned, and he will be discharged of his debt by
giving any other slave.


THE SAME (Digest 39) If I built on vacant ground of yours
and after that you were in possession of the building so erected,
I should have no right of condictio [for the expense incurred], as
you and I would have had no dealings with one another ; the fact
is that a man who pays money which is not due does thereby in
some sort deal with the other, but when the owner of a site takes
possession of a building erected there by someone else, no dealings
are had. Indeed, even if a party who built on another man’s
ground should actually deliver possession, he would have no right
of condictio, since he would not have passed the property in any-
thing ;—simply the owner would have come into possession of what
belonged to him. Hence it is well understood that if a man who
believed himself to be heir should shore up a block of chambers
which was part of the inheritance, the only way in which he could
make sure of recouping the cost he incurred would be by keeping
the property in his hands.


THE SAME (Digest 40) Where a whole inheritance has been
left a person by jfidei-commissum and, on condition that he gives


35


36


37


38


318 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book XII


ten to the heir, a parcel of land over and above, then, if the heir
avers that he entertains doubts of the inheritance, and he hands it
over under the Trebellian Senatusconsultum, the person mentioned
has no reason for giving the money, and consequently he can have
a condictio to recover anything that he may have given in the
matter by way of fulfilling the condition.


THE SAME (Digest 45) Where a man pays a sum demanded
in consequence of there having been no defence made to the action
for it, then, even if he should later on be ready to make a defence,
he will not be allowed an action to recover what he paid.


Pautus (EHpitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 5) The slave of a
certain person lent a man a dish without his owner's knowledge,
the one to whom it was lent pledged it for debt and absconded, and
the person with whom it was pledged declared that he would not
give it back, unless he got his money ; but, the slave having paid
him the money, he returned the dish. The question was asked
whether there could be an action brought against him for return of
the money. The answer was that if the person with whom the dish
was pledged knew that a dish was being left in his hands as a pledge
which did not belong to the pledgor, he had made himself liable for
theft, and, that being the case, that, if he had taken money from
the slave by way of letting the latter buy back the thing stolen,
there could be an action for the return of it ; should he however
have been unaware that what was left in his hands was not the
pledgor’s own, he was not a thief, moreover, if the money had been
paid him by the slave as on behalf of the person from whom he had
received the pledge, he could not be sued for the return of it.


JULIANUS (on Urseius Ferox 3) I bought from you my own
slave in ignorance of the fact, and I paid you the purchase money ;
I am thoroughly of opinion that I can sue you for return of the
money, and that I am entitled to bring a condictio with that object,
whether you were aware or not that the slave was mine.


AFRICANUS (Questions 9) Two brothers being in the potestas
of the same person, one of them borrowed a sum of money from the
other and, after the death of their paterfamilias, repaid it: the
question was asked whether he had a right to sue for the return of
it. The answer was that he certainly might sue for the return of
[so much of it as corresponded with] the share in respect of which
he himself was heir to his father ; but that, as for the share which


TIT. VI] that was not due 319


was inherited by his brother, he could sue for the return [of the
corresponding amount| only on the assumption that at least as
much had come to the hands of that brother out of his [the
borrower’s| pecudiam, as the pre-existing natural obligation [which
would nullify his claim to the return] must be held to have been
taken away by the very fact that his brother had received part of
his [the borrower’s| peculium; so much so that, if the peculium
had been bequeathed in advance to the son, I mean the son who
owed the money to his brother, the brother could retain out of it
the sum which was owed him. This, he proceeded to say,
was quite in keeping with the view approved of by Julianus,
that, if he [the borrower above mentioned] had owed something
to a stranger, and, after the death of his father he had had to pay
him the debt, he would have had a right to recover from his co-
heirs in an action familie erciscunde the amount which the
creditor would have been able to get from them by an action de
peculio. Consequently it was equally true that, if he began with the
action familie erciscunde, the proper course was that the peculium
should be so divided as that, with regard to a particular portion of it,
he should be guaranteed by his co-heir [against having to pay it away
in discharge of the debt], and, as he went on to say, if he had a
right to be protected as against a stranger, much more could he
claim to be guaranteed against a debt which he owed to his brother.
1. The question has been asked, whether, if a father lends money
to his son and the latter after being emancipated repays it, he can
sue for the return of it. The answer was—that, if no portion of the
peculium remains in the hands of the father, the son cannot sue ;
as one thing which tends to prove that the natural obligation [to
repay the loan] still exists is the fact that if a stranger brought an
action de peculio within the year, the father would retain [out of
the peculium] what his son owed him. 2. Conversely, where a
father owed money to his son and pays it to him after he is
emancipated, he cannot ask for the return of it ; as here again the
same argument applies in favour of the natural obligation still
existing, namely, that if a stranger should bring an action de peculio
within the year, the peculiwm will be held to include the amount
which the father owes. A similar rule will apply equally where a
son is disinherited and a stranger, being heir, pays the son what the
father owed him. 3. I was guaranteed the payment of a legacy,
and, the surety having paid me the amount, it turned out that I
had no right to the legacy: our authority held that the surety
could sue to have the money returned.


39


40


41


42


43


320 On the Condictio for Money paid |B00K xIr


Marcranus (Institutes 8) Should anyone, when he is able
to have security given him by a fide-commissary, omit to do so,
according to a rescript of the Divine Severus and Antoninus, he
can bring an action to recover as undue any payment that has
been made in excess of the amount owing.


THE SAME (Rules 3) When a man has a perpetual exceptio
to a demand, he can bring an action to recover any payment made
by mistake; still this does not hold in every case ; as where the
exaceptio is allowed for the sake of the person against whom
proceedings are taken, he can sue for a return of what he paid, for
example, in cases under the Senatusconsultum [Velleianum] on
the subject of guarantees; but where it is given to punish the
one to whom the money is owing, money wrongly paid cannot be
recovered by action; for instance, where a son under potestas
takes a loan of money contrary to the Senatusconsultum Mace-
donianum and, after becoming an independent person, repays it, he
cannot sue to recover it. 1. If a portion of a house is left
by jidei-commissum from and after a particular day, and, before the
fidei-commissum vests, it is burnt, but the heir has it rebuilt at his
own expense, it is well recognized that the cost of doing so must
come out of the property left, and, if the heir delivers over the house
without deducting the amount, a condictio may be brought for an
unascertained amount to recover such cost, on the ground that the
heir gave more than what was owing. 2. If a patron makes an
agreement with his freedman that the latter shall not be sued
for services, and after that any payment should be made by
the freedman, an action may be brought to recover it.


NERATIUS (Parchments 6) If a ward without the guardian’s
concurrence promises in a stipulation to make some payment and
pays accordingly, he has a right of action to recover the money,
as he was under no obligation to pay it, even by natural law.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 68) Penal sums being once paid it
is not in accordance with the practice that there should be an
action to recover them.


PAULUS (on Plautius 3) When a man has sworn that he is
not bound in law to make over property, there is an end of all
contention, and hence the rule is that, if any money is paid under
these circumstances, there can be an action brought for the return
of it.


45


46


AT


48


» 49


TIT. VI] that was not due 321


THE SAME (on Plautius 14) No action for return can be
brought against a man who has received what he had a right to,


even though payment was made by someone who was not the
actual debtor.


JAVOLENUS (Hatracts from Plautius 2) Where a man who
has sold an inheritance and delivered it to the purchaser omitted
to retain what the deceased owed him, he can sue to have it returned,


as anything paid in excess of a debt can properly be recovered by
a condictio.


THE SAME (Hatracts from Plautius 4) A person who pays
on behalf of the heir and with the heir’s own money legacies which
are not due cannot himself sue for the return of what he gave; but,
if he paid the heir’s money without the latter’s knowledge, then the
owner of the coins, so our authority tells us, will have a good
vindicatio for them. The same legal implications attach to
corporeal property in general.


CELSUS (Digest 6) You promised under a mistake to pay
money which you did not owe, and it was paid by the person who
was surety for you. My opinion is that, if the surety pays on your
behalf, then you will be liable to the surety and the promisee will be
liable to you, and it is not necessary that you should first ratify, as
you may be held to have commissioned the surety to make this
very payment on your behalf. Should the surety have paid [as] on
his own behalf a sum which he did not owe, [I should say] that he
can sue the promisee for the return, as he has paid money which
was undue on principles of universal law; and, whatever the
amount is by which the sum which he succeeds in recovering from
the person to whom payment was made falls short [of what he paid],
so much he can get from you by an actio mandati, if, that is, when
the promisee sued the surety, it was owing to the latter not being
acquainted with the facts that he omitted to plead his excepétio in
bar of the action.


THE SAME (Digest 6) When a man promises that, if some-
thing or other should be done by him or when it should be done,
he will pay ten, then, if he pays what he promised before the thing
is done, he will not be held to have done what he promised to do,
and he can consequently sue for a return of the money.


Mopestinus (Rules 3) A condictio can be brought to recover
money against those only to whom the money has been in some


M. J. Il. 21


50


51


52


53


54


55


322 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book xu


form or other paid, not against those [as such] who are benefited
by the payment.


PoMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 5) Where a man deliber-
ately pays what he does not owe with the very intention of
afterwards suing to recover it, he cannot sue.


THE SAME (on Quintus Mucius 6) In those cases in which
people have a right of retention of a thing but no right to sue
for it, they cannot bring an action to have it returned, if they
have handed it over.


THE SAME (on Quintus Mucius 27) People make payment
either on a ground (0b causam) or for a purpose (0b rem) : it may be
on a past ground, for instance, if my inducement for paying is that
I have acquired something from you or something has been done by
you, so that, even if the ground [assumed] is imaginary, there can
be no action for return of the money: payment is for a purpose
[when it is made] with a view to something ulterior to be done,
and, if it is not done, the right to an action for return of the money
takes effect.


ProcuLus (Epistles 7) An owner gave his slave liberty by
testament, on condition that he paid ten; the slave not being aware
that the testament was void, the ten were paid to me; the question
is asked who it is who can sue for the return of the money.
Proculus’s answer is as follows :—if the slave himself gave money
which was part of his peculiwm, without having received from his
owner any permission to make such a payment, then the coins
remain the property of his owner, and he can sue me for them, not,
that is, by a condictio, but by an action in rem. But if someone
else at the slave’s request paid me his own money, the coins paid
became mine, and the person who owned the slave in whose behalf
they were paid can sue for them by a condictio: but a more con-
siderate as well as more practical plan is that the person who
advanced the money should recover what he has a right to [from
me] directly.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 2) Wherever, owing to a mistake,
payment has been made upon grounds of any kind which in law
were of no weight or failed of effect, a condictio will lie.


THE SAME (Questions 6) Where urban estates are leased
by one who knowingly took wrongful possession (preedo), what he
receives under the head of rent cannot be recovered in an action


56


TIT. VI that was not due 323


brought by the person who paid it, but he [the wrongful possessor]
will be bound to pay it to the owner. The same rule will be applied
as to passage money in the case of ships which such a possessor
let or worked without title, or money which he receives for the use
of slaves whose services he let out; in fact, if a slave who was
not let out at all hands over the price of his services to such a
wrongful possessor, as if he were his owner, he will not pass the
property in the money. Should such a possessor receive money
paid for the use of vessels which had been let out by the
owner or rents for blocks of chambers, he can be sued, on the
ground of undue payment received, by the person so paying, and
the latter is not discharged of his debt ; so that, with regard to the
common rule that a wilfully wrongful holder is liable to a condictio
for profits [which he has received], this applies only where such
profits belonged to the owner of the property.


THE SAME (Questions 8) There is quite enough to make a
case of money not being due where the defence to an action for it
founded on a given exceptio is one as to which it is uncertain
whether it is temporary or absolute. If, for example, a person!
makes an agreement that he shail not be sued for a debt until Titius
becomes consul, then, seeing that the death of Titius may render
absolute an exceptio which, if Titius takes the consulship, is
temporary, it is perfectly correct to say that, if anything is paid in
the meantime, an action can be brought for the return of it. In
fact, just as an agreement which appoints a particular day for
payment can never lead to a condictio [if payment is made
sooner] any more than there would be one if the debtor paid on
the day named, so too it is plain that where there is a legal defence
which is founded on an agreement of uncertain operation [in the
above particular] the case is practically one of a conditional
obligation”.


THE SAME (Responsa 3) Where a guardian pays down on
behalf of a boy under age money that is not due, the latter has a
right of condictio for the return of it. 1. A creditor requests that
the debt should be paid to his agent ; in this case, if money is paid
in excess of the debt, an action can be brought against the agent for
undue payment ; but if the creditor, in pointing out a person to
receive payment, expressly named a larger sum to be paid him, the
action for the return of money paid unduly will be against the party

1 Read quis for gut.
2 Read condicionis for condictionis. Cf. M.


58


59


60


324. On the Condictio for Money paid [Book xm


who pointed the other out, and the right of action is not held to be
taken away if proceedings should have been taken against the agent
to no purpose.


THE SAME (Responsa 9) A testator left a fidet-commissum
to a slave whom he manumitted, provided always that he acquired
his liberty by the testament ; the slave received the money without
any application being made to the judge, and, after that, he was
declared to be freeborn. Hereupon, the money left by fidei-
commissum not having been due, there can be an action for the
return of it.


THE SAME (Definitions 2) If a surety who is legally dis-
charged pays the money under a mistake, there will be nothing, so
far, to prevent his suing for a return of it; but if the principal
debtor should afterwards himself pay under a mistake, he cannot
sue; the first payment, which was void, does not dissolve a natural
obligation, nor does it a civil one, if the principal debtor was really
bound.


PAULUS (Questions 3) Julianus declared that a man who
really owed money and who paid it after issue was joined in an
action could not sue for the return of it, if the action were still
pending, because he could not sue if the case against him were
dismissed, nor could he if he were ordered to pay, as, even if it
were dismissed, he would still continue to be debtor by natural law;
he would, in fact, Julianus adds, be in the position of a man who
promised in such terms as these,—that he would pay whether such
and such a ship came from Asia or did not come, seeing that one
ground or else the other’ gives occasion for the payment. 1. But
where a man who owes money absolutely promises to pay it on a
condition, his object being to novate the contract, many hold that
so long as the novation is in suspense, if he pays, he can sue for the
return of the money,—because it is not yet clear which is the
obligation in pursuance of which he paid; and it is, in their
opinion, a similar case if we suppose that two different persons
promise the same sum, the one in absolute terms and the other on
a condition with the object of novating the contract. But here the
circumstances are different ; as in the case [first mentioned] of the
absolute and conditional stipulations, it is certain that it is the
same person who will be debtor in either case.


1 For alterius read alterave. Cf. M.


TIT. VI] that was not due 325


Sczvoua (Responsa 5) [A ward having become heir to his
father, | the guardians of the ward paid some of the creditors out of
the father’s assets, but after that, as the property was not sufficient,
they made the ward decline the inheritance : the question is asked
whether the creditors will have to return the amount paid them by
the guardians in excess or the whole of what they received. My
answer was that, if there had been no fraudulent dealing, nothing
was owing to the guardians or to the ward, but they were liable to
the other creditors for so much of their own debts as had been paid
in excess.


MACIANUS (Fvdet-commissa 4) If payment of a /fidei-
commissum has been made the subject of a stipulation, in spite of
the fact that it was not due, still, inasmuch as it has been promised
with a view to the discharge of a testamentary trust by one who
was aware of the facts, it is a legal debt.


GAIUS (on Cases) Neratius mentions a case that might arise
of a man being unable to sue for the return of what he handed over,
on the ground that he owed what he gave, in which however he is
not discharged of his obligation. An instance is where one who
was bound to deliver a particular slave hands him over when a
statuliber ; he is not, he says, discharged, because he does not pass
the absolute property in the man to the promisee ; still, he cannot
sue to have him returned, because he owed all he handed over.


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 7) If aslaveowner owed money
to his slave and paid it to him after his manumission, he cannot
sue for the return of it, even though he paid under the impression
that he was liable to some action to compel him to do so, as he paid
in recognition of an obligation good in natural law. Liberty we
know exists in virtue of natural law and command over men was
introduced by the law of the world (jus gentium), and thus the
question of debt or no debt in connexion with the right to bring a
condictio [for money once paid] must be considered from the point
of view of natural law.


Pauus (on Plautius 17) In short, to exhibit in general
terms the law as to actions for the return of things handed over, it
should be understood that property is delivered either in pursuance
of a compromise of claims, or on a foregoing ground (causa), or in
order to fulfil some condition, or for something to be done,
or without any obligation; and in all these cases the question as to
an action for the return of the property presents itself. 1. Now,


326 On the Condictio for Money paid [Book XII


with regard to delivery in pursuance of a compromise, even if
there was no good reason for it (ves nulla media), there can be no
action for the return ; as, if there was any contention at law, the
very fact that the contention is given up is held to amount to a
ground. If, on the other hand, a plain case of fraud should be brought
to light and the compromise be invalid, the action will be allowed.
2. Again, if something is given on some foregoing ground, for
instance, because I thought that I had been helped in my business
by the other party, though this was not really the case, then,
seeing that I desired to make him a present, however erroneous my
impression may have been, the action for return of the gift cannot
be brought. 3. I can however proceed by condictio as having
fulfilled a condition attached to a legacy or to an inheritance
[which I thought was given me] whether in reality no legacy was
made me or a legacy [that was made] is taken away, and thus I can
sue for the return of what I gave,—the fact beg that I did not
give with the idea that I was concluding a contract,—since the
object with a view to which I gave was not realized. The same
holds where I was unwilling or unable to take up the inheritance.
The rule will not apply in a case where my slave was appointed
heir subject to a condition and I thereupon give something [in
pursuance of the condition], after which the man takes up the
inheritance, being then manumitted ; as in this case the object aimed
at is realized. 4. What is given for something to be done may be
the subject of an action for return on principles of justice and fair-
ness ; for example, where I give you something in order that you
may do a particular thing and you do not doit. 5. Where a man
sues for the return of what was not owing, proceeds and the chil-
dren of female slaves that were given must be handed over as well,
with a reservation of the cost. 6. In a case of corn being delivered
without obligation, its quality is taken into account, and, if the
defendant has consumed the corn, the action will be for the value.
7. Similarly if what I gave was a habitatio, I can sue for the money,
I do not mean for the amount which it could have been let for, but
the amount for which you [the defendant] would have hired it.
8. If I hand over to you a slave whom I was not bound to give, and
you manumit him, then, if you did this with knowledge of the facts,
you will be liable to pay his value, but if without such knowledge,
you will not be under that liability, but you must pay the value of
the services due from him as a freedman, and you will have to make
over any inheritance acquired from him. 9. Payment is “undue,”
not merely when it is not owing at all, but equally so when it is


66


67


TIT. VI] that was not due 327


owing to one man but made to another, or in a case where what
one man owes another pays as if he owed it himself.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 8) This condictio, introduced as it
has been on principles of justice and fairness, has become the
customary means of procuring the return of such property of one
man as is discovered to be in the possession of another without any
title to it.


Scaivoua (Digest 5) Stichus, after receiving by the testament
of a person whom he believed to be his owner a gift of his liberty,
on condition that, for ten years from the testator’s death, he paid
ten every year to his heirs, in accordance therewith paid the sum
so specified for eight years ; after which he discovered that he was
really freeborn, and he made no payment for the years remaining ;
moreover he was judicially declared to be freeborn. The question
was asked whether he could sue for the return of the money which
he had given the heirs as not having been due, and, if so, by what
kind of action. The answer was that, if he had paid money which
had not been procured either by his own services or through the
property of the man whom he had served in good faith, there could
be an action for the return of it. 1. A guardian paid money to a
creditor of his ward in excess of what was owing to him, and, when
the action on guardianship was brought, he did not credit himself
with the amount: I wish to know whether he has a right to sue
the creditor for return of the money. The answer was “ Yes.”
2. Titius, being in debt to a great many persons, one of whom was
Seius, assigned his property to Meevius in pursuance of a secret sale,
on the understanding that the latter would satisfy the creditors.
Meevius, on this, paid to Seius, as if it were owing to him, money
which had already been paid by Titius himself; and the question
was asked, on certain receipts being found in the possession of
Titius the debtor relating to debts partly paid, who it was that had
a right to sue for the return of the money paid unduly, Titius the
debtor or Meevius, the latter having been made “ procuraétor on his
own behalf.” The answer was that, taking the facts as stated, it was
the one who paid last. 3. The inquirer asked further whether the
agreement which it is the practice to insert on settling accounts,
namely such as follows,—that there shall be no further dispute
between the parties in pursuance of the contract herein referred
to,—would be a bar to the action. The answer was that there was
nothing stated which would make it a bar. 4. Lucius Titius lent
to Gaius Seius, who was under twenty-five years of age, a given sum


J


328 On Condictio for Money paid not due {BooK xt


of money, and received a certain amount from him by way of
interest. The heir of Gaius Seius the aforesaid minor got an order
for a restitutio in integrum from the Governor of the province as
against Publius Meevius [heir of Lucius Titius?], to enable him to
avoid paying the debt which fell on the deceased’s estate, but’ with
regard to the interest on the principal, which interest Seius the
person under twenty-five had paid the creditor, nothing was said
in the court of the Governor as to any action for the return
of it nor was any judgment given about it. I wish to ask
whether the heir of Gaius Seius the person under twenty-five
years of age can sue for the return of the interest which the latter
had paid to the creditor as long as he lived. The answer was that,
taking the facts as stated, there could be no action for the return
of what the deceased had paid by way of interest. I wish to ask
further, assuming your opinion to be that there can be no such
action, whether the heir has a right to retain the interest out of
some other debt. The answer was :—“ No, not even that.”


VII.
On CoNnDICTIO FOR WANT OF GROUND.


ULPIaANus (on Sabinus 43) Again, there is a right of
condictio in the following case, viz. where a person makes a
promise without ground or where he pays what was not owing.
Where however he has promised without ground, he cannot bring
a condictio for values which he never gave but only for the
obligatio itself; but we may add that if he promised on a fore-
going ground, but the ground failed, the rule is that it will be a
case for a condictio. 2. Whether the promise was made without
ground at the outset, or there was a ground for the promise which
is exhausted or has failed, the rule is that it is a case for a condictio.
3. It is acknowledged law that a condictio for anything can be
brought against a man only where it has come to his hands either
on no just ground or under circumstances which come to the same
thing.

THE SAME (on the Edict 32) A fuller having engaged to wash
some clothes, the clothes are lost, whereupon, being sued on his

1 del. ef. M.


TIT. vi] On Condictio for want of Ground 329


contract, he pays their value to the owner, after which the latter
finds them. What action must the fuller bring to recover the value
which he gave? To this Cassius says that he not only can sue on
the contract, but he can bring a condictio against the owner. My
own opinion is that he has at any rate a right of action on the
contract ; but as to the right to bring a condictio, this has been
questioned, as he did not pay anything which he did not owe 3
unless indeed we like to say that the money can be recovered by
a condictio for the reason that it was given without ground, as, no
doubt, when the clothes are found, the money may be held to have
been given without ground.


JULIANUS (Digest 8) People who are under an obligation
without ground can get discharged of the obligation by a condictio
for want of ground brought for an unascertained amount; and it is
immaterial whether the plaintiff contracted the whole obligation
without ground or a more extensive obligation than he need
have contracted, except indeed that proceedings taken in order
to be freed from all obligation whatever differ from those taken
in order to be relieved to some extent: for instance, a man who
promised to give ten, if’ he had no ground for making the promise,
can, by a condictio for an unascertained amount, procure that he
shall be formally released from the whole stipulation, but, if he
promised ten where he need only have promised five, he can procure
by a similar condictio that he shall be discharged of five.


AFRICANUS (Questions 8) It is immaterial whether a thing
was given at the outset without ground, or the ground on which it
was given failed.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 11) A woman in view of a marriage
with her maternal uncle gave a sum of money by way of dos, but
did not marry him. The question has been asked whether she can
sue to have the money returned. To this I said that, when money
is paid on a ground which is immoral on the part of both giver and
receiver, there is no right of condictio, and, where both are equally
guilty, the person in possession has the better right ; adding that
I supposed that anyone who followed that line of argument was
likely to give the opinion that the woman could not bring a
condictio ; but that nevertheless it could be properly said on the
other side that in the instance before us it was not so much a case
of an immoral ground as of no ground at all, it being in fact


1 del. nam.


330 On Condictio for want of Ground [Book XII


impossible that the money which was given should be turned into
a dos, as the object in view of which it was given was not illicit
intercourse but marriage. 1. A stepmother gave money by way of
dos for a marriage with her stepson, similarly a daughter-in-law for
marriage with her father-in-law, but no marriage took place. At
the first glance it looks as if there were no right of condictio to
recover the money, because it is a case of incest by universal law ;
nevertheless, in these cases it is still clearer that there was no
ground at all for the giving of dos; consequently there is a right
of condictio.


1


THIRTEENTH BOOK.


Ik
ON THE Cowpicrio Furriva.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 18) In the case of a thing stolen the
condictio can be brought by the owner alone.


PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 16) Both lunatics and infants are
amenable to a condictio furtiva (founded on theft), where they
have become compulsory heirs, though they cannot be sued [in the
action for theft].


PAULUS (on Sabinus 9) If a condictio founded on a case of
theft is brought for a slave, there is no doubt that damages are
demandable to the extent of the plaintiffs interest; say, for
example, that the slave was appointed heir to someone and his
owner is in danger of losing the inheritance. Julianus himself says
this. Again, if the condictio is for a slave now dead, the plaintiff,
he tells us, will get the value of the inheritance.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 41) If a slave ora son under potestas
commits a theft, there is a right of condictio against the owner of
the slave for whatever came to his hands ; as for the balance, the
owner can surrender the slave for noxa.


Pautus (on Sabinus 9) A condictio founded on a case of
theft can be brought against a son under potestas, as the only
person who is ever liable to such a condictio is the one who
committed the theft or his heir.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 38) Accordingly, even where a
theft is committed with the aid and advice of another, the latter
will not be liable to the condictio, though he is to an action for
theft.


332 On the Condictio Furtiva [BOOK XIII


7 THE SAME (on Sabinus 42) Where a man has settled for the
loss as a thief, it is quite certain that this is no bar to a condiciio ;
by settling for the loss the right of action for theft is taken away,
but not the right of condictio. 1. The action for theft is brought
for the statutable damages, the condictio for the actual goods ; the
result of which is that the right to an action for theft is not taken
away by the condictio nor the right to a condictio by the action for
theft. Accordingly, a man whose property has been stolen has a
right of action for theft and a right of condictio and a right of
vindicatio (action to recover as owner), he can also have an action
ad exhibendum (for production). 2. The condictio for stolen goods,
inasmuch as it is an action for a thing, is good against the heir
of the thief too, and that not only while a slave [for example]
who was stolen is living, but even after his death ; in fact, where
the stolen slave met with his death while in the possession of the
heir of the thief, or even not in his possession, the rule still is that,
after the slave’s death, the right of condictio will run on against
the heir. What we have just said of the heir applies equally to any
kind of successor.


8 THE SAME (on the Edict 27) Where goods are stolen the
condictio may be brought for the actual goods ; but is this only so
long as they are still in existence, or does it hold equally where they
are no more to be found in the world? As to this, if the thief has
delivered them up, then beyond doubt no condictio can be brought ;
but, so long as he does not do so, there remains a good right of
condictio for the value put upon them, as it is impossible for the
things themselves to be handed over. 1. Where a condicéio is
brought for stolen goods, the question arises what the time is to
which the estimate of their value applies. As to this, the rule
is that we must look at the time at which the thing bore the
utmost value it ever had, especially considering that a thief will
not get off by handing over property the value of which has been
reduced ; a thief is held to be always in default. 2. Lastly it should
be observed that mesne profits are included in this action.


9 THE SAME (on the Edict 30) In a condictio on the ground
of theft the defendant is liable not merely for the amount which has
come to his hands, but for the whole, assuming that he is sole heir ;
but a man who is heir for a share is liable to the extent of such
share in the thing stolen as he has in the inheritance.


10 THE SAME (on the Edict 38) A thief is liable to the condictro


11


12


TIT. I] On the Condictio Furtiva 333


whether he is “manifest” or “not manifest.” But a thief manifest
will only be liable to the condictio so long as the owner has not
taken possession of the thing! stolen ; it is clear that no thief is
liable to a condictio after the owner has once taken possession.
Hence Julianus, in order to be able to proceed with the discussion
of the condictio in the case of a thief manifest, takes the case of
the detected thief having killed or broken up or poured out what
he had misappropriated. 1. A man who is liable for vi bona rapta
(robbery) can be sued in a condictio, so Julianus informs us
(Digest b. 22). 2. The condictio will be admissible only so long as
the ownership in the thing has not passed away from the owner by
his own act; so that, if he should transfer it to another, he loses
the right of condictio. 3. Hence Celsus says (Digest b. 12) that if
the owner bequeaths the stolen goods to the thief unconditionally,
his heir cannot bring a condictio for them against him, and, even if
the bequest is not to the thief himself but to someone else, the
same rule holds and the condictio is lost, as the ownership is gone
by the act of the testator, that is of the owner.


PauLus (on the Edict 39) Even the legatee himself cannot
bring the condictio ; the condictio is open only to the person from
whom the thing was stolen or to his heir; but the legatee has a
good right of vindicatio for a thing which the owner bequeathed
to him.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 38) Accordingly Marcellus (b. 7)
lays down the law in very apt language ; what he says is :—If what
was stolen is still your property”, you can condict it; but it is
equally true that, if you lose the position of owner otherwise than
by your own act, you can still condict it. 1. Hence, where the
thing was common property, it makes a difference, as he well says,
whether you challenged your co-owner to communi dividundo
proceedings or he challenged you ; as if it was you who challenged,
you lost the right to bring the condictio, but, if it was your fellow-
owner, you have it still. 2. Neratius (Parchment books) mentions
that it was held by Aristo that, where a thing has been given in
pledge, the pledgee can, if it is stolen, bring a condictio for an
unascertained amount.


1 After ejus read ret. Cf. M.

2 Si res mihi subrepta tua remaneat, condices. The word mihi is puzzling.
M. suggests reading it before condices. I have left it out, which is practically the
same thing. The above reading is impossible, but the sense is clear.


13


14


15


16


334 On the Condictio Furtiva [BOOK XTII


Pautus (on the Edict 39) If cups have been made out of
silver that was stolen, according to Fulcinius, they can be condicted ;
accordingly in a condictio for the cups, a value will be put upon
any device engraved which was made at the expense of the thief ;
just as, where a [slave] child is stolen and grows to be a man, the
valuation will be of his worth as full-grown, although he grow to
manhood under the care and at the expense of the thief.


JULIANUS (Digest 22) If a stolen slave has been bequeathed
subject to a condition, then, as long as the condition is in suspense,
the heir can bring a condictio, but should the condition be fulfilled
after joinder of issue, the action must thereupon be dismissed, just
as if the same slave had been ordered by testament to be free
subject to a condition, and the condition were fulfilled after joinder
of issue: the fact being that the plaintiff himself has now no
interest in getting hold of the man and the property has ceased
to be his through no ill practice on the part of the thief. If
judgment were given while the condition was still pending, the
judge must form an estimate as to what price the slave would
fetch in the market. 1. But in this action the plaintiff will not
have to give security to the person against whom proceedings are
taken. 2. If an ox is stolen and then killed, the owner has a good
condictio for the ox and the hide and the flesh, where, that is, hide
and flesh have been handled [so as to constitute theft], and the
horns can be condicted too. But if the owner, by means of the
condictio, gets the value of the ox, and afterwards brings a similar
action for any other of the things above mentioned, he can beyond
question be barred by an exceptio. Should he on the other hand
condict the hide and get the value of it, and thereupon proceed
to condict the ox, then, if the thief offers the value of the ox less
the value of the hide, the plaintiff will be barred by an exceptio
of dolus malus. 3. The rule is similar on a theft of grapes ; there
is a good right of condictio in law for the mustum and the grape-
stones.


CELSUS (Digest 12) Where a slave steals from anyone, he
will be liable to an action for theft on account of his act on
becoming free ; but no condictio can be brought against him,
unless he handled the goods after he became free.


PoMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 38) Where a man commits
theft by making use of something which was lent him or deposited
with him, he can be called to account by a condictio on the ground


TIT. 1] On the Condictio Furtiva 335


of theft as well [as by the ordinary actions]. A difference between
this and the actio commodati is that, if the thing is destroyed,
even without any malice or negligence on the part of the defendant,
he is still liable to the condictio ; whereas, in the actio commodati,
the defendant is rarely held liable except so far as he was guilty of
negligence, and, in the actio depositi, only for deliberate malice’.


17 PAPINIANUS (Questions 10) It is a matter of small account,
| as bearing on the extinction of the right of condictio, whether,
when a slave has been stolen, there is an offer to restore him or the
matter is brought under a different head of debt and a different
kind of obligation ; nor do I concern myself with the question
whether the slave is on the spot or not, as the default which was
involved in the fact of theft is got rid of by a sort of shifting of
the claim (velutt quudam delegatione).


SCAVOLA (Questions 4) Seeing that, if a man receives money
which is not due with knowledge of the fact, this amounts to theft,
we may consider the question whether, where a procurator pays
with his own money, this does not amount to a theft on the
procurator himself. Pomponius says (Hpistles 8) that the pro-
curator does have a right of condictio founded on theft ; but that
I myself [the principal] have a similar right, if I ratify such a
payment of something that was not owed. However, if one action
is brought, this puts an end to the right to bring the other.


Pauuus (on Neratius 3) Julianus gave it as his opinion
that, where a daughter removed [her husband’s| goods, a condictio
must be allowed against her father, i peculiwm (to the extent of
what her father allows her).


; 20 TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 15) Where the thief is ready
to defend a condictio, and, as long as the thing stolen is in existence,
it is within my power to bring the action, but after a while the
thing is destroyed, the old lawyers were still of opinion that the
right to a condictio would remain, as it is clear that where a man
at the outset handled anything against the will of the owner, he is
always in default in the matter of restoring it, it being a thing
which he never ought to have taken away at all.


1 Omit depositi before agetur. Cf. M.


cf


(—b


336 On Condictio under the Statute [BOOK XIII


IL.
On CoNDICTIO UNDER THE STATUTE.


PAULUS (on Plautius 2) If an obligation is introduced by a
new statute, and no provision is made in the statute itself as to
what kind of action it is by which to proceed, the action must be
“under the statute.”


III.
ON A TRITICARIAN CONDICTIO.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) A man who sues for a definite
sum of money which he has advanced must employ the action
referred to in the words “ Where a definite demand is made,” but
one who sues for anything of a different kind must do so by a
“triticarian”’ condictio. To state the law in general terms, the
things which are sued for in this action are any which there may
happen to be which differ from money advanced, whether they are
determined by weight or by measure, and whether they are movable
or consist of land. Accordingly, one may sue in this way for a
piece of land, including the case of land let on perpetual lease,
or one in which the plaintiff stipulated for the conveyance of a
mere right, such as a usufruct, or a servitude to be attached to
either kind of estate [urban or rustic]. 1. No one can sue in this
action for his own property, except in those special cases in which
this is allowed, for example, in a case founded on theft, or one in
which a movable object! has been forcibly carried off.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 18) Sabinus goes further and says
that, where a man has turned anyone by force out of his land, he
is liable to a condictio for it, and Celsus too says the same thing, but
this is only in case the person who was ejected and brings the action
is the owner ; and, if he is not owner, still, according to Celsus, he
can bring a condictio for the possession.


1 Read re after v7. M.


TIT, 11] On a triticarian Condictio 337


THE SAME (on the Edict 27) In this action, if the question
is asked to what time the valuation of the thing sued for is to refer,
the better opinion is, and this is held by Servius, that we must
consider the time when judgment is pronounced against the de-
fendant, and if, by that time, the thing [say any animal] should have
ceased to exist, the time of death; but this, as Celsus says, must
he taken with some allowance; we must not look at the closing
moments of life, lest the valuation be brought down to a very
small sum; for example, suppose a slave is mortally wounded.
But whichever of the above times is taken, so Marcellus tells us
(b. 20), if the object sued for lost value at a time when the de-
fendant was already in default, an estimate must be made of the
depreciation ; consequently, if the defendant hands over a slave
who, after he had come to be in default, was deprived of the sight
of one eye, he is not really discharged ; so that, in a case of that
nature, the valuation must refer back to the moment when the


defendant began to be in default.


Galus (on the provincial. Edict) If the subject of the suit
should be goods of any kind which ought to have been handed over
on a given day, for example, wine, oil or corn, then, according to
Cassius, the damages ought to be determined by the value which
they would have borne on the day when the goods were to be
handed over ; or, if no agreement was made as to the day, then
the value which they bore when issue was joined; and a similar
rule applies as to place; so that an estimate should first be made
with reference to the place where the goods were to be handed
over, but, if there was no agreement as to place, then the place to
be considered must be the one where the action was brought. In
fact this principle is applied as to every kind of case.


PN;


ON THINGS WHICH ARE TO BE RENDERED AT A SPECIFIED
PLACE.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 9) It used to be held that
it was not open to any one to bring an action at a different place
from that in which, according to the terms of his stipulation,
the thing sued for would have to be rendered. As, however, it
was unjust, supposing the promisor never came to the place where,


Mo, J. 1%, 22


338 On things which are to be rendered [Book xm


according to his promise, the thing would have to be handed over,
whether because he purposely avoided the place or because he
was unavoidably detained elsewhere, that the promisee should be
unable to come by what he had a right to, it was therefore thought
proper to provide an wézlis actio to meet the case.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) An arbitrarian action may be
advantageous either to the plaintiff or to the defendant ; where the
advantage is on the side of the defendant, the judgment is for a
smaller sum of money than is claimed, and, where it is on the side
of the plaintiff, for a greater sum’. 1. The action in question may
be founded on a stipulation such as the following: I stipulate with
you that ten shall be paid me at Ephesus. 2. If a man sues on
a stipulation that there shall be given him either ten at Ephesus
or a slave at Capua, he cannot lay one of the two places out of the
case when he brings his action, lest he should be depriving the
defendant of the advantage given by locality. 3. According to
Sceevola (Questions b.15), it is by no means the fact that what is
implied tacitly in a stipulation is, as a matter of course, in the
defendant's power ; what he is [to be] bound to do he can, he says,
determine, but not whether or not he is [to be] bound at all.
Accordingly, where a man promises to give either Stichus or
Pamphilus, he can choose what his delivery shall be of, so long as
both are alive; but, as soon as one of the two dies, there is an end,
he says, of his power of selection, or else it would be open to him
to determine whether he is bound at all, assuming that he were
unwilling to hand over the living slave whom alone he would be
bound to give. Hence, in the case before us, if a man promised to
give something at either Ephesus or Capua, he could not be sued
at all, if it depended on his choice where the action should be
brought, as he would as a matter of course choose a different place
[from that in which the plaintiff was], and the result of this would
be to put in his power to determine whether he should be bound
at all; accordingly Sceevola holds that the action can be brought
against him in either of the two, and that without further mention
of place, so that the plaintiff is allowed to select the place where
to sue. In fact he lays it down in general terms that the plaintiff
can choose where to sue and the defendant where to hand over,
that is until the action is brought. Hence, he proceeds to say,
if there is an alternative as to subject joined to an alternative as to
place, the necessary result is to give the plaintiff the choice as to


1 Del. pecunia fiat.


TIT. Iv | at a specified place 339


subject through his right of choice as to place; indeed the truth
is you put it out of the plaintiff's power to bring an action by
your wish to keep the choice [of subject] in the hands of the
defendant. 4. Ifa man stipulates with the words “at Ephesus and
Capua,” what our authority says is that he must sue for part at
Ephesus and part at Capua. 5. If he stipulates for a set of flats
to be built, without adding the place where, the stipulation is void.
6. If a man’s stipulation is for ten to be paid at Ephesus, then, if he
sues before the day on which he can reach Ephesus, he sues to
no purpose ; [there.is no doubt indeed that a suit is brought to
no purpose*| before the time, as Julianus himself says that a
particular day is tacitly implied in such a stipulation as the above.
Consequently I believe that what Juiianus holds is sound, that where
a man stipulates at Rome for something to be given at Carthage on
the same day, the stipulation is inoperative. 7. Again, Julianus
discusses the following point, namely, where a man has stipulated
that something should be given at Ephesus to either himself or
Titius, whether, if payment should be made to Titius at some other
place, the promisee can in spite of this last fact, claim by action
that payment should be made to himself: as to which what Julianus
tells us is that there is no discharge of the debt, so that an action
can be brought for the amount of the promisee’s loss. But
Marcellus says, both in an independent discussion and in a note
to Julianus, that it may be held that there is a good discharge
even if payment is made to me in some other place, although I
cannot be compelled to accept it against my will; and, if there is
no discharge, the proper thing to say certainly is, in his opinion,
that the promisee has still a right to ask for the whole sum: the
case being like that of a man building a block of chambers on
a different spot from that specified in his promise, who would not
be discharged of any part of his obligation. However, my own
view is that the case of paying a sum of money differs from that of
building a set of flats, and consequently that the action can only
be brought for the loss incurred. 8. We may proceed now to
discuss the duty of the judge who hears such a case and consider
whether he must follow scrupulously the amount named in the
contract or either go beyond or fall short of such amount, so that
if the defendant has an interest in making payment at Ephesus
rather than at the particular place where the action is brought,
this fact may be taken into account. Julianus, following in this


1 Of, M.


bo
bo
.,


340 On things which are to be rendered [BooK xi


the opinion of Labeo, took into account also the position of the
plaintiff, who sometimes might have some interest in getting
payment at Ephesus ; accordingly account must be taken of what
is advantageous to the plaintiff. For example, what is to be said
if he advanced money on a contract of bottomry and is to be repaid
it at Ephesus, at which place he owed a sum of money under a
penalty or on security, and the consequence of your [the defendant’s |
default is that the property which he pledged is sold or the penalty
incurred? Or say he owed money to the treasury, and [his] your
promisee’s property has been sold for much less than its value ;
the amount of difference it made to him will have to be taken into
account in the arbitrarian action, and that on a scale which may
go beyond the statutable limits for interest on money lent.
Suppose, again, he was in the practice of buying goods for sale ;
ought not the profit [which he missed the opportunity of making]
to be taken into account and not simply the actual loss he incurred?
My opinion is that the profit that he misses should be taken into
account too.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) The reason why this
action is submitted to the judge’s decision is that we all know how
much the prices of things vary from one city or region to another,
especially in the case of wine, oil and corn; and, as for money,
though it may be thought that its power is one and the same
everywhere, still, in some places it is procurable easily and at
a moderate rate of interest and in others with greater difficulty
and only at a heavy rate of interest.


Uupianus (on the Edict 27) If, on the other hand, the
action is brought at Ephesus, only the actual amount can be asked
for, and nothing further, unless the plaintiff had made some
stipulation for it, or unless the advantage of despatch comes in
in the case [in some other way]. 1. Sometimes the judge before
whom the action is brought, seeing that the case is arbitrarian,
will be bound to discharge the defendant after first requiring him
to undertake to pay the money at the place where the promise
was made. For instance, how if it is alleged that the money was
offered to the plaintiff at that place, or deposited there, or that
it could easily be paid there: ought not the judge in some such
cases to discharge the defendant? To state the matter briefly,—
the judge who is appointed to hear such a case ought to keep
equitable principles in view as well [as strict law].


TIT. IV | at a specified place 341


PAULUS (on the Edict 28) If an heir is ordered by the testator
to give something at a specified place, there is ground for an
arbitrarian action ;


PoMPonIus (on Sabinus 22) or money was lent on the
understanding that it should be repaid at a specified place.


PAULUS (on the Edict 28) In bona fide cases, even though
it was a term in the contract that a thing should be handed over
at a specified place, the action allowed is that on purchase or on
sale or on deposit, and not the actio arbitraria. 1. But if a man
promised in a stipulation’ that he would make delivery at a specified
place, this last is the action to which to have recourse.


AFRICANUS (Questions 3) Having stipulated for the payment
to you of a hundred at Capua, you took a surety ; any action for the
money brought against the surety will have to be on the same
terms as if it were against the promisor himself; that is to say,
if it is brought in any other place than Capua, it must be an
arbitrarian action, and the damages must be laid at an amount
representing the interest which either the defendant or the plaintiff,
[as the case may be], would have in the money in question being
paid at Capua rather than anywhere else. Should it moreover
happen that it was owing to the default of the principal debtor
that the whole hundred were not paid at Capua, the burden on the
surety must not be any the greater, as this case cannot properly be
compared with that of an obligation to pay interest ; in such a case
as that, there are two stipulations, but here there is only one, that
is, a stipulation for repayment of money lent, in connexion with
the performance of which the question of the measure of damages
is entrusted to the equitable discretion (arbitrium) of the judge:
and one thing which in my judgment exhibits very plainly the
difference between the two cases is that, if, after the defendant has
begun to be in default, part of the money owing is paid and an
action is brought for the rest, the prescribed function of the judge
is such that he must make an estimate of the interest which the
plaintiff has in payment being made at Capua with reference to the
reduced amount only which is the subject of the action.


Uupianus (on Sabinus 47) When a person promises to pay
at a specified place, he is not at liberty to pay in any other place
than the one for which he promised, without the consent of the


promisee.


1 Stipulatus sit: an unusual use of the word. Cf. D. 12. 6. 13.


10


342 On things to be rendered at a specified place [BK xT


PAULUS (Questions 4) If, after default of the promisor as to
payment in Capua, the promisee should be about to bring an
arbitrarian action, but he should first take a surety with reference
to such action, let us consider whether it is not the case that any
amount that might have to be added to the original debt by the
judgment of the Court will not be owing [from the surety] and
does not form part of his obligation ; so that, in fact, even now, if
the principal sum should be paid, or the action should be brought
at Capua, the special power of the judge [arbitrium|] is at an end ;
unless, indeed, it should be said, supposing, for instance, the judge
would have to order payment of the sum of a hundred and twenty,
that thereupon, if payment were made of a hundred, that sum must
be held to be paid on the whole amount, that is out of [the amount
due for] both the original debt and the penalty, so as to leave it still
open to the plaintiff to sue for so much more as is still due of the
original debt’, with a penalty in addition for non-payment of that
amount. But this view of the matter is in my opinion inadmissible,
especially as, in accepting the payment the creditor may be held
to have remitted the penalty.


V.
ON A CONSTITUTUM OF MONEY.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) In this Edict the Pretor
favours natural justice, as he maintains assurances by constitutum
made in pursuance of agreement, seeing that to disappoint credit
given is a serious matter. 1. The Preetor says :—“ Where a man
makes a constitutwm of money owed” [etc.]. The word “man”
must be taken to mean man or woman, as women too are bound
by a constitutum of money, provided they are not guaranteeing
a debt. 2. Nothing is said in the Edict as to the case of a boy
under age ; however, the boy is not bound by a constitutwm with-
out the concurrence of his guardian. 3. It has been asked whether
a son under potestas is bound, if he makes a constitutwm. In my
opinion the truth is that he is bound by his constitutwm and his
father is bound de peculio. 4. If a person has made a stipulation
which was inoperative, but his real wish was to make a stipulation


1 Read ex sorte for sortem. Of. M.


rT. sv | On a constitutum of money 343


and not to have a constitutum given him, the proper view is that
he cannot bring an action on constitutwm, because what was done
was not with the intention of making a constitutwm, but of
giving a promise. 5. The question has been asked whether the
constitutum can be for anything other than what is due. Since how-
ever it is now good law that one thing can be given in discharge of
a contract, in the place of another, there can be nothing to prevent
a constitutum being made of something other than what is due;
for instance, where a person owes a hundred and makes a con-
stitutwm of corn of that value, I should say the constitutum is
valid. 6. A constitutum of a debt can be made, on whatever
ground it is owing, that is to say on whatever kind of contract,
whether it be one to give a specific sum or an unliquidated amount,
and whether it is of purchase money owed in pursuance of a sale
or money payable by way of dos or on the ground of guardianship
or of any contract whatever. 7. Even a debt owing in natural law
will be enough. 8. Add that a man who is liable to an “honorary”
action and not by civil law will be bound by a constitutwn; a debt
owing in honorary law is held to be a debt. Hence too, if a con-
stitutum is made by a paterfamilias or by the owner of a slave of
a debt for which he can be sued in an action de peculio, the liability
will extend to the amount which there was in the peculiwm when
the constitutum was made; and, in fact, if he made it for any-
thing over and above that amount on his own account, he will not
be liable in respect of the excess.


JULIANUS (Digest 11) But if he engages by constitutwm on
his son’s account that he will pay ten, then, although there should
be [only] five in the pecaulium, he will be liable on constitutum to
pay ten.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) If a husband engages by
constitutwm for a larger amount of dos than his means admit of,
then, seeing that he makes a constitutwm of a debt, he is liable for
all that he engages for, but the judgment given at the suit of the
wife will be for payment to the extent of his means. 1. If a man
engages by constitutum for a sum which he owes by civil law but
does not owe by preetorian law, because, that is, he has an eaceptio,
the question is asked whether he is bound by the constitutum ; to
which the true answer is, as indeed Pomponius himself says, that
he is not bound, as the money engaged for by constitutwm is not
owing by the principles of law in force. 2. Where a man who is
debtor both by civil and preetorian law is under an obligation which


344 On a constitutum of money — [BOOK XIII


takes effect at a future day, we may ask whether he can bind himself
by a constitutum. To this Labeo says that he can‘, and Pedius
confirms this opinion. Labeo himself adds that the constituiwm
was introduced chiefly on account of the very case of such pecuni-
ary debts as could not yet be sued for; with which opinion I am
much disposed to agree: there is a plain advantage in a rule to
the effect that a person who is bound from and after a given day
and who gives a constitutum to the effect that he will pay on that
day will be liable accordingly.


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) But if he engages by constetutum
to pay on an earlier day, he is equally liable.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) If a man promised to pay at
Ephesus, and he engages by constitutwm that he will pay at some
other place, there is no doubt that he is liable. 1. Julianus says
that a legate who engages by constitutwum at Rome to repay
something which he borrowed in the province cannet? be sued
thereon, and this is perfectly true; indeed if he gave a con-
stitutum not during his stay at Rome but while he was still in the
province, to the effect that he would pay at Rome, no action on
constitutum will be allowed against him. 2. The rule above laid
down that what is assured by constitutum must be the payment of
an existing debt, is one which regards the subject-matter; it does
not go as far as this, that the person to whom the assurance is given
must be already a creditor [of the person who gives it], as, if you
engage by constitutwm to pay [my creditor] what I owe [him], you
will be liable accordingly, and, if an engagement is made to me by
constitutum to pay [me] what is owing to you, the payment must be
made. 3. Moreover, in Julianus (b. 11) we read the following :—
“Titius sent me a letter in these words: ‘I have given a written
assurance at the request of Seius that, if he owes you anything,
I* would, on the same being proved‘, give you an undertaking for
payment thereof, and would discharge the debt without any
dispute.’” Titius is hereupon liable on a constitutum of money.
4. Still, if one man gives a constitutum for payment by another,
and not for payment by himself in the place of another, he is not
liable. Pomponius tells us this (b. 8). 5. Again, if you give me


Del. constitutum. M.

2 Ins. non before debere. Cf. D. 5. 1. 8. and M.

3 In the text, Scripst me secundum mandatum etc. me tibi cauturum.
Some would omit the second me, cf. M.: I would rather omit the first.

4 For debitum read debet cum. Cf. M.


TIT. V| On a constitutum of money 345


a constitutum to the effect that you will pay me, you will be liable,
but, if you give me a constitutwm that you will pay Sempronius,
you will not be liable. 6. Julianus (Digest b. 11) says that a con-
stitutwm can be given to a procurator; which Pomponius explains
to mean that you may engage by constitutwm to pay the pro-
curator himself, but not the principal. 7. Again, a constitutwm
can be given to the guardian of a ward or the actor (agent) of
a municipality or the cwrator of a lunatic [or a minor']. 8. But
these persons will themselves be liable on their own constitutum.
9. If a constitutum is given to the actor of a municipality or the
guardian of a ward or the curator of a lunatic or a minor, engaging
that payment shall be made to the municipality or the ward or the
lunatic or the minor, there will, I should say, have to be an utilis
actio allowed, as a matter of equitable dealing (utilitatis gratia), to
such municipality or ward or lunatic or minor. 10. It is settled
that a constitutum can be given even to a slave, and also,—if it be
given to a slave to the effect that payment will be made either to
the owner of the slave or to the slave himself,—that the slave will
acquire for his master an obligational demand, irrespective of the
quality of such slave himself.


PauLus (Sentences 2) This principle applies equally where
a constitutum is given to one who serves me as a Slave in good
faith.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) Indeed the constitutwm is valid
even where it is made to a son under potestas. 1. If I stipulate
for payment to be made to me or Titius, then, according to Julianus,
no constitutum can be given to Titius on his own account, since he
has no right to sue for the money, though valid payment can be
made to him.


PauLus (on the Edict 29) But if you give a constitutum
that you will pay either me or Titius, I have a good right of action ;
though if, after you have given a constitutum that you will pay me
simply, you pay Titius, you will none the less be liable to me.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 8) However Titius will be liable to
be sued in condictio indebiti, in order that money wrongly paid
to him may be restored to the person who paid it.


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) The rule is the same where there
are two promisees by stipulation, and thereupon a constitutwn


1 M. would insert this, not without reason.


11


12


13


14


346 On a constitutum of money [BOOK XII


is given to one of them and, after that, payment is made to the
other ; the truth being that the person to whom the constitutwm
is given ought to be regarded as in the position of one to whom
payment has already been made.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) Accordingly the constitutwm
will always be valid, so long as what is so engaged for is some real
debt, even though no person should be forthcoming whe is at the
moment debtor; suppose, for instance, before entry is made on the
debtor’s inheritance, or at a time when he is in captivity in the
hands of an enemy, some person should give a constitutwm that
he will pay the debt; Pomponius himself tells us that such
a constitutum is good, as the money which is the subject of it is
really owing. 1. If a man owes a hundred awrez and engages by
constitutum to pay two hundred, he is liable to the extent of a
hundred only, because that is the amount owing; accordingly,
a man who gives a constitutum for principal and with it for
interest which is not owing will be liable to pay the principal
only.


PAULUS (on the Edict 13) Again, if the amount owed is ten,
and the party engages by constitutwm to give both ten and Stichus,
it may be laid down that he is liable in respect of ten only.


THE SAME (on the Edict 29) But if a man who owes twenty
engages by constitutum to pay ten, he is liable accordingly.


Uupranus (on the Edict 27) Any man who engages by
constitutum that he will pay is liable, whether he goes on to
name a particular amount or not. 1. If a man engages by
constitutum that he will furnish security, then, if occasion for
security arises, even a constitutum such as mentioned must be
allowed. 2. Add that, ifa man engages by conséitutum that some
particular person will guarantee his debt, the engagement, as
Pomponius tells us, is equally binding. How then if that person
refuses to be guarantor? I should say that the man who gave
the constitutum is bound [thereby], unless something different
was intended. Suppose however he (the proposed guarantor) dies
before the time. If default has been made, a fair rule would be
that the party who gave the constitutum should be liable either to pay
damages representing the creditor's interest in the matter or else ~


to offer some other person as guarantor who is equally substantial:


but, if there has been no default, I should be inclined to say that
the debtor is not liable [under the constitutum]. 3. People can


17


15


16


TIT. V | On a constitutum of money 347


give a constitutum both when present and when absent, just as they
can make an informal agreement by a messenger or in person, and
they can use any phraseology they please.


Pauwus (on the Edict 29) Moreover, even if, when I give
you a constitutwm, the person through whom I give it is a free
man, there will be no difficulty caused by the fact that this would
be a case of an acquisition being made! through free persons,
because in the present case the agent is held to be simply vouch-
safing his services.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) If two persons [say you and [,]
give a constitutum as co-debtors, either one of us may be sued
for the whole amount. 1. Moreover a man may engage by
constitutum [to pay] at some particular place or time, and the
creditor not only may sue” at the place pointed out by the con-
stitutum, but can do so anywhere, as in the case of an actio
arbitraria. 2. The Preetor says :—“Should it appear that the
party who gave the constitutwm neither discharges the original
debt nor performs his engagement and there was nothing on the
part of the plaintiff to prevent the performance of what was
promised by constitutwm” [etc.]. 3. It appears then that if there
was nothing to prevent it on the part of the plaintiff, there is
a good right of action, even though there was something to
prevent it in the natural course of things; but the better rule
is that the defendant should get relief. 4. There is some room for
doubt, where the Preetor speaks of the party not performing his
constitutum, whether his words relate to the time expressed in the
constitutum itself or we have to carry them on to the time of
joinder of issue, and I should take it to be the time expressed in.
the constitutum.


Pauwus (on the Edict 29) However, even if he offers to pay
the debt on some other day, but the plaintiff declines to receive
it, though he has no sufficient reason for so declining, it is only
just that the defendant should be relieved, either by means of an
exceptio or by a construction being put on the Pretor’s words
which meets the justice of the case, so that, down to the time
of trial, if the plaintiff acts in the way mentioned, he will himself


1 There is a temptation to insert non before adguirimus: “the fact that
people do not make acquisitions” ete. Cf. Pothier.

2 For posse eum we must read potest is, but the pronoun cannot refer to the
debtor.


18


19


348 On @ constitutum of money [BOOK XIII


suffer by it; the result being that the above words, viz. “nor
performs his contract” express the supposition that he does not
perform it up to the day for which he made the constitutum, nor
at any time afterwards.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 27) We may add that the words
of the Preetor which come after the above, “there was nothing
on the part of the plaintiff” etc., give rise to a similar question.
Here Pomponius is in doubt, where it so happens that there was
nothing on the part of the plaintiff to prevent performance, on the
day when the constitutum was to be carried out, but there was
earlier or later. My own opinion is that these words also must be
referred to the day fixed by the constitutwm. Hence, if the plaintiff
fails to attend, being prevented by bad health or by force or by
bad weather, it is, as Pomponius says, at his own peril. 1. With
regard to the words which follow “and [it appears] that the money
at the time when it was promised by constitutwm was owing,’ they
require more detailed explanation. In the first place, one thing
which they import is this, that if some debt was owing when the
constitutum was made, but now it is not owing, the constitutum is
nevertheless valid, because the right of action relates back.
Consequently, as Celsus and Julianus tell us, if a man is bound
by an obligation on which he can be sued only during a limited
period, and he makes a constitutwm, he ought to be liable, even
though, after the constitutwm is given the period in question should
have expired. Hence, even if he gives a constitutwm that he will
pay at a time when he will have ceased to be bound, Julianus still is
of the same opinion, seeing that he gave the constitutwm at a time
when there was an obligation, though he made it refer to a time
when his liability under it would have ceased. 2. It is worth while
to add here something on the question whether this action is penal
or aims at an indemnity, and the better opinion is, as Marcellus
himself holds, that it is for an indemnity. 3. It was long ago
a question whether a man who had brought this action would
have thereby extinguished his right under the original claim. As
to this, the safest view is that it is when payment is made in con-
sequence of these proceedings that the [original] debt will be
discharged rather than when issue is joined, seeing that the
payment will avail for both obligations.


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) Where anything is due subject
to a condition and a constitutum is given which makes it payable


TIT. Vv | On a@ constitutum of money 349


either absolutely or on a given day, it will be due subject to
the same condition, so that, if the condition is fulfilled, [the party]
is bound, but, if it fail, both rights of action are lost. 1. But if
a man owes a debt absolutely and gives a constitutwm subject to a
condition, Pomponius says that he may be sued in an wtilis actio
[on the constitutum]. 2. If a paterfamilias or the owner of a
slave has given a constitutum that he would pay the amount
which there was in the peculiwm, the peculium itself will not be
reduced by the fact that he thereupon came to be bound accord-
ingly; and even if the peculiwm should be exhausted, still he is
not released ;


THE SAME (on Plautius 4) as the fact of the peculiwm
becoming more or less extensive will not affect the right of action
on constitutum.


THE SAME (on the Edict 29) If a man promises to hand
over Stichus, and Stichus dies at a time when the promisor has
let himself be in default, then, if he gives a constitutwm that he
will pay the value, he is liable accordingly. 1. If you give a
constitutum without mentioning a day, it may be said that you are
not liable, although the Edict is drawn in comprehensive terms ;
otherwise proceedings may be taken against you at once, unless
you are ready to pay the moment you have given the constitutum;
however, a short delay must be observed, that is, not less than ten
days, before the demand is put in force. 2. A man who gives
a constitutum that he will make a payment does not adequately
discharge his engagement if he [only] offers security ; but if a man
[who] makes a constitutum to the effect that he will give security
offers a surety or a pledge, his liability is at an end, as it makes no
difference what kind of security he gives.


THE SAME (Short Notes 7) If a sum of money has been
promised you by constitutwm, [founded on a debt owing to you as
an heir,] and after that you hand over the inheritance under the
Senatusconsultum Trebellianum, then, as you have transferred to
another the right to demand the original debt, you will not be
allowed to sue for the money as owing by constitutwm. The same
principle will apply to one who had been in possession of the estate
of a deceased person, if the inheritance has since been adjudged
to another in virtue of superior title: but the better opinion is
that leave to bring the action [on constitutum] ought to be granted


23


24


25


26


350 On a constitutum of money [BOOK XII


to the fideicommissary or to the person who succeeded in the
action [for the inheritance].


JULIANUS (Digest 11) If a person promises to give a slave
and the slave dies at a time when it was the promisor’s fault that
he had not been delivered, then, though what he engaged by
constitutum was that he would hand over a slave, still he will be
liable as for a constetutum of money and so have to pay the man’s
value.


MARCELLUS (Responsa) Titius sent a letter to Seius in the
following words:—“I have in my hands a balance of fifty on your
loan as the result of a contract made by my wards, which sum
I shall be bound to repay you in good money on the Ides of May ;
and, if I do not pay it by the aforesaid day, I shall be bound to
pay by way of interest” so much. I wish to ask whether Lucius
Titius has by this undertaking put himself in the place of his
wards as debtor. Marcellus’s answer was that, if a stipulation
had been made, he had taken their place. I also wish to ask,
supposing he did not take their place, whether he is liable on
constitutwm. Marcellus replied that he was liable for the prin-
cipal: that being the more indulgent and more _ beneficial
construction.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 8) A man owed one or other of
two things, [whichever he pleased,| and he made a constitutwm of
one of them: the question has been asked whether he can stili
give that one of the two which was not the subject of the con-
stitutum. I replied that he must not be listened to if he wanted
now to break faith as to the thing which he secured by constituium:
1. If, on the oath being tendered to you, you swear that money is
owed you, having already a right of action in regard of it, you have
a right to take proceedings on a constitutwm of money: indeed, if
I do not tender the oath of my own accord, but do so only on being
driven to it by the necessity I am under of tendering it back to
you, as, in fact, it is generally admitted that a man acts more
reasonably in tendering the oath back, than in taking an oath
himself, there is no practical difference ; even though it was owing
to your assurance and my modesty that I came to feel compelled
to tender it back.


Sc&VOLA (Responsa 1) A man wrote to his creditor in the
following terms :—‘“Sir, the ten [pieces] which Lucius Titius
received as a loan from your chest are at your disposition in my


27


28


29


30


31


TIT. Vv] On a constitutum of money 351


hands, irrespective of what may appear due for interest.” The
opinion given was that, taking the facts as stated, the party was
liable to an action for money secured by constitutwm.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 14) It matters little whether a
constitutum is made in the presence or the absence of the debtor.
Pomponius goes further and tells us (b. 34) that a man can give
a constitutum even without the debtor's consent, and, accordingly,
he regards the opinion of Labeo as false, who holds that if, after
a person has given a constitutum on somebody else’s behalf, the
principal should enjoin him not to pay, he must be allowed an
exceptio in factum ; and Pomponius’s opinion is very reasonable,
as when the person who made the constituéwm has once incurred
the obligation, he cannot be allowed to escape liability by the act
of the [principal] debtor.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 5) Where a man has given
an assurance by constitutwm that he will pay on another’s behalf,
the person for whom he gave such constitutwm still remains bound.


PAULUS (on the Edict 24) A man who is liable to an action
for injuria or theft or robbery will be bound by a constitutum.


THE SAME (Sentences 2) If a man engages by constitutum
to pay money to [one or other of] two persons, [say] to you or
Titius, then, although in strict law he remains liable by the
appropriate action for the money promised by conséitutwm, even
if he pays Titius, still he will have the benefit of an excepitio.


SCAHVOLA (Digest 5) Lucius Titius died owing money to the
Seii; whereupon these latter assured Publius Meevius that the
inheritance belonged to him and induced him to write them a
letter in which he declared that he was their debtor, in terms
implying that he admitted that he was the heir of his uncle [Lucius
Titius], to which he added that he had debited himself with the
money in his accounts. The question was asked whether, the fact
being that nothing whatever came to Publius Meevius from Lucius
Titius’s estate, he could, in virtue of the above mentioned letter be
sued on a constitutwm of money, and, if so, whether he could avail
himself of an exceptio of dolus. The answer was that no civil
action could be brought on the ground in question, but that an
action on constitutum was equally inadmissible, taking the facts
as stated. The inquirer asked further whether there could be an
action brought for the return of what had been paid by way of


352 On a constitutum of money [BOOK XIII


interest in virtue of the circumstances above mentioned. The
answer was that, taking the facts as stated, there could.


Vi.


THE ACTION ON LOAN FOR USE OR THE COUNTER ACTION.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) The Preetor’s words are :—
“Whatever any person shall be asserted to have lent, I will allow
an action for the same.” 1. The interpretation of this edict is not
difficult; there is only one thing to be remarked, viz. that the
magistrate who drew the edict mentioned loans where Paconius
spoke of making use of a thing. Now between making a loan and
giving a thing to be used there is, according to Labeo, the same
difference as between genus and species ; a movable thing may be
lent, but not what consists in land, though even what consists in
land may be given to be used. However, as we know, land too
may be said with correctness to be lent; Cassius himself agrees
with this. Vivianus goes so far as to hold that a habitatio can be
lent. 2. Children under the age of puberty are not liable to be
sued on a loan for use, as no such loan can so much as exist to
which a boy under age is a party without the concurrence of his
guardian, in fact, it goes as far as this, that even if, after attaining
the age of puberty, the boy should be guilty of fraud or negligence,
he is not liable to this action, as the loan had no force from the
first. .


Paulus (on the Edict 29) Neither can an action on a loan
for use be allowed to be brought against a lunatic. But actions for
production will be allowed against both, so that, when the thing
is produced, it may be made the subject of a vindicatio.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) However my opinion is that,
if the ward is enriched [by the loan], an utilis actio on the loan
must be allowed against him in accordance with the rescript of
the Divine Pius. 1. Should the thing lent be restored, but restored
in a worse condition, it will not be held to be restored at all, being
restored after having got into a worse condition,—unless the loss
is made good,—as a thing may be said correctly not to be restored
when it is restored in a worse condition’. 2. In this action there
will be the same oath to the claim allowed as in bona jide cases in


1 Sie!


mit. vi] Zhe action on loan for use or counter action 358


general, and, in connexion with the question what is the value of
the thing lent, the time taken into account is that at which the
case is decided, although, for actions in strict law!, what is considered
is the time when issue is joined. 3. An heir of the person who
received the loan will be sued in respect of the same share as that
which he takes in the inheritance, unless it so chance that he has
it in his power to restore the whole thing, but he does not do so ;
should that be the case, there will be judgment against him for
the whole, that being held to be in accordance with the mind
(arbitrium) of an impartial judge. 4. If the loan is made to a son
under potestas or to a slave, the action must be only de peculio,
but the lender can have a direct action too against the son himself.
We may add that if the plaintiff lent to a slave woman or a daughter
under potestas, the action can only be de peculio. 5. The pater-
Familias or the owner, as the case may be, will not suffer judgment
on the ground exclusively of wilful wrong done by the son or
slave ; as fraud too, though fraud only, on the part of the father or
owner himself will be taken into account; this distinction is
pointed out by Julianus (on the acto pignoraticia 11). 6. There
can be no loan of an object which is consumed in the use, unless
the borrower took it for purposes of ostentation or display.


Gaius (on verbal obligations 28) Loans of money are often
made with the object of letting the money serve for form’s sake in
the place of an actual payment.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) If it is agreed that the thing
lent shall be restored at some particular place or time, it is part
of the judge’s duty to take such place or time into account. 1. If
a person brings this action and accepts an offer of the damages
assessed, he thereby passes the property in the thing to the party so
offering. 2. We have now to consider what it is that is taken into
account in an action on a loan; is it only wilful wrong or
negligence too, or again, every risk? As a matter of fact, in
contracts people are sometimes answerable for wilful wrong
alone, and sometimes for negligence as well; in a case of deposit,
for wilful wrong; because, there being no question of advantage
to accrue to the person with whom the deposit is made, it is quite
right that wilful wrong only should be answered for: except,
that is, in cases where there is the additional fact of a payment
to be made [to the defendant],—as then negligence comes in as


1 Por stricti read strictis iudiciis. Cf. M.


Mae ITs Oe


354 The action on loan for use [BOOK XII


well, as indeed has been enacted,—or cases in which it was agreed
at the outset that the person in whose hands the thing was
deposited should answer both for negligence and accident (peri-
culum). But where the advantage of both parties is at stake, as in
a case of purchase or hire or dos or pledge or partnership, the
party answers for both wilful wrong and negligence. 3. In
loan, for the most part the whole advantage accruing is that of the
person to whom the loan is made, so that the opinion held by
Quintus Mucius is really the more correct one, namely, that the
party must be responsible for negligence, and answer for employing
diligence, and, in case the thing has been handed over with a
valuation, the whole risk must be borne by the one who engaged
that he would make good the valuation. 4. But where mischief
happens through old age or illness, or something has been forcibly
taken by robbers, or! any similar misfortune occurs, the rule is that
no loss which arises is to be laid to the charge of the person who
took the loan, unless there was in the case some negligence on his
part. On the same principle if any mischief happened through
a fire or the fall of a building, or any other? unavoidable loss
occurred, the borrower will not be held liable, unless, having it in
his power to preserve the property lent him, he preferred preserving
his own. 5. He is certainly bound to keep a watch on the things
lent him and that a diligent one. 6. Still, whether such watch need
be kept as to a slave who is lent him is a point on which the old
lawyers were in doubt. There is no doubt that it is sometimes
required even as to a slave, for instance where the slave is fettered
when lent, or where he is of such an age as to require to be
watched ; in any case if the understanding was that the party who
asked for the loan should keep watch the rule is that he must do
so. 7. Sometimes even in case of death [of the slave or animal
lent] the loss falls on the person who asked for the loan ; thus,
if I lend you a horse for you to take it to your country house and
you go into battle with it, you will be liable to an action on the
loan, and the same principle applies to a slave. No doubt, if I lent
the horse with the understanding that you might take it into battle,
I must bear the risk ; as Namusa has it, if I lend you a bricklayer
and he falls down from a scaffolding, the risk is mine. However this
last, I should say, is true only if, when I lent the man, the very
understanding was that he was to work on a scaffolding ; but if
it was that he was to carry on his work on the ground, but you
made him get on a scaffolding, or the mischief happened in
1 After aut ins. si. M. * For aliquid read aliud. Cf. M.


TIT. VI| or the counter action 355


consequence of some fault in the scaffolding, which was fastened
without sufficient care, though not by the man himself, or it was in
consequence of the ropes or poles being too old, then I should say
that the risk, happening as it did through the fault of the person
who asked for the loan, must be borne by that person himself.
We learn from Mela himself that if a slave who is lent to a stone-
cutter is crushed to death by the scaffolding, the artisan is liable
to an action on the loan, because he put the thing together without
sufficient care. 8. Moreover, besides this, when a man makes use
of what was lent him in some way other [than was intended], he is
liable not only on loan but to an action for theft, so Julianus
informs us (Digest b. 11). He goes on to say :—If I lend youa
blank paper and you get your debtor to write on it a note of hand as
an assurance to you, which I obliterate, then, if [lent you the paper
with a view to the assurance being made on it for you, I am liable
to be sued by you in a counter action; but, if this was not the case,
and you did not let me know that the note of hand was written,
you are in fact, he says, liable to an action on loan, indeed, he
continues, even to an action for theft, because you make use of the
thing lent in a different way [from that understood in the agree-
ment], just as a man is liable for theft if he uses a horse or a
garment in a different way from that with a view to which it was
lent. 9. So far is the borrower bound to answer for diligence in
the matter of a loan that he is answerable for it even in connexion
with such objects as go with the thing lent ; for instance, suppose
I lent you a mare and the mare was accompanied by a foal ; in this
case the old lawyers held that you were bound to see to the safety
of the foal too. 10. There are cases, no doubt, in which a person
who asks for a loan will be answerable only for wilful wrong, as for
example if he made express agreement to that effect, or where
the lender made the loan entirely in his own interest, say he made
it to his own fiancée or his wife, in order that she might be the
better dressed when she was brought to his house, or the Preetor
was exhibiting sports and lent [materials of some kind] to the
players, or someone else volunteered to lend them to the Preetor.
11. We may now consider in what particular cases an action on
loan will lie: as a matter of fact, the old lawyers were in a state
of uncertainty about these cases. 12. I gave you a thing for you
to pledge it with your creditor, and you so pledged it: but you
do not redeem it in order to restore it to me. Here, Labeo says,
an action on loan will lie, and this I should say is the case, unless
there is some consideration in money given me ; should that be the


23—2


356 The action on loan for use [BOOK XIII


case, I should have to sue im factwm or on a contract of letting and
hiring. Of course if I give something by way of pledge on your
behalf at your request, I shall have a right of action on mandatum.
Labeo says further and very properly that if I am guilty of no
negligence in the matter of redeeming the pledge, but the creditor
declines to restore it, then you have a right of action on loan so
far as this only, that you can call on me to assign to you my own
rights of action against him. It will moreover be held that [ am
not guilty of negligence if either I have paid the money already or
Iam ready to pay it. No doubt the cost of the judicial proceedings
and others connected with the case must in fairness be defrayed
by the party who received the loan. 13. If you request me to lend
you a slave with a dish, and the slave loses the dish, according
to Cartilius, the risk is borne by you, as the dish itself is held to
be lent, consequently you must answer for negligence in respect
of it too. There is no doubt that, if the slave runs away and takes
it with him, the party who received the loan is not liable, unless
he was guilty of negligence in respect of the flight of the slave.
14. If you ask me to lay out a dining table for you and to furnish
plate in discharge of that service, which I do, whereupon you
request me to do the same thing on the day following, and, as
I cannot conveniently take the plate back again home, I leave
it where it is, and it is lost,—what is the proper action to bring
and on whom will the loss fall? lLabeo tells us that, as to the
matter of risk, it makes a great deal of difference whether I set
someone to watch or not; if I did, the risk is mine, but if not,
it must be borne by the person in whose hands the plate was left.
I should say myself that the proper action is one on loan, but that
the person in whose hands the things were left must provide for
their safe keeping, unless some other agreement was made expressly.
15. If a waggon is lent or let to two persons jointly, then, as we read
in Celsus the son (Digest b.6), the question may arise whether each
of them is bound for the whole sum engaged for or only for a
portion of it. What he says is that both of two people cannot have
the ownership or possession of the whole of a thing, nor can any-
one be the owner of a portion of an object, he can only have part
ownership of the whole object for an undivided share. The use,
no doubt, of a bath or a porch or a field may belong to each person
as to the whole of it, as I do not have the use of a thing any the
less for the fact that someone else has it too ; but, in the case of
a waggon which is lent or let, I do practically have the use of it in
respect of a particular part, because I do not occupy the whole


TIT. VI] or the counter action 357


space of the waggon ; still it is, he says, the better opinion that I
must answer for dolus and negligence and diligence and provide
for safe keeping in respect of the whole ; and consequently the
two persons will be treated very much as if they were correal
debtors, and if one is sued and pays the damages this will be a
discharge to the other, and they both have rights of action for
theft :


6 PoMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) so that, if either of the two
brings such an action, the other's right of action against the thief
is taken away.


rf ULPrIANus (on the Edict 28) Hence the question arises
whether, if one of the two brings the action for theft, it is he only
who can be sued for the loan. What Celsus says is that if the other
should be sued, the one, that is, who did not bring the action for
theft, but he is willing that the first should be sued at his risk,
namely the one who, in consequence of his bringing the action for
theft, made gain out of the thing lent, he can claim to be heard,
and the decision must be in his favour. 1. Should the lender have a
right to sue the other of the co-debtors on the Lex Aquilia, we may
consider whether he (the lender) will not have to assign his right
of action [to the defendant in the action on the loan], assuming that
the other did some damage which the one who is being sued on the
loan will be compelled to make good ; as, even if the lender had a
right of action on the Lea Aquilia against the present defendant
himself, the really just course is that when he sues on the loan he
should release the other right of action : unless indeed it should be
said that if he sues on the Lex Aquilia the damages he recovers
will be the less by the amount which he recovered in pursuance of
his claim on the loan; which, no doubt, is not an unreasonable view
to take.


8 POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 5) People retain both the posses-
sion and the ownership of things which they lend ;


9 ULPIANUS (on the Edict 2) as no one who lends anything
thereby passes the property in it to the person to whom he
lends it.


10 THE SAME (on Sabinus 29) When a man has received any-
thing by way of loan, it is certain that, if he puts it only to the use


i


12


13


358 The action on loan for use [BOOK XIII


for which he borrowed it, he will have nothing to pay, if he has not
made it in any respect the worse by his own negligence ; no doubt,
if he has made it the worse by negligence’, he will be liable.
1. If I put a thing in the hands of a person, that he may look at
it, the question arises whether he is in the same position with one
to whom something is lent. As to this, if I put the thing in his
hands on my own account, because I desired to find out what it was
worth, he will be answerable to me for wilful mischief only, if it
was on his own account, he must answer for the custody of it as
well, and consequently he will have a right of action for theft. We
may add that, if it should be lost on the way, when it is being
brought back, then, if I had instructed him as to the person by
whom he should send it, the risk will fall on me, but if he entrusted
it to a person of his own choosing, he will have to answer to me for
negligence as well [as wilful mischief], assuming that he received
it on his own account,


Pauuus (on Sabinus 5) on the ground that he did not
choose a sufficiently trustworthy person for it to be carried safely ;


ULprIaAnus (on Sabinus 29) but, if he received it on my
account, he will answer for wilful mischief only. A slave who
was sent to ask back a thing which had been lent, on receiving
it ran off. If his owner had requested that it should be given
to the slave, the owner bears the loss, but if he sent him in order
to remind the other, so that the thing lent might be sent back, the
loss falls on the person to whom it was lent *.


Pompontus (on Sabinus 11) If a man who has received a
loan should have judgment given against him in an action on loan
on the ground that the thing is not to be found, an undertaking
must be given him that if the owner finds it he will hand it over to
him. 1. If a man takes a thing for the purpose of trying it, and
makes some gain by it, suppose, for example, he takes horses, and
they are hired out [by him], he will have to hand over the exact
gain he makes to the person® who let him have them on trial ; no
one ought to be at liberty to make gain of anything until the thing
is held at his risk. 2. If a free man has been serving me in good
faith as a slave, and I lend him something, treating him as my slave,


‘ Omit edus. M.
* For qui commodatus read cur commodatum. Cf. M.


3 After preestabit ins. et. M.


14


15


16


17


TIT. VI] or the counter action 359


let us consider whether I can sue him in an action on loan [on
discovering him to be a free man]. Celsus the son used to say
that, if I had ordered such a man to do anything, I could take
proceedings against him either on mandatum or preescriptis verbis ;
from which it would follow that there is a similar rule in a case of
loan. It makes no difference that people who contract with a
free man, who serves them in good faith as a slave, do not do so
with the idea of putting him under a legal obligation, as, in fact,
it very often happens that over and above the intention at the
moment there arises a tacit obligation; an example of this is
a case in which money which is not owing is given by mistake
with the intention of discharging a debt.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 48) — If my slave lends you something
belonging to me as to which you know that I object to its being
lent you, this gives me a right of action on loan and of action for
theft and also a right of condictio for the return of it on the ground
of theft.


Pauwus (on the Edict 29) People can lend even the property
of other persons which they have in their possession, and that
although they possess it with the knowledge that it belongs to
someone else,


MARCELLUS (Digest 5) so that even a thief or a plunderer
who lends anything will have an action on loan.


PAavuLus (on the Edict 29) In a case of loan an agreement
that a person shall not be answerable for wilful wrong is not
enforceable. 1. The counter action on commodatum can be brought
even without the direct action, just as what are called counter
actions can in general. 2. Where the action on loan is brought in
consequence of something done by an heir of the borrower, judg-
ment will be given against him for the whole damages, even though
he is heir in respect of a share only. 3. Just as it is an act of free
bounty and good feeling rather than compulsory to make a loan to
anyone, so too it is for the person who confers the benefit to lay
down terms and limits with reference to it. But when this has
once been done, when, that is, the party has made the loan, then
such an act as that of laying down limits and going back on the
terms and depriving the other, at a wrong time, of the use of the
thing lent, is forbidden not only by good feeling, but also by the
obligation created by the handing over on one hand and the


18


360 The action on loan for use [BooK XIII


receiving on the other. Each party does something for the other
and consequently rights of action are allowed on both sides, so as
to leave no doubt that what was at first a matter of favour and
mere bounty takes the form of an interchange of performances
and of civil rights of action on both sides. We see something of
the same kind in the case of a man who has taken some steps in
the way of looking after the affairs of an absent man; such a one
cannot divest himself of all concern for things which are liable to
be lost, without being obliged to answer for it, as, if he had left the
business alone in the first instance, perhaps someone else would
have taken it up; taking up amandatwin is a matter of free choice,
but to carry it through isa necessity. It is on this principle that if
you lend me tablets for my debtor to use to give me an undertak-
ing, you have no right to ask for them back before the proper time,
as, if you had refused to lend them,:I should either have bought
others or else procured witnesses. It is the same thing if you lend
timber to shore up a set of flats, and then carry them away
again, or perhaps even lend me some which you know to be rotten ;
when something is done as a favour, a man ought to be the better
for it, not to be taken in. In such cases the rule is that the
counter action is available as well [as the direct one]. 4. If two
things have been lent, Vivianus sets down that the action for loan
can properly be brought for one of them by itself; what Pom-
ponius says is that this may be held to be true if they are quite
distinct things, but that a man who has lent a chariot or a litter
cannot properly bring an action about separate parts of it. 5. I
lost a thing which you lent me and I gave you its value instead,
after which the thing came into your hands ; Labeo holds that, if
I bring a counter action, you will have either to hand me over the
thing or else give me back what you received from me.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) In a case of anything being
lent, the sort of diligence to be exercised is such as any thoroughly
diligent owner bestows on his own things, so that the only mishaps
for which he is not responsible are those which cannot be resisted,
for example, deaths of slaves which happen without any dolaus or
negligence on his own part, attacks by robbers or enemies, the
machinations of pirates, shipwrecks, fires, the flight of slaves such as
it is not the ordinary rule to keep watch over. With regard to
what has just been said as to robbers, pirates and shipwrecks, we
must always understand this to apply where something has been
lent a man on terms which allow him to take it with him abroad ;


TT. VI] or the counter action 361


of course if I lend a man silver because he told me he was going
to ask some friends to dinner, and he takes it abroad with him,
then, beyond all doubt, he must answer for anything that happens
through pirates or robbers or shipwreck. All this is as I say if
the property was lent for the sake of the recipient only ; if it was
for the sake of both parties, for instance, where you and I have
invited a common friend to dinner, and you undertake to arrange
the whole affair, but I lend you the plate, 1 know some writers
hold that you need only answer for dolus; but it is worth consider-
ing whether it is not the fact that you are liable for negligence
too, the decision as to what amounts to negligence being made on
the same principles as in the case of things given in pledge or by
way of dos. 1. Wherever a thing given in pledge, or property that
is lent or deposited, has its value reduced by the act of the person
who receives it, the other party has the right to bring not only the
actions we have mentioned, but that on the Lea Aquilia too: but
if any of those first mentioned is brought, the right to the others
is taken away. 2. There may be sufficient grounds in the case to
make it the proper course for an action to be brought against the
lender, suppose, for example, the action is for expenses incurred in
respect of the slave’s health, or, in case he should take to flight, for
the purpose of seeking him out and bringing him back ; as for the
expense of his keep, that, you may say, will on natural principles
fall on the person who received him in order to make use of him.
It may be remarked that what is above said as to expense incurred
for the slave’s health or in consequence of his flight must be taken
to apply to outlay that is considerable in amount; as for the ex-
penditure of small sums, the rule on the whole is that it falls on
the person last mentioned, as does the cost of the slave’s keep.
3. Again, where a man lends defective vessels, then if the wine or
oil put into them should be spoilt or spilt, he must be ordered to
pay for it. 4. Moreover, wherever a man could recover anything
by means of a counter action, he can keep it in his hands even in
the direct action which is brought against him, that is, by exercis-
ing the right of set off. It is however possible that what the
borrower would have a right to recover on his side is more [than
what the lender sues for], or the judge declines to take the set off
into account, or no proceedings are taken against him for the
restoration of the thing lent for the reason that the thing itself
was accidentally destroyed, or it has been already restored without
application being made to the judge: so we shall have to say that
the counter action is necessary.


19


20


21


22


3620) The action on loan for use [BOOK XIII


JULIANUS (Digest 1) The rule that people who engage to
keep something or receive it to use are not answerabie for wrong-
ful damage done by another is beyond all doubt : how can people
secure by any care or diligence that somebody shall not do them
wrongful damage ?


THE SAME (on Urseius Ferox 3) If I give silver lent by
you to me to a slave of mine to bring to you, who is such a trust-
worthy man that no one need imagine that some set of rascals
would get round him, then, if such persons get hold of it, the loss
will be yours and not mine.


AFRICANUS (Questions 8) You lent mea thing, and then you
carried it off: after this, you brought an action on loan and I was
unaware that you had taken the thing, whereupon the judge ordered
me to pay and I did so; but I subsequently found out that the
thing had been carried off by you. The question was asked what
sort of action I could bring against you. The answer given was
that there could be no action for theft, but that I could have a
counter wétilis actio on the loap. 1. I, on a campaign, handed to
my comrades some vessels to be used at our common risk, and my
slave stole them and ran off with them to the enemy, but later on
the slave was captured without the vessels. It is clear that I have
a right of action against my comrades according to their respective
shares ; but they themselves can proceed against me for theft on
account of the act of my slave, as the noxa follows the delinquent
subject. And if I lend you a thing for you to use at your own
risk, and it is carried off by my slave, you can bring an action for
theft against me on account of the act of my slave.


Pauwus (on the Edict 22) If a slave whom I lent you commits
a theft [against you], the question arises whether all you have a
right to is the counter action on loan, just as that is the action
which you could bring where you had laid out money in the way
of medical expenses on the slave’s behalf, or you can bring an
action for theft. As to this, without any manner of doubt the
party who asked for the loan has a right to a noxal action for
theft, and the one who lent! is liable to a counter action on loan, if
he lent the slave with knowledge that such was his character but
the borrower was unaware of it.


1 After éenert ins. gui commodavit. M.,


23


TIT. VI | or the counter action 363


PoMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 22) If I lend you a horse
for you to use on the road to a particular spot, then, if the horse is
reduced in value by means of the journey without there being any
negligence of yours in the matter, you are not liable to an action
on loan: the fact is the negligence is mine, because I lent, for such
a long journey, a horse which was not able to stand the exertion.


Wait
ON THE ACTION ON PLEDGE OR THE COUNTER ACTION.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 40) A pledge can be contracted
not by delivery only, but even by bare agreement, though nothing
should be delivered. 1. We may consider then, in case a pledge
has been contracted by bare agreement, whether it is not the fact
that, supposing a man shows anyone some gold with the intimation
that he will hand it over by way of pledge, but he thereupon hands
over brass, he thereby makes a binding pledge of the gold, and it
is in keeping with the above that it is a pledge of the gold and not
of the brass, because to this last they did not agree. 2. Shoulda
man, however, in making a pledge of brass declare that it is gold
and hand it over by way of pledge accordingly, we may consider
whether he does not thereby make a binding pledge of the brass,
in short whether the true view is not that inasmuch as the parties
are agreed as to the individual article to be given, it is pledged
accordingly : and in fact this is the better opinion. At the same
time the party who gave it is hable to a counter action on pledge,
not to speak of the swindle (séedlionatus) which he commits.


POMPONIUS (07 Sabinus 6) If a debtor has sold and delivered
an article which he pledged, and you have lent him money which he
paid to the creditor to whom he gave the pledge, moreover you
have made an agreement with him that the thing which he has
already sold should be pledged with you, there is no doubt that
your agreement is inoperative, as you have accepted for a pledge a
thing which belonged to a third person ; and in fact it follows from
the above circumstances that the purchaser has come to have in his
hands an article which is released from the pledge, and the fact
that the article was released by means of money of yours is beside
the question.


364 On the action on pledge [BooK xMI


THE SAME (on Sabinus 18) If, in pursuance of an agreement
with your debtor that he will pay the money owing at once you
have given him back the article pledged, whereupon he has handed it
through the window to a person whom he has specially placed there
to receive it, then, according to Labeo, you can bring against your
debtor an action for theft and also an action for production ;
should you moreover bring the counter action on pledge, and the
debtor plead by way of exceptio that the thing pledged had been
given back to him, you can by way of rveplicatio allege dolus and
fraud, as in virtue of the fraud it will be held that the thing was
not given back at all but abstracted by a dishonest manoeuvre.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 41) If the parties have come to an
agreement as to the sale of the thing pledged, either at the first or
subsequently, then not only is a sale valid, but the purchaser at
once becomes owner of the thing. However, even where there has
been no agreement made about the sale of what is pledged, still the
law in force is that a sale is allowable, provided there is no agree-
ment that it should not be allowable ; but, if it was agreed that
there should be no sale, then, if the creditor sells, he is liable to an
action for theft, unless the debtor was three times called upon to
pay, and he did not do it.


PomMpPontius (on Sabinus 19) This is the rule, whether the
agreement was that there should be no sale at all or something has
been done in breach of the terms agreed to, either in reference to
the amount or a condition or the place of sale.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 35) Should it be agreed that you are
to be at liberty to sell the land which is pledged with you, still it
does not at all follow that you can be compelled to sell, even though
the person who gave you the pledge is insolvent, because the
assurance in question was given you for your own sake. However,
Atilicinus holds that on special cause shown the creditor can be
compelled to sell ; suppose, he says, the amount owed is much less
than the value of the thing pledged, and the latter can be sold just
now for more than it would fetch later on. Still, the better rule
would be that the person who gave the pledge should be able to
sell it, and pay the debt when he has received the purchase money,
it being understood that the creditor is compellable to allow the
property pledged to be inspected, if it is movable, provided the
debtor gives him a sufficient undertaking to save him harmless :


TIT. VII] or the counter action 365


the fact is that it would amount to cruelty that a creditor should
be compelled to sell against his will. 1. If the creditor sells the
land pledged with him for more than the amount of the debt, and
he lends the surplus at interest, he must pay over the interest
thereon to the person who gave him the pledge ; moreover, if he
uses the surplus himself, interest must equally be paid ; but if he
has been keeping it in his hands by way of deposit, he need not
pay any interest.


PauLus (Sentences 2) Should the creditor have allowed
some time to elapse before handing over the surplus which he was
allowed to keep on deposit, then, in consideration of his default, he
must be compelled to give the debtor interest too, such as the case
requires.


PompPontus (on Sabinus 35) If I incur some unavoidable
expense in the matter of a slave or a piece of land which I took by
way of security, I not only shall have a lien but even a right to the
counter action on pledge: suppose, for instance, on some occasion the
slave was ill, and I paid money to medical men, but he died, or,
again, say that I shored up or repaired a set of chambers and after
that it was burnt to the ground and | had nothing in my hands on
which I could exercise a lien. 1. If several slaves are given in
pledge, some of which the creditor sells for so much money, on the
understanding that he assures the purchaser against their being
recovered in virtue of superior title, and he thereupon pays himself
his debt, he can keep the remaining slaves until an undertaking is
given him that he shall be saved harmless in respect of whatever it
was that he promised with reference to the event of the other
slaves being recovered. 2. If one of the heirs of the debtor pays
his share of the debt, still the whole thing given by way of pledge
can lawfully be sold, just as it might be if the debtor himself had
paid a portion of the debt. 3. If I stipulate for money to be paid
me at the end of one, two and three years, and receive a pledge by
way of security, and I agree that unless on each day assigned for
payment the money is paid I shall be at liberty to sell the thing
pledged'!, what is held is that I cannot sell the thing until all the
sums have become payable, for the reason that by the above words
all three payments are pointed out, and it is not a fact that on each
day assigned for payment the money is not paid until all three days
have arrived. But when all three times for payment have passed,
then, if even one portion only should be unpaid, the pledge may be


1 See D. 13. 7. 34, and Gradenwitz, Interpolationen, 37.


366 On the action on pledge [BOOK XT


sold. Had the words been these:—“if any one payment should
fail to be made on the day assigned for it” [etc.] then the promisee!
would have a right to sue on the agreement at once 4. An
agreement as to the right to sell a pledge should be framed
generally so that everyone may be covered by it: but, even if it
extends only to the creditor himself, his heir also may lawfully sell,
if there has been no agreement contrary to this. 5. Where a
pledge may be sold by virtue of an agreement, it may be sold on
account not only of unpaid principal but also of other matters such
as interest and expenses incurred in respect of the property.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) If a debtor has given me by
way of pledge the property of a third person, or has behaved
in bad faith in relation to the pledge, the rule is that the
counter action is available. 1. A pledge may be given not only
for money but also on other accounts, for instance, where a man
gives a pledge to someone in order that he may become surety for
him. 2. Strictly speaking a thing is said to be pledged when it is
handed over to the creditor : where even possession does not pass
to the creditor we speak of hypothec. 3. For the action on pledge
to be available all the money must have been paid, or satisfaction
given in respect of it. By satisfaction given we mean satisfaction
in such form as approved itself to the creditor, though there was
no payment: whether he desired that security should be given to
him by other pledges in order that he should renounce this one, or
by sureties, or by the provision of another debtor, or by the
payment of a money consideration or by mere agreement, the
action on pledge is available. And the general rule may be laid
down that in all cases in which the creditor has consented to
release the pledge, satisfaction is held to have been given to him
if he has received the form of security he desired, even though he
committed an error of judgment in the matter. 4. One who has
given a third person’s property by way of pledge may bring the
action on pledge if he has paid the debt. 5. Though one who has
brought the action on pledge before payment has not brought it in
the proper way, nevertheless, if he offers the money at the hearing,
he is entitled to recover the pledged property and the amount of
his interest.


1 Tn text e7, not mihi.

2 This section is somewhat puzzling. The writer seems to think that the
sentences “on each day the money is paid” and “on each day the money is not
paid” express an exhaustive alternative.


10


11


TIT. VII] or the counter action 367


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) But if he is prepared not
to pay but to give satisfaction in some other way, say, for instance
he is willing to give an expromissor, this is of no service to him.


Uupianus (on the Edict 28) If issue is joined with a
debtor in respect of the debt, or a guarantor is sued, this is not
regarded as amounting to payment. 1. If the obligation on which
the debt rests is superseded (novata) this destroys the pledge,
unless there has been an agreement that the pledge shall be re-
newed. 2. If I take a pledge from you on the understanding that I
am going to hand over some money to you, and I do not hand it over,
I shall be liable to the action on pledge though there has been no
actual discharge by payment: the same rule applies if a formal
receipt has been given for the money lent, or the condition on which
the pledge was to depend has failed or a valid agreement has been
come to that no claim for the money shall be made. 3. If the
property was pledged in respect of the principal alone, or of the
interest, the action on pledge is available when that money has
been paid in respect of which the property was bound. But
whether the interest was expressly contracted for or not, in any
case if the property was pledged in respect of it also, the action on
pledge will not be available so long as any of it is unpaid. The
case is different with interest that a man has promised beyond the
statutory limit, for this is entirely unlawful. 4. If there are
several heirs to the creditor, and to one of these his share is paid,
the other heirs of the creditor ought not to suffer any injury, [on
account of this payment,] but having tendered to the debtor what
he has paid to their co-heir they may sell the whole property. This
opinion is not without foundation. 5. The money is regarded as
having been paid not only if the payment was made to the man to
whom the property was pledged, but also if it was made at his
wish to a third person, or to one whose heir he is, or to his
procurator, or to a slave appointed to collect debts. Accordingly
if you rent a house and let part of it to me, and I pay the rent to
your lessor, I can bring the action on pledge against you (for
Julian lays it down that payment may be made to him). Of course
the goods brought into the house by me will be liable only for the
amount at which I hired my room, for it is incredible that the
agreement can have been that my paltry things should be liable for
the whole of the rent. There is considered to have been a tacit
agreement with the owner of the house that he should have the
benefit not of the agreement of the lodging-house keeper but


12


13


14


15


368 On the action on pledge [BOOK X1II


of his own. 6. We do not acquire an obligation by pledge by
means of a free person: so fully is this the rule that in general we
cannot acquire it through a procurator or a tutor and thus they
themselves may be sued by the action on pledge. Nor is this
affected by the rule, enacted by our Emperor, that possession can
be acquired by means of a free person, for that rule operates to the
effect that we can obtain, through a procurator or a tutor, the
actual possession of a thing subjected to a pledge to us, but a free
person will not always acquire the obligation itself for us. 7. But
if my procurator or tutor gives a thing in pledge he himself can
bring the action on pledge: this applies in the case of a procurator
provided he had authority to give a pledge,


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 9) — or had been entrusted
with the general administration of the property of ene who was in
the habit of borrowing money on the security of pledges.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28)! If, when the creditor is selling
the pledge, an agreement is come to between him and the buyer
that if the debtor pays the price to the buyer he shall be entitled
to get his property back, Julianus holds, and there is a rescript
to the same effect, that as a result of this agreement the creditor
is compellable by the action on pledge to transfer to the debtor his
action on sale against the buyer. Moreover the debtor himself
can sue for recovery of the property, or bring an action tm factum
against the buyer. 1. In this action there is a liability both for
wilful wrongdoing and for negligence, as in the case of loan for use;
also, safe custody is required but there is no liability for vis maior.


PAuLus (on the Edict 29) Thus the same degree of care is
required of the creditor as a diligent owner commonly bestows on
his own affairs.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) Upon returning the pledge the
creditor should give the debtor security by way of personal under-
taking against dolus, and if the property pledged was land, he must
also give him an undertaking as to [the completeness of | his right,
in case servitudes should have been lost, through failure of the
creditor to exercise them.


' For trigensimo read vicensimo. Cf. M. and Lenel, Ed. Perp. (2) 246, n. 4.


16


oe: Vvi0l or the counter action 369


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) If a tutor pledges the property
of his ward in conditions which do not conflict with statutory rules,
the pledge is valid, assuming that he receives the money for the
purposes of the ward. The rule is the same in the case of the
curator of a minor or lunatic. 1. It is clear that the creditor has
a counter action on pledge. Accordingly if [the debtor] gives
property which belongs to a third person, or is pledged to a third
person or to the State, he is liable to this action though he is also
liable to prosecution for swindling (stel/ionatus). But is this so
only if he was aware of the facts or also if he acted in ignorance ?
So far as concerns the prosecution ignorance is a defence: in the
case of the counter action, ignorance is, as Marcellus tells us
(Digest b. 6), no excuse. But if the creditor takes the thing knowing
that it is the property of a third person, or pledged, or unsound, the
counter action is not available to him. 2. Even land held on per-
petual lease (vectigale predium) may be pledged, as may also a
surface right (swperficiarium), since nowadays actiones utiles are
given to holders of these surface rights.


MARCIANUS (on the hypothecary formula) However, the
Divine Severus and Antoninus have provided by rescript that the
pledge will be without prejudice to the chief-rent.


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) If we have agreed that a claim
against a debtor of mine shall be pledged to you, this agreement
is to be maintained by the Preetor, so that he will protect both
you in suing for the money and the debtor if I sue him. Accord-
ingly if it was a money debt, you will set off against your claim
the money you recover : if it was any specific thing, you will hold
what you recover by way of pledge. 1. If the bare ownership is
pledged a usufruct which afterwards falls in will be included in the
pledge: the rule is the same in the case of alluvion. 2. If pledged
land is sold the pledge still subsists, since the land passes subject
to its incidents as in the case of a child born to a slave woman
after sale. 3. If a person has made an agreement that a wood
shall be pledged to him, Cassius holds that a ship built of this
material is not subject to the pledge, for the material is one thing,
the ship another, and therefore it is proper to add expressly in
giving the pledge: “ Whatever is made or grows out of this! wood.”
4. If a slave pledges a thing belonging to the peculium, this is to
be upheld if he had the right of free administration of the peewiwm.
For he can also alienate these things.

1 After ex insert ea. M.


M. J. IL. 24


19


20


21


22


370 On the action on pledge [BOOK XII


MARCIANUS (on the hypothecary formula) We must under-
stand the same rules to be laid down in the case also of a
Jiliusfamulias.


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) A third person’s property may be
given in pledge with the consent of the owner: and, further, if it
is given without his knowledge, and he ratifies the transaction, the
pledge will be valid. 1. If a thing is pledged to several persons
at the same time, the legal position of them all is the same. 2. If
it is the creditor’s fault that the money is not paid to him, the
action on pledge may rightly be brought. 3. In some cases,
even though the money has been paid, the action on pledge should
be refused : for instance, if the creditor has bought his pledge
from the debtor.


THE SAME (Short notes 6) Where a house is given in pledge
the site also is subject to the pledge, for it is a part of the house.
And, conversely, a building erected is subject to the rights over the
soil.


ULpriaNnus (on the Edict 30) If a pledge has been stolen
and the creditor brings the action for fwrtwm, Papinianus holds
that he must set off against the debt whatever he recovers, and
this is true even though the jfurtwm was committed as a con-
sequence of negligence on the part of the creditor. This is to be
laid down still more strongly in relation to what he has recovered
by the condictio. We must however consider whether what the
debtor himself has paid under an action for fwrtwm or the condictio |
is to be set off against the debt: and it is uniformly laid down,
both by textbooks and in practice, that there is no obligation to
restore to him what he himself has paid under an action for
Jurtum. So says Papinianus (Questions b. 9). 1. Papinianus lays
down the same rule for the case in which the creditor, under the
influence of fear, has handed back to the debtor a pledged slave
whom he had received in good faith as security, for if he brings the
action founded on putting in fear and recovers fourfold, he will
neither give back anything out of what he has received nor set it
off against the debt. 2. If a thief gives property in pledge, the
action on pledge is open to him in respect of produce also,
although he himself will not acquire produce (for there is a right
to bring against a thief both a vindication for existing produce and
a condictio for that which has been consumed): he will therefore
derive advantage from the fact that the creditor was a bona jide


23


TIT. Vit] or the counter action 371


possessor. 3. If, when the pledged property has been sold, the
debtor, who has obtained permissive occupancy of the property, or
has hired it, fails to give it up, he is liable under the counter action.
4, Where the creditor on the sale of the pledge gave a promise
of double damages (this having been the ordinary practice and he
having been sued on account of a claim of superior title (evictio) and
condemned), can he avail himself of the counter action on pledge ?
It may be said that he has this resource provided that he sold in
this way without dolus or carelessness, and conducted the affair
like a careful owner. But if such a sale brought no advantage
with it, but he was selling for what he could have got for the
property even if he had not made this promise, then he cannot fall
back [on this action],


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 8) and thus he will not be
able to recover from the debtor more than the amount! of the debt.
But if there had been a stipulation for interest, and, five years, let us
say, after having received? the price of the pledged property, being
defeated [in an action for the double damages], he pays them to
the buyer, he can recover from the debtor the interest for the
intervening time, since it has become clear that nothing has been
paid him in such a manner that it cannot be taken away.
But if he has paid merely the single price he will be barred by
an exceptio, on the ground of dolus, from a claim of interest,
since he has had the use of the price which he had received from
the buyer.


ULPIANus (on the Edict 30) The point has been acutely
put to me: if the creditor has obtained from Cesar a decree that
he shall possess the pledge [as his own] and it has been recovered
from him by superior title, has he the counter action on pledge ?
As to this it seems to me that the obligation of pledge is at an end
and that there has been an abandonment of the contract. On the
other hand, the wét/is actio on purchase is at his disposal, as if the
property had been given to him by way of payment, so as to give
him satisfaction up to the amount of the debt, or of his interest,
and the creditor may have a right of set off, if, as it happens, an
action is brought against him on pledge or on any other ground.
1. The question is asked, whether one who has paid the creditor
with bad money has the action on pledge, as having paid the money


! For summa read summam. Cf. M.
? After obligata read consecutus est. Of. M.


24—2


25


372 On the action on pledge [BOOK XII


due. And it is settled Jaw that he is neither entitled to bring the
action on pledge nor released from the debt, for bad money does
not release one who pays it: the coins ought in fact to be returned
to him. 2. If the creditor has actually sold the pledge for more
than was due, but has not yet recovered the price from the buyer,
can he be sued by the action on pledge for payment of the excess,
or, rather, ought the debtor! either to wait till the buyer pays, or
to take transfer of actions against him? J hold that the creditor
is not to be forced to make payment, but that either the debtor
should wait, or, if he does not wait, the actions against the buyer
should be assigned to him, at the risk, nevertheless, of the vendor.
If however he has already received the money, he must hand over
the excess. 3. If the creditor has misused pledged property, or has
injured the health of slaves, account is taken of this in the action
on pledge. Of course if, on account of their misconduct, the
creditor has punished them, or put them in irons, or sent them
before the preefectus or preeses it must be said that he is not liable
to the action on pledge. Consequently if he has prostituted a
female slave, or compelled her to do any other discreditable act,
the pledge of the woman is at once discharged.


THE SAME (on the Edict 31) If the creditor has given the
pledged slaves instruction in handicrafts, there will be the counter
action if they had already learnt something of them, or it was with
the debtor’s consent. If indeed neither of these was the case, but
it was in necessary handicrafts, there will be the counter action,
but not so that the debtor will be compelled to go without the
slaves by reason of the magnitude of the charges. For just as
his liability for dolus and carelessness does not permit him to
neglect the thing?, so also he must not put the pledged property
into such a condition that the recovery of it is burdensome to the
debtor : suppose for instance a large tract of land is pledged by
a man who is hardly able to redeem it, much less to cultivate it,
and you, having taken it as a pledge, put it into such a state of
cultivation as to make it of great value : indeed, the truth is that it
is not fair that I should be forced to seek other creditors, or to sell
what I wished to get back, or to abandon it to you under pressure
of poverty. These points should therefore be considered by the
judge, taking a middle line, so that he should pay attention neither
to a debtor making much of trifles, nor to a creditor inclined to
overburden the debtor.


1 After debeat ins. debitor. M. 2 After creditorem ins. rem. M.


26


27


28


29


30


TIT. VII] or the counter action 373


THE SAME (Disputations 3) There is nothing surprising in
the fact that a pledge is created where a magistrate for any reason
puts a person into possession of property, since our Emperor, with
his father, has frequently laid it down by rescript that a pledge can
be created also by will. 1. It should be noted that where a pledge
is created by a magistrate’s order, it is not established until actual
possession is taken.


THE SAME (Opinions 6) A debtor who had not the money
at hand gave his creditor, who was asking for the return of a loan,
certain articles in gold, that he might give them in pledge to an-
other creditor. If the person who received them from the debtor
holds them freed by payment and recovered [from the man to
whom he pledged them] he is compellable to produce them. But
if they are still in the hands of the creditor’s creditor, they are
considered as bound with the consent of the owner. But the
appropriate action is available to the owner of them against his
creditor to compel delivery of them when they are released.


JULIANUS (Digest 11) If a creditor who has taken a thing
in pledge, having lost possession of it, brings the Servian action
and recovers damages, the debtor afterwards suing for the same
thing will be repelled by an eaceptio, unless he offers to him [who
holds it] what was paid for it. 1. If a slave takes a pledge on
account of the peculiwm, the action on pledge is available to the
debtor against the master.


THE SAME (Digest 44) If you buy a third person’s property
in good faith, and pledge it to me, and take it back in permissive
occupancy (precario), and thereafter the owner makes me his heir,
the pledge ceases and only the permissive occupancy will survive :
for this reason your wsucapio will be interrupted.


Pauuus (Epitomes of the Digest of Alfenus Varus 5) One
who had lent money, to a man who traded with a lighter, detained
the lighter in the river on his own authority, as the money was not
paid on the agreed day. Then the river rose and carried away the
lighter. The answer was that if he had detained it without the
consent of the lighterman, the lighter was at his risk, but that if
the debtor had allowed it to be detained, by his consent, negligence
alone must be made good to him, not vis maior.


31


32


33


34


35


36


374 On the action on pledge [BOOK XIII


AFRICANUS (Questions 8) If a slave given in pledge commits
Jurtum against the creditor, it is open to the debtor to abandon
the slave by way of surrender for noxa. But if he gave him to me
in pledge knowing that he was a thief, though he is ready to leave
him with me, as surrendered ‘for noxa, nevertheless I shall have
the action on pledge, for an indemnity. Julianus says that the
same rules are to be observed also if a slave deposited or lent
commits furtum.


MARCIANUS (Rules 4) A creditor can bring the counter
action on pledge against a debtor who has given a third person’s
property as a pledge, even though the debtor is solvent.


THE SAME (on the hypothecary formula) If the debtor has
paid the money he can bring the action on pledge to recover
property given in antichresis, for since there is a pledge he can
use this word [in his claim].


MARCELLUS (Responsa) Where Titius had lent money to
Sempronius, and taken a pledge for it, and because the money was
not paid the creditor was about to sell the pledge’, [the debtor]
asked the creditor to buy the land at a certain price, and at the time
of his request wrote a letter by which he declared that he had sold
the land to the creditor. I ask whether the debtor can revoke this
sale on offering the principal and interest which are due. Marcellus
answered that on the facts stated he cannot revoke it.


FLORENTINUS (Institutes 8) When something is due on
account of both principal and interest from one who owes money
secured by pledges, whatever is received from the sale of pledges
is to be credited in the first instance to interest which is admittedly
due at that time, and then, if there is anything over, to the
principal. In fact a debtor is not to be listened to, who when he
knows that he is not solvent expresses a choice as to the obligation
from which he prefers his pledge to be freed. 1. Pledge transfers
only possession to the creditor, the ownership of the debtor being
unaffected : he may however enjoy his property both by permissive
occupancy and by hiring.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 11) The question has been raised
in what way a person is liable who in a case of pledge gives the
creditor brass in substitution for gold. Sabinus observes most


1 M. would insert rem after eam. See A. ¢. 8. 3 and Gradenwitz, Jnterpola-
tionen, 37.


37


«638


39


TIT. vit] or the counter action 375


correctly on this case, that if, when gold has in fact been given, he
substitutes brass, he is liable for theft, but that if he substitutes
brass at the time of delivery he has behaved in a rascally way,
but is not a thief. However, in this case also I think the action
on pledge will apply, and so Pomponius holds. Moreover, as has
been repeatedly laid down by rescript, he wili be punished under
the extraordinary procedure (extra ordinem) on the ground of
swindling (stellionatus). 1. Add that if anyone knowingly and
deliberately gives me the property of a third person in pledge,
or pledges to me what is already charged to someone else, and
does not tell me of this, he will be punished under the same
charge. Of course if the thing is of great value and is pledged
for a small amount of money, it should be said that not only is
the accusation of swindling inapplicable, but so also are the actions
on pledge and on dolus, the fact being that the person who took
the second pledge was in no way defrauded.


PauLus (on Plautius 5) If I let on hire to the owner a
pledge which has been delivered to me I retain possession by
the letting, for before the debtor hired the thing he had not the
possession of it, while I have the intention of retaining pos-
session, and, again, the hirer has no intention of acquiring it.


MopDESTINUS (Defferences 1) On account of the risk of the
action on pledge, the sanction of a tutor is necessary to a pupzllus
who takes a pledge.


THE SAME (Responsa 4) Gaius Seius gave his land to Lucius
Titius in pledge, on account of money lent. Later, an agreement
was made between them that the creditor should possess the pledge
for a certain time, as a set off against his money. However, before
this time had expired, the creditor, in declaring his last wishes,
provided by his will that one of his sons should have this land,
and added “which I bought from Lucius Titius',’ whereas he had
not bought it. Gaius Seius, who was the debtor, also amongst
others signed this will. I ask whether by the fact that he signed
it he prejudiced himself in any way, since no instrument of sale is
produced, but only the agreement that the creditor should take the
produce for a certain time. Herennius Modestinus answered that
the contract of pledge was not affected by the fact that the debtor
had signed the will of the creditor in which he declared that he
had bought the pledge.


1 Probably this should be Gaius Seius.


40


41


42


43


376 On the action on pledge [BOOK XU


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 3) A debtor cannot validly buy from
the creditor a pledge he has given, since a purchase of one’s own
property is void, nor, if he buys it for less than the debt, and claims
the pledge, or vindicates the ownership, is the creditor bound to
restore possession to him, unless he offers the whole of the debt.
1. The debtor’s son who is still in the potestas of his father cannot
effectively acquire the pledge from his father’s creditor with money
of his peculium, and thus, if the patron of the debtor has obtained
bonorum possessio in opposition to the provisions of the will he
will acquire the ownership of a half!. For the pledge is released
by the money which the son paid by way of price out of what
belonged to his father. 2. When the money is paid the creditor
ought to restore the possession of the pledge which was actually
with him, and the debtor? is not required to pay any more.
Accordingly if the creditor has meanwhile himself given the pledge
as security, when the debtor has paid the money which he owed, no
action will be given in respect of the second pledge, nor will any
right of retention remain.


PAULUS (Questions 3) You gave a third person’s property
in pledge and thereafter you became owner of the property: an
actio utilis on the pledge is given to the creditor. The same rule
is not to be laid down if I become heir to Titius who has given my
property as security without my consent, for in a case of this kind
the right to recover the pledge is not to be granted to the creditor :
it does not necessarily suffice in order to make the actio utilis on
pledge available that the owner is the same person as he who
owes the money. But if he had agreed to the pledge, so that a
point can be made of his trickery, he cannot fairly oppose the
bringing of the actio utilis against him.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 3) In the action which lies on
account of the giving of a pledge, the creditor is compelled by law
to give back with interest the excess of the price [over the debt]
and he is not to be heard if he seeks to substitute the buyer as
defendant (delegare), since in the sale, which takes place under a
pact®, the creditor is carrying out a transaction of his own.


ScavoLa (Digest 5) A man gave a vacant plot of land as
security to a creditor, and handed over the instrument of purchase.
When he wanted to build on the land, a dispute having been raised


1 See Inst. m1. vii. 2. * After cogitur add debitor. M.
3 For facto read pacto. Cf. M.


TIT. vit] or the counter action 377


with him by the adjoining owner as to the width of the land, which
he could not otherwise prove, he asked the creditor to produce the
document of title handed over by him. As the creditor did not
produce it he erected a smaller building and thus suffered damage.
It was asked whether if the creditor claims the money or vindicates
the pledge, supposing an eaxceptio doli is set up, the judge ought
to take account of this damage. The answer was that if there was
no intent that the debtor should be wronged by being deprived of
the use of the instrument, he can bring the action on pledge when
he has paid the money, but if the refusal was with that intent then
there will also be an action for the amount of his interest against
the creditor even before the money is paid. 1. Titius! borrowed
money from Gaius Seius under a pledge of leather sacks. At a
time when Seius had these sacks in his granary, a centurion sent
from the office of food supply carried them off for commissariat
purposes. They were afterwards recovered on the application of
Gaius Seius the creditor. I ask whether Titius the debtor, or
Seius the creditor, ought to bear the damage caused by this use of
them. The answer was that on the facts stated [Seius]? was not
liable for the damage due to this cause.


1 Omit cum. M. 2M.


1


FOURTEENTH BOOK.


ON THE EXERCITORIAN ACTION.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) The usefulness of this Edict
is known by all to be indisputable. People every now and then
enter into contractual relations with masters of vessels, to meet
the necessities incurred on a voyage, without knowing what is
their class or character, and it was therefore right that the person
who appointed the master for the ship should be bound by the
contract just as is a person who has placed an énstitor (commercial
agent) at the head of a shop or a business, it being in fact more
necessary to make an agreement with the master of a ship than
with a commercial agent ; as the circumstances of the case make
it easy for the party to form an opinion as to what the class of
persons is to which the ¢nséitor belongs and make a contract
accordingly, but with the master of a ship the case is different,
since, not uncommonly, place and time do not admit of a fuller
judgment being arrived at. 1. By “master of a ship” we must
understand the person who is entrusted with the care of the whole
ship: 2. but should the agreement be made with one of the seamen,
no action is allowed to be brought against the exercitor, although
an action is allowed against him founded on a delict on the part of
any one of those who are on board the vessel to aid in the naviga-
tion. The reason for this is that the ground of action in the case
of the contract is a very different thing from the ground in the case
of the delict, seeing that a man who appoints a master to a ship
allows contracts to be made with him, but a man who engages
seamen does not authorize contracts being made with them, though
he is bound to see that they behave with no negligence or dolus.
3. Masters are appointed for the business of letting vessels for the
purpose of cargo or for passengers’ or to buy gear, but if a master


1 Omit conducendis. Cf. M.


TIT. I] On the Exercitorian Action 379


is appointed for the purchase or sale of wares, his act will bind the
exercitor in these cases too. 4. It is of no consequence what is the
rank of such a master, whether, for example, he is free or a slave,
and, [if a slave,] whether he belongs to the exercitor or to someone
else, nor will it matter what his age is; as the party appointing
has only himself to blame [if he made a bad appointment]. 5. The
law recognizes as master not only one who was appointed as such
by the exercitor, but one who was appointed by a master ; this is
in fact an opinion given by Julianus as to a case on which he was
consulted where the exercitor was not aware [of the appointment] ;
where, however, he is aware and he has allowed the person so
appointed to discharge the office in question on the vessel, he is
regarded as having put the person there himself. This appears to
me to be a reasonable view ; if I appointed a master, I am bound
to make good whatever he does, otherwise those who contract with
him will be disappointed, and the rule ought to be applied in the
case of a master still more readily than in that of an dnstitor, on
grounds of public utility. What are we to say then if the exercitor,
in appointing a master, laid down that the man appointed was not
to be at liberty to appoint someone else? It is a point to be
considered whether the opinion of Julianus is still to be followed.
Suppose, indeed, he forbad the appointee in express terms such as
these, ‘“ You are not to employ Titius as master.” However, we
shall have to say that the principle of consulting the interest of
marine commerce requires us to go even to this length. 6. The
word ship (navis) must be applied to seafaring vessels or to those
used in rivers or in the course of navigating in lakes, or to rafts.
7. The Preetor does not allowa right of action against an exercitor
on every kind of ground, but only in connexion with the particular
kind of case for which [the master] was appointed, I mean where
he was appointed to deal with cases of that kind ; the ship may,
for example, have been let out for the carriage of goods, or [the
master] may have bought things which are useful to one who is
navigating a ship or he may have engaged to pay or may have paid
money with a view to repairs of the ship, or the crew may sue for
their wages. 8. Suppose the master borrowed a sum of money,
will this be held to be done on account of the matter in hand? As
to this, Pegasus is of opinion that if he borrowed money in further-
ance of the business for which he was appointed, an action
ought to be allowed, and with this opinion I agree; how if he
borrowed it in order to fit out or equip the ship or to provide
sailors? 9. Here Ofilius raises the question,—supposing the


380 On the Exercitorian Action [BOOK XIV


master borrows money for the purpose of repairs to the ship and
converts them to his own use, will an action be allowed against the
exercitor? To which his own answer is that if the master received
the money with the express agreement that he would spend it on
the ship, but after that he changed his mind, the exercitor was
bound and had himself to blame for appointing such a man master ;
but if from the very first he entertained the idea of defrauding the
person who lent the money, and particularly avoided saying that
he took the money for purposes connected with the ship, the
conclusion must be different, and this distinction is approved by
Pedius. 10. On the other hand, if the master practises deceit as
to the prices of things which are sold to him, the loss must fall
on the exercitor and not on the person to whom money is owing.
11. Again, if the master borrows money from a third person and
pays off the one who lent money for repairs of the ship, I should
say that such a lender must be allowed to bring an action, just as
if he had lent for the purposes of the ship. 12. The fact is, it is
the appointment which lays down the terms binding on the con-
tracting parties ; so that, if the master was appointed for the ship
on the understanding only that he was to collect freight, but not
that he was to let out [spaces on the vessel], the evercitor having,
it may be, let out [such spaces] himself, the exercitor will not be
liable, if the master lets; or, if the understanding was that he
might let but not that he might demand freight, a similar rule will
apply ; or if it was that he should contract with passengers but
not offer the use of the ship for carrying cargo, or the converse,
then, if he transgress the restrictions laid down for him, he will
not thereby put the exercitor under any liability. We may add
that if the master was appointed in order that he should hire out
the ship for the carriage of goods of a specified kind, say vegetables
or hemp, and he should agree to carry marble or other materials*
of any kind, the rule is that the exercitor is not bound. The truth
is that some ships are transport vessels and some, to use the
common word (ut ipsi dicunt), are passenger vessels (¢7Batnyot),
and there are, to my knowledge, a great many shipowners who tell
the masters that they must not carry passengers, moreover, that
business is to be done only in some particular parts and particular
seas, for instance, there are ships which carry passengers to
Brundisium from Cassiopa or Dyrrhachium but are not fit to
take cargo, again, some are suitable for river navigation but are
not fitted for sea voyages. 13. Should there be several masters
1 Kor alia materia read aliw materie. Cf. M.


TIT. 1] On the Exercitorian Action 381


appointed without the duties being distributed amongst them,
a contract made with any one of them will be binding on the
exercitor, but if their respective duties are assigned, so that one
may let out [space in the vessel] and another take freight, then
the exercitor will be bound by any one who acts within his duty.
14. Should however the terms of the appointment be, as they often
are, that no person appointed is to make any contract apart from
the others or other, anybody who contracts with one only will have
himself to blame for it. 15. The term exercitor is understood to
mean the person by whom all proceeds and payments are received,
whether he is the owner of the vessel or he hired the vessel at a
lump sum either for temporary use or altogether. 16. Whether
the person who acts as ewercitor is a man or a woman, sui iwris or
under potestas or is a slave, is a matter of small account ; but for a
person sui zwris under age to be exercitor, the law requires the
concurrence of his guardian. 17. People are allowed to choose
whether they would like to sue the exercitor or the master. 18. On
the other hand, [the Preetor] does not hold out a right of action!
to the exercitor against persons who contracted with the master,
because he did not require to be aided in the same way ; but he
can sue the master ex locato, if he is furnishing his services for a
pecuniary payment, or, if he serves gratuitously, he can sue him
ex mandato. Of course the prefecti, on account of the service of
the food supply, and, in the provinces, the presides of the provinces
are in the habit of coming to their assistance by the extraordinary
procedure (extra ordinem) in the matter of contract by masters
of vessels. 19. If the exercitor of a ship is in the potestas of
another person, and carries on the business with his approval, an
action lies, on account of transactions with the shipmaster, against
the person in whose potestas the exercitor is. 20. But though an
action lies against him in whose poftestas the exercitor is, still, it is
available only if he carries on the business with his consent. The
reason why the person who has the exercitor in his potestas is
liable in full by reason of consent is that shipowning is of the
highest public importance. But the employment of institores is
not equally beneficial: for that reason those who have contracted
with one who is, to the knowledge of his master, carrying on a
business with property of the peculium are entitled only to take
their share in the distribution [of the peculium]. But if the
transaction with the shipmaster was merely with the master’s
knowledge and not also with his assent, are we to allow a claim


1 For actio non read actionem non. Cf. M.


382 On the Exercitorian Action [BOOK XIV


in full as in the case of an assenting master, or shall we give an
action on the lines of the actio tributoria? In these doubtful
conditions it is better to follow strictly the words of the edict and
not to penalise the mere bare knowledge of the father or master in
the case of ships, or, in the case of trading with property of the
peculium, to give such an extended meaning to consent as to
create an obligation for the full amount of the claim. In accord-
ance with this Pomponius also seems so to lay it down for the case
of one who is in the potestas of another : if he conducts the business
with assent the master is liable in full, in cases short of this only to
the extent of the peculiwm. 21. We must understand the expres-
sion “in potestas” to cover those of both sexes, sons and daughters,
male and female slaves. 22. If a slave forming part of a peculiawm
acts as exercitor with consent of the son in whose peculiwm he is,
or an underslave does so with that of the slave, the father or
master who has not lent his approval will be liable only to the
extent of the peculium, but the son himself will be liable in full.
Of course if they carry on the business with the consent of the
father or master these will be liable for the whole claim, and, in
addition, the son if he himself also assented, will be liable in full.
23. However, although the Preetor promises the action only if the
transaction is with his shipmaster, yet, as Julian has also observed,
the father or master will be liable in full even though the contract
is with the exercitor himself. 24. This action against the
exercitor lies in respect of the shipmaster, and thus if either of
them has been sued, there can be no action against the other.
Supposing some part of the money is paid, if this is by the ship-
master the obligation is reduced by direct operation of law (épso
wwre) ; if it is by the exercitor, then, whether he pays on his own
account, that is in view of the “honorary” obligation, or on behalf
of the shipmaster, the obligation is reduced, since a third person
also, who pays for me, frees me from the debt. 25. If several
persons are jointly exercitores in respect of a ship, the claim for
the full amount can be brought against any one of them,


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) in order that a person
who contracted with one may not be compelled to split up his
claim amongst several opponents,


PAULUS (on the Edict 9) and it does not matter in the least
what share each of them has in the ship: the one who has paid
will recover from the others in the action on partnership.


Tn; 1] On the Exercitorian Action 383


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29%) If, however, several exercitores
manage the ship themselves, they are to be sued each to the extent
of his share in the business ; for they are not to be considered as
acting as shipmasters for each other. 1. But where several exer-
citores have appointed one of their number to be shipmaster any
of them will be liable to be sued on his account for the whole
claim. 2. If a slave belonging to more than one person acts as
exercitor with their assent, the law is the same as in the case of a
plurality of exercitores. Evidently if he did it with the assent of
one of them that one will be liable for the whole claim, and,
accordingly, I consider that, in the case before mentioned, each of
them is liable in full. 3. If it is a slave who was exercitor of a ship
with the assent of his owner and he is alienated, the man who has
alienated him is, none the less, liable in full. In the same way he
will be liable though the slave dies, for the principal is also liable
after the death of the shipmaster. 4. These actions will be available
without limitation of time and both to and against heirs; ac-
cordingly if a slave dies, who was exercitor with his master’s
consent, the action will be available after a year has expired,
though the action on peculium is not available after the year.


PAULUS (on the Edict 29) If you employ as shipmaster one
who is in my potestas I also shall have an action against you if
I make any contract with him: the same rule applies if he is owned
in common by us. You will however have an action against me on
the contract of letting, because you hired the services of my slave,
since even if he had contracted with a third person you could sue
me for a transfer of the rights of action which I held on account of
him, just as you could have proceeded against a freeman if you had
in fact hired one: if however the services were gratuitous you can
bring an action on mandatum. 1. In the same way if my slave is
exercitor of a ship and I contract with his shipmaster, there will
be nothing to bar me from bringing against the shipmaster any
action to which I am entitled by either civil or “honorary” law:
this edict does not in fact bar any other person at all from pro-
ceeding against the shipmaster, for no transfer of any action is
effected by this edict, but one is added. 2. If one of these
exercitores contracts with the shipmaster, he will be able to sue
the others.


Pauwtus (Short notes 6) Where a slave is exercitor of a
ship without his master’s assent, if it is with his knowledge there


1 The reference should be to b. 28. Cf. M. and Lenel, Ed. Perp. (2) 248.


384 On the Exercitorian Action [BOOK XIV


is an action on the lines of the actio tributoria; if he does not
know of it there will be an action on the peculium. 1. If a
common slave is exercitor of a ship, with the consent of his
masters, an action for the full amount due should be given
against any of them singly.


7 AFRICANUS (Questions 8) Lucius Titius appointed Stichus
as master of a ship!: he, having borrowed money, gave an ac-
knowledgment that he had received it for the purpose of repair
of the ship. The question was raised whether Titius was liable to
the exercitorian action only if the creditor proved that the money
had been spent in repairs to the vessel. The answer was that the
creditor could effectively sue if at the time when the money was
lent, the ship was in such a condition that it needed to be repaired:
for while it is not reasonable that the creditor should be driven to
this, that he should himself undertake the repair of the ship, and
attend to the owner’s business (which would certainly be the result
if he had to show that the money had been spent in repairs), yet
this may be required, that he shall know that he is lending for the
purpose for which the appointment as shipmaster was made. And
this certainly cannot be the case unless he knows this also, that the
money is needed for repairs. From this it follows that even if the
ship was in need of repair, yet, if much more money was lent than
was wanted for the purpose, an action for the full amount ought
not to be allowed against the owner of the ship. 1. Sometimes
the question must also be taken into account whether the money
was lent at a place in which the things on account of which it was
lent could be acquired : what, in fact, are we to say, our authority
asks, in a case in which money is lent for the purchase of a sail at
an island such that a sail is absolutely not to be had there? To
put it shortly, the creditor is bound to show some care in the
matter?, 2. Our authority remarks that practically the same
rules are to be laid down also if the institorian action is under
discussion, for in that case also the creditor is required to know
that this was a necessary acquisition of the goods for the purchase
of which the slave was appointed, and that the fact that he lent it
for this purpose suffices: it is not also to be required that he
should himself undertake the burden of seeing to the application
of the money to that purpose’®.


1 For navis read navi. Cf. M.
2 After ea ins. re.” M.
3 Text corrupt, but this seems to be the meaning. Cf. M.


TIT. 11] On the Rhodian Law of Jettison 385


Il.
ON THE RHODIAN LAW OF JETTISON.


PAULUS (Sentences 2) It is provided by the Rhodian Law
that if merchandise is thrown overboard to lighten the ship, the
loss occasioned for the benefit of all must be made good by the
contribution of all.


THE SAME (on the Edict 34) When jettison has been made
on account of the labouring of the ship, the owners of the lost
goods ought to sue the master of the ship ea locato, that is, if they
had handed over their goods for carriage under a contract of
locatio: he can then proceed ex conducto against the others, whose
goods have been preserved, so that the loss may be distributed, in
proportion. Servius, in fact, gave a responsum to the effect that
they ought to sue the shipmaster ex /ocato requiring him to hold
the goods of the other passengers till they make good their share
of the loss. In any case, even though he does not! retain posses-
sion of the goods he will have independently an action ex locato
against the passengers. For what are we to say if there are
passengers who have no packages”? Clearly the more convenient
plan is to hold the merchandise if there is any. But if one has not
hired the whole of the ship he can proceed ex conducto like
passengers who have hired accommodation on her, for it is
eminently just that the burden should be shared by those who have
secured, by the loss of others’ goods, the advantage that their own
goods are preserved. 1. If there is no loss of merchandise, but the
ship is damaged or loses some of her rigging, there will be no
general contribution, for those things which are provided for the
purposes of the ship are in a different position from those on
account of which one has received freight money : to take a similar
case, if a smith breaks an anvil or a hammer this will not be
charged against the person who employed him to do the work.
But if this damage was done at the wish of the passengers*, under
the influence of fear, it must be made good. 2. Ina case in which
a number of traders had brought together on the ship various kinds

1 After etst ins. non. M.


9


2 Ze. have only valuables about their persons. Pothier.
3 After vectorum, omit vel. M.


bo
or


M, J. II.


386 On the Rhodian Law of Jettison [Book xIv


of merchandise, and, in addition, many passengers, free and slave,
had taken passage in her, upon the arising of a great storm, goods
had been of necessity thrown overboard. Thereupon these points
arose for discussion: whether all must contribute for the jettison,
even those, if any, who had brought on board only goods which did
not burden the ship, such as precious stones and pearls, and what
proportion was to be paid, and whether anything was to be paid in
respect of freemen, and by what action the matter could be
adjusted. The rule laid down was that all to whom it was advan-
tageous that the jettison should be made must share the loss, for
they owed the tribute on account of the preservation of their
goods!, and, as a consequence, even the owner of the ship was
liable in proportion. The amount of the loss must be divided in
proportion to the value of the goods. No valuation can be made
of free persons. The owners of the lost goods will sue the sailor,
that is the shipmaster, ex conducto. In the same way it was
discussed whether a valuation was to be made of each man’s
clothing and of rings, and the view held was that everything must
be taken into account except what might have been brought on
board for consumption, which would include food-stuffs, there
being the stronger reason in this case that, if at any time there was
a shortage of these on the voyage’, each one would bring what he
had into the common stock. 3. If the ship has been ransomed
from pirates, Servius, Ofilius and Labeo hold that all must contri-
bute, but as for what is taken away by the plunderers, the loss
must fall on him to whom it belonged?, and no contribution is to
be made to one who has ransomed his goods. 4. The share [of the
loss] is ordinarily contributed according to the value of the goods
which are preserved, and of those which are lost, and it is in no
way material that those which are lost might have been sold at
a higher price‘, for what is made good is loss not profit. But
with regard to those things in respect of which contribution has to
be made, the valuation should be not according to the price at
which they were bought, but to that for which they will sell.
5. Of slaves who are lost at sea no valuation is to be made, any
more than if any sick slaves have died on the ship, or any have
thrown themselves overboard. 6. If any of the passengers is
insolvent the loss will not fall on the shipmaster, for the seaman is
not required to investigate everyone’s financial position. 7. If
goods which have been thrown overboard are recovered, the


1 Read guia tributum ob id servate res deberent. Cf. M.
2 navigatione. Cf. M. 3 fuerit. Cf. M. + potuerunt. Cf. M.


TIT. 11] On the Rhodian Law of Jettison 387


obligation to contribute is discharged: in the event of the contri-
bution having already been made, those who have paid can sue the
shipmaster ex locato, so that he may proceed ex conducto and pay
back what he recovers. 8. What is thrown overboard [to save the
ship] remains however the property of the owner, and does not vest
in anyone who gets possession of it, for it is not considered to have
been abandoned.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 19) If a mast or other gear of the
ship is cast overboard in order to avoid a peril to all, contribution
is due.


CALLISTRATUS (Questions 2) If in order to lighten the
burdened ship because, with her cargo, she could not enter a river
or harbour, certain goods are put over the side into a boat, lest
the ship should be endangered outside the river or in the entrance
itself or in the harbour, and the boat is sunk, an account must be
taken between those who have their goods saved on the ship and
those who lost theirs in the boat, exactly as if these goods had
been thrown overboard. It may be added that Sabinus also
approves this opinion (Responsa b. 2). On the other hand if the
boat is saved with some of the goods, but the ship is lost, no
account is to be taken in respect of those who lost their goods in
the ship, because jettison leads to contribution only if the ship is
saved. 1. But there is also a responsum of Sabinus to the effect
that if a ship which has been lightened in a storm, by jettison of
the goods of a merchant, is lost elsewhere, and the goods of some
merchants are recovered by divers, for pay, an account must be
taken as between him whose goods were thrown overboard during
the voyage, to lighten the ship, and those who afterwards
recovered their goods by means of divers. But [he says that]
he whose goods were thrown overboard has, if some of them are
recovered by divers, no account to render to those whose goods
were not! thus saved, for their goods cannot be said to have been
thrown overboard to save the ship, which was in fact lost.
2. But when jettison has been made from the ship, and the goods
of someone, which remained on the ship, have been damaged,
we must consider whether he should make contribution, since
he ought not to be burdened with the double loss of both
contribution and deterioration of his goods. But the view may be
defended that he must contribute on the basis of the present value
of his goods. Thus, for example, if the goods of two persons were


1 Ins. non.


25—2


388 On the Rhodian Law of Jettison [Book xiv


worth twenty each and those of one of them came to be worth only
ten, owing to damage by water, the one whose goods are not affected
will contribute on a basis of twenty, the other on a basis of ten.
It is possible however to hold an opinion on the point, turning on
our making a distinction as to the cause by which the goods came
to be damaged, that is, whether it was due to their becoming
exposed owing to the throwing overboard of merchandise, or to
some other cause, say, for instance the goods lay somewhere in a
corner and a wave reached them. In this case the owner will have
to contribute, but ought he not to be free from contribution in the
first case, since the jettison injured him too? Or ought he [to be
liable] even in this case, where his goods have been damaged by
water, owing to the jettison having been made? But we must
apply a more subtle distinction, as to whether the greater burden
is involved in the damage or in the contribution: if, for example,
the goods were worth twenty and the contribution amounts to ten,
but the damage is two, then, the damage being deducted, he must
contribute for the rest. How then if the damage involves a greater
loss than the contribution? Say, for instance, the goods are
damaged to the extent of ten awe while the contribution amounts
to two: certainly he ought not to bear both charges. But here let
us consider whether a contribution ought not to be made to his
loss. For what difference does it make whether I lose my goods
by jettison, or now have them in a damaged state by reason of
their having been exposed? In fact, just as relief is given to one
who has lost his goods, so there should be relief to him who now
holds his goods in a damaged condition by reason of the jettison.
Papirius Fronto laid down these rules in this way in a responsum.


HERMOGENIANUS (EHpitomes of Law 2) The loss of the ship
is not made good by contribution from those who saved their goods
in the wreck, for the accepted view is that the justice of this
contribution is admitted only when, by the remedy of jettison, the
interest of other owners has been looked after and the ship is safe.
1. If the mast has been cut away to save the ship with her
cargo there will be a just claim to contribution.


JULIANUS (Digest 86) A ship caught! by a storm, her
rigging, mast and yards burnt by lightning, was driven into Hippo.
Being there provided with a hasty emergency rig she sailed for
Ostia and safely delivered her cargo. The question was raised


1 For depressa read deprensa. Cf. M.


10


TIT. IT] On the Rhodian Law of Jettison 389


whether those to whom the cargo belonged were bound to pay a
contribution to the shipmaster towards the expense. The answer
was that they need not do so, for this expenditure was incurred
rather to fit out the ship than to save the cargo.


PAULUS (Epitomes of Alfenus’s Digest 3) The jurist gave a
responsum to the effect that if a ship was wrecked or stranded,
what each man saved of his own property he kept for himself, as
[in case of goods saved] from a fire.


JULIANUS (Extracts from Minicius 2) Those who throw
any goods overboard to lighten the ship have no intention to treat
them as abandoned. Indeed if they find them anywhere they may
carry them off, and if they form an idea as to the place at which
they were cast ashore, they may make a demand for them: so that
they are in just the same position as one who, overloaded by
his burden, drops something on the road intending to return
shortly with others and carry it off.


Votusius Mactanus (on the Rhodian Law) A petition of
Eudaimon of Nicomedia to the Emperor Antoninus. Lord Emperor
Antoninus : Being shipwrecked in Icaria', we have been plundered
by the taxfarmers” who live in the Cyclades Islands. Antoninus
said to Eudaimon : I am indeed lord of the world, but the Law is
lord of the sea. This matter must be decided by the maritime law
of the Rhodians, provided that no law of ours is opposed to it.
The most divine Augustus also laid down the same rule.


LaBEo (Probabilities, epitomised by Paulus, 3) If you have
taken a contract to carry slaves no freight is due to you in respect
of a slave who died on the ship. Paulus: Say rather that the
question is, what were the terms of the contract, whether freight
was to be due in respect of those put on board or of those landed?
As to the case in which this cannot be made out, here it will
suffice for the shipmaster to prove that the man was put on board.
1. If you hired a ship on the terms that your goods were to be
carried in her, and the shipmaster, knowing that you did not wish
it, and not under any pressure of necessity, transferred your goods
to a worse ship, and your goods were lost with the ship in which
they were last carried, you have an action ex conducto locato
against the master of the first ship. Paulus: This is by no means


! For "Iradia read “Ikapia. Cf. M.
2 For dyudotv read Snuootwvar. Cf. M,


390 On the Rhodian Law of Jettison [BooK XIV


the case supposing both ships were lost on the voyage, since the
event was not a consequence of dolus or negligence of the sailors.
The rule will be the same if the first shipmaster, detained by the
public authority, was prevented from sailing with your goods.
The same rule will apply if he took the contract from you on the
condition that he should pay you a certain penalty unless by an
agreed day he had landed your goods in the place for carriage to
which you had handed over the goods! and it was through no fault
of his that he did not wait?, though the penalty was [in fact] remitted
to him. We shall have to lay down the same rule in the same
kind of hypothesis, if it is proved that the shipmaster, prevented
by illness, was incapable of making the voyage, or again if the ship
became unseaworthy without dolus malus or negligence on his part.
2. If you have hired a ship of the capacity of two thousand
amphore and have put amphore on board you owe the freight
for two thousand amphore. Paulus: Naturally if the ship was
hired as a whole (per aversionem) you owe for two thousand
amphore, but if the freight was fixed according to the number of
amphore put on board, the rule is the contrary one ; for you owe
the freight for as many amphore as you shipped.


If.


ON THE INSTITORIAN ACTION.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) The Preetor has thought it
fair that, just as we derive profits from the administration of
institores, so also we should be bound by, and liable to be sued on,
their contracts. But he does not make the same provision with
regard to the person who has appointed an ¢nstitor, that he also
may sue. If indeed he had his own slave as ¢nstitor, he may rest
secure, as the rights of action are acquired to him. If however [he
has appointed] either another man’s slave, or even a freeman, he
will not be able to sue, but he will nevertheless be able to sue the
institor himself or his master, either on mandatum or on voluntary
agency (negotiorum gestorum). But Marcellus holds that an
action should be given to the person who appointed the istitor
against those who have contracted with him,


1 locasses. Of. M. > For spectaret read easpectaret. Cf. M.


TH. (Tn On the Institorian Action 391


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) in the form applicable
to the mode in which the istitor contracted, provided that he
cannot protect his interests in any other way.


ULPIANUS (0n the Edict 28) An institor is so called because
he intervenes (énstet) in conducting a transaction, and it is of no
great importance whether it is a shop that he is appointed to
manage or any other sort of business,


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) for they sometimes take goods to
the [houses of] people of good position and sell them there. The
place at which the selling and buying occurs does not affect the
basis of the action, since in each case it is true that the enstetor
has bought or sold.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) Thus, to whatsoever business
he has been appointed, he will be rightly called an institor. 1. For
Servius, also (on Brutus b. 1), says that if any business is done
with the manager of a set of flats, or with a man whom you have
appointed to look after a building, or to buy corn, you will be
liable in full. 2. Labeo has also said that one who has appointed [a
man] to lend money at interest, to cultivate lands, or to carry on
commercial dealings, or to undertake public contracts, is liable in
full. 3. So also if a man has put a slave in charge of a money-
changer’s table, he will be liable on his account. 4. And it is also
established that those to whom clothiers and linen weavers give
clothing to be hawked and sold, whom we commonly call cércétores,
are properly described as institores. 5. So too we may rightly
call mule drivers institores, 6. and the managers appointed’ by
fullers and tailors. Stablekeepers also are to be considered as
holding the position of institores. 7. Further, Labeo tells us that
if a shopkeeper sends his slave about the country to buy merchan-
dise, and send it to him, he is to be considered as in the position of
an institor. 8. The same writer says that if an undertaker has a
slave employed to prepare corpses for burial, and he robs a corpse,
an action on the lines of the institorian action should be given
against him, although the action on fwrtwm and that on injuria
are both available. 9. Labeo says further that if a baker
was in the habit of sending his slave to a certain place to sell
bread, and then he (the slave), having taken money in advance from
some people? to deliver bread to them every day, failed to do so,


1 For prapositus read prepositos. Of. M.
2 After presenti ins. a quibusdam. M.


392 On the Institorian Action [BOOK XIV


there is no reason to doubt that [the baker] will be liable if he
authorized the giving of money to him in this way. 10. And further
where a fuller, setting out on a journey had requested that orders
should be given! to his apprentices, to whom he had handed over
the shop fully equipped, after whose departure an apprentice had
received clothing and run away, the fuller is not liable if the
apprentice was left as procurator, but if it was as istitor, he
is liable. Of course if he told me I might safely trust his workmen,
he will be liable not to the institorian action, but to that on locafio.
11. Itis not however every transaction with the ¢nstitor which binds
the person who appointed him, but only cases in which the contract
was made with reference to the matter to which he was appointed,
that is to say only to that? to which he appointed him. 12. Accord-
ingly if I have appointed a man to sell goods I shall be liable on
his account to the action on purchase, and again, if, as it may be,
I have appointed him to buy, I shall be liable only to the action on
sale, but (and Cassius also adopts this view) one will not be bound
if he was appointed to buy and he sells, or he was appointed to
sell and he buys. 13. However if a person lends money to an
institor appointed to buy there is ground for the institorian action,
and similarly if he was appointed to pay the rent for the shop;
this I believe to be true, supposing he was not forbidden to borrow.
14. Ifa loan of oil is made to a person whom I have appointed to
buy and sell oil, the rule will be that the institorian action is avail-
able. 15. So also, if an ¢nstitor, when he had sold some oil, took a
ring by way of earnest, and does not return it, his master is liable to
the institorian action, for the contract had reference to the business
to which he was appointed, unless, indeed, he was instructed to
sell for cash. It follows that if the cnstitor happened to take
a pledge for the price, the institorian action will be available.
16. Again, the institorian action is available to a guarantor who
intervened on behalf of the ¢nstitor, for this is a consequence of
his transaction. 17. If an institor has been appointed by some-
one, but the person who appointed him is dead, and there is an
heir to him, who employs the same znstitor, there can be no doubt
that he will be liable. Moreover if a contract was made with him
before the inheritance was entered on, it is fair that the institorian
action should be given to one not aware of the facts. 18. Again,
if my procurator, tutor or curator has appointed an enstitor, it


1 For imperaret read imperaretur. Cf. M.
2 For ad id read id ad. Cf. M.


10


1


TIT. IIT] On the Institorian Action 393


must be said that the institorian action should be given as if he
had been appointed by me.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) But the institorian action will
also be available against the procurator himself, if he was a
general procurator.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) And further, if anyone, volun-
tarily acting in my affairs, appoints [an institor], and I ratify the
act, the same rule must be laid down. 1. It matters little who is
the enstitor, male or female, free or your own slave or the slave of
someone else. Also [it is indifferent] who the person appointing!
is: for if a woman has appointed, the institorian action will be
available, as the exercitorian is, and if a woman is appointed she
herself will also be liable. Moreover if a woman under potestas, or
a female slave, is appointed, the institorian action is available.
2. A child who is institor binds the person who appointed him by
the institorian action, since he has himself to blame for appointing
him,


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) for, again, many people
appoint boys and girls to manage shops.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) However, if the person who
appoints is himself a child under guardianship, he will be bound if
the appointment was with the sanction of the tutor, but not
otherwise.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) But an action will never-
theless lie against him so far as he is enriched by the transaction.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) But if a child under guardian-
ship becomes heir to the person who appointed, it is perfectly just
that the child should be liable so long as he remains in charge, for
he should have been removed by the tutores if they did not wish to
avail themselves of his assistance. 1. Further, if the person who
appointed was a minor under 25, he will not be relieved on account
of non-age without enquiry into the matter. 2. A man is not
considered to hold the position of one in charge of a business if a
notice is publicly set up that there is to be no contracting with him:
the rule is not indeed that there may be dealing with an ¢stitor
only if it is permitted, but that one who wishes to prevent contract
with him must prohibit it: apart from this the person who appointed


1 For guisquis preposuit read quis sit qui preposuit. M.


394 On the Institorian Action [BOOK XIV


him will be bound by the appointment itself. 3. Publicly set
up is understood as meaning, in plain letters, so that the notice
can be easily read from the ground, that is, in the front of the shop
or place where the business is carried on, not in an obscure place
but in the open. May it be in Greek or must it be in Latin?
I think this is according to the character of the place, so that there
may be no ground for a plea of inability to understand the writing.
Assuredly if anyone pleads that he cannot read writing or had not
observed what was set up, while in fact many people read it and it
was openly posted up, he will not be listened to. 4. It is necessary
that the notice be permanently set up, otherwise if the contract was
made at a time when there was no notice posted up, or it was
hidden, the institorian action will lie. In like manner if the owner
of the merchandise put up a notice but someone else took it away,
or by the effect of time, or of rains or anything of that sort, the
result produced was! that there was no notice or none was apparent,
it must be held that the person who appointed is liable. So if the
institor himself, with the intention of deceiving me, took it down,
his dolus ought to affect the person who appointed him, unless the
other contracting party was privy to the dolus. 5. A condition on
the appointment must be taken into account, for what are we to
say if the employer wished dealings with him to be made under a
certain condition, or with the cooperation of a certain person, or
with security, or in a certain matter? It is eminently just that the
purpose of his appointment should be regarded. So too if he had
several institores and wished contracts to be made with all together,
or only with a particular one. And again if he gives notice to any-
one not to contract with him he is not liable to the institorian
action: for we can prohibit both a certain person and a certain class
of persons or traders from contracting, or we may permit it to certain
persons. But if he has forbidden contract now with this man and
now with that, with continual changes, all of them are entitled to
the institorian action against him, for persons making contracts
ought not to be misled. 6. If however the employer absolutely
prohibited any contract with him, then he is not considered to be
in the position of one put in charge of the business, since he is
rather in the position of a caretaker than in that of tmstitor: he
will not therefore be able to sell anything, not the merest trifle,
out of the shop. 7. If the institorian action has been rightly
brought the tributorian action is excluded by direct operation of
law, for there can be no tributorian action in relation to the
1 contigit. Cf. M.


12


13


14


TIT. U1] On the Institorian Action 395


master’s goods [as opposed to the peculium]. But if he was not
an institor of his master’s goods the tributorian action survives.
8. If I hire from your slave the services of his underslave, and
make him ¢nstitor of my goods, and he sells an article to you, this
is a purchase, for when a master buys from his slave, though he is
not legally bound, there is a purchase, even to this extent that the
master may possess and acquire by long possession, as a buyer,


JULIANUS (Digest 11) and accordingly you will have an
actio utilis institoria against me, while I, on the other hand, shall
have against you either an action on the peculium of the managing
slave (dispensator), if I choose to proceed ea conducto, or on the
peculium of the underslave on the ground of having given him a
mandatum to sell, and the price at which you bought may be
considered as applied to your concerns (in rem tuam versum)
on the ground that you became a debtor to your own slave.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 28) A man had appointed a slave
to manage an oil business at Arles, and the same slave to borrow
money: he had borrowed money: the creditor, thinking the money
had been received for the oil business, brought the action in ques-
tion but could not prove that the slave had received it for the
purpose of the business. Although the right of action is consumed,
and he can take no further proceedings on the ground that he was
also appointed to receive loans of money, yet Julianus holds that
an actio utilis is available to him. 1. But it must be borne in mind
that the master is liable to the institorian action only if there has
been no supersession (novatio) of the obligation, either by the
institor or by some third person who makes a stipulation with the
intention of superseding it. 2. If two or more persons are carrying
on a shop and they appoint as institor a slave whom they held in
unequal shares, Julianus asks whether they are liable in proportion
to their shares in him, or equally, or in proportion to their shares
in the business, or for the whole debt. And he says that the better
view is that, as in the case of exercitores and of the action on the
peculium, any one of them can be sued for the whole debt, and
whatever he who was sued has paid he will recover by the action on
partnership or by that for the division of common property. This
opinion we have also approved above.


PAULUS (on Plautius 4) It will be the same if a third
person’s slave has been appointed to a business owned in common,
for an action for the whole debt ought to be given against either


15


16


1%


396 On the Institorian Action [BOOK XIV


owner, and of whatever either of them has paid he will recover a
share by the action on partnership or by that for the division of
common property. Certainly in any case in which the action on
partnership or that for division of common property is not available
it is clear law that each is liable to condemnation only for his part,
as, for instance, if he to whose slave money was lent, having
instituted two heirs, freed the slave, for each heir is to be sued
only in respect of his part, because the action for division is not
available between them.


Uupranus (on the Edict 28) Finally it should be noted
that these actions are available without limitation of time and both
to and against heirs.


PAuLus (on the Edict 29) If a contract is made with any-
one’s bailiff (vilicus) no action lies against the employer, for a
bailiff is appointed to collect produce, not to trade. If however
I have a bailiff who is also appointed to sell goods it is not unfair
that an action on the model of the institorian action should lie
against me.


THE SAME (on the Edict 30) —_ If a manis appointed to buy and
sell slaves or beasts of burden or stock, not only is the institorian
action available against the employer, but also the redhibitorian
and that on the stipulation for double or single value are available
against him for the whole claim. 1. If you have the slave of Titius
as institor I can proceed either against you under this edict or
against Titius under the edicts considered below. But if you
forbade dealing with him there can be an action only against
Titius. 2. If a child under fourteen becomes heir to a father who
had institores, and thereupon there is dealing with them it must be
said that an action lies against the child, on the ground of advan-
tage to the common course of trade, as in the case in which, after
the death of a tutor with whose sanction an institor was appointed,
there is dealing with him. 3. Pomponius also has laid it down
that an action should certainly be given on account of a contract
which came into existence before the inheritance was entered on,
even though the person who becomes heir is insane ; for no blame
attaches to one who, knowing that the employer has died, contracts
with the institor carrying on the business. 4. Proculus says
that if I give you notice not to lend to a slave appointed by me —
there is ground for the exceptio: “if he (defendant) did not notify
him (plaintiff) not to lend to that slave.” But if he has peculium


18


19


20


TIT. 111 | On the Institorian Action 397


or proceeds of that contract have been applied to my affairs},
and I am not willing to pay to the extent of my enrichment, a
replicatio on the ground of dolus malus should be used, for I must
be considered to have committed dolus malus in seeking to profit


by another’s loss. 5. It is true that a condictio will also lie in this
case.


THE SAME (Various Passages) An wstitor is one who is
appointed to a shop or place to buy or sell, or is appointed to such
a function with no specification of place.


PAPINIANUS (Responsa 3) An actio utilis on the model of
the institorian action will be given against one who appointed a
procurator to borrow money, and this will be equally true where
the procurator who has promised money, in answer to a person stipu-
lating, is solvent. 1. If a master who had a slave énstitor at a table
for receiving deposits of money, also, after he has freed the slave,
carries on the same business through the libertus, the conditions
of liability will not be affected by the change of status. 2. A son
appointed by his father, to manage a shop, borrowed money for
purposes connected with his merchandise: his father became
guarantor for him: proceedings by the institorian action will also
lie against him, for by his guaranty he associated the case of
borrowing money with the trade of the shop. 3. A slave appointed
solely for the purpose of lending money at interest does not as
imstitor” make his owner liable in full, under przetorian law, by
taking a debt on himself by way of surety, but with regard to money
which he promised to a third person by way of substituted liability
(delegatio) on behalf of one to whom® he lent at interest, an action
will rightly lie against the owner, who has acquired a claim for
money lent against the person who offered the substitute.


SCAVOLA (Digest 5) Lucius Titius had a ldbertus, appointed
to manage a money-changer’s table which he was conducting: this
man gave an undertaking to Gaius Seius in these words: ‘“ Octavius
Terminalis, managing the affairs of Octavius Felix, to Domitius
Felix greeting. You have 1000 denarw in the bank of my patron,
and I shall be bound to pay over these denarii to you on the last
day of April.” It was asked whether, Lucius Titius having died
without an heir, and his goods having been sold, Terminalis could
be sued at law on this letter. The answer was that neither was he


1 The words ex eo contractu are to be placed after aut. Cf. M.
2 For institorem read institor. Cf. M. 3 For gui read cut. Cf. M.


1


398 On the Institorian Action [BOOK XIV


bound in law by these words, nor did there exist any equity to
base a claim against him, since he wrote this in the course of his
duty as czstitor in support of the credit of the business.


IV.


ON THE TRIBUTORIAN ACTION.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) The utility of this edict also
is not small, since a master, who, apart from it, has a privilege in
cases of contract by a slave (inasmuch as he is liable only to the
extent of the peculiwm, the assessment of which is made subject to
the deduction of what is due to the master), is however required
under this edict to rank for dividend like an outside creditor, if he
knew that the slave was trading with property of the pecudzeum.
1. Though the expression merchandise is rather narrow, so that it
does not apply to slaves who are fullers or tailors or weavers or
slavedealers, yet, according to Pedius (b. 15), the edict is to be
extended to businesses of all kinds. 2. Merchandise of the
peculium is not to be defined in the way in which peculiwm is, for
peculium is understood subject to a deduction of what is due to
the master, but merchandise of the peculiwm renders the master
liable to the tributorian action, even though there is nothing in
the peculiwm [beyond what is due to him], but! only if the
business is carried on with his knowledge. 3. In this case the
knowledge to be understood is that which includes assent, or
rather, as I think, not assent but tolerance ; the master need not
desire it, but must not disapprove it. Thus if he knows the facts,
and makes no protest and opposition, he will be liable to the
tributorian action. 4. The word potestas is to be extended to
both sexes; and also to all those who are under the domestic
control of another. 5. The tributorian action will apply not only
to slaves but also to those who are in apparent slavery to us
in good faith, whether they are free or the slaves of someone else
or slaves in whom we have a usufruct,


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) provided however that the wares
traded with in connexion with the peculiwm belong to us.


1 Ins. at. M.


TIT. IV | On the Tributorian Action 399


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If however it is a common
slave and both owners know the facts, the action will lie against
either of them, but if one knows and the other was ignorant, the
action will lie against the one who knows ; whatever is due to the
one who was not informed will however be deducted in full. If
action is brought against the one who was not privy, since he is
sued on the peculiwm, what is due to the one who was, will also be
deducted, and that in full, for, if he were sued by the action on the
peculium, what was due to him would be deducted in full. And
so Julianus has laid it down (Digest b. 12). 1. If the slave of a
child under guardianship, or of a lunatic, trades with merchandise
of the peculiwm to the knowledge of the tutor or curator it is my
opinion that the dolus of the tutor or curator should not prejudice
the ward or lunatic, or be, on the other hand, a source of profit to
him, and consequently, that he should be liable to the tributorian
action, by reason of dolus of the tutor, only to the extent of any
profit that may have come to him: I think the same also in the
case of a lunatic. Pomponius however holds (Letiers b. 8) that
if the ¢wtor is solvent the ward is liable on account of his fraud,
and it is clear that he will be liable to this extent, that he must
assign the action he has against the tutor. Moreover if there was
dolus on the part of the ward, he being of such an age as to be
capable of dolus, this has the effect of making him liable, although
knowledge on his part would not be enough, in respect of the
trading. What then is the conclusion? It is that knowledge on
the part of the futor and curator ought to create liability to this
action: to what extent dolus creates liability I have shown.


Pauuus (on the Hdict 30) If the ward whose tutor was
aware [of the trading] is guilty of dolus after reaching puberty, or
the lunatic, when he is of sound mind, they are liable under this
edict.


ULPIANuS (on the Edict 29) But Pomponius does not
doubt, nor do we, that knowledge and dolus of a procurator
create liability. 1. When an underslave of my slave carries on
trade, if this is actually with my knowledge I shall be liable to the
tributorian action: if I am not aware of it but the principal slave
is, Pomponius tells us (b. 60) that an action on his peculiun is
available and that nothing is to be deducted from the peculiwm of
the underslave in respect of what he owes to the principal slave,
while what is due to me is deducted. If however we were both
aware of the facts, the same authority holds that both the


400 ‘On the Tributorian Action [BOOK XIV


tributorian action and that on the peculiwm are available, the
tributorian on account of the underslave but that on the peculium
in respect of the principal slave (the plaintiff however being
required to elect under which action he prefers to proceed), but on
the terms that both what is due to me and what is due to the
principal slave will have to rank for dividend in the tributorian
action, while, if the principal slave had not been privy, whatsoever
was due to him from the underslave would have been deducted in
full. 2. And, again, if a female slave carries on trade, it is held
that the tributorian action is to be allowed. 3. So, too, it matters
little whether the contract is with the slave himself or with his
institor. 4. [The words] “in respect of the business” (mercis
nomine) are very properly added, lest every kind of dealing carried
on with him should give rise to the tributorian action. 5. The
law is that under this action everything received from the stock in
trade or in respect of it must be divided. 6. Those who hold the
slave in potestas are summoned to rank for dividend with the
creditors of the concern. 7. The question has however been raised
whether the master shares in the division of the goods only in
respect of what is due to him in connexion therewith, or also if in
fact anything is due to himon another account. And Labeo lays it
down that [the rule applies] on whatever account money is due to
him, and that it matters little! whether the slave became indebted
to him before the trading began or afterwards, for it is enough
that he has lost the privilege of deduction. 8. What, however, is
to be said, if those who made contracts with the slave have taken
the goods in pledge? I think it must be held that they are to be
preferred to the master, by right of pledge. 9. Whether the
indebtedness is to the master or to those who are in his potestas,
in any case it must rank for dividend. 10. If there are two or
more masters, a dividend will certainly be payable to each of them
in proportion to his debt. 11. It is not however the whole
peculium which is available for division, but only that which is
connected with the business, whether there is existing merchan-
dise, or the value of it has been received and devoted to the
peculium. 12. Moreover if money is still due on account of goods
from persons to whom the slave was in the habit of selling, this
also will be available for division, as it is received. 13. If thisslave
has in the shop, besides the stock, utensils of trade, are these also
available for distribution? And Labeo lays it down that these too


1 For referret read referre. Cf. M.


TIT. Iv] On the Tributorian Action 401


will be divided, and this is perfectly just ; for this outfit is com-
monly, indeed always, provided out of the funds of the business.
Things other than these however which he had in the peculium will
not be distributed, say, for instance, he had gold or silver, except
in the case in which he has acquired them with the capital of the
business. 14. So too if he had in the business slaves acquired by
means of the stock, these also will be part of the divisible fund.
15. If the slave had several creditors, but some of them were in
respect of particular businesses, are they all to be grouped
together and summoned to share in the distribution 2 Suppose he
was carrying on two kinds of business, those, let us say, of mantle
making and linen weaving, and had separate creditors. My view
is that they must be summoned to distribution separately, for each
of them gave credit to the concern rather than to the man.
16. Further’, if he had two shops doing the same kind of trade,
and I did business, say, with the shop in the Bucinum quarter and
another dealt with that across the Tiber, I think it most fair that
the distribution should be made separately, lest one set of creditors
be paid out of the goods or property of the other’. 17. Clearly if
goods were being offered for sale in the same shop, even though
those now there were acquired with money of one creditor, they
will all be available for distribution unless they were pledged to
the creditor. 18. But if I have handed over my goods for sale, and
they still exist, the question must be considered whether it is not
unfair that I should be required to rank for dividend. If, indeed,
my right has become a mere personal claim against you, it is a
case for distribution ; where however it has not done so, since sold


property does not cease to be mine, even though I have sold it,


unless the money is paid or a guarantor given, or satisfaction made
in some other way, in that case the rule will be that I can bring a
vindication. 19. The distribution is made in proportion to the
amount due to each, and thus if one creditor appears, requesting a
distribution, he will receive his portion in full, but since it may
happen that there may be another creditor or other creditors of the
business carried on with the peculiuwm, this creditor must give
security that he will refund proportionately if it happens that
other creditors present themselves.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) For this action does not, like
that on the peculium, give a more advantageous position to the
first claimant, but puts all in the same position, whenever claiming.

! For sed read sed et. Cf. M. 2 Omit alii damnum sentiant. M.


M. J. II. 26


402 On the Tributorian Action [BOOK XIV


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) He ought also to give security
that, if anything else should turn out to be due to the master, he
will make a proportionate refund to him. For suppose a con-
ditional debt is impending, or there is an undiscovered debt, this
also must be allowed, since the master ought not to suffer injustice
though he is called on to share in the distribution. 1. But how if
the master will not distribute the goods or undertake this trouble-
some matter, but is ready to give up the peculiwm or the
merchandise? Pedius puts it on record that he is to be listened
to, which opinion has justice in it, and it will usually be the duty
of the Preetor to appoint an arbitrator in this matter, by whose
mediation the merchandise of the peculium may be distributed.
2. If, owing to the dolus malus of anyone, distribution in the
proper way is prevented, the tributorian action lies against him to
compel him to make good the amount by which what was dis-
tributed was less than what ought to have been distributed. By this
action a check is placed on the dolus malus of the master. It is
considered to be distributing too little if nothing at all is dis-
tributed. If, however, not knowing what the slave has in stock,
he distributes too little, he is not considered to have done so with
dolus, but if, on learning the facts, he fails to distribute it, he is
not now free from dolus. In like manner if he procures payment
to himself out of this merchandise he may be certainly said to have
distributed less [than was due]. 3. Further if he has allowed the
stock to go to waste, or has misapplied it or has intentionally sold
it at too low a price, or has not made buyers pay the price, he
must be held liable to the tributorian action, assuming that his
action was wilful. 4. Again, if the master denies that anything is
due to anyone at all, we must consider whether there is a case for
the tributorian action. And the better opinion is that of Labeo,
that the tributorian action is available : otherwise it will be to the
advantage of the master to deny. 5. This action is available both
without limit of time, and against the heir, to the extent only of
what he has received,


JULIANUS (Digest 11) because the action is not one on
dolus but involves a claim of property. For this reason even
though the slave be dead, the master, and his heir also, should be
held liable, without limitation of time, for the act of the deceased,
although the action is available only if dolus has been committed.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) What is laid down as to
the heir will also apply to other successors. 1. A man must


TH: Iv] On the Tributorian Action 403


choose by which action he will proceed, whether by that on the
peculium, or by the tributorian action, since he knows that he will
not be able to fall back on the other. Of course if a man desires to
bring the tributorian action on one claim and that on the peculiwn
on another, he should be listened to. 2. Labeo hoids that, if the
peculium is left to a slave freed by will, the heir ought not to be
liable to the tributorian action, as neither having received any-
thing nor committed dolus. But Pomponius (b. 60) has laid it
down that the heir is liable to the tributorian action, unless he has
taken care to get security from the slave or has deducted from
the peculium what ought to have been distributed, a view which is
not without reason, since he who has so acted as to prevent
distribution is himself the promoter of dolus. For the action
against the heir, limited to what he has received, lies when he is
sued in respect of dolus of the deceased, not when he is sued on
his own.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) The action on the peculiwm can
be brought against a buyer of the slave also: the tributorian action
cannot.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) It is sometimes advan-
tageous for plaintiffs to proceed by the action on the peculium
rather than by the tributorian, for, in the action which we are
discussing, only that comes in for division which is included in the
merchandise with which the business is carried on, and whatever
has been received in respect of it, but in the action on the
peculium the whole amount of the peculium is taken into account,
in which the merchandise also is included. And it may be that
the business is being carried on with a half or a third or even a
less part of the peculiwm: it may also be the case that he owes
nothing to his father or owner.


JULIANUS (Digest 12) One man sues the master on account
of the slave, by the action limited to the peculiwm ; another sues
by the tributorian action: the question was raised whether the
master ought to deduct from the peculiwm what he will be paying
to the plaintiff in the tributorian action. The answer was: pro-
ceedings can be brought by the tributorian action only in a case in
which the master, in distributing the value of the merchandise, has
not satisfied the terms of the Preetor’s edict ; that is, when he has de-
ducted a greater part of his own debt than he has divided among the
creditors, for instance, if, when the stock was worth 30 of which he

26—2


-


404 On the Tributorian Action [ BOOK XIV


himself had advanced 15, but two outside creditors had advanced
30, he deducted the whole 15 and gave the creditors the remaining
15, when the right course was to deduct only 10 and to give the
creditors 10 each. It follows that when he has acted in this way,
he is not to be considered as having freed the slave from liability to
him, because he has still to pay five on his account in the tributorian
action. Accordingly if proceedings on the peculium are begun,
there being, let us suppose, peculium other than this stock in trade,
he will be entitled to deduct five as being still a creditor of the
slave.


Vi:


DEALINGS ALLEGED TO HAVE BEEN HAD WITH A PERSON IN
THE POTESTAS OF ANOTHER.


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 9) The proconsul makes
every provision that one who has contracted with a person in the
potestas of another, even though the above-mentioned actions,
that is to say, the exercitorian, the institorian or the tributorian, be
not available, may yet come by his own, so far as the state of the
case permits, having regard to considerations of equity and good
conscience. For, if the transaction was entered on with the
authorisation of the person in whose potestas he is, he pro-
mises an action for the full amount in respect of it: if on the
other hand it was not with his authority, but proceeds have been
devoted to his purposes, he creates an action to the extent of the
application to his purposes: if again it was neither of these, he
establishes an action to the extent of the peculiwm.


ULpPIANus (on the Edict 29) The Pretor says, “after
enquiry I will give an action to the extent of what he is able to
pay against a person who is emancipated or disinherited or has
abstained from the inheritance of one in whose potestas at death
he was, whether the business was done of his own motion or on the
authorisation of the person in whose potestas he was, and whether
the proceeds were applied to the purposes of the pecwliwm or to
the concerns of the person in whose potestas he was.” 1. More-
over if he has become independent (sui jwris) without emancipation
or has been given in adoption and thereafter his natural father has
died, and again, if such a person has been appointed heir for a


TIT. V] Dealings with one in potestas of another 405


very small share, it is most just that this action should be given
against him also, after enquiry into the facts, to the extent of his
ability to pay.


THE SAME (Disputations 3) Whether in this case what is
due to others should be deducted may afford matter for discussion.
Certainly if they are creditors who contracted with him when he
was in the potestas of another, the correct rule will be that the
first claimant has the better position, except in the case in which a
creditor with a special priority appears, for, not without reason,
account will be taken of this prior claimant. But if there are
creditors who contracted with him after he became independent, it
is my opinion that they should be taken into account.


THE SAME (on the Edict 29) But if the son is appointed
heir for a considerable share, it rests in the choice of the creditor
whether he will sue him for the whole debt, or for the fraction of
it due from him as heir. But here too it is the duty of the judge
to determine whether on the facts he is to be sued only to the
extent of his ability to pay’. 1. But sometimes, even if the son is
disinherited or emancipated, an action will be given against him for
the full amount due, as, for instance, if at the time when the
contract was made with him he falsely declared himself to be a pater-
Familias, for Marcellus has laid it down (Digest b. 2) that even if
he has not the means to pay he is liable to be sued, by reason of
his falsehood. 2. Though on his contracts an action lies against
him [only] to the extent of his means, he is nevertheless liable in
full on his delicts. 3. Relief is given to the son alone, not to his
heir as well, for Pomponius, also, tells us (Questions b. 9) that an
action for the whole debt lies against the son’s heir. 4. But
should not lapse of time be taken into account, so that if pro-
ceedings are actually brought against the son at once the action is
given to the extent of his capacity to pay, but if it is after many
years there should be no such indulgence? And it is my view that
account should be taken [of this]: for the enquiry into the facts
will go into this. 5. One who has sued on the peculiwm when he
might have sued on the basis of authorisation is in the position of
not being able afterwards to bring the action on an authorised
contract, and so thinks Proculus. But if he sued on the
peculium owing to his having been deceived as to the facts, Celsus
holds that relief should be afforded to him. This opinion is sound.


1 Text probably corrupt. Cf. M.


5


406 Dealings alleged to have been had with | Book XIv


Pauuus (on the Edict 30) If a filiusfamilias has been sued
and condemned during the life of his father, an action on the
judgment should be given against him to the extent of his capacity
to pay, if he has been emancipated or disinherited. 1. If the
inheritance of the father is transferred under the Senatusconsultum
Trebellianum to a son who was disinherited, he should be con-
demned to pay not to the extent of his means but the whole debt,
since in effect he is in a sense heir. 2. But if he has intermeddled
with the inheritance, under compulsion, with the intention of
transferring it, the course followed should be exactly as if he had
abstained.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 2) A man who has pretended to
be a paterfamilias and has made a stipulation on the mandatum
of someone is, according to Marcellus, liable to the action on
mandatum, though he be not in a position to pay the amount due ;
and it is obviously true that he ought to be liable, since he has
committed dolus. The same may also be said of all actions resting
on good faith.


Sc@vo.ia (Responsa 1) A father allowed a son to borrow
money, and gave a mandatum by letter to the creditor to lend to
him: the son became heir to the father for a very small share. I
answered that it lay in the discretion of the creditor whether he
would prefer to sue the son to whom he had lent the money for
the whole amount, or the heirs, each in proportion to the share to
which he succeeded. But the son is condemned to the extent of
his ability to pay.


Pauwus (Decrees 1) Titianus Primus had appointed a slave
to lend moneys and take pledges: this slave was also in the habit
of undertaking, on behalf of dealers in barley, debts arising from
purchase, and paying them. The slave having run away, and the
person to whom he had been given as a substituted debtor
(delegatus), to pay the price of the barley, having sued the master
on account of the énstitor, he! denied that he could be sued on
this account, for the man had not been appointed for this traffic.
But as it was proved that the same slave had engaged in other
transactions and had hired granaries and had paid money to many
people, the prefect of the grain supply gave judgment against the
master. We contended that this appeared to bea sort of guaranty,
since he was paying money for another, for? he undertook debt for


1 Ins. is. M. 2 For non read nam. Cf. M.


:


TIT. V| a person in the potestas of another 407


others, but that it was not the practice to give an action against
the master on this ground, and that it did not seem! that the
master had authorised this. But, as he appeared to have appointed
the slave to act for him in all these matters, the emperor upheld
the judgment.


VI.
ON THE SENATUSCONSULTUM MACEDONIANUM.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) The terms of the Senatus-
consultum Macedonianum are as follows: “Whereas Macedo, to the
other causes of wickedness which nature bestowed on him, added
also indebtedness, and (to say no more) one who lends money on
dubious obligations often provides evil dispositions with means of
ill-doing, it is enacted that to one who has lent money to a jilius-
Jamilias no action or claim be given even after the death of his
parent, so that those who, setting a most evil example, lend money
at interest may know that no acknowledgment of a filiusfamilias
can be made a good claim by waiting till the death of the father.”
1. If the question whether the son is in potestas is in suspense, for
instance because he has a father in the enemy’s hands, the question
whether there has been an infringement of the senatusconsultum
is in suspense. For if he relapses into potestas the senatus-
consultum operates; if he does not it has no application: therefore
in the mean time an action should be refused. 2. Certainly, if a
person who has been arrogated borrows money and afterwards gets
an order of restitution, so that he is to be emancipated, the
senatusconsultum will apply, for he was a jiliusfamilias. 3. Official
position in a filiusfamilias has no force to prevent the Senatus-
consultum Macedonianum from applying ; for though he be Consul
or of what dignity you will, the senatusconsultwm applies, unless
indeed he has a military peculium, for in that case the senatus-
consultum will not operate,


THE SAME (on the Edict 64) so far as the military peculiwm
extends, since fjiliifamilias are in the position of independent
citizens in respect of the military peculium.


1 For videtur read vidert. Cf. M.


408 On the Senatusconsultum Macedonianum [BK XIV


THE SAME (on the Edict 29) If a person believed a man to
be a paterfamilias, not being misled by mere foolishness or
ignorance of law, but because he appeared as a paterfamilias
publicly, to people generally, and was in the habit of acting,
contracting, and executing the duties of offices, as such, the
senatusconsultum will not apply. 1. Accordingly Julianus tells us
(b. 12) that the senatusconsultum does not apply in the case of
one who was in the habit of farming the public revenues, and
there have been frequent imperial enactments to this effect.
2. So also in the case of one who could not know whether the man
was a filiusfamilias, Julianus (b. 12) says that the senatusconsultum
does not apply, for example, in the case of a child under guardian-
ship or a person under twenty-five years of age. But in the case
of the minor relief should also be given, by the Preetor, after
enquiry: while in that of the ward he was justified also on another
ground in saying that the senatusconsultwm would not apply, since
the money which the ward hands over without the sanction of his
tutor does not become a loan, just as Julianus himself says (b. 12),
that, if a filiusfamilias lends, the senatusconsultwm does not apply,
as the money does not become a loan even though he had the free
administration of the peculiwm. For the father in giving the
right of free administration of the peculiwm does not authorise the
throwing of it away; and therefore, he says, the right of specific
vindication of the money remains to the father. 3. It is only one
who has lent money to a /iliusfamilias who offends against the
senatusconsultum, not one who has contracted otherwise, for
instance one who has sold or let on hire, or contracted in some
other way; for it was the giving of money which was considered
dangerous to their parents. And therefore, although I have become
a creditor of a filiusfamilias either on the ground of a purchase, or
of some other contract in which I have paid no money, though I
may have made a stipulation, notwithstanding that the matter
has become a loan, nevertheless, since payment of money does
not enter into it, the senatusconsultum does not apply. This
will be the rule only if there was no scheme for a fraud on the
senatusconsultum, so that one who could not lend money preferred
to sell to him, so that the other party should have the value of the
goods in place of a loan. 4. If I have made a stipulation [for
payment] with a filiusfamilias, and lent him the money after he has
become a paterfamilias, whether he has suffered capitis deminutio,
or has become independent by the death of his father, or otherwise,
without capitis deminutio, the rule to lay down is that the


TIT. VI] On the Senatusconsultum Macedonianum 409


senatusconsultum does not apply, as the loan was made to one
who was already a paterfamilias ;


SCAVOLA (Questions 2) for the common saying that it is
not allowed to lend to a filiusfamilias is to be referred not to the
verbal transaction, but to the payment of the money.


PAULUS (Questions 3) Accordingly in this case he will also
be condemned for the whole debt, not to the extent of his ability
to pay.


SCAVOLA (Questions 2) On the other hand, if you have
made the stipulation with a paterfamilias and afterwards lend the
money to him when he has become a filiusfamilias, it will be
correctly laid down that the power of the Senate is to be applied,
because the essential part of the obligation was perfected by the
payment.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) So if a filiasfamilias has given
a guaranty, Neratius says (bb. 1 and 2) that the senatusconsultum
does not apply. Celsus agrees (b. 4). But Julianus adds that if
recourse was had to this as a pretext, so that a filiusfamilias
who was going to receive a loan became a guarantor, some other
person being made the principal debtor, the fraud effected on the
senatusconsultum prejudices [the claim] and an exceptio should be
given both to the jiliusfamilias and to the principal debtor, since
relief is given also to the guarantor of a filiusfamilias. 1. Thesame
writer says that if, when the money was to go to a filiusfamilias,
I accepted two debtors, Titius and the filiusfamilias, but I accepted
Titius as a principal debtor, with the object that he should not avail
himself of the help of the senatusconsultwm as a guarantor of the
Jiliusfamilias, an exceptio utilis should be given on account of the
fraud. 2. But, further, if a jiliusfamilias, at a time when his
father was banished or was absent for a long time, promised a
dowry for a daughter, and gave something of his father’s as a
pledge, the senatusconsultum will not apply; the father’s property
will not indeed be bound [by the pledge]: of course if the son
becomes heir to the father and sues to recover the pledge he will
be defeated by the exceptio on the ground of dolus. 3. It is a
point to be considered whether we ought to regard as a loan not
only one of money paid over, but, in fact one of any thing which
can be lent for consumption. But the words appear to me to be
meant to apply to money paid, for the senatusconsultum says “has
lent money.” But if there has been a fraud on the senatusconsultum,


410 On the Senatusconsultum Macedonianum [BK XIV


grain, for instance, or wine or oil having been given so that, this
produce having been sold, the price may be used, relief should be
given to the filiusfamilias. 4. If the fjiliusfamilias was in the
potestas of one person when the money was lent, but is now in
that of another, the intention of the senatusconsultum is not
inapplicable, and the exceptio will therefore be given. 5. Again if
not death, but some other event has happened to the father,
whereby he is removed from citizenship, the senatusconsultum must
be held to be applicable. 6. The action is refused not only to him
who lent the money, but also to his successors. 7. In like manner
also, if one person handed over the money, and another made
the stipulation [for repayment], the excepto will be given against
the latter, though he himself did not pay the money. But if one
or the other of them did not know that he was in the poféestas of
this father, the somewhat severe rule is that both are affected by
the knowledge. The same rule applies where there are two
co-stipulators. 8. Again if I have accepted two jiliifamilias as
debtors, but supposed one of them to be a paterfamilias, it will
be a material point to which of them the money went, so that, if I
knew the one to whom it went to be a filiusfamilias, | am barred
by the exceptio: if it went to the one as to whom I was in
ignorance, I am not barred. 9. But whether the money was lent
at interest or without interest the case is within the senatuscon-
sultum. 10. Though the Senate does not explicitly say to whom
it gives the exceptio, yet it must be understood that the heir of the
filiusfamilias, if he dies a paterfamilias, and his father, if he dies
a filiusfamilias, may avail themselves of the exceptio. 11. In some
cases even though the senatusconsultum is available, nevertheless
an action lies against a third person: suppose for instance a
filiusfamilias who is an institor has borrowed money; for
Julianus tells us (b. 12) that the institor himself will rely on the
senatusconsultum if he is sued, but the institorian action lies
against the person who appointed him. However, he says, if the
father himself had appointed him to manage his business, or had
allowed him to carry on one with the peculiwm, the senatuscon-
sultum would not apply, for the contract may be considered to
have been made with the father’s assent, since if he knows that he
is trading he may be supposed to have allowed this too, if he did
not expressly prohibit it. 12. In like manner, if he has received
money and applied it to his father’s concerns the senatus-
consultwm does not apply, for he received it on behalf of his father,
1 Omit merces accipere. M.


TIT. VI] On the Senatusconsultum Macedonianum 411


not for himself. Moreover, if he did not in the first instance
receive it with that purpose, but, later on, did in fact apply it to
his father’s concerns, Julianus tells us (Digest b. 12) that the
senatusconsultum does not apply, and that he must be understood
to have received it in the beginning with a view to its application
to his father’s purposes. But if he pays to his father, in discharge
of his own debt, money which he has borrowed, he will not be
considered to have expended it in his father’s concerns, and thus,
if the father did not know of it, the senatusconsultum will still
apply. 13. The observation that the senatusconsultum would not
apply in the case of one who, being away for the purpose of his
studies, had borrowed money, holds good provided he has not
exceeded a reasonable limit in his borrowing, at any rate the
amount which his father was in the habit of allowing him. 14. If
a son has borrowed money to pay off one who, if he sued, could
not be met by the exceptio, the exceptio on the senatusconsultum
does not apply. 15. Moreover the senatusconsultum will not apply
if the father begins to pay what the son has borrowed, on the
ground that he has ratified the transaction. 16. If after he has
become a paterfamilias he pays part of the debt the senatus-
consultum will not apply and he will not be able to recover what
he has paid.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) If, however, it has been paid by
a curator, in ignorance, it should be recovered.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) But if, when he has become
a paterfamilias, he gives a thing by way of pledge, the rule to be
laid down will be that the eaceptio on the senatusconsultum is to
be refused to him, to the amount of the value of the pledge. 1. If
the son pays to the creditor money which a third person has given
to him as a present, can the father bring a specific vindication for
this or recover it [by condictio|? And Julianus says that if the
money was actually given to him on the condition that he should
pay it to the creditor, it is to be considered as having passed
immediately from the donor to the creditor, and the moneys
become the property of the receiver : if indeed it was simply given
to him, the son had no power of alienation of the moneys, and
therefore, if he pays, the condictio is available to the father in any
case. 2. This senatusconsultum applies also to women in potestas,
nor is it material if they are alleged to have acquired ornaments
with the money ; for by the decree of the most distinguished order
an action is refused also to one who has lent money to a filius-


10


11


12


13


412 On the Senatusconsultum Macedonianum [BK XIv


Jamilias, and it does not matter whether the coins have been
consumed or are extant in the peculium. Much more therefore
will the contract of one who has lent money to a jiliafamilias be
disapproved by the rigour of the senatusconsultum. 3. Relief is
given not only to the filiusfamilias and to his father, but also to
his guarantor, and to his mandator, who also themselves have the
resource of the action on mandatum, unless indeed they inter-
vened with the intention of making a gift, for then as they have
no right to fall back on him, the senatusconsultum will have no
operation. But, further, if they did not intervene with the intent
to make a donation, but at the wish of the father, the whole
contract will be considered to have been approved by the father.
4. And yet those who have intervened on behalf of the jfilius-


Jamilias without the father’s consent cannot recover on paying,


for so the Divine Hadrian also enacted, and it may be said that
they will not get their money back. And yet they are protected
by a perpetual exceptio ; but so also is the son himself, but never-
theless he does not recover, for only those cannot recover what
they have paid who are freed from an action by way of penalty on
the creditors, and not because a law aimed at absolutely destroy-
ing their liability’. But although they do not recover on paying,


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) because the natural obligation
remains,


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) yet, nevertheless, if, not having
pleaded the eaceptio, they are condemned, they can avail them-
selves of the exceptio on the senatusconsultum. And so Julianus
tells us in the case of the jiliusfamilias himself, on the analogy of
the woman who has become a guarantor.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) If money is lent to a son with
the bare knowledge of the father, it should be held that the
senatusconsultum does not apply. But if the father has authorised
lending to the son, and has afterwards changed his mind without
the knowledge of the creditor, there will be no case for the senatus-
consultum, as the beginning of the contract is what has to be
considered.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) If, with the intent of
superseding the old obligation, we stipulate with a fliusfamilias
for payment of what we have lent to a third person, Julianus
writes that the senatusconsultum is no obstacle.


1 See however M.


B14


15


16


17


18


|

)
19
20


TIT. VI} On the Senatusconsultum Macedonianum 413


JULIANUS (Digest 12) I have a son and by him a grandson:
money was lent to my grandson with his father’s assent: the
question was raised whether this was done contrary to the senatus-
consultum. I said that though in the language of the senatus-
consultum sons are mentioned, yet the same rule ought to be
observed in the case of a grandson too: the assent of this father
will not prevent the money from being regarded as lent contrary
to the senatusconsultum, since he himself is in the condition of not
being able to borrow money against the will of his father.


MARCIANUS (Jnstitutes 14) It matters nothing who has lent
to a filiusfamilias, whether it is a private citizen or a city; for
the Divine Severus and Antoninus have laid it down by rescript
that the senatusconsultum applies to the case of a city also.


PAULUS (Responsa 4) If a filiusfamilias, in the absence of
his father, has given an acknowledgment as having received money
under a mandatum from his father, and has written to his father
to pay the money in the province, the father, if he disapproves the
action of his son, ought, without delay, to communicate an expres-
sion of his contrary wish.


THE SAME (Sentences 2) If a filiusfamilias borrows money
for the purpose of giving it as a marriage portion on behalf
of his sister, the father will be liable to the action for money
applied to his concerns ; for, if the girl dies married, a right to
recover the marriage portion is given to him.


VENULEIUS (Stipulations 2) Julianus says that the creditor
of a filiusfamilias cannot receive a guarantor after the latter’s death,
because there survives no obligation either civil or natural with
which the guarantor can be connected: of course a guarantor can
properly be received from the father on account of the action on
the peculimm which may lie against him.


PoMPONIUS (Various Passages 7) Julianus says that the
exceptio under the Senatusconsultum Macedonianwm stands in
the way of no one except one who knew or could have known that
the person to whom he lent was a filiusfamilias.


THE SAME (on Senatusconsulta 5) If one to whom money
had been lent while he was in his father’s potestas, made, in
ignorance of the facts, after he had become a paterfamilias, an
independent promise of the money, in such a way as to supersede
the old obligation, and a claim is brought on that stipulation, an
exceptio based on the facts should be pleaded.


FIFTEENTH BOOK.


1.
ON THE ACTION ON THE PECULIVM.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) The Preetor thought it the
orderly method to set forth first those contracts of persons who are
subject to the potestas of another which give a right of action for
the whole debt and then to proceed to the present case in which
an action is given on the peculiwm. 1. This edict is, however,
threefold, for there arises from it either an action on the peculium,
or one based on the application of property to [the defendant’s]
concerns, or that based on authorisation. 2. The words of the
edict are of this kind : “whatever transaction shall be gone through
with him who is in the potestas of another.” 3. It speaks of him,
not of her, but an action is nevertheless given under this edict in
respect of one who is of the female sex. 4. If a contract is made
with a filiusfamilias or a slave, who is under the age of puberty,
the action on the peculium is given against the father or master if
the peculium of these persons has been enriched. 5. The word
potestas is to be understood as applied in common both to the son
and to the slave. 6. No greater attention is to be paid to the
ownership of the slaves than to the fact of having them at disposal,
for we may be sued on account not only of our own slaves, but also
of common slaves, and indeed of those also who are, in good faith,
in the relation of slaves to us, whether they be freemen or slaves
of another person.


Pomponius (on Sabinus 5) The action limited to the
peculium and the other “honorary” actions lie against the holder of
usufruct or wsus in a case in which the slaves held in usufruct or
usus would ordinarily acquire [to the holder]: in other cases,
against the owner.


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 415


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) Although the Preetor promises
the action where! there has been a transaction with one who is in
potestas, yet it must be understood that the action on the peculium
is given though he is in the potestas of no one, for example, if a
contract is made with a slave who forms part of an inheritance
before the inheritance is entered on. 1. Hence Labeo says that if
a slave is substituted in the second or third grade, and while the heirs
in the first grade are deliberating, a contract is made with him, and
he then, on their repudiating, becomes free and heir, it may be said
that he is liable to be sued on the peculiwm and to the extent to
which proceeds have been applied to his concerns (de in rem verso).
2. It is of little moment whether a slave belongs to a man or toa
woman, for a woman also is liable to the action on the peculiwm.
3. Pedius says that even owners under puberty are liable on the
peculium, for the contract is not made with the children them-
selves, that the sanction of a tutor should be looked for. The same
writer adds that a ward cannot confer a peculium on a slave even
with the sanction of a tutor. 4. We hold, further, that the action
on the peculiwm should be given against the curator of a lunatic,
for even the slave of such a person may have a peculium, not by
reason of its having been granted to him that he should have it,
but where there has been no prohibition of his having it. 5. The
question has been discussed whether ifa filiusfamilias or a slave
becomes guarantor for anyone or accepts liability as surety in any
other way, or gives a mandatum [for a loan of money], there is an
action on the peculium. Here the better view is that in the case
of the slave regard must be had to the reason for the guaranty or
mandatum. And Celsus (b. 6) approves this opinion in the case
of a slave guarantor. If therefore the slave undertakes the
liability as a voluntary surety, not as doing a piece of business
affecting the peculiwm, the master will not be liable on the peculiwm.
6. Julianus also writes (Digest b. 12) that if a slave gives a


- mandatum for a payment to my creditor it is a material point? what


ground he had for giving the mandatwn. If the mandatwn was for
payment to him, as a creditor of his own, the master has incurred
liability on the peculium, but if he merely rendered a service as
voluntary guarantor, the master does not incur the liability on the
peculium. 7. With this agrees what the same Julianus says, that if
I have taken a guarantor from my son, whatever I receive from the
guarantor, I shall have to account for in an action on mandatum,
not as for money applied to my concerns, but to the extent of the
! Kor tamen read tum. Cf. M. 2 Omit ait.


416 On the Action on the Peculium [Book xv


peculium. You may say the same in the case of a guarantor of a
slave, and also if a third person makes a payment to me on behalf
of my son who is indebted to me. He adds that if, however, my
son was not indebted to me, the guarantor will be able to avail
himself of an exceptio doli, and to bring a condictio if he has paid.
8. If a slave, while living as a free man, agrees to a reference to
arbitration, the question is raised whether an action on the peculinm
should be given for the penalty agreed to be paid on disobedience
to the award, the case being regarded as one of voluntary agency
(negotia gesta), just as the action lies [for the penalty] in the case
of maritime loan’. But to both Nerva filius and myself the better
view appears to be that an action on the peculium ought not to be
given on a reference by a slave, for neither is an action given
against him (the master) if the slave is condemned in an action at
law. 9. But if a son is accepted as a guarantor, or as any kind of
surety, it is a question whether he binds the father to the extent
of the peculium. The sound view is that of Sabinus and Cassius
who hold that the father is always liable to the extent of the
peculium, and that [a son] differs in this respect from a slave.
10. Accordingly the father will always be liable on a reference to
arbitration. Papinian speaks in the same sense (Questions b. 9),
and he says that it is immaterial on what matter the reference was
agreed to, whether it was on one on which [the creditor] could
have brought an action on the peculium against the father, or was,
in fact, on one on which he could not have done so, since the
father is sued on the stipulation. 11. The same authority says
that the father is liable also to an action on a judgment to the
extent of the peculium, and so Marcellus thinks, even under an
action in respect of which the father could not have been liable to
an action on the pecalium, for, just as in a stipulation a contract is
made with a filiusfamilias, so it is in an action at law. Thus not
the origin of the action, but the actual liability on the judgment, is
to be taken account of as the source of obligation: accordingly, he
is of the same opinion where the son is condemned as voluntary
defendant on behalf of another (defensov). 12. It is clear law that
a condictio on the ground of theft lies against a filiusfamilias.
There arises a question, however, whether the action on the
peculium should be given against the father or the master: and
the better view is, that the action on the peculiuwm should be given
to the extent to which the master has been enriched by the theft
committed. Labeo approves this view, on the ground that it is
1 Cr. 22. 2.\9.


Se


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 417


most unjust that, by the slave’s theft, the master should be enriched
without incurring any liability. For the action on the peculium is
also available in connexion with the action for things carried off,
brought on account of a filiafamilias, to the extent of what has
reached the father. 13. If a filiusfamilias who is a duwmvir has
not taken care that security is given [by a éutor] for the future
safety of the ward’s property, Papinianus says (Questions b. 9)
that the action on the peculiwm is available. And I am of opinion
that the question whether he became a decurio at the wish of his
father changes nothing, for the father’s obligation was to safeguard
the public interests.


Pompontus (on Sabinus 7) Not that of which the slave
keeps an account separately from his master forms part of the
peculium, but that which the master has himself set apart, keeping
his own account distinct from that of the slave. For since the
master can take away the whole peculiam of the slave or increase
it or diminish it, what is to be considered is not what the slave,
but what the master, has done with the view of creating a peculiwm
for the slave. 1. This however I consider to be correct in the case in
which the master wished to release the slave from a debt, so that if
the master has remitted what the slave owed, by a mere expression
of intent, the slave ceases to be a debtor, but if, on the other hand,
the master makes statements of account so as to make himself out
a debtor to the slave, when, in actual fact, he is not a debtor, I hold
otherwise, for a peculium is to be increased not by mere words but
by actual transactions. 2. From these rules it is apparent that
not whatever a slave may hold without his master’s knowledge is
in the pecultum, but whatever he holds with his consent, other-
wise what a slave has stolen from his master will also be in the
peculium, which is not the case. 3. But it often happens that a
slave’s peculium undergoes diminution without the master’s know-
ledge, for instance when the slave does damage to the [property of]
the master, or commits theft. 4. If you commit theft against me
with the help of my slave, that must be deducted, from the
peculium, by which what I can recover in respect of the stolen
property falls short [of what is due]. 5. If the pecuiwm is
exhausted by debt due to the master, the assets nevertheless retain
their character as peculium, for if the master should make a gift
of the debt to the slave, or a third person should pay the master
on behalf of the slave, the peculiwm is made up, and there is no
need of a new grant by the master. 6. That is to be considered


M: J.) 11: 27


418 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK XV


in the peculium of underslaves of which they keep an account
distinct not only! from the master, but also? from him in whose
peculium they are.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) The father or master is liable
to be sued on account of a deposit only to the amount of the
peculium, and so far as I may have been defrauded by any dolus
malus on his part. 1. Further, if any property has been handed over
toa filiusfamilias or slave on permissive occupancy (precarto) the
father or master is liable only to the extent of the peeulium. 2. If
a jiliusfamilias has tendered an oath, and it has been sworn, an
action on the peculium should be given, as if a contract had been
made, but in the case of a slave the rule is different. 3, The
peculium is so called as being a small sum of money or property
(pusilla pecunia vel patrimonium pusillum). 4. Tubero however
defines peculium thus, as Celsus reports (Digest b. 6): what the
slave, by the master’s permission, holds distinct from the master’s
accounts, that being deducted from it, if anything, which is due to
the master.


CELSUS (Digest 6) According to Labeo the definition of
peculium which Tubero expressed does not cover the peculinm of
underslaves, but this is incorrect, for by the very fact that a master
has conferred a peculium on his slave, he must be understood to
have authorised one for the underslave.


Unpianus (on the Edict 29) And Celsus also himself
approves this opinion of Tubero. 1. And he adds that a ward
or lunatic cannot, indeed, grant a peculium to a slave, but a
peculium already created, that is before the lunacy supervened,
or by the father of the ward, will not be taken away by these
conditions. This opinion is sound and agrees with what Marcellus,
commenting on Julianus, adds, “that it may happen that a slave
has a peculiaum in respect of one of his masters, and not in respect
of the other, for example if one of the masters is a lunatic or a
ward, if (as, he says, some think) a slave cannot have a pecaulium
except by the master’s concession. But I think that, for him to
have one, it is not essential that it be permitted by the master for
the slave to have a peculium, but that it be not taken away.” The
case of free administration of the peciuliwm is different, for this
must be expressly granted. 2. Clearly, however, it is not necessary


1 The words non solum appear to be misplaced. Cf. M.
2 Omit id cuius. Of. M.


©o


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 419


for him to know all the individual things, but to have a more
general knowledge, and Pomponius leans to this view. 3. A son, as
well as a slave, under the age of puberty, can have a peculiun,
says Pedius (b. 25), since, he remarks, in this matter all depends on
concession by the master. And thus if the son or slave becomes
insane he will keep the peculium. 4. Things of all kinds may be
in the peculiwm, both moveables and land: he may also have in
his peculium underslaves and the peculiwm of underslaves, and, also,
beyond this, claims against debtors. 5. Further, if anything should
be due to the slave in an action of theft or in any other action, it
will be reckoned in the pecelium ; also, as Labeo says, inheritance
and legacy. 6. Moreover he will have in the peculiwm what his
master owes him, if, let us suppose, he has spent money on the
master’s business and the master has been willing to remain a
debtor to him, or if the master has sued a debtor of his. Thus, if,
for instance, the master has recovered double damages for evictio
under a purchase by the slave, this will be applied to the slave’s
peculium, unless, as it happened, the master had the intention not
to allow it to be in the peculium of the slave. 7. So also if a
fellow-slave owes him anything it will be in the peculium, if, in fact,
he has a peculiwm, or comes to have one, as the case may be.


PauLus (on Sabinus 4) Property of the master, as to which
he has formed a wish that it shall be in the pecudiwm, he has not
then and there made peculium, but [only] if he has handed it over,
or, as it was in the hands of the slave, has treated it as handed
over: for the thing needs an actual transfer. But, on the other
hand, so soon as he has formed a contrary desire, the peculium of
the slave ceases to be peculiwm.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) But if the master does damage to
[property of | the slave this will not be credited to the peculium, any
more than if he stole [from the slave]. 1. Certainly, if a fellow-slave
has done damage, or stolen, this appears to be held to be in the
peculiwn, and so says Pomponius (b. 11): for, again, if the master
has recovered, or can recover anything from one who has stolen
property from the peculium, this, says Neratius (Responsa b. 2), is
to be credited to the peculium’. 2. The peculinm is however to be
estimated subject to a deduction of what is due to the master, for
the master is considered to have stepped in first and proceeded
against his slave. 3. To this limitation Servius added, further,


1 Omit ez. M.
yo re.


420 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK Xv


anything which may be due to those who are in his potestas, for no
one doubts that this also is due to the master. 4. Moreover that
also will be deducted which is due to those persons who are in the
tutela or cura of the master or the father, or of whom he is
managing the affairs, provided he is free from dolus, for, again, if he
puts an end to, or lessens, the peculium, by dolus, he is liable. For
if the master is held always to step in first and sue, why may he not
be supposed to have proceeded against himself also in this case, in
which he will be liable either in an action on fuéela, or In one on
voluntary agency (negotia gesta), or in an actio utilis? For, as
Pedius accurately puts it, the reason why the peculium is less by
what is due to the master or father is that it is not likely that the
master would assent to the slave’s having in the peculium what is
due to him. Indeed since in other cases we hold one who is
managing affairs for another or administering a ¢utela, to have
recovered the money from himself, why should he not in this case,
of peculium also, have exacted what ought to have been exacted ?
The view will therefore be maintainable that it is as if he had paid
to himself, if anyone seeks to proceed on the peculiwm. 5. The
slave’s creditor who has become heir to his master also deducts
from the peculiam what is due to him, if he is sued, whether the
slave has received a gift of liberty or not, and the same holds if the
slave is given by way of unconditional legacy: for he will deduct
what is due to him as if be had stepped in and proceeded against
himself, though he at no time had the ownership of the man freed
or left as an unconditional legacy. So says Julianus (b. 12). Of
course if the slave has received a gift of liberty under a condition,
Julianus says, less doubtfully, in the same passage, that the heir
will deduct, for he has become the master. In support of his view
Julianus also adduces the point, that if I become heir to one who,
after the death of the slave or son, was liable to be sued within the
year, on the peculium, I shall without doubt deduct what is due to
me. 6. Whether he is in debt to the master on contract or for
unpaid balances in account, the master will deduct. So too, if he
is in debt to him on delict, for example, by reason of a theft which
he has committed, there will equally be a deduction. But it is a
debateable point whether [there will be deducted] the amount
of the theft itself, that is, only the actual loss incurred by the
master, or so much as he could have claimed if the slave of another
person had committed the theft, that is, with the penalties for
theft. But the view first expressed is the sounder, that only the
amount of the theft itself may be deducted. 7. If the slave has


10


a1


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 421


wounded himself, [the master] ought not to deduct this damage,
any more than if he killed himself or threw himself over a
precipice, for even slaves are entitled to inflict personal injuries
on themselves. But if the master has looked after the slave
wounded by himself, I think he has become a debtor to the master
in respect of the expenses, though, if he had attended to him
in ill-health, he would have been rather looking after his own
interests. 8. Also if the master has incurred an obligation on
account of the slave or, having incurred an obligation, has satisfied
it, this will be deducted from the pecaliwm ; so too, if money has
been lent him with the master’s sanction, for Julianus (Digest
b. 12) lays it down that this should be deducted. But I consider that
this is true only if what was received by him has not been applied
to the purposes of the master or father, otherwise he will be bound
to charge this against himself. Again, if he becomes guarantor for
the slave, Julianus says (Digest b. 12) that this should be deducted.
But Marcellus holds that, in both cases, if the master is not as yet
out of pocket, it is better that the money should be paid to the
creditor, on the terms that he gives security that he will refund,
if the master, having been sued on account of the matter, pays
something, than that there should be a deduction in the first
instance, so that, preferably, the creditor should have the interest
of the money in the meantime. If however the master, having
been sued on the peculium, is condemned, it will be proper that
there should be a deduction in a later action, for the master or
father has become liable to an action on the judgment: for, again,
if, not having suffered judgment, he had paid something to the
creditor on account of the slave, he would deduct this also.


Gaius (on the provincial Edict 9) If however the first
action on the peculium is as yet in suspense, and judgment is given
under the later action, no account of the first action ought to be
taken in any way in the condemnation under the second, since, in
the action on the peculium, the first comer has the better position ;
but he is held to be the first comer, not who first joined issue, but
who first reached the stage of decision by the judge.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If a master, sued in a noxal
action, has paid the damages, this must be deducted from the
peculium, whereas if he has made noxal surrender nothing can be
deducted. 1. Again, if the master has given a formal undertaking
that he will pay something on behalf of the slave, it will be right
that a deduction be made, just as if the slave had promised the


422 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK xv


master to take over the obligation (expromiserat) of a debtor to
him. It is the same also if he has taken over liability under a
promise of payment to his master for his liberty, he having become
a debtor to his master, but only if the action is brought after he is
freed. 2. But if a slave has obtained payment from a debtor of the
master, the question arises whether he has made himself a debtor
to the master, and Julianus says (Digest b. 12) that the master
will not be able to deduct, otherwise than if he has ratified the
taking: the same things are to be said also in the case of a filius-
Jamilias. And I consider the view of Julianus to be correct; for
we take into account natural debts in deduction from the pecaiwm,
and it is in accordance with nature that a son or slave should be
free from liability, by reason of the fact that he has apparently
exacted what was not due. 3. But it is a debateable point whether
what the master has once deducted when he has been sued, he
ought again to remove from the peculiwm if he is sued, or whether,
in fact, a deduction having once been made, payment should be
considered to have been made to him. Here Neratius and Nerva
think, and Julianus also tells us (Digest b. 12), that if he actually
took it away from the pecauliwm it ought not to be deducted, but
that if in fact he left the condition of the peculiwm unaftected he
should deduct. 4. Then he says that if a slave had in the peculium
an underslave worth 5, and owed the master 5, on account of which
the master deducted the underslave, and, afterwards, the under-
slave having died, the slave acquires another of the same value,
he does not cease to be a debtor to the master, as if the first ©
underslave had died to the loss of the master, unless, as it might
be, he died when [the master] had taken him away from the slave,
and paid himself. 5. The same writer says, with truth, that if,
when the underslave was worth 10, the master, sued on the
peculium, paid 5 on account of the slave, because 5 were due to
himself, and, thereafter the underslave died, the master will be
able to deduct 10 as against another plaintiff on the peculiwm,
because he had made the slave his debtor in respect also of the 5
he had paid for him. And this opinion is sound, unless he took
the underslave from the slave in order to pay himself. 6. But
what we have said, that what is due to him who is sued on the
peculium ought to be deducted, is to be understood thus: provided
he could not recover this in any other way. 7. Julianus goes on
to say that if a vendor who has sold the slave, with the peculiwn,
is sued on the peculium, he ought not to deduct what is due to
him, for he could have deducted this from the balance sheet of the


12


13


14


15


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 423


peculium, and can now bring a condictio for it as not having been
due (for what is due to the master is not in the pecwlium) He
can also, he says, bring an action on sale. This is to be approved,
provided there was so much in the peculiwm when it was sold that
the master could satisfy his claim; apart from this, if, later on,
there was an addition to his claim, the condition of a debt which
the master had not deducted* becoming satisfied, the contrary
must be said. 8. The same writer says: if one has acquired a
slave in respect of whom he had an action on the peculium, can he
deduct what is due to him, since he has an action on the peculium
against the vendor? And he rightly holds that he can: for so also
any other person can choose whether he will proceed against the
buyer or the seller: this man, therefore, chooses deduction instead
of action. And I do not see what the creditors have to complain
of, since they themselves can sue the vendor if they think that
perhaps there is something in the peculium. 9. However not
only what is due to him who is sued is to be-deducted, but, indeed,
anything which may be due to his partner, and so Julianus says
(Digest b. 12), for by the same principle as that on which either
may be sued for the whole debt, he is entitled to deduct what is
due to the other. This opinion is the accepted one:


JULIANUS (Digest 12) for in this case action may be brought
even against that owner in respect of whom there is no peculium.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) But it is not correct in the
case of buyer and seller, and in that of usufructuary and owner,
and of others who are not partners, and of the owner and the
bona fide buyer, for Julianus also says (b. 12) that neither of these
can deduct what is due to the other.


JULIANUS (Digest b. 12) Again, where, by a will, it is
directed that a slave shall be free at once, the action on the peculian
should be brought against each of the heirs, and none of them will
deduct more than is due to himself. 1. So, where the slave died
during the master’s life, and then the master, within the year, left
several heirs, both the action on the peculiwm and the right of
deduction are divided.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) But if there are two bona fide
possessors, it must still be said that neither will deduct more than
is due to him, and the same is true if there are two usufructuaries,


1 After debetur insert potest. Cf. M.
2 Kor distraxerat read detrawerat. Cf. M.


16


17


18


19


424 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK XV


since they have no partnership relation between them. The same
rule will sometimes be laid down in the case of partners if, as it
happens, they have separate peculia as between themselves, so that
one cannot be sued in respect of the peculiwm of the other. Other-
wise, if the peculiwm is common, they will be sued for the whole
and, also, that will be deducted which is due to either of them.


JULIANUS (Digest 12) What case, then, is there in which
the peculiwm of a common slave will belong to one alone of his
masters? First, if one sells a half share in a slave and gives
him no peculiwm: again, if one gives money or property of any
kind to a common slave, with the intention to retain the ownership
of the things, but to give the slave the administration of them.
Marcellus adds the note: that also is a case, where one owner
takes away the peculiwm, or where an owner has, in truth, certainly
granted one, but the grant applies to debts due to the master.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If my ordinary slave has
underslaves, can I deduct from the pecauliwm of the ordinary slave
what the underslaves owe me? And the first question is this:
whether their peculia are reckoned in the pecalium of the ordinary
slave. Here Proculus and Atilicinus hold that just as these
underslaves are in the peculiwm, so too are their peculia. And, in
fact, what their master, that is the ordinary slave, owes me, can be
deducted from their pecauliwm, that however which the underslaves
themselves owe, only from their own peculium. But, also, if they
owe something, not to me but to the ordinary slave, it will be
deducted from their peculiwm as being due to a fellow-slave. That
however which the ordinary slave owes to them will not be deducted
from the peculium of the ordinary slave, because their peculium is
in his peculiwm (and Servius gave a responsum to this effect), but,
as I think, their peculiwm will be increased, as in the case in which
a master owes to his slave.


PAULUS (Questions 4) From which it follows that if his
peculium is left to Stichus, and he sues under the will, he will not
be compelled to give up what his underslave owes to the master,
unless he, that is the underslave, has a pecaliwm.


Uupranus (on the Edict 29) Hence the question arises
whether, if an action on the peculium has been brought, in respect
of the ordinary slave, action can still be brought in respect of the
underslaves; and I think it cannot. But if an action has been
brought on the peculium of the underslave, there may also be an


8 oe ee i eee te. Ste


a ae eee


eee


i


<<.


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 425


action on the pecwiwm of the ordinary slave. 1. There may be,
belonging to me, a peculiwn of a twofold legal nature: suppose
there is a dotal slave: he may have a peculium which concerns me ;
he may also have one which concerns my wife. For what he has
acquired in the husband’s affairs or by his labour, this belongs to
the husband, and accordingly if he has been appointed heir or a
legacy has been given to him, in contemplation of the husband,
Pomponius says that the latter is not under an obligation to hand
this over. If, then, an action is brought against me on a contract
which concerns me, can I deduct everything, whatever it may be,
which is due to me, whether in an affair of mine or in one which
concerns my wife? Or do we in fact distinguish the origins of the
business, as referring to two peculia, in such a way that regard is
had to the origin of the debt which is sued on, so that if the action
is in fact brought on a contract which concerns the wife, I can
deduct what is due from that peculium', if on a contract which
concerns me | can deduct my own claim? And this question is more
luminously treated in the case of a usufructuary, whether an action
on the pecudium can be brought against him only on that contract
which? concerns him, or on any. Here Marcellus tells us that the
usufructuary is also liable, and on any contract, for he who
contracts contemplates the whole peculiwn of the slave as his
property. Clearly, he says, this must be admitted, in any case,
that, when the person whom the matter concerns has been first
sued, the other, for whom there was no acquisition [under the
contract], may be sued for the residue. And this is the more
probable view and is approved by Papinianus. The same must be
said in the case of two bona fide buyers. But in the case of the
husband it is better to say, simply, that he is liable to the action
on the peculium. But if the husband has paid something on
account of a slave of this kind, can he deduct it as against the wife
suing on account of dos? And he says that if what was paid to
the creditor concerns the peculium of each kind, it ought to
constitute a diminution of each, proportionately, and it can be
gathered from this that if the contract refers to either one® of the
peculia, there will be in the one case a deduction for the wife alone,
in the other there will not, if the contract referred to that peculiwm
which remained with the husband. 2. Sometimes an action on the
peculium is given even to the usufructuary himself against the

1 For peculio read contractu and for contractu read peculio. Cf. M.

* For quod read qui. Cf. M.

3 For alterum read alterutrum. Cf. M.


20


21


22


23


426 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK Xv


master, for example, if he has a peculium in respect of the latter,
but in respect of the former has either none or less than is due to
the usufructuary. The same considerations may give a result in the
contrary sense, although in the case of two owners the action on
partnership or that for division of common property suffices :


Pauwus (on the Edict 30) for partners cannot bring the
action on the peculium against each other.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) The Preetor has also with
excellent reason charged in the peculiwm whatever the master has
done with dolus malus by which the peculiwm is lessened. But we
must understand it to be dolus malus if he has taken away the
peculium from him ; and further, if he has allowed him to entangle
the affairs of the peculiwmn to the destruction of the creditors’
interests, Mela writes that this is something done with dolus malus.
So also if, when one has an idea that a third person is going to
proceed against him [on the peculiwm], he hands the pecudiwm over
to someone else, he is not free from dolus. But if he pays a debt
to a third person, I have no doubt about this, that he is not liable,
for the payment is to a creditor, and it is lawful for a creditor to
be active in recovering his own. 1. If the act is done with dolus
of a tutor, or a curator of a lunatic, or a procurator, it is to be
considered whether the ward or the lunatic or the employer can be
sued on the peculium. Here I think that, if the tutor is solvent,
the ward is liable to account for his dolus, especially if any
proceeds have reached him, and so Pomponius tells us (Letters
b.8). The same must be said in the case of curator and procurator.
2. A buyer however will not be liable for the fraud of his vendor,
nor will an heir or other successor, except so far as proceeds have
reached him. But whether the act done with dolus malus is before
joinder of issue or after, it comes within the official purview of the
judge. 3. If the master or father declines the action on the
peculium he is not to be listened to, but should be compelled to
join issue, as in the case of any other personal action.


Pompontius (on Sabinus 7) If the master has given an
undertaking as to apprehended damage (damn infectz) in respect
of a house belonging to the pecaliwm, account ought to be taken of
this, and therefore security should be given by him who is suing
on the peculium.


THE SAME (on Sabinus 9) The undertaking as to appre-
hended damage in respect of a house in the pecaulium must be


Sa


24


25


296


27


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 427


given in full, in the same way that a noxal action on account of an
underslave must be submitted to in full, because the plaintiff, if
the proper steps in defence are not taken, takes away the things,
or possesses them, as a pledge.


ULPIANUS (on Sabinus 26) The curator of a lunatic can
both give and deny the administration of the peculiwm to the slave,
as well as to the son of the lunatic.


POMPONIUS (on Sabinus 23) Such clothing is included in
the peculium, as the master has given with the intent that the
slave is to have the use of it permanently and has handed over to
him, on the terms that no other person is to use it, and that it may
be kept by him with a view to that use. But clothing which the
master has so given to the slave to use, not that he may always use
it, but only for a certain purpose at stated times, for instance, when
in attendance on him or waiting on him at table’, this clothing
does not form part of the peculium.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) If the master has once, when
sued on the peculiwm, made good what was due on this ground,
that is, what he had done with dolus, he will not have to make
anything good to others on the same facts. And, further, if the
slave owes him as much as that by which he has, with dolus,
diminished [the fund], he will not be liable to condemnation. It
will follow from these propositions that also where the slave has
been freed or alienated, he is liable on the ground of dolus too,
within the year.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) The action on the
peculium is given in respect both of female slaves and of jiliw-
Jamilias: especially is it available against such a person if she is a
tailoress or weaver or carries on any common handicraft. Julianus
says that the action on deposit, also, and on loan for use, should be
given in respect of them, and that the tributorian action should be
given if they have carried on business with merchandise of the pecu-
lium to the knowledge of the father or master. Muchmoreundoubted
also is it where there has been application to the concerns of the
father or master, and where the contract was with his authorisation’.
1. It is settled law that the master’s heir ought also to deduct such
property of the inheritance as the slave, in respect of whom an
action on the pecudium is brought against him, had carried away,
consumed or damaged, before the inheritance was entered on.


1 Text corrupt. Cf. M. 2 For est quod read exque. Cf. M.


428 On the Action on the Peculium  [B00K Xv


2. If a slave has been alienated, notwithstanding that the Preetor
promises an action on the peculiwm, within one year, against the
person who has alienated him, yet, nevertheless, an action is also
given against the new master, and it is immaterial whether he has
acquired another peculium, with him, or [the new owner] has
granted to the same man that which he bought or received as a
gift together with him. 3. The view has been generally accepted,
and Julianus also approves it, that it is to be freely permitted to
the creditors to sue heirs’ singly for their proportions, or to proceed
against any one for the whole. 4. But Julianus is of opinion that
it is not to be allowed to the person who sold the slave to bring an
action on the peculiwm against the buyer in respect of that which
he had lent to the slave before the sale. 5. And, again, if I lend
to a third person’s slave, and buy him and then sell him, he holds,
similarly, that no action should be given to me against the buyer.
6. He considers, however, that an action should be given to me
against the vendor, but only within a year reckoned forward from
the purchase, for what I lent while he was still the property of an-
other person, with a deduction for what the slave has in the way of
peculium, in relation to me. 7. But, just as Julianus thinks that
when he has been alienated no action ought to be given to me
against the buyer in respect of what I myself have lent to my slave,
so also he denies that it should be permitted to me to proceed
against the buyer in respect of what my own slave has lent to my own
slave, if the one to whom the loan was made has been alienated.
8. If one has contracted with the slave of two or more persons, it
should be permitted to him to sue for the whole debt any one of
the owners he chooses, for it is unfair that he who contracted with
one should be driven to a divided attack against several adversaries ;
and account should be taken, not merely of that peculium which the
slave has in connexion with the one against whom action is brought,
but also of that which he has in relation to the other. This, how-
ever, will not result in loss to the one who is condemned, since he
himself can get back again from his partner or partners, by the
action on partnership, or that for the division of common property,
what he has paid above his proportion. Which view Julianus
considers to hold good, provided there was also a peculiwm in
respect of the other owner, for in that case each owner, in paying,
may be regarded as freeing his partner from debt, but if there is
no peculium in respect of the other owner, the contrary is the rule,
for he is not considered to be freeing him from debt in any way.
1 Read heredibus singulis.


28


29


30


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 429


JULIANUS (Digest 12) Accordingly if no one has become
heir or Preetorian successor (bonorwm possessor) to the partner, he
against whom the action has been brought should be condemned
to the extent of any peculiwm there is in respect of him and of so
much as he is able to recover out of the estate [of the other
partner].


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) If a man has, by will,
directed that a slave is to be free, having left as heirs those who have
contracted with the slave, the co-heirs may even proceed against
each other by the action on the pecuwlium, for each is liable, at the
suit of any other person, in respect of that peculiwm which has
fallen to him. 1. Even though a master prohibits dealing with
his slave an action on the peculiwm will lie against him.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) It has been matter of dispute
whether the action on the peculium lies even though there is
nothing in the pecauliam, when the action is brought, provided only
that there is at the time of judgment. Proculus and Pegasus say
that it lies! nevertheless, for the obligation is rightly alleged, even
though there is nothing in the peculiwm. The same has been laid
down in respect of the action for production and the real action,
and this opinion merits our approval. 1. If the action is brought
against one who is part heir to the master or father, he is to be
condemned to the extent of the peculiwm which falls to the heir
who is sued. In the same way’, the action for money applied to
his concerns lies proportionately (unless he has applied something
to the purposes of the heir himself), nor is the heir liable to be
sued like one of common owners, but only for his share. 2. And,
again®, if the slave himself is made heir to a share, the action may
be brought, in the same way, against him. 3. If however the son
is appointed, even for a share, he will none the less be liable to an
action for the whole. Butif he wishes to acquire the proportionate
obligation of his co-heir he is to be heard, for what if the property
has been applied to the father’s purposes? Why should the son not
recover from his co-heir what is in the father’s estate? So also if
the peculium is rich. 4. He who has once brought the action on
the peculium can sue again for the residue of the debt, when
the peculiam has been increased. 5. Ifa creditor has been defeated
by the vendor by means of the exceptio based on the expiration of
a year, relief should be given to him against the buyer, but if it is


1 For teneri read tenere. Cf. M. 2 Kor idem et read item de. Of. M.
3 For sed read sed et. Cf. M.


31


32


430 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK Xv


by any other exceptio, he is to be relieved to this extent, that,
deduction being made of the amount that he might have recovered
from the vendor, he may recover the residue from the buyer.
6. In an allegation of dolus time is to be taken into account; for it
may be that the Preetor will not allow the point of dolus malus to
be taken after the limit of time for the action on dolus, since the
action on do/lus is itself not given after the established limit of time.
7. But in the case of the heir the clause as to dolus ought so to be
framed as to extend! to what has reached him, not beyond this.


PAuLus (on the Edict 30) But if the heir himself has
committed dolus, he makes it good in full.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 2) If one is sued, out of two or
more heirs of a person who could have been sued within the year,
the slave having been freed [inéer vivos] or directed to be free
[by will], or been alienated, or died, all the heirs will be released from
liability, although he may not be condemned in a greater amount
than? that of the peculiwm which he who is sued holds, and this
Julianus so lays down. And it is the same also if the proceeds
have been applied to the concerns of any one of them. Further if
there are several usufructuaries, or bona fide possessors, one, being
sued, releases the others, although he ought not to be condemned
in a greater amount of peculium than he holds. But though this
results from strict law, yet equity requires that an action should
be given against those who are released by an accident of the law,
so that recovery rather than the bringing of the action should free
them; for he who contracts with the slave has in mind as his
property, the whole of the peculium which exists anywhere.
1. But though in this action the previous one is restored, neverthe-
less account should be taken of both increase and decrease, and,
therefore, whether there is now nothing in the peculiwmn or some-
thing has been added to it, the present condition of the peculium
is to be looked at. Consequently, in relation also to vendor and
buyer, this appears to us to be the truer view, that we can recover
from the buyer what has accrued to the peculium, and the claim
from the buyer is not to be dated backwards, as in one and the
same litigation, to the time at which the vendor was sued. 2. If
the vendor of the slave has sold the slave with the peculium, and
delivers the peculium, he will not be liable to action even within
the year, for, as Neratius has said, this price of the slave is not
peculoum.

1 For fiert read finiri. Cf. M. 2 After maiorem insert quam. M.


33


34


35


36


37


mmr. 1 On the Action on the Peculium 431


JAVOLENUS (extracts from Cassius 12) But if a person has
sold a slave on the terms that he was to receive a price for the
peculium, the peculium is looked on as being in the hands of him
to whom the price of the peculium went,


PoMPONIUS (extracts from various passages 12) not of him
who holds the things in the peculium.


JAVOLENUS (extracts from Cassius 12) But where the heres
has been directed to hand over the peculiwm on payment of a fixed
sum, the peculium is not considered to be in the hands of the heir.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 2) It is a debateable point whether,
in contracts resting on bona fides, the father or master should be
liable on the peculiawm or for the full amount!, just as it has been
discussed in the action on dos, where a dos has been given to a
son, whether the father is to be sued only to the extent of the
peculium. However, I am of opinion that the action is available
not only on the peculiwm, but also so far as, beyond this, the
woman has been tricked and defrauded by the dolus malus of the
father, for, if he holds the property and is not ready to give it up,
it is fair that he should be condemned to the extent of its value.
For Pomponius has said that what is expressly laid down in the
case of a slave who has received a thing in pledge is to be held
applicable also in the other bonae jfidei actions. For, again, if a
thing has been given in pledge to a slave the action is available
not only on the peculiwm and for what has been applied to [the
master’s] concerns, but it has also this additional clause, “and so
far as the plaintiff has been tricked and defrauded by dolus malus
of the master.’ Now the master may be considered to be acting
with dolus if he will not restore when he has the power of restoring.


JULIANUS (Digest 12) If a creditor of your son appoints
you heir and you sell the inheritance, you will be liable on the
peculium under the clause in the stipulation: “whatever amount
of money shall come to you under the inheritance.” 1. If you give
your slave permission to buy an underslave for 8 awre7, he buys
for 10 and writes you that he has bought for 8, and you authorise
him to pay the 8 out of your money, and he pays 10, you will
recover by real action only 2 awrei on account of this, but these
will be made good to the vendor to the extent only of the pecaiun
of the slave. 2. I sold to Sempronius a slave whom I owned in


1 Omit the first an. M.


38


432 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK xv


common with Titius: the question arose whether, if an action on
the peculium is brought against Titius or Sempronius account
ought to be taken of such peculium as is in my hands. I said that,
if the action is brought against Sempronius, account ought in no
case to be taken of the peculiam which I hold, because he has no
action against me by which he can recover what he has paid.
Further, if action should be brought against Titius more than a
year after I have sold, in the same way, the peculiwm which is
with me is not to be reckoned, for an action on the peculiwm can-
not now be brought against me. But if action should be brought
within the year, then account must be taken of this peculium too,
since the acceptance of the rule that where the man has been
alienated, it is to be permitted to the creditor to sue both the
seller and the buyer. 3. If an action on the peculiwm has been
brought against one who has an usufruct in the slave, and the
creditor has recovered less [than was due], it is not unfair that he
should recover his own out of the whole of his pecaliaum, whether
it be in respect of the usufructuary or of the owner. It does not
matter whether the slave has hired his own labour from the
usufructuary or has borrowed money from him. And thus it will
be right to give him an action against the owner, that being
deducted which the slave has by way of peculcwm in respect of the
usufructuary.


AFRICANUS (Questions 8) I have deposited 10 with a filius-
familias and I bring an action on deposit on the peculium.
Although the son owes the father nothing and holds these 10, he
held nevertheless that the father was none the more liable to be
condemned, if there is no peculium beyond this, for this money, as
it remains mine, does not form part of the peculiwm. He says,
further, that if any other person whatsoever is suing on the
peculium, there cannot be the least doubt that it is not to be
reckoned. And thus I ought to bring an action for production,
and, upon production, a vindicatio. 1. If his future wife has
promised to a filiusfamilias a certain sum by way of dos, and, a
divorce being effected, brings an action on the dos against the
father, ought she to be released from the whole promise, or with a
deduction of what the son owes the father? He answered that
she was to be released from her whole promise, since even if an
action was brought against her on the promise, she could certainly


t This sentence, which appears to refer to indebtedness to the usufructuary,
seems quite irrelevant to the context. See however M.


A. eS


39


40


He. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 433


defend herself by the exceptio doli mali. 2. Stichus has in his
pecwium Pamphilus who is worth 10, and this Pamphilus owes the
master 5; if an action on the peculium is brought on account
of Stichus, he held that the value of Pamphilus ought to be
included, and, indeed, the whole value, with no deduction of what
Pamphilus owes the master, for no one can be understood to be
himself in his own peculium: thus in this case the master will
suffer a loss, just as he would if he had lent to any other of his
slaves who had no peculium. And he says that it will appear more
clearly that this is so, if the case is put of the peculiwm being left
to Stichus, who, if he sues under the will, is certainly not compell-
able to suffer a deduction for what his underslave owes, except
out of the peculium of the latter; otherwise the result would
follow, that if the underslave owes the master as much [as the
peculium|], the slave himself will be considered to have nothing in
the peculiwn, which is plainly absurd. 3. I lent money to a slave
whom I had sold to you: the question arose whether the action on
the peculiwm against you should be given to me on the terms
that there should be deducted whatever remained with me out
of the peculium. But this is in fact not in the least true, and
it will not be material whether I sue within a year from the time
when I sold or afterwards, for, indeed, no action against me is
given to other persons who contracted with him at that time.
Moreover, on the other hand, if those who had previously con-
tracted with this slave proceed against me, I may not deduct what
he began to owe me after [the sale]. From which it is clear that
the liability of that peculium which has remained with me should
have no connexion with contracts of a later time.


FLORENTINUS (Jnstitutes 11) The peculiwm consists also of
what the man has put by through frugality, or what he has by
some service earned as a gift to him, from any person, where that
person’s wish was that the slave should have this as his own, to be,
as it were, his property.


MARCIANUS (Rules 5) The peculium comes into existence,
grows, lessens and dies, and thus Papirius Fronto justly said that
the peculium resembled aman. 1. It has been a topic of debate how
a peculium comes into existence. And the ancient writers distinguish,
in this way: if the slave has acquired what the master is not bound
to provide, this is peculium, but if [he has acquired] tunics or
anything of that sort which the master is bound to give him, this
is not peculium. Thus, therefore, does the peculium come into


9
MI iL 28


41


42


43


44


45


46


47


434 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK xv


existence: it grows when it is added to, it lessens when underslaves
die or things are destroyed: it dies when it is taken away.


ULpianus (on Sabinus 43) Neither can a slave owe any-
thing, nor can anything be owed to a slave, but when we misapply
this word we are rather pointing out a state of fact than connecting
the obligation with the civil law. Accordingly the master will
properly claim from third parties what is owed to a slave: as for
what the slave himself owes, an action is given against the master
in respect of that, on the peciiwn, and so far as anything from
it has been applied to the master’s concerns.


THE SAME (0n the Edict 12) Some authorities rightly think
that an action on the peculiwn should be given against an
arrogator, though Sabinus and Cassius consider that an action on
the peculiwm ought not to be given ou account of earlier dealings.


PAvuLus (on the Hdict 30) If, after I have brought an action
against you on the peculiwm, before the matter is adjudicated on,
you have sold the slave, Labeo considers that you ought to be
condemned in respect also of that pecauliwm which he has acquired
while with the buyer, and that no relief should be given to you, for
it was the fault of yourself, who had sold the slave, that this came
upon you.

ULPIANUS (on the Edict 63) If anyone has contracted with
a filiusfamilias he has two debtors, the son for the whole debt, and
the father to the extent of the peculiwm.


PAuLus (on the Edict 61) And therefore if the father has
taken away the peculium from the son, the creditors can neverthe-
less proceed against the son.


THE SAME (on the Edict 60) One who grants administration
of the peculiwm is understood to allow in general terms what he
would be ready to allow specifically.


THE SAME (on Plautius 4) Whenever notice is written up
in a shop to this effect: “I forbid business to be done with my
slave Januarius,” it is settled law that the master has secured only
this, that he is free from liability to the institorian action, not also
to that on the peculiwm. 1. Sabinus said, as a responswm, that
where a slave had become a guarantor, the action on the peculium
was not to be given against the master, unless the guaranty was
given in the master’s concerns or on a matter affecting the
peculium. 2. If the action on the peculiwm has once been brought,


48


49


TH. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 435


although when judgment is given there proves to be less in the


_ peculium than he owes, yet it has been laid down that there is no


ground for undertakings as to future additions to the peculium:
for that this does exist in the action on partnership is due to the
fact that the partner owes the whole amount. 3. If a creditor of
the slave has recovered part from the buyer, Proculus says that a
tudicium utile for the residue is available against the vendor, but
that it is not to be permitted to the creditor to divide his action in
the first instance, so as to proceed at the same time against the
buyer and the vendor ; for it is enough that this alone is granted
to him, that, when, having chosen one defendant, he has recovered
less [than was due], an action is given to him against the other,
the previous action being rescinded. And this is the accepted
law. 4. But not only any outside creditor can proceed against the
vendor, in respect of previous dealings, but also the buyer himself,
and this view approves itself to Julianus (although he himself can
also deduct against another plaintiff), provided that he allows
for what he has in his possession. 5. If a slave is sold with a
reservation of the peculiwm, the outcome is that the vendor can
avail himself of deduction [if the slave owed him anything before
the sale]!, and that if the slave incurs any indebtedness to the
vendor after the sale this does not diminish the peculia, because
he does not owe it to his master. 6. The rules we have laid down
as to the buyer and the seller are the same also if ownership is
changed in any other way, as by legacy or by a gift of dos, for the
peculium of a slave, wherever it may be, is looked on as resembling
the property of a freeman.


THE SAME (on Plautius 17) The free administration of the
peculium does not continue to exist in the case either of a
Jugitivus or of one who has been stolen, or of one as to whom one
does not know whether he is alive or dead. 1. One to whom
administration of his peculiwm has been given can agree with his
creditor and a debtor of his own that the latter shall be accepted
as a substituted debtor (delegare debitorem).


POMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 4) Not only that is
peculium which the master has granted to the slave, but, in fact
that also which has been acquired without his knowledge indeed,
but which, nevertheless, if he had known of it, he would have
allowed to be in the peculium. 1. If a slave, without my know-


1 See M.
28—2


50


436 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK Xv


ledge, manages transactions of mine, he will be considered to be a
debtor to me to the same extent as that to which he would have
been liable if, as a freeman, he had administered my affairs.
2. For a slave to be regarded as a debtor to the master or the
master to the slave, the matter must be looked at from the point
of view of civil law: and therefore, if the master in his accounts
has entered himself as a debtor to his slave, when, in absolute fact,
neither had he borrowed money, nor had any other ground of
liability previously existed, the mere entry does not make him a
debtor.


PAPINIANUS (Questions 9) At a time when there is nothing
in the peculiwm, the father goes into hiding: I, who am about to
bring an action on the peculium against him, cannot be put into
possession of his goods with a view to the protection of the estate,
for he who would be entitled to absolution if he joined issue is not
hiding with intent to defraud. Nor is it germane to the matter
that it may happen that a condemnation follows, for also if money
is due under a condition or at a future time, the debtor is not
considered to be hiding with intent to defraud, although he may be
condemned by a wrongful decision of the judge. But Julianus
considers that a guarantor, given when there is nothing in the
peculium, is liable, since a guarantor can be taken for a future right
of action also, provided that he is expressly so taken. 1. If a
creditor appoints as heir a father who was liable on the peculiwm,
as the time of death is looked at for Falcidian purposes, the
peculium at that date will be considered. 2. Even after the master
has been sued on the peculiwm, a guarantor can be taken on behalf
of the slave, and', for the same reason as that for which if a slave
pays the money after issue has been joined in an action he cannot
get it back any more than if issue had not been joined, a guarantor
will be taken to have been validly accepted, because the natural
obligation, which even a slave is understood to incur, has not been
brought into issue. 3. A third person’s slave, while he was acting
as slave to me, with good faith? [on my part], gave to me, that I
might free him, moneys borrowed from Titius, and I did manumit
him : the creditor asked whom he should sue on the peculium. I
said that although in other cases the creditor would have the
choice, yet in that stated the owner was to be sued, and he would
bring an action for production against me for the money, which
had become vested in him and had not been alienated by reason of


1 Omit ideo. M. 2 For bonae jfidei read bona fide. Cf. M.


I
i
:
;
Bi


51


52


TIT. 1] On the Action on the Peculium 437


the transaction stated to have been gone through in relation to the
civil status of the slave ; nor was the distinction to be admitted of
those who hold that, if I do not manumit, the money is the owner’s,
but that if a manumission does in fact follow, the money is
considered to have been acquired for me, as in my affairs, for
the money is given to me by reason of, rather than in, an affair
of mine.


SCAVOLA (Questions 2) In respect of what is owed to the
slave by third persons the master is not as a matter of course to
be adjudged liable, to a person suing on the peculiwm, to the full
amount of the debt, since both the expenditure in recovering it
and the result of execution of judgment may be uncertain, and
account is to be taken of the delay of time allowed to those who
have suffered judgment or that involved in sale of the goods, if that
is the better course to take. Consequently, if he is prepared to
assign his rights of action, he will be absolved. What is said’
where action is brought against one of partners, namely, that the
whole peculiwm is to be reckoned, as there is an action against the
partner, will come to the same result in that case’, if he is prepared
to assign his rights of action : and in the case of all those whom we
hold to be liable for this reason, that they have a right of action,
the substitution (delegatio) has the force of lawful payment.


PAULUS (Questions 4) A question is asked on an actual
case: a man who was administering a tutela, as a freeman, was
adjudged a slave. If his master is sued on the peculiwm by the
ward, whose claim has in fact been declared by rescript to be
preferred to those of other creditors of the slave, is that which is
due to the master deducted from the peculiwm, even here? And,
if you think it can be deducted, does it matter whether he became
a debtor to the master while he was still acting as a freeman,
or afterwards? And is the action on the peculiuwm available
to the tmpubes? I answered that no privileged claim can have
priority over the father or master when sued on the peculiwm in
respect of the son or slave. Clearly in the case of other creditors
account is to be taken of privileged claims, for what if a son has
received a dos, or has administered a tutela? This has therefore
been rightly laid down by rescript, in the case of a slave also who
has acted as tutor, and since the position of the first claimant is
ordinarily the better, action® on the part of others will be barred.


1 Omit enim. M. 2 For in eodem read in eo eodem. Cf. M.
3 Omit quam. M.


53


54


55


56


438 On the Action on the Peculium [BOOK Xv


Certainly if he has made loans in the ward’s business or has
deposited moneys in a [banker's] chest, a real action is given to him
(the ward) for the moneys and a wtilis actio against the debtors,
that is, if they have consumed the moneys ; for he had no power to
alienate them : and this is also to be laid down in the case of any
tutor. Nor, however, do I think it material when he became
indebted to the master, whether when he was in possession of liberty,
or afterwards, for, so too, if I lend to the slave of Titius and come to
be his master, I shall deduct what I have previously lent to him,
if I am sued by the action on the peculiwm. How’, then, does the
matter stand? Since the action on the peculium is not available a
utilis actio based on the action on tutela should be given against
the master, so that what this man held as his property may be
considered to be his peculiuwm. 1. If a dos has been given to a
jiliusfamilias, or he has adminstered a tuéela, account will have to
be taken of the special priorities in the action on the pecwiwun, a
postponement being granted in the action of other creditors, or
security taken if they who have no privilege sue first, that what
they have received shall be refunded if action is afterwards
brought against the father on the privileged claim.


THE SAME (Questions 11) If the peculiwm was not taken
away from Stichus when he was freed, it is considered to have been
granted : he cannot however sue debtors unless the rights of action
have been transferred to him.


ScAVOLA (Responsa 1) [A testator] gave to one amongst
his heirs a prelegatum of lands as they were equipped, with the
slaves: these slaves were debtors of the master. The question
was asked, whether the action on the peculiwm is available to the
other heirs against him. His responsum was that it was not
available.


NERATIUS (Responsa 1) He whom I was suing on the
peculium was forcibly carried off by you: what was in the peculiwm
at the time when you forcibly carried him off is what must be taken
into account.


PauLus (on Neratius 2) What my slave has promised to
me as a substituted debtor (eapromisit) for a debtor to me should
be deducted from the peculiwm, and is none the less due from the
debtor. But let us consider whether the debt of him for whom


1 Words appear to have been omitted here or earlier in the text, indicating
that the owner has not granted a peculium to the slave in question.


58


TT. 0 On the Action on the Peculium 439


the substituted promise was made should not be thought to
become a claim of the peculiwm. Paulus: certainly if when any-
one sues on the peculiwm, [the master] wishes to deduct this, he
makes the claim part of the peculiwm.


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 8) If a son or a slave, in
respect of whom an action limited to the peciuliwm has been
brought, dies before the case is ended, that peculiwm will be taken
into account which any one of them had when he died. 1. But
Julianus writes that he who by his will directs that his slave is to be
free, and leaves him the peculiwm, is understood to leave him the
peculium as at the time at which the liberty attaches to him, and,
therefore, all increases of the peculiwm, in whatever form, acquired
before the inheritance is entered on, belong to the freedman.
2. But if one leaves the peculiwm of the slave to a third party, [he
holds] that the question turns on a conjectural inference as to the
wish of the testator, and that the more probable view is, that that
is left which is in the pecudium at the time of the death, in the
sense that whatever accessions there are to things in the peculium
before the inheritance is entered on, such as children of female
slaves and young of stock, are due, but such things as are given to
the slave, or as he acquires by his labour, do not belong to the
legatee.


SCAVOLA (Digest 5) [A testator] left to one amongst his
heirs lands as they were equipped, with slaves and other things
and whatever was there: these slaves were indebted to the master,
as well in other matters as in respect of their periodical accounts.
The question was asked whether the action on the pecwiwm is
available to the other heirs against him for the money owed by
them. His responsum was that it was not available.


ji
WHEN THE ACTION ON THE P£CULIUM IS LIMITED TO A YEAR.


ULPIANus (on the Edict 29) The Preetor says: “ After the
death of him who was in the potestas of another, or after he has
been emancipated, freed or alienated, I will give an action within
one year from the time when action could first have been brought
on the matter, to the extent of the peculiwm and so far as anything
has been done by the dolus malus of him in whose potestas he


440 When the Action on the Peculium [Book xv


was! by which the peculiwm is lessened.” 1. So long as the slave
or son is in potestas the action on the peculiwm is without limit of
time, but after his death, or after he has been emancipated, freed
or alienated, it becomes limited in time, that is, toa year. 2. But
the year will be reckoned so far as it is available (wfilis), and
therefore Julianus has said that if? the obligation is conditional,
the year is to be reckoned*, not from the time when he was
emancipated, but from that at which, the condition being satisfied,
action could be brought. 3. It is with reason that the Praetor has
made the action temporary in this case, for since the peculiwm is
extinguished by death or alienation, it sufficed that the obligation
was prolonged to the extent ofa year. 4. Alienation and manu-
mission, however, apply to slaves, not to sons, but death applies to
slaves as well as to sons, emancipation, indeed, only toason. But,
further, if he ceases to be in the potestas in some other way, without
emancipation, the action will be limited to a year. Again, if the
son becomes independent (sez cus) by the death or deportation of
the father, the heir of the father, or the jiscus, will be liable to the
action on the peculiwm within the year. 5. In the case of alienation
is certainly included a vendor, who is liable to an action on the
peculium within the year: 6. but also if he has made a gift of
the slave, or exchanged him, or given him as dowry, he is in the
same position: 7. so too is the heir of one who has made a legacy
of the slave, not with the peculium. For if he has either given him
as a legacy or directed that he is to be free, with the peculium, this.
has been the subject of discussion : and it seems to me to be the
truer view that the action on the pecaliwm ought not to be given
either against the freedman or against him to whom the peculiam
was left. Then, is the heir liable? And Ceecilius says he is liable,
because the peculiwm is in the possession of him who has released
himself from obligation by paying it over. But Pegasus holds that
an undertaking should be given to the heir by him to whom the
peculium has been left, because the creditors come to him: thus if
he hands it over without an undertaking he will be liable to be
sued. 8. Where the heir is directed to transfer the inheritance,
the slave and peculium being retained, if he is sued on the
peculium, he may not avail himself of the exceptio on the [Senatus-
consultum | Trebellianum, as Marcellus, discussing the point, admits :
but he to whom the inheritance is transferred is not liable, as
Sczevola says, since he has not the peculiwn, and has not done


1 For est read fuertt. Cf. M. 2 Omit et. M. 3 Omit ex eo. M.


=X ae


TIT. 11] is limited to a Year 441


anything with dolus by which he is prevented from having it.
9. Pomponius (b. 61) has said that, also, if a usufruct has ceased,
the action should be given against the usufructuary within the
year. 10. In a book of Labeo’s the question was discussed whether
you should be allowed to sue again when the error was discovered,
if, when the son was alive you, thinking him dead, sued by the
action limited to a year and were defeated by the eaceptio, because
the year had elapsed. And he says it should be permitted to the
extent of the peculium, but not also to what has been applied to
[the defendant’s| concerns, for, in the earlier proceeding the actio
de in rem verso was rightly brought, since the exceptio based on
the expiration of the year relates to the pecudiwm and not to what
has been applied to his concerns.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) Since, after the death of the
Jiliusfamilias, there is an action against the father, limited to a
year, just as there was without any limit while the son was alive,
therefore, if there was an action on the peculium in a case of
redhibitio, it will be for six months after the death of the son,
and the same is to be said in the case of all other actions subject
to a limit of time. 1. If the slave to whom credit has been given
is in the hands of the enemy, the action on the peculium against
the master is not to be limited by the year, so long as it is possible
for him to return, with postliminium.


POMPONIUS (on Quintus Mucius 4) The conception of
peculium has sometimes to be employed also if the slave has ceased
to exist, and the Preetor gives an action on the peculiwm within the
year. For in that case too, both accession and diminution are to be
admitted, as of a peculiwm (although by the death or manumission
of the slave it has already ceased to be a peculium), so that there
may be accession to it as to a peculium, by fruits or the young of
stock, and by children of female slaves, and diminution, as where
an animal has died, or has been lost in any other way.


III.
ON THE ACTIO DE IN REM VERSO.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If those who are in the potestas
of another have nothing in the peculiwm, or have something, but
not all that is due, those who hold them in potestas are liable if
what was received has been applied to their concerns, the contract
being considered to have been, as it were, made rather with them.


442 On the Actio de in rem verso [BOOK XV


1. Nor does the action on application to his concerns (actio de iu
rem verso) appear to be promised without useful effect as that on the
peculium would suffice, for Labeo very rightly says, that it may be
the case that the property has been applied to [the master’s|
purposes and also the action on the peculiwm is not available. For
what if the master has taken away the peculiwm without dolus
malus? What if the peculiwm is determined by the death of the
slave and the available year (annus utilis) is ended? For the actio
de im rem verso is perpetual and is available whether he has taken
away [the pecauliwm] without dolus malus, or the action on the
peculium is ended by the [lapse of a] year. 2. In the same way, if
several are proceeding on the peculium, the facts ought to be to the
advantage of him whose money has been applied to [the master’s |
concerns so that he should have the more productive action.
Certainly, if someone has stepped in first and proceeded on the
peculium, it must be considered whether the actio de in rem verso
is barred. And Pomponius reports Julianus as holding that the
actio de in rem verso is destroyed by the action on the peculiwm
(because what has been applied to the master’s concerns and paid
on account of the slave has been embodied in the pecalium just as
if it had been paid to the slave himself by the master), but only in
the case in which the master has paid over, under the action on the
peculium, what the slave had applied to his concerns : otherwise, if
he has not paid it over, the actio de in rem verso remains.


JAVOLENUS (Extracts from Cassius 12) The actio de in rem
verso cannot be brought against one who has freed a slave for
money received, because, owing to his giving the liberty, he is not
enriched by the moneys.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) However, if the slave gives to
the master, that he may be freed, a sum of money that he has
borrowed from me, this sum is not indeed to be reckoned in the
peculium, but there is considered to have been applied to his
concerns any sum by which what the slave paid exceeds the value
of the slave. 1. There is considered to have been application to the
concerns of the master, if the slave applies to the master’s purposes
the very thing which he has received (as where he has received wheat
and has used it up as food for the master’s slaves), or if he pays, toa
creditor of the master, moneys he has received from a lender (and,
also, if he made a mistake in paying, and thought a man to be a
creditor who was not, Pomponius says (b. 61) that this amounts to
application to the master’s concerns, so far as the master has the right


TIT. 111] On the Actio de in rem verso 443


to recover it as not being due), or when the slave has engaged in a
transaction with the view of carrying on or administering any affair
of the master’s (if, for instance, he has borrowed money in order that
he may buy grain to feed the slaves or in order to provide them with
clothing), or when, having borrowed for the peculium, he afterwards
applies [the money] to the master’s uses : for the rule of law is that
there may be an actio de in rem verso even though he applies it at
first to the peculiam and afterwards to his master’s affairs. 2. And
we lay it down generally that there is an actio de in rem verso in
those cases in which a procurator would have an action on
mandatum, or one who had attended to business without authority
would have an action on negotia gesta, and wherever the slave has
consumed anything in order to improve property of the master or
to prevent its deterioration. 3. Thus, if a slave has procured
money in order to supply himself with food and clothes, according
to the practice of his master, that is, to the extent to which his
master had been in the habit of providing for him, Labeo writes
that he is considered to have applied it to his master’s concerns.
Therefore it will be the same also in the case of a son. 4. But if,
having borrowed money, he has decorated his master’s house with
frescoes and various other things which contribute to luxury rather
than utility, there is not considered to be [such] application, for a
procurator could not have charged this, unless perhaps he had the
mandatum or [express] wish of the master, nor ought the master to
be burdened by reason of what he himself would not have done.
What then is the result? The master ought to allow the creditor
to take these things away, that is, without injury to the house, lest
the owner be compelled to seli the house in order to make good the
amount by which it has been increased in value. 5. The same
Labeo says that if a slave, having borrowed moneys from me, lends
them to another, the master is liable to the acto de in rem verso,
since he has acquired an obligatory right: Pomponius approves
this opinion, provided he did not make it a debt to the peculiwn,
but dealt with it as on his master’s account. 6. Labeo says that
that also is applied to the master’s concerns, which the slave, having
borrowed money, buys for the master, with his assent, as a provision
for luxury, such as unguents, or anything he may have procured for
pleasures or discreditable outlay : for we do not enquire whether
what was consumed went to the good of the master, but whether it
was in the master’s business. 7. Hence it is rightly said, also, that
if a slave has acquired grain for feeding the master’s slaves and has
put it in the master’s granary, and it has been destroyed or


444 On the Actio de in rem verso [BOOK XV


spoilt or burnt, it is considered to have been applied [to the
master’s concerns]. 8 And again, if he bought for his master
a necessary slave, and he died, or put up supports to a block of
buildings and it fell down, I should say that there was an actio de
in rem verso. 9. But if he received it as intending to apply it to
the master’s concerns, but did not, and deceived the creditor, it is
not considered [so] applied, nor is the master liable, lest the
credulity of the creditor prejudice the master or the cunning of the
slave injure him. What, however, if he was a slave who was in the
habit of applying what he received [to the master’s concerns]?
Still I think this does not injure the master, if the slave received it
with another intention, or if, having received it with this intention,
he afterwards applied it in another way: the creditor ought, then,
to take pains to see to what purpose it is applied. 10. If the slave
has borrowed money to buy clothing, and the moneys are destroyed,
which can bring the actio de in rem verso, the lender or the
vendor? I think, however, that if the price has in fact been paid, the
lender will have the actio de in rem verso, even where the clothing
has been destroyed, but if the price was not paid, but the money
was given for this purpose, that clothing should be bought, and the
money is destroyed, but the clothing has been distributed to the
slaves, the lender will certainly have the actio de in rem verso.
But has not the vendor also [the action], since his goods have been
applied to the master’s affairs? Reason requires that he should be
liable, from which it follows that the master becomes liable to two
persons on one transaction. Thus, again, if both the money and
the clothing have perished, it will have to be said that the master is
liable to both, since both intended to apply [the subject-matter]
to the master’s concerns.


GAIUS (on the provincial Edict 9) But it should be laid
down that the position of the first comer should be the better, for
it is unfair that the master should be condemned to both on the
ground of application to his affairs.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If the slave buys things not
required by the master, as if they were necessary, such as slaves,
Pomponius says there is an application to the master’s concerns to
the extent of the true value of the slaves, while, if he had bought
things actually needed, the master would have been liable to the
full amount at which they were sold. 1. The same writer says that
whether the master ratifies the slave’s contract or does not, the
actio de in rem verso lies. 2. An actio quod cussu lies for what the


TIT. IT] On the Actio de in rem verso 4.45


slave bought for the master if he bought it at the actual wish of
the master, but if it was not at his wish, but the master in fact
ratified it, or, apart from this, if he bought something necessary or
advantageous to the master, there will be an actio de im rem verso ;
if, however, none of these was the case, there will be an action on
the peculium. 3. It is held that not only that money is applied to
the master’s concerns which passes immediately from the lender to
the master, but also that which was at first in the peculiam : this,
however, is true in all cases in which the slave, managing an affair
of the master’s, enriches him with money of the peculiwm. Other-
wise, if the master takes away the peculiwm from the slave, or sells
him with the peculium, or sells the things in the peculiwn, and
receives the price, this is not regarded as applied in the master’s
concerns.


TRYPHONINUS (Disputations 1) For, if this were true, he
would be liable to the actio de in rem verso, even before he sold
the things in the peculiam, because by the very fact that the slave
had the things in the peculiam he was enriched, which is obviously
false.


ULPIANus (on the Edict 29) And therefore, also, if the slave
gives the master property of the peculium, the actio de in rem verso
will not be available : and these propositions are correct. 1. Cer-
tainly, if the slave has borrowed money and pays it [to the master]
with the intention of making a gift, where he does not wish to
make him a debtor to the peculium, there is an actio de im rem
verso. 2. That is not true which Mela says, that if you give silver
to my slave, that he may make cups for you out of any silver he
likes, and then, when the cups have been made, the slave dies, you
have an actio de in rem verso against me, because I can bring a real
action for the cups. 3. That is certainly true which Labeo says,
that if the slave buys perfumes and unguents and devotes them to
a funeral which concerned his master, there is considered to have
been application to the master’s concerns. 4. The same writer says
that if I buy from your slave an inheritance which belonged to you,
and I pay money to the creditors, and then you take this inheritance
away from me, I shall recover it from you by an action on purchase,
for there is considered to have been application to your concerns :
for, again, if I buy an inheritance from a slave, with the view of
setting off what was due to me from the same slave, though I have
paid nothing, yet I shall recover by the action on purchase what has
gone to the profit of the master. I, however, do not think that the


10


446 On the Actio de in rem verso | BOOK XV


buyer has an actio de in rem verso, unless the slave acted with the
intent of applying the proceeds to the master’s concerns. 5. If a
filiusfamilias, having borrowed money, gives it as dowry for his
daughter, there is held to have been an application to [his] father’s
concerns to the extent to which the grandfather was going to give
[dowry] for the granddaughter. This opinion appears to me to be
true only if he gave the money with the idea of acting in his father’s
business.


Pauwus (on the Edict 30) And Pomponius says that it does
not matter whether he gives it on behalf of his daughter or his sister
or a granddaughter, issue of another son. We shall therefore say
the same also if a slave has borrowed money, and given it by way
of dowry, on account of his master’s daughter.


JAVOLENUS (Hextracts from Cassius 12) If indeed the father
was not going to give a dowry, there is not considered to have been
an application to the father’s concerns.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If a son has become guarantor
for the father and has paid the creditor, there is considered to have
been application to the father’s concerns, since he freed his father
from obligation. 1. Similar to this is what Papinianus writes
(Questions b. 9): if a son has undertaken litigation on behalf of
his father as voluntary defendant (defensor), and has been con-
demned, the father is liable to the actto de in rem verso, for, indeed,
the son has released him by undertaking the litigation. 2. Papi-
nianus further deals with the case in which I have made a
stipulation with the son for what the father owed, and then sued
the son: for, here also, there will be an actio de in rem verso,
unless the son, in binding himself, desired to make a gift to
the father. 3. Accordingly it may be said, also, that if he under-
takes litigation on the peculiwm, as voluntary defendant, on behalf
of his father, the father will be liable to the actio de in rem verso,
to the extent of the peculium, the advantage of which conclusion
will be this, that if the action on the peculiwm is ended, he may be
sued by the actio de in rem verso. 1 think that the father is liable
to the actio de in rem verso even before condemnation, when issue
has been joined in the action undertaken on the father’s account.
4. But there is considered to be application to the father’s concerns,
so far as anything has been [so] applied, and therefore if part has
been applied, the action will lie for that part. 5. But will the
master be liable only for the principal, or also for interest? Here


TIT. 111] On the Actio de in rem verso 447


if [the slave] promised interest, Marcellus says (Digest b. 5) that
the master must make it good, but if it was not promised it will
certainly not be due, because it was not included in the stipulation.
Clearly, if I, having the master in mind, have given money to a
slave who was not administering an affair of his master’s, but being
myself administering it, I shall be able to sue for interest too, by
the action on voluntary agency (negotia gesta). 6. Applied [to the
master’s concerns| we must understand to mean, continuing to be
[so] applied, and thus the actio de in rem verso lies only if the
money has not been paid by the master to the slave or the son.
If, however, it has been paid, to the destruction of the creditor’s
interests, that is, has been paid to the son or the slave who was
likely to lose it, since it has been paid, the application has ceased
indeed, but it is most just that the action on dolus malus should
be available against the father or master; for a debtor to the
peculium, also, is not released if he pays to the slave, fraudulently,
what he owed him. 7. If the slave is a debtor of the master, and,
having borrowed from a third person, pays him, to the extent to
which he is in debt to the master he is not applying it [to his
concerns], but as to what is in excess, he is [so] applying it. Thus,
if, when he owed the master 30, having borrowed 40, he paid it to
his creditor, or expended it on the establishment, we shall have to
say that the actio de in rem verso lies for 10, but’ if he owes the
same amount, then nothing is considered to have been [so] applied.
For, as Pomponius says, the principle is that relief is given against
profit to the master, and therefore, if he was a debtor to the master
when he applied property to his concerns, it is considered that
nothing has been applied ; if, again, he became a debtor to the
master afterwards, it ceases to be so applied, and the case will be
the same, if [the master] pays it to him. He says, further, that if
the master makes him a gift of an amount equal to what he paid
the creditor for him, if this was by way of reward there is considered
to have been no application to the master’s concerns ; if however he
gave it to him in any other way, the application still exists. 8. The
same writer discusses this point: if he applied 10 to his master’s
purposes, and afterwards borrowed the same sum from his master,
and has a peculium of 10 besides this, we must consider, he says,
has the application to the master’s concerns ceased? Or are we, in
truth, not to take away the actio de im rem verso, since there is
peculium from which the debt can be taken? Or should we rather


1 For quamvis read quoniam. Cf. M. 2 For aut read at. Of. M.


it


12


13


14


448 On the Actio de in rem verso [BOOK XV


deduct from each proportionately? I, however, think that the
actio de in rem verso is destroyed, since he has become a debtor
to the master. 9. The same writer also asks whether, if he has
applied property to your concerns, and has become your debtor,
and then your creditor, for the same amount as he owed you, the
actio de im rem verso revives, or whether it cannot be rehabilitated
through subsequent events. And this is the true view. 10. The
same writer deals with the question whether a son can apply
property to the father’s concerns, according to the event, for instance,
if the father and son are co-debtors, and the son, having borrowed
money, pays it on his own account, or if you have lent money to
the son with the authorisation of the father, and the son has paid
you the debt. It appears to me that if the money had in fact come
into the father’s hands, there will be considered to have been
application to his concerns : if, however, this was not so, and the
son paid, as dealing with his own business, there is no actio de in
rem verso.


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) What a slave has borrowed for
this purpose, that he may pay it to his own creditor, will not be
applied to the master’s concerns, although the master is freed from
an action on the peculiwm.


Galus (on the provincial Edict 9) If a filiusfamilias or
slave buys land for the father or master, this is indeed considered
to be application [to his concerns], but in the sense that, if it was
worth less than what it was bought for, so much is considered to
have been applied to [his] concerns as it is worth: if, however, it
is worth more, only so much as it was bought for is considered to
have been applied to [his] concerns.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) If there has been application
to the concerns of one of [two] masters, the question arises whether
he alone, to whose concerns the thing was applied, can be sued, or
also his partner. And Julianus says that he alone is to be sued to
whose concerns it was applied, as in the case in which he alone
authorised the contract : which opinion I think to be correct.


JULIANUS (Digest 11) Note by Marcellus : Sometimes, too, the
actio de in rem verso may be brought against one co-owner,
by reason of the fact that there has been application to the
concerns of the other, and when he has been sued he can recover
from his partner that in respect of which he has been condemned :
for what shall we say if the peculiwm is taken away from the slave by


15


16


17


TIT. 11 | On the Actio de in rem verso 449


one owner? Paulus: accordingly this question is thus settled if
there can be no action on the peculium.


ULPIANUS (Disputations 2) If a filiusfamilias has made
a constitutum of what the father owed, it must be considered
whether the actio de in rem verso ought to be given. He did not
however release the father, for he who makes a constitutwm binds
himself indeed, but does not, in point of fact, free the father. Of
course, if he pays after making the constitutwm, though he may be
considered to have paid on his own account, that is, by reason of
his having made a constitutwm, he will nevertheless be rightly said
to have applied property to the father’s concerns.


ALFENUS (Digest 2) A man let out a field, for cultivation,
to his slave, and had given him oxen. As these oxen were unfit,
he had given authority for these to be sold and others again
provided with the money received: the slave had sold the oxen,
had bought others, had not paid the moneys to the vendor,
and had afterwards become insolvent. He who had sold the
oxen claimed the money from the master, by an action on
the peculiwm and for money applied to concerns of the master,
as the oxen on account of which the money was claimed were
in the master’s hands. The responsum was, that there was not
considered to be any peculium, except what might be left over
after deduction of what the slave owed to the master, that it
appeared to him that the oxen were indeed applied to the master’s
concerns, but that he had paid on that account what the first
oxen had been sold for: to whatever extent the later oxen were
worth more money, to this the master ought to be condemned.


AFRICANUS (Questions 8) A slave, having borrowed money
for the master’s purposes, lost it without negligence: the jurist
held that notwithstanding this an actio de in rem verso could be
brought against the master. For, so too, if my procwrator, when
about to expend money in my business, having borrowed money,
lost it without negligence, he could properly proceed on account of
it [against me], by the action on mandatum or that on negotia
gesta. 1. I made a contract with Stichus, the underslave of your
slave Pamphilus: the action on the peculiwm and for property
applied to your concerns ought to be given in such a way as to
cover whatever has been applied to your own affairs or to the
peculium of Pamphilus, that is to say, even though the action is
brought when Stichus has died or been alienated. If however I sue
after the death of Pamphilus, the better view is that, though

MS, BE: 29


18


19


450 On the Actio de in rem verso [BOOK XV


Stichus is still alive, nevertheless, in respect of that which has been
applied to the peculium of Pamphilus, the action ought not to be
given except within one year from the time at which he died, for I
may be considered to be then suing, in a sense, on the pecwlium of
Pamphilus, as in the case in which I sue for what I lent with his
authorisation. Nor ought the fact to affect us that Stichus, on
whose peculium the action is brought, is alive, since this thing
cannot be in his peculiwm, unless the peculium of Pamphilus still
exists. The same principle will give the result, that we must say
that what has been applied to the pecalium of Pamphilus, must be
made good, in the sense that a deduction is first made of what
Pamphilus owes you, but what has been applied actually to your
concerns will be made good even without any deduction for what
Pamphilus owes you.


NeERATIUS (Membranes 7) Although you have become .
guarantor for my slave in a matter which was undertaken with
a view to application to my concerns! (for instance, if, where
a slave had bought grain for the maintenance of the slaves, you
gave a guaranty to the vendor of the grain), yet it is the more
reasonable view that you may have an action on the peculiwm on
that account, but not the actio de in rem verso, so that in any
contract there shall be an actio de in rem verso only on the part of
the one person who advanced the very thing which has been applied
to the master’s purposes.


. PAULUS (Questions 4) <A filiusfamilias bought a toga: after-
wards, he having died, the father, in ignorance, and supposing it to
be his own, applied it to the purposes of his funeral rites. Neratius
says (Responsa) that this is considered to be application to the
father’s concerns, but that, in the action on the peculiwm, what is
non-existent ought to be reckoned in one case, where this results from
the dolus malus of the person against whom the action is brought.
However, if the father was under an obligation to buy a toga for
the son, it was applied to the father’s concerns, not now, when it is
used in the funeral, but then when he bought it (for the funeral of
the son is a debt of the father, and Neratius, also, who thought the
father liable to the actio de in rem verso, declared this transaction,
that is the burial and funeral ceremonies of the son, to be a debt of
the father, not of the son): he has therefore become a debtor to the
peculium, though the thing does not exist, so that he can be sued


1 Kor versaretur read verterctur. Cf. M.


20


21


TIT. 111] On the Actio de in rem verso 451


on the peculium, in which action account is also taken of what has
been applied to the master’s concerns ; which additional clause
is however needed, when a year has elapsed since the death of
the son.


Sca@:voLa (Responsa 1) A father promised a dowry for his
daughter, and agreed that he would maintain the daughter : as the
father did not make this good, the daughter borrowed money from
her husband, and she died married. I gave the responsum : if what
was lent was expended on things without which she could not take
care of herself, or maintain the slaves of the father, an actio utilis
dein rem verso ought to be given. 1. The slave of one who was
absent on state service lent money to the slaves of a ward, the tutor
endorsing the memorandum of stipulation, which stated the tutor
as the contracting party: the question was asked whether an action
was available against the ward. I gave the responsum: if, having
been given for the purposes of the ward, it was applied to his
purposes, although! for the better confirmation of the act of the
slaves, the ¢utor promised, it may nevertheless be said that there
will be an actio de in rem verso against the ward.


THE SAME (Digest 5) A man married a filiafamilias, the
father promising a dowry, and it was agreed between all parties
that either the father or she herself should bear the cost of her
maintenance: the husband lent her money, reasonably thinking
that the father would give an allowance equal to what he had
arranged to give his daughter: she employed these moneys in
necessary purposes for herself, and on the slaves she had with her,
and (his domestic affairs being entrusted to her) she applied a
certain amount of her husband’s money to the same purposes :
thereafter, before the father has paid all the allowance, the
daughter dies ; the father repudiates the expenditure : the husband
keeps possession of the property of the wife. I ask whether the
actio de in rem verso lies against the father. The responswum was :
if what was lent was spent on things without which she could not
take care of herself or maintain the slaves of the father, an actio
utilis de in rem verso ought to be given.


1 Kor et read etsi. M.


452 On the Actio quod iussu [BOOK XV


IV.
ON THE ACTIO QUOD IUSSU.


ULPIANUS (on the Edict 29) Upon authorisation by the
master an action is very properly given against him in full, for,
in a sense, the contract is made with him who authorises it.
1. Authorisation is however to be understood, whether one gives it
with witness, or by letter, or by words, or by messenger, and
whether it was specially for one contract or in general terms: and
therefore also, if one has made a declaration, in such a form as
this: “do what business you will with my slave Stichus at my risk,”
he is considered to have given sanction for everything, unless an
express declaration prohibits something. 2. But I ask whether he
can revoke this authorisation before the obligation is incurred, and
I think he can, just as if he had given a mandatum, and afterwards,
before the contract was made, had, changing his mind, revoked the
mandatum and notified me. 3. So, too, if the father or master has
given a mandatum he is considered to have authorised. 4. And,
again, if the master has endorsed the slave’s memorandum of agree-
ment, he is liable to the actio quod iussu. 5. How then, if he be-
comes guarantor for the slave? Marcellus says that he is not liable
to the actio quod wussu, for he intervened in the transaction as a
third party ; and he does not say this because the master is liable on
the ground of guaranty, but because to authorise (dubere) is one
thing, and to guarantee (jideiwbere) is another : the same authority
goes on to say that, even though his guaranty is invalid, yet he is not
liable as having authorised, and this is the truer opinion. 6. If one
has ratified what a slave of his or a son has done in the way of
business, the actio quod tussu lies against him. 7. If a ward, who
is owner, gives authorisation, he is certainly not liable unless he
authorised with the sanction of the tutor. 8. If a contract with the
slave is made with the authorisation of the usufructuary, or, again,
with that of one to whom, in good faith, he is acting as slave,
Marcellus thinks the actio quod iussu should be given against him,
and I also approve this opinion. 9. If a contract with a slave is
made with the authorisation of the curator of a minor, or of a lunatic,
or of a spendthrift, Labeo thinks the actto quod iussu should be
given against those whose slave he was: the same holds in the
case of an actual procurator. But if he is not an actual procurator,
the same Labeo says that an action should rather be given against
him himself.


rT. TV | On the Actio quod iussu 453


PAULUS (on the Edict 30) If a loan is made to the slave of
a ward, with the authorisation of the tutor, I think that if the loan
was to the advantage of the ward, an action should be given against
the ward, “quod tussit tutor.” 1. If a loan is made with the
authorisation of the master of a female slave, or with that of the
father of a girl, the actio quod dussu should be given against him.
2. If, with my authorisation, a contract is made with a third person’s
slave, and I afterwards buy him, I shall not be liable to the actio
quod tussu, lest an action which was at the outset without effect, be
validated by the course of circumstances.


ULPIANUS (Responsa 2) A master who has authorised the
loan of money to his slave, at six per cent. interest, is liable to the
extent to which he has authorised, and an obligation of pledge does
not attach to those lands which a slave has bound without the
consent of his master.


THE SAME (on the Edict 10) If a transaction is effected
with the slave of a city, on the authorisation of the person ap-
pointed to the administration of the affairs of the city, Pomponius
says that an actio quod iussu can be brought against him.


PauLus (on Plautius 4) If a father, or master, being about
to receive a loan of money, gives authorisation for it to be paid to
a son or toaslave, there is no question but that the condictio can be
brought against him himself: certainly in this case the actio quod
dussu is not available. 1. If one of the masters of a slave authorised
the making of a contract with him, he alone will be liable, but if
two gave the authority, the action can be brought against either of
them for the whole, because they are similar to two persons who
have given a mandatum.


Cambridge :


PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M.A.
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS.


BINDING SECT. JUL 30 {938}


Vy
7


fh


PLEASE DO NOT REMOVE oT
CARDS OR SLIPS FROM THIS POCKET
| a ee
UNIVERSITY OF TORONTO LIBRARY


ey rane


Justinian I, Emperor of the East.
Digestis
Digest, trans. by C. H. Monro
|
{


nips

jini

pees pH ‘
Sh sbe ee
i


ivi f zits
palgon eve
ate Siege


soanh cia
ee


Ritoia
pipric nih bee teh oe rb r
seit ae iets ; ihe


ae af
Me ae


abip y enity
i ada
beep eee TA oa
4a SARS ¥ ¥ng i
Lisa ites


as shite eeriaty ts
oF sSeedelaiate 7
Fgh yeEeay pes oy


by sepia Gs
, ede ba eee? tte
A es PT BSH i
Neen une see
Sieh,
gate


sob vrae hye
7th Sidhe, ¥


SHLIEE Baty
gt Baa


shy Joo
dre deteie teiety
Ap ea


wy?
ie ath Sangean
SEs PAM EE TA


satelite
chy be


Ravages
Satire rs psa \ia ey
septs ashes
ype sR Seno,
are oe pyareaq erin’:
a) 5


ST iraeacesy >
boas


On
yd nese
Ves shyt pa yon


Ntyouonnaytt wey?


ene


ei byt
5 he
Rony Rieatat
Sane bp Pee
ae a
+ nt


ait


Set t ae i aS ee
a


Bt a¥,

i stv! tk

es oH ai

iA Ave) Ras
He us


ah
ny Al
rf tint
