The Essayes of Montaigne
Michel de Montaigne, translated by John Florio (1603)
========================================================================

PROVENANCE NOTE (Tower of Babel staging): The complete text of Montaigne's Essays in John Florio's 1603 translation — the FIRST English Montaigne, Shakespeare's Montaigne, one of the masterpieces of English prose. Raw OCR via Internet Archive (essaysofmontaign01/02/03montuoft, Saintsbury edition); library stamps removed. This 1603 translation is in the public domain.

========================================================================

be  supported.  Lastly,  both,  though  in  different  ways, 
owed  not  a  little  of  the  influence  they  possessed  to  a  very 
curious  coincidence  of  what  may  be  called  their  tempera 
ment  (for  a  book  has  a  temperament  as  well  as  a  man) 
with  the  temperament  of  the  English  people  at  the  parti 
cular  time.  I  have  nothing  to  do  here  with  the  Plutarch- 
ian  part  of  this  thesis ;  and  it  is  FLORIO'S  Montaigne,  not 
Montaigne  by  himself,  with  whom  or  which  I  have  to  deal. 
But  the  sympathy  between  the  book  and  its  readers,  and  the 
quality  in  the  one  which  made  it  react  so  powerfully  on  the 
other,  are  matters  very  germane  indeed  to  the  subject,  and 
not  to  be  neglected  in  any  fit  discussion  of  it. 

Montaigne  an  Almost  everybody  knows  that  Montaigne  was  long  held, 
and  indeed  no  doubt  held  himself,  to  have  been  of  English 
extraction.  The  notion  has  been  vigorously  impugned  by 
recent  patriotic  scholarship  in  France,  and  is  now  generally 
given  up ;  though  I  confess  that,  having  myself  examined 
the  evidence  very  carefully,  I  do  not  think  it  so  conclusive 
as  it  appears  to  others.  It  is,  however,  a  matter  of  little 
moment :  the  point  of  real  importance  being  that,  whether 
Montaigne  had  English  blood  in  him  or  not,  he  had  distinct 
and,  for  a  Frenchman,  unusual  affinities  to  the  English 
character,  and  especially  to  English  character  in  a  phase 
which  it  was  just  entering  in  his  time,  and  was  to  pass 
through  for  something  like  a  century  afterwards.  As  there 
is  generally  a  glimmering  of  some  mistaken  truth  at  the 
back  of  the  most  ludicrous  and  glaring  falsehood,  this 
resemblance  probably  lies  somewhere  at  the  bottom  of  that 
Montaigne-Bacon  craze,  which,  though  even  more  demon- 
strably  preposterous  than  the  Shaconian  mania,  has  been  held 
by  some.  And  it  is  to  be  noted,  for  the  better  correction  of 
x 


INTRODUCTION 

national  pride,  that  the  points  of  contact  between  Montaigne 
and  BACON  personally,  and  between  the  spirit  of  Montaigne 
and  that  of  Englishmen  generally,  in  the  very  late  sixteenth 
and  almost  the  entire  seventeenth  century,  are  by  no  means 
exclusively  or  mainly  points  to  be  admired.  Some  of  them  The  worst  of 
are  very  nearly,  if  not  entirely,  the  same  as  the  points  which 
MACAULAY  has  brought  out,  with  much  of  his  usual  exaggera 
tion,  but  with  all  his  usual  vigour,  in  his  portrait  of  seven 
teenth-century,  and  especially  post-Restoration,  statesmen 
in  England.  They  may  be  also  found,  in  a  different  order 
of  thought  and  observation,  by  comparing  the  work,  at  the 
completion  of  the  period,  of  three  men  so  different  in 
origin,  education,  and  station  as  PEPYS,  ROGER  NORTH,  and 
DEFOE,  and  noting  the  veins  of  similarity  which  run  through 
them.  When,  not  to  multiply  illustrations,  the  excellent 
Roger  expatiates  on  his  brother's  good  stars  which  forced 
him  to  London  during  his  wife's  last  illness  because,  '  when 
6  she  must  expire,  and  probably  in  his  arms,  he  might  have 
6  received  great  damage  in  his  health,'  he  writes  in  exactly 
the  same  spirit  with  reference  to  another  as  that  which 
made  Montaigne,  in  a  famous  letter,  point  out  to  the 
jurats  of  Bordeaux  that  for  him,  their  mayor,  to  go  to  them 
in  their  trouble  with  the  plague  would  do  them  no  good 
and  expose  his  worshipful  self  to  danger.  A  hundred  more 
or  less  similar  instances  of  meanness,  selfishness,  candid 
cynicism,  materialist  resignation  to  the  comfortable  which 
meet  and  startle  us  side  by  side  with  the  almost  fantastic 
chivalry  and  idealism  otherwise  distinguishing  the  seven 
teenth  century,  receive  parallel  comment  and  illustration  in 
Montaigne  and  in  Englishmen  of  the  age  succeeding  his. 
And  the  causes  were  no  doubt  the  same  in  both  cases, 

xi 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

though  they  affected  England  later  than  France,  and  there 
fore  showed  their  effects  later.  They  were  the  revulsion  and 
reaction  from  the  early  Renaissance  enthusiasm  for  learning, 
from  the  vast  impulse  of  discovery  which  followed  COLUMBUS 
like  a  secular  wave,  the  bitter  satire  of  the  religious  wars, 
the  sense  of  change  affecting  civil  politics,  the  feeling  of 
personal  insecurity,  the  far-reaching  shadow  of  philosophic 
doubt.  Of  the  mood  or  temperament  likely  to  be  produced 
by  such  causes,  Montaigne  is  almost  the  Bible,  though  he  is  a 
Bible  containing  better  and  nobler  things  no  doubt,  and  by 
virtue  of  his  admirable  literary  quality  furnishing  much  anti 
dote  to  his  own  bane.  But  that  much  of  his  popularity  when 
he  was  presented  to  Englishmen  was  due  to  the  diversion, 
not  accomplished  but  begun,  of  the  national  character  into  a 
somewhat  lower  channel  than  that  in  which  it  had  run  for 
centuries,  I  have  very  little  doubt ;  and  that  it  had  (in  the 
infinitesimal  way  in  which  such  things  can  have)  something 
to  do  with  increasing  the  change  I  do  not  think  impossible. 
It  is  time,  however,  to  come  to  the  actual  consideration  of 
the  book  itself,  not  as  Montaigne's,  or  at  any  rate  not  as 
Montaigne's  only,  but  as  Florio's,  and  as  presented  by  him 
to  an  audience  of  Englishmen  in  the  reign  of  ELIZABETH 
and  on  the  eve  of  the  accession  of  JAMES. 

John  Florio  The  author  of  this  notable  English  book,  whose  birth 
by  calculating  backward  from  a  date  on  his  portrait  is  set  at 
1553,  was  no  doubt  an  Englishman  by  place  of  nativity. 
He  was  the  son  of  a  Protestant  minister  of  Florentine 
extraction,  who  had  fled  to  England,  was  pastor  of  an 
Italian  congregation  in  London,  at  exactly  the  middle 
of  the  sixteenth  century,  was  under  the  protection  of 
Cranmer  and  Sir  William  Cecil,  and  was  domiciled  with  the 
xii 


INTRODUCTION 

latter  till  imputations  were  made  on  his  morals.  He  was 
also,  it  would  seem,  a  teacher  of  Italian  and  an  author.  His 
son  John  is  said  to  have  been  educated  first  abroad,  the 
Marian  persecution  having  driven  his  father  from  England. 
Then  he  went  to  Oxford,  training  others  before,  at  the 
mature  age  of  twenty-eight,  he  himself  matriculated  in  1581, 
at  Magdalen  College.  Before  this  he  had  published  First- 
Fruits  (English  and  Italian  dialogues),  1578,  dedicated  to 
LEICESTER,  and  a  translation  of  RAMUZIO'S  Navigations  in 
1580.  After  Leicester's  death  SOUTHAMPTON  and  PEMBROKE 
became  Florio's  patrons,  and  he  appears  to  have  been  able 
to  live  in  London  and  haunt  the  society  of  literary  men  and 
literary  ladies.  The  Montaigne  was  licensed  in  1599,  but 
not  issued  till  four  years  later.  The  reign  of  James  brought 
him  promotion  :  he  was  made  at  once  Reader  to  Queen  Anne  His 
in  Italian,  and  a  year  later  Gentleman  Extraordinary  and  Promotl 
Groom  of  the  Privy  Chamber  to  the  King.  Latterly  he 
lived  at  Fulham,  and  died  there  some  time  in  the  autumn  of 
1625.  His  wife  was  named  Rose,  and  he  had  a  daughter 
Aurelia.  His  books,  including  manuscript  works,  he  left  to 
the  Earl  of  Pembroke,  to  be  placed  either  at  Wilton  or  in 
London,  but  they  are  not  known  to  be  at  the  former  place. 
During  his  lifetime,  besides  the  works  noticed  above,  he 
published  a  Giardino  di  Recreazione,  1591  (a  collection  of 
Italian  proverbs) ;  Second  Fruits,  a  continuation  of  the  First 
Fruits  with  the  Garden  annexed ;  A  World  of  Words  (an  A  World  of 
Italian-English  dictionary),  reprinted  by  himself  in  1611,  Words 
and  again  in  1659,  as  'augmented  by  himself  in  his  life- 
4  time  with  many  thousand  words  and  Thuscan  phrases,'  and 
with  an  English-Italian  part,  the  work  of  his  editor,  GIO 
VANNI  TORRIANO.  This  World  of  Words  (1598),  indeed, 

xiii 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

is  one  of  the  most  delightful  of  a  delightful  but  too 
much  neglected  class  of  books — the  older  dictionaries  which 
supply  English  at  its  best,  and  illustrate  it  at  its  quaintest. 
Something,  but  not  much,  is  known  about  Florio  per 
sonally,  and  as  with  all  persons  who  had  the  fortune  or 
misfortune  to  be  in  any  way  connected  with  Shakespeare, 
more  is  guessed.  Sir  WILLIAM  CORNWALLIS  informed  a  world 
greedy  of  personal  details  that  he  was  '  less  beholding 
4  to  nature  for  his  fortunes  than  wit ;  yet  lesser  for  his  face 
4  than  his  fortune ' ;  adding  that  he  looked  '  more  like  a  good 
'  fellow  than  a  wise  man ' ;  but  yet  was  4  wise  beyond  both  his 
'  fortune  and  education.1  Daniel,  the  poet,  called  him  his 
friend  and  brother.  Florio  himself  describes  himself  as 
4  Resolute  John  Florio,'  and  the  Shakespearian  commentator, 
improving  on  all  this,  after  his  kind,  must  needs  add  to  it 
that  Resolute  John  was  the  original  of  Holofernes  in  Love's 
Labour ''s  Lost. 

Florio's  Style  That  Florio  must  have  had  an  abundant  vein  of  that 
coxcombry  which  distinguishes  most  of  the  lesser  and  some 
of  the  greater  men  of  the  Elizabethan  time,  a  very  slight 
examination  of  his  work  will  show.  The  '  Address  to  the 
4  Reader '  of  the  second  edition  is  nearly  as  good  in  its  sub 
stance  as  in  its  signature,  4  Still  Resolute  John  Florio." 
4  Enough,1  quoth  the  Still  Resolute  One,  4  if  not  too  much, 
4  hath  been  said  of  this  translation,"*  and  he  proceeds  to 
observe  that,  'if  the  printer'  [of  course  only  the  printer, 
and  Resolute  John  being  careless  of  the  matter]  'hath 
6  corrected  the  faults  as  he  was  directed,  it  is  much  amended  : 
4  if  not,  know  that  through  mine  attendance  on  Her  Majesty 
4  I  [Resolute  John]  could  not  intend  [superintend]  it.'  No 
sycophancy  to  readers,  gentle  or  other,  here,  it  will  be  seen  : 
xiv 


INTRODUCTION 

no  sinking  of  Resolute  John's  important  court  employments. 
As  for  ( the  printer,'  there  may  be  two  opinions.  There 
are  of  course  errata,  which  are  errata  merely ;  but  a  careful 
study  even  of  the  first  few  essays  will  show  any  reader  that, 
despite  the  general  excellence  of  the  translation,  the  resolu 
tion  of  John  sometimes  exceeded  his  carefulness  or  his 
knowledge.  In  the  famous  exordium,  '  a  well-meaning 
4  book '  is  certainly  not  happy  for  un  livre  de  bonne  foy.  At 
the  end  of  the  first  essay,  sang  espandable  is  very  feebly 
rendered  '  remaining  blood,'  and  two  essays  later,  '  to  carry 
*  the  keys  of  the  castle  upon  the  deceased  of  the  captain '  is 
marvellous  ungainly  for  porter  les  clefs  de  la  place  sur  le 
corps  du  trespasse.  A  great  number  of  these  little  slips  are 
noticeable,  and  will  be  noticed  in  the  proper  place,  and,  as  it 
is  pretty  certain  from  the  general  tenour  of  the  translation 
that  they  did  not  come  from  ignorance,  it  stands  to  reason 
that  they  can  only  have  come  from  a  certain  amount  of 
haste  in  the  original  composition,  supplemented  by  the 
intense  devotion  of  Resolute  John  to  his  duties  as  Gentle 
man  of  Her  Majesty  Anne  of  Denmark's  Chamber. 

In  all  this,  however,  there  is  nothing  of  Holofernes  but  Florio  and 
the  pedantry  and  a  certain  quickness  of  temper.  Holofernes  Labors*  Lort 
would  most  assuredly  not  have  put  off  his  faults  upon  the 
printer.  He  would  have  argued  to  the  convincing  of  Sir 
Nathaniel,  the  stupefaction  and  bemusement  of  Goodman 
Dull,  and  the  amazed  satisfaction  of  most  of  the  souls 
feminine  in  the  parish,  that  all  the  mistakes  were  right,  that 
there  were  no  mistakes  at  all.  And  to  do  him  justice  he 
would  probably  have  taken  the  utmost  pains  to  prevent  the 
'  undressed,  unpolished,  uneducated,  untrained,  or  rather 
'  unlettered,  or  ratherest  unconfirmed'  blundering  of  the 

xv 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

printer   from    spoiling    the   precious   things   that   he   had 
himself  delivered  upon  the  mellowing  of  occasion.     On  the 
other  hand,  though  Resolute  John  certainly  had  been  some 
thing  like  a  schoolmaster,  there  is  no  evidence  that  Holo- 
fernes  ever  became  anything  like  a  Gentleman  of  the  Queen 
of  Navarre's  Chamber — an  argument  most  facete,  legitimate, 
and  well  suited  to  the  subject.     In  short,  except  that  both 
were,  as  has  been  said,  schoolmasters,  and  that  both  were, 
though  in  decidedly  different  kinds,  coxcombs,  it  is  difficult 
to  discover  the  least  resemblance  between  the  two.     For 
the   last   five-and-twenty   years   of  his   life   it  would  seem 
that  Florio's  ambition  was  rather  in  the  way  of  Boyet  or 
Osric  than  in  that  of  the  author  of  the  unlucky  entertain 
ment  which  was  so  rudely  received  by  its  audience.     Indeed, 
if  Southampton  and  Pembroke  had  not  been  famous  names 
in  the  biographies  both  of  Florio  and  Shakespeare,  it  may  be 
taken  for  granted  that  we  should  have  heard  nothing  of  the 
matter.    Neither  of  it  nor  of  Florio's  personality  (which  was 
probably  not  less  nor  more  coxcombical  than  assorted  with  the 
manners  of  those  scholars  of  the  time  whose  education  was 
above  their  breeding)  shall  any  more  be  heard  or  said  here. 
Florio  and          The  more  carefully  comparison  of  his  version  is  made  with 
Montaigne    hig  original?  the  better,  I  think,  will  it  serve  to  show  that 
the  translation,  as  a  whole,  cannot  be  called  unfaithful,  despite 
the  liberties  and  the  occasional  downright  mistakes  noted 
above.    But,  except  from  the  merely  pedagogic-pedantic  point 
of  view,  such  a  plea  is  hardly  needed.     Save  for  the  purposes 
of  a  4  crib,1  or  of  a  pure  exercise  in  scholarship,  intended  to 
benefit  rather  the  writer  than  the  reader,  it  is  of  infinitely 
less  importance  that  a  translation  should  be  done  on  the 
vcrbum  rerbo  principle  than  that   it   should,  as   far  as   is 
xvi 


INTRODUCTION 

possible,  produce  on  its  reader  the  effect  which  the  original  His 
produces  on  the  reader  of  that  original.  And,  that  it  may  Excellences 
do  this,  the  certain  vital  qualities  which  it  must  possess  con 
sist  much  more  in  the  spirit  and  vigour  of  the  phrase,  in  the 
gust  and  character  of  the  version,  than  in  bare  faithfulness  to 
the  thing  translated.  In  these  qualities  few  translators  have 
surpassed  Resolute  John  when  he  is  at  his  best.  Take,  for 
instance,  the  short  and  admirable  essay  on  Fear,  the  seven 
teenth  of  the  first  book.  Here  your  pedant  will  boggle  at 
'  I  know  not  well '  for  ne  sgais  gueres  in  the  first  line.  But 
would  the  pedant  have  thought  of  anything  so  good  as '  well 
'  I  wot  it  is  a  strange  passion '  for  tant  y  a  que  ?  Would 
the  pedant  have  given  us  a  sentence  like  this  :  '  At  what  time 
'  the  Duke  of  Bourbon  took  Rome,  an  Ancient  that  kept  sen- 
6  tinell  in  the  borough  Saint  Peter  was  at  the  first  alarm  sur- 
'  prised  with  such  terror  that,  with  his  colours  in  his  hand, 
6  he  suddenly  threw  himself  thorow  the  hole  of  a  breach 
'  out  of  the  citie '  ?  I  protest  that  '  in  the  borough  Saint 
c  Peter  '  affects  me  as  '  his  noun  '  and  '  his  verb '  did  Lamb. 
And  here  again  :  '  the  like  happened  but  not  so  successfully 
'  unto  Captaine  Julius  his  ensigne  bearer  at  what  time  Saint 
'  Paul  was  taken  from  us  by  the  Earl  of  Bures.1  And  here : 
4  at  which  siege  likewise  that  horror  and  feare  is  very  memor- 
'  able  which  did  choake,  seize  upon,  and  freeze  the  heart  of  a 
'  gentleman  that  having  received  no  hurt  at  all  he  fell  down 
6  starke  dead  upon  the  ground  before  the  breach."*  And  yet 
again  :  '  The  poor,  the  banished,  and  seely  servants,  live  often 
'  as  pleasantly  and  as  carelessly  as  the  other/  What  a  relish  is 
there  in  writing  of  this  sort !  What  a  curious  sense  of  life 
and  art  as  contradistinguished  from  vegetation  and  drudgery ! 
This  savour  is  mightily  assisted  by  the  quaint  verse-tags 
c  xvii 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

His  Tags  of  translation  in  which  Florio  renders  (except  in  a  few  cases, 
which  seem  to  shock  him)  all  Montaigne's  verse  citations, 
whether  from  the  classics  or  from  modern  languages.  In 
the  '  Fear"  essay  just  discussed  he  gives  for  '  turn  pavor  sapi- 
6  entiam  omnem  mihi  ex  ammo  expectorat ' : 

'  Fear  then  unbreasts  all  wit 
That  in  my  mind  doth  sit/ 

a  literal  following  of  expectorat  no  less  happy  in  its  result 
than  sublime  in  its  audacity.  Sometimes,  it  is  true,  the 
quaintness  almost  reaches  the  inconceivable  oddity  of  Stany- 
hurst :  and  such,  perhaps,  is  the  rendering  of  Petrarch's 

Chi  puo  dir  comegli  arde,  e  in  picciolfuoco  : 

'  He  that  can  say  how  he  doth  frie 
In  petty-gentle  flames  doth  lie ' ; 

while  the  version  into  English  sapphics  of  Catullus  on  the 
same  page  is  6  thwick-thwack-thirlery  bouncing '  with  a 
vengeance  : 

'  Tongue-tied  as  in  trance,  while  a  sprightly  thin  flame 
Flowes  in  all  my  joynts  with  a  selfe-resounding, 
Both  my  eares  tingle,  with  a  night  redoubled 
Both  mine  eyes  are  veiled. ' 

But  he  is  usually  happier  than  this,  especially  when  he  gives 
himself  plenty  of  licence,  and  calmly  renders 

Point  ne  sefaut  corroucer  aux  affaires, 
II  ne  leur  chaut  de  toutes  noz  choleres 

'  We  ought  not  angry  be  at  what  God  dooth, 
For  He  cares  not  who  beares  an  angry  tooth. ' 

The  attaching  quality  of  this  can  hardly  be  over-estimated, 
especially  in  an  age  which,  though  by  no  means  unlearned, 
xviii 


INTRODUCTION 

was  still  to  a  very  great  extent  unsophisticated.  And  he 
can  be  very  close,  too,  in  his  own  peculiar  way,  as  for  instance 
here,  where  even  Dryden  could  not  have  bettered  the  thing 
much,  in  the  Lucretian  tag : 

Nam  verae  voces  turn  demum  pectore  ab  imo 
Ejiciuntur,  et  eripitur  persona,  manet  res. 

'  For  then  are  sent  true  speeches  from  the  heart ; 
We  are  ourselves ;  we  leave  to  play  a  part. ' 

Of  his  quainter  moods  a  good  example  is  when  he  turns 
omnes  eodem  cogimur  into 

( All  to  one  place  are  driven,  of  all 

Shak't  is  the  Lot-Pot  where-hence  shall 
Sooner  or  later  drawne  lots  fall, 
And  to  death's  boat  for  aye  enthrall. ' 

Is  it  possible  to  regard  with  too  much  affection  a  man  who 
could  write  '  Shak't  is  the  lot-pot,1  even  if  he  borrowed  it 
from  somebody  else  ?  Sometimes,  indeed,  Florio  is  less  for 
tunate  : 

(  As  we  are  born  we  die  :  the  end 
Doth  of  th'  originall  depend/ 

cannot  be  said  to  be  very  happy  for  the 

Nascentes  morimur,  finisque  ab  origine  pcndet 

of  Manilius,  though  the  impression,  and  especially  the  first 
impression,  of  language  changes  so  subtly  that  Elizabethan 
ears  or  eyes  may  have  been  led  less  astray  at  the  first  reading 
than  Victorian,  supposing  that  both  were  ignorant  of  Latin. 
About  the  following  there  can  be  no  doubt,  however.  The 
famous  question, 

Cur  non  ut  plenus  vitae  conviva  recedis  ? 

xix 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

has  always  been  open  to  the  damaging  retort,  '  But  I  am 
6  not  "  plenus  "  :  I  want  more.1  It  becomes  more  vulnerable 
still  in  Florio^s 

'  Why  like  a  full-fed  guest 
Depart  you  not  to  rest  ?  ' 

because  there  is  the  still  more  fatal  riposte,  '  Yes  :  but  is  it 
4  to  rest  ? ' 

In  the  same  context  there  are  some  other  Lucretiaii 
nuts  which  John's  resolution  might  have  cracked  better  if  it 
had  condescended  to  be  sicklied  with  a  little  more  thought. 
He  is,  as  a  rule,  most  happy  at  short  sentences,  something 
in  the  way  of  those  posies  of  which  the  Elizabethans  were  so 
fond,  as  here  : 

Aditum  nocendi  perfido  praest at  fides. 

'  Trust  in  the  untrusty  may 
To  hurt  make  open  way.' 

It  is,  indeed,  very  probable  that  the  abundance  of  quota 
tion  in  Montaigne,  and  the  sententious  fashion  in  which 
Florio  presented  these  quotations,  were  among  the  causes 
which  made  the  book  popular  with  a  generation  which 
loved  such  things  as  well  as  Dr.  Folliott  himself. 
His  Another  charm  of  Florio's,  closely  connected  with  the 

'  savour  and  individuality  of  his  phrase,  as  above  noted,  and 
indeed  to  some  extent  cause  of  it,  is  his  boldness  in  com 
pounding.  Like  some  other  Elizabethans,  he  had  undoubt 
edly  studied  Du  Bartas  and  the  earlier  Pleiade.  Indeed,  the 
attempt  to  emulate  classical  freedom  in  this  respect  was 
common  to  the  Renaissance  generally :  and  perhaps  no  lan 
guage  offers  such  temptations  to  the  practice  as  English, 
which  is  as  naturally  well  disposed  to  it  as  French  is  ill- 
xx 


INTRODUCTION 

disposed.  'Lot-pot'  itself  is  almost  too  humorous  an 
example  :  but  there  are  plenty  of  others  not  exposed  to  that 
rebuke,  if  rebuke  it  be.  '  Plumb-cheeked  '  for  enjoue  (i.  38) 
is  almost  a  stroke  of  genius  :  and  the  comparative  philologist 
may  go  shake  his  ears  if  he  likes  over  the  evident  confusion 
of  joue  and  jouer.  Florio  is  so  fond  of  such  things  that  he 
will  gratuitously  turn  a  single  into  a  compound  word,  so  that 
when  Montaigne  calls  fame  a  simple  voix  he  must  needs 
translate  it  '  idly-simple.1  Les  yeux  ouverts  must  be  '  broad- 
'  waking ' ;  ce  lourd  grossissement  de  pourpoints  swells  yet 
further  into  '  the  bumbasting  of  long  peasecod-bellied  doub- 
'  lets.'  Si  grand  pcine  appears  as  '  so  great  mind-possessing 
6  toil.'  For  this  last  one  can  hardly  praise  him :  but  it  is 
certain  that  he  understood  and  hit  the  taste  of  his  own 
audience,  and  thus  was  a  faithful  usher  to  his  Lord  Michael 
of  Montaigne.  But  if  Florio  is  thus  fond  of  compounds — (I  His  Coinages 
must  add  one  example,  that  in  which  les  estroicts  baisers  de 
la  ieunesse,  savoureux  gloutons  et  gluants  becomes  '  the 
'  close-smacking,  sweetness-moving,  love-alluring,  and  greedy- 
4  smirking  kisses  of  youth  ') — and  of  striking  quaintnesses  of 
phrase,  he  cannot  with  justice  be  accused  of  another  piece 
of  preciousness,  the  selecting  or  manufacturing  of  unusual 
words.  In  a  minute  examination  of  a  considerable  number 
of  pages,  enough  to  be  a  fair  sample,  I  find  only  three  such  : 
— munite  for  '  fortify,'  '  kicking,  winching,  and  flying '  for 
modes  et  pennades,  and  '  bardel '  for  the  French  word  bardellc, 
a  saddle-pad  or  saddle-cloth.  This  is  no  excessive  allowance, 
and  I  believe  it  to  be  not,  as  a  rule,  exceeded.  '  To  petard 
4  a  gate,'  for  instance,  is  merely  an  example  of  the  right  Eng 
lish  idiom  by  which  almost  any  noun  can  be  turned  into  a 
verb  at  pleasure.  Florio  gives  himself,  indeed,  the  licence 

xxi 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

(which  could  hardly  be  refused  him  by  any  but  a  very  fero 
cious  purist)  of  transferring  bodily  to  English  those  Latin- 
French  words  of  which  Montaigne  is  so  full,  in  regard  to 
which,  as  students  of  the  original  know,  he  is  responsible 
for  the  introduction  and  naturalisation  of  more  than  perhaps 
any  other  great  French  writer,  and  for  which  he  was  much 
grumbled  at  by  sticklers  for  authority  in  his  own  day. 
Resolute  John  boldly  writes  c  suffragant  and  subsidiary '  for 
sujfragante  et  subsidiaire.  For  my  part,  whether  he  had 
English  examples  or  not  before  him,  I  say, '  What  for  no  ? * 
Provided  that  a  word  is  properly  formed  in  the  language 
from  which  it  comes,  and  observes  the  rules  of  analogy  in 
transferring  itself  to  the  language  into  which  it  goes,  I  have 
never  myself  been  able  to  conceive  any  reason  of  sound 
scholarship  or  good  economy  which  can  be  alleged  against 
its  introduction.  Even  if  it  duplicates  one  already  in  exist 
ence  it  is  sure  to  be  useful :  and  as  a  rule  it  does  not  dupli 
cate,  but  supplies  a  new  shade  of  meaning. 

His  Sometimes  one  is  not  quite  certain  whether  the  translator 

or  the  printer  is  responsible  for  oddities.  '  Ogwardish,'  for 
instance,  for  encouardy  looks  like  a  compound  of  a  clerical 
error  and  a  misprint,  and,  just  below  it,  'wretch-stripped  and 
6  robbed,1  for  miserable  desvalise,  is  still  more  questionable, 
for  '  wretchstript '  in  good  English  could  only  mean  '  stripped 
4  by  a  wretch.'  It  is  very  likely  that  Florio  meant  to  cross 
out  'wretch*  and  leave  only  '  soldier."  Perhaps,  indeed,  he 
had  been  practically  carrying  out  the  recommendations  of 
the  text  (which  plead  for  more  frequent  '  breakfasts,  nun- 
'  chions,  and  beavers*),  with  the  result  of  being  'jolly-quaint. 
Of  his  spelling  nothing  need  be  said,  for  the  simple  reason 
that  here,  as  elsewhere,  there  is  very  little  reason  to  suppose 
xxii 


INTRODUCTION 

that  it  is  in  any  proper  sense  his  spelling  at  all.  And  almost  His  English 
as  few  words  will  serve  for  the  other  beggarly  elements  of 
his  style — its  grammar  and  arrangement.  These  usually 
follow  very  closely  those  of  the  original.  He  has  broken 
up  Montaigne's  sentences  a  good  deal ;  but  this,  which  is 
little  save  a  matter  of  punctuation,  of  itself  saves  him  from 
the  welter  of  relatives  and  the  corrupt  attempts  to  imitate 
Latin  involutions  which  frequently  disfigure  the  English 
prose  of  his  time.  Sometimes,  but  rarely,  he  allows  the 
thread  of  construction,  which  Montaigne  himself  in  his 
digressions  and  second  thoughts  does  not  always  maintain 
very  accurately,  to  escape  him.  But  for  the  most  part,  to 
use  his  own  charming  version,  he  deserves  '  prick  and  praise 
6  for  natural  purity  and  pure  elegancy  of  tongue.1  What  is 
especially  remarkable  is  the  fact  that  he  has  succeeded  in 
combining  so  much  that  is  idiomatic  and  racy  of  the  Eng 
lish  soil  with  the  ease  and  polish,  occasionally  rather  desti 
tute  of  character,  natural  and  almost  inevitable  in  the  prose 
style  of  men  who  are  familiar  with  many  languages,  and 
who  not  unfrequently  miss  the  cachet  of  any  in  obeying  the 
lessons  of  all. 

'  II  faict  bon,'  says  Montaigne  himself  in  the  longest,  the 
most  debated,  but  certainly  the  least  read  of  his  essays,  the 
Apologie  de  Raimond  Sebond, '  traduire  les  aucteurs  comme 
'  celuy-la  ou  il  n'y  a  gueres  que  la  matiere  a  representer:  mais 
'  ceux  qui  ont  donne  beaucoup  a  la  grace  et  a  Telegance  du 
4  langage  ils  sont  dangereux  a  entreprendre  nommement  pour 
'  les  rapporter  a  un  idiome  plus  foible.'  In  the  opinion  then 
commonly  held,  even  by  true-born  Englishmen,  of  English, 
Florio  might  have  thought  that  the  last  clause  of  this  warn 
ing  applied  to  himself:  though  we  certainly  should  not 

xxiii 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

His         admit  it.     And  if  '  grace '  and  '  elegance '  are  not  exactly 
Achievement  the  wordg  thftt  would   be  seiected  to  express   the   style   of 

Montaigne,  its  extraordinary  variety  and  vigour — the  diable 
au  corps  which  it  everywhere  exhibits — might  have  seemed 
as  dangerous  to  undertake.  The  foregoing  survey  may  have 
pointed  out,  in  general  and  analytically,  what  the  reading  of 
a  very  few  pages  of  the  text  will  show,  no  doubt  more  con 
vincingly,  in  another  way,  that  the  danger,  such  as  it  is,  has 
been  met  and  surmounted.  For  all  the  occasional  inaccu 
racies,  and  the  slight  eccentricities  already  noted,  only  the 
very  greatest  masters  of  Elizabethan  prose  have  provided 
work  pleasanter,  more  stimulating,  and  less  monotonous  to 
the  reader.  On  the  other  hand,  Montaigne  certainly  comes 
under  the  benefit  of  his  own  statute  in  respect  of  the  suit 
ableness  for  translation  of  writers  who  are  full  of  matter, 
whether  there  is  in  them  something  besides  matter  or  not. 
His  own  style  and  manner  vary  considerably  ;  and  perhaps 
Florio  has  not  been  quite  so  successful  in  rendering  the 
longer  arguments  and  more  weighty  discourses  of  the  later 
books  and  essays  as  in  giving  the  lighter  jottings  of  the 
earlier.  A  certain  weariness  of  the  work  often  comes  on 
the  translator  of  a  long  book — a  certain  half  or  more  than 
half  conscious  tendency  to  hurry  and  slur.  Unless  I  have 
myself  suffered  from  some  similar  affection,  I  have  noticed 
more  pieces  of  laziness  (such  as  keeping  the  French  word 
deffaillance  where  '  faintness '  would  perfectly  well  have  done), 
and  of  positive  leading  astray  (as  where  in  a  not  easily 
quotable  passage  about  Diogenes  he  transfers  faisant  souhait 
from  the  philosopher  to  the  spectators).  But  in  looking  to 
the  whole  these  petty  faults  vanish  :  and  that  whole  remains 
an  almost  unapproached  enlargement  of  the  reading  sphere 
xxiv 


INTRODUCTION 

of  contemporary  Englishmen.  A  great  gulf  has  always  re-  Originals  and 
mained  fixed  between  the  classics  in  the  original  and  their 
readers  in  translations,  and,  strange  as  it  may  seem,  a  gulf 
lesser  but  ever  widening  has  been  opened  between  modern 
nations  in  modern  times.  Only  in  a  few  cases  of  exceptional 
temperament  and  education  is  it  possible,  despite  all  our 
travel  and  all  our  study  of  modern  languages  and  litera 
tures,  for  an  Englishman  and  a  Frenchman,  a  Frenchman 
and  a  German,  to  see  eye  to  eye  or  think  mind  to  mind. 
Nay,  which  is  more  remarkable,  the  community  of  language, 
of  literature,  and  even  to  some  extent  of  customs  and  insti 
tutions,  has  not  prevented  the  appearance  of  a  similar  gulf 
between  Americans  and  Englishmen.  The  same  things 
actually  present  themselves  from  different  angles  and  are 
seen  through  a  different  atmosphere ;  and  positively  intelli 
gent  individuals,  not  merely  the  average  fool,  on  the  two 
sides  of  the  water  honestly  wonder  each  how  the  other  can 
possibly  hold  the  opinions  and  think  the  thoughts  which  to 
that  other  seem  the  only  opinions  and  thoughts  possible  to 
a  sensible  man.  In  mediaeval  days  there  was  almost  com 
plete  solidarity  (to  use  a  word  which  Resolute  John  would 
have  used  without  blenching  had  it  come  in  his  way)  all  over 
Europe  in  thought,  whatever  diversity  of  custom  and  ver 
nacular  there  might  be.  And  the  disturbances  of  the 
Renaissance  did  not  at  first  affect  this  :  nay,  as  they  were 
common  to  all  nations,  they  for  a  moment  made  it  closer 
before  causing  the  final  separation. 

This,  aided  by  those  special  coincidences  and  relationships 
on  which  I  have  commented  in  the  earlier  pages  of  this  in 
troduction,  and  by  the  intrinsic  merits  of  Florio's  version,  at 
once  domesticated  Montaigne  with  the  purely  English  reader. 
d  xxv 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

Montaigne's  What  that  reader  gained  by  this  addition  to  his  household 
C^ua  ities      ft  js  noj.  my  |3USjness  t0  describe  at  any  very  great  length  or 

in  any  very  great  detail  here.  Let  me  only  remind  his  living 
representative,  before  he  begins  reading  what  may  possibly 
be  more  familiar  to  him  at  second  than  at  first  hand,  that 
Montaigne's  great  peculiarity  is  range  over  the  widest 
variety  of  subject  combined  with  the  presence  of  a  constant 
and  unvarying  attitude  of  mind.  On  the  first  point  there 
is  no  dispute.  Except  art — in  which,  save  as  regards  litera 
ture,  he  seems  to  have  felt  an  interest  rather  curiously  small 
for  a  man  of  his  age  and  country — there  is  hardly  anything 
in  life  that  does  not  enter  into  the  scope  and  scheme  of 
Montaigne^s  observation,  and  form  a  subject  for  one  or  more 
of  those  apparent  divagations  which  are  really  perambula 
tions  and  quarterings  of  his  subject — life  itself.  The  exact 
definition  of  his  attitude  has  been  far  more  keenly — has, 
indeed,  been  almost  furiously — contested.  There  would 
probably  have  been  less  dissension  if  the  disputants  had 
learnt,  what  seems  to  be  one  of  the  hardest  of  literary  lessons, 
to  confine  themselves  to  what  their  author  says,  instead  of 
making  it  a  mere  sacred  text,  to  be  reverenced  and,  indeed, 
praised,  but  to  be  practically  expounded  in  accordance  with 
a  Gemara  and  Mishna  of  things  which  he  does  not  say,  but 
which  they  think  he  would,  could,  might,  or  ought  to  have 
said.  In  particular  there  has  been  an  unauthorised  and 
unhistorical  tendency  to  suppose  in  him  a  custom  of  speak 
ing  tongue-in-cheek,  after  a  manner  which  cannot  really  be 
traced  higher  than  Bayle,  though  from  Bayle's  time  it  be 
came  almost  habitual  with  a  large  class  of  French  writers. 
That  pleasant  things  were  unquestionably  and  indiscrimi 
nately  good,  but  to  be  used  with  a  great  deal  of  questioning 
xxvi 


INTRODUCTION 

and  discrimination,  seems  to  me  to  have  been,  as  far  as  he 
had  one,  Montaigne's  definite  rule  of  choice  in  action.  That 
his  que  sgais-je  ?  expresses  an  equally  deliberate  opinion  that 
belief  is  quite  possible,  but  that  it  can  in  no  case  pass  into 
demonstrated  or  demonstrable  knowledge  in  things  intellec 
tual,  I  am  myself  most  firmly  convinced.  I  am  as  certain 
as  I  can  be  about  any  man's  thoughts  but  my  own  that  his 
epicureanism,  as  it  is  commonly  called,  did  not  overpass  the 
limits  of  the  first  proposition,  and  that  his  pyrrhonism  did 
not  pass  the  limits  of  the  second.  Nor  do  I  find  the  least 
inclination  in  myself  to  quarrel  with  either,  though  I  think 
the  second  too  wide.  Montaigne's  fault,  as  I  take  it,  was 
a  fault  of  defect,  not  of  error.  He  had  the  French  lack, 
on  one  and  the  more  common  side  of  the  French  character, 
of  the  romantic,  the  enthusiastic,  the  transcendental.  It  is 
all  very  well  for  him  to  say  fine  things  about  poetry  in  one 
place  and  claim  to  be  '  transpierced  and  transported '  by  it : 
the  real  man  peeps  out  much  more  clearly  in  the  remark, 
when  he  is  talking  about  women,  that  poetry  is  '  un  art 
'  folastre  et  subtil,  desguise,  parlier,  tout  en  plaisir,  tout  en 
'  montre,  comme  elles."1  His  marvellously  abundant  fancy 
scarce  ever  passes  into  imagination :  there  are  no  brave 
translunary  things  in  him.  But,  except  for  the  purpose  of  His  Defects 
defining,  it  is  always  unsatisfactory  to  me  to  talk  of  what  a 
man  is  not. 

What  Montaigne  is  more  than  half-a-dozen  generations 
have  decided  without  hesitation  and  without  mistake.  In 
his  own  range  and  circle — that  of  the  practical  man  who  is 
at  the  same  time  thoroughly  imbued  with  literature,  of  the 
moraliser  who  never  merely  pays  himself  or  any  one  else  with 
words,  of  the  intelligent  user  of  life  as  he  finds  it, — it  may  be 

xxvii 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

doubted  whether  there  has  ever  been  a  wiser  man  than  he, 
and  held  for  certain  that  there  has  been  no  more  attractive 
exponent  of  this  particular  kind  of  wisdom.  In  one  special 
respect  Montaigne  must  always  have  had  a  peculiar  attrac- 
Montaigne  in  tion  for  Englishmen.  It  has  been  an  almost  invariable 
characteristic  of  our  race  that  we  have  been  either  slavish 
adherents  of  custom  and  fashion,  or  eccentric  and  rather 
deliberate  contemners  of  them,  or  (sometimes)  both  at  once. 
In  contradistinction  to  this,  the  determined  and  yet  unosten 
tatious  way  in  which  Montaigne  displays  his  intention  to 
vivre  a  sa  guise,  his  reduction  of  things  to  unconventional 
standards  without  any  flying  in  the  face  of  convention  for 
the  mere  sake  of  flapping  the  wings,  must  have  at  once 
struck  us.  No  one  applies  the  merely  practical  reason  so 
well  as  he  :  no  one  turns  on  the  dry  light  so  steadily  and 
with  so  little  parade.  In  our  altitudes  we  may  and  perhaps 
should  despise  him  a  little :  for  he  is  something  of  a  Lord 
Glenvarloch  in  the  game  both  of  thought  and  of  life,  and 
we  are  as  little  disposed  to  call  him  a  '  great  gamester '  in 
either  as  Sir  Mungo  was  to  apply  the  term  in  the  other 
case.  But  it  is  not  very  easy  to  carry  on  life  at  altitudes  : 
and  yet  it  has  to  be  carried  on.  So  at  the  beginning  of  the 
stormiest  century  of  our  annals  Englishmen  were  presented 
with  this  curious  reducer  of  all  things  to  a  que  sgals-je  ?  to 
a  common  denominator  of  the  practical  reason,  to  a  level 
where  if  the  great  things  of  optimism  are  not  recognised,  and 
are  even  decently  pooh-poohed,  there  is  not  the  slightest 
affectation  of  believing  that  this  is  the  worst  of  all  possible 
worlds.  Some  of  them  rejected  the  lesson  with  heat,  and 
became  Crashaws  in  literature  and  Montroses  in  politics  : 
others  took  it  rather  too  seriously,  and  their  name,  when  they 
xxviii 


INTRODUCTION 

became  eminent,  was  Temple  or  Godolphin  or  (for  the 
influence  of  Montaigne  on  the  Spectator  has,  I  think,  been 
generally  too  much  ignored)  Addison.  Even  here  one 
speaks  but  figuratively :  for  all  these  distinguished  persons 
would  no  doubt  have  been  themselves,  even  if  there  had 
been  no  Montaigne  in  the  world.  In  the  vast  majority  of 
cases,  doubtless  what  Florio  and  his  follower  Cotton  did  was 
simply  to  provide  fit  pasture  for  fit  persons — to  supply,  as  is 
the  common  but  not  ignoble  office  of  literature,  somewhat 
unorganised  and  unvocal  thought  with  the  ready-made  ex 
pression  of  its  thinking,  far  better  thought  than  it  could 
have  managed  for  itself.  Like  every  other  writer,  Mon 
taigne  is  after  all  for  moods — moods  individual  and  moods 
national,  moods  moral  and  moods  literary.  The  moods  for 
which  he  is  suited  are  numerous,  and  his  adaptation  to  them 
is  remarkable.  Those  who  can  will  of  course  always  read  The  End 
him  in  the  original :  for  those  who  cannot  there  is  certainly 
no  English  version,  despite  its  occasional  inaccuracies,  which 
can  be  recommended  with  half  the  warmth  and  sincerity 
which  can  be  lent  to  the  claims  of  Florio — Still  Resolute 
after  nearly  three  centuries  to  achieve  his  task,  and  pro 
vided  by  nature  and  chance  with  an  equipment  of  parallel 
language  which  all  Wardour  Street,  even  backed  up  by  the 
profoundest  academic  knowledge,  cannot  furnish  now. 

GEORGE  SAINTSBURY. 


XXIX 


Some  copies  of  the  First  Book  oftMs  Edition  of  Fiona's 
Monlaigne  were  sent  out  with  an  error  on  the  Title-page 
and  on  page  xxxi.  Cancel  leaves  are  sent  herewith  to 
replace  those  pages. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

The  three  Jirst  editions  of  Florio's 

translation  of  the  '  Essais'   were 

published    in    1603,    1613,    and 

1632   respectively.     The   text  of 

this   reprint,   with   the   prefatory 

matter,    is  from    the   edition   of 

1632;  the  title  which  follows 

from  that  o/l6l3. 


BIBLIOGRAPHICAL  NOTE 

The  title  of  the  Essays  is  reprinted 

from   the  Jirst'  edition  of  1613, 

the    prefatory    matter    and    the 

text  from   the  third  edition 

0/1632. 


E    S    S  A  Y   E    S 

WRITTEN    IN    FRENCH    BY 

MICHAEL, 

LORD    OF    MONTAIGNE 

KNIGHT   OF   THE   ORDER    OF    S.    MICHAEL, 
GENTLEMAN  OF  THE  FRENCH    KINGS  CHAMBER: 

DONE    INTO    ENGLISH, 

ACCORDING  TO  THE  LAST  FRENCH  EDITION,  BY 

IOHN   FLORIO 

READER   OF   THE    ITALIAN    TONGUE 
UNTO    THE    SOVERAIGNE    MAIESTIE    OF   ANNA, 

Queene    of   England,    Scotland, 
France  and  Ireland,  etc. 

AND  ONE  OF  THE  GENTLEMEN  OF  HIR 
ROYALL    PRIUIE    CHAMBER. 

1613 


TO  THE  MOST  ROYAL  AND  RENOWMED  MAIESTIE 

OF    THE    HIGH-BORNE    PRINCESSE 

ANNA   OF  DENMARKE 

By  the  Grace  of  God  QUEENE  of  England, 
Scotland,  France,  and  Ireland,  etc. 

Imperiall  and  Incomparable  Majestie, 


EEING  with  me,  all  of  me  is  in  your  Royall 
possession,  and  whatsoever  peeces  of  mine 
have  heretofore,  under  other  Starres  pass 
ed  the  publike  view,  come  now  of  right  to 
be  under  the  predomination  of  a  Power, 
that  both  con  tain's  all  their  perfections, 
and  hath  influences  of  a  more  sublime 
nature,  I  could  not  but  also  take  in  this 
part  (wherof  time  had  worn-out  the  edition)  which  the 
world  hath  long  since  had  of  mine,  and  lay  it  at  your  Sacred 
feet,  as  a  memoriall  of  my  devoted  duty,  and  to  shew  that 
where  I  am,  I  must  be  all  I  am,  and  cannot  stand  dis 
persed  in  my  observance,  being  wholly  (and  therein  happy) 

Your  sacred  Maiesties  most 

humble  and  loyall  servant, 

IOHN   FLORIO. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


ALL'   AVGVSTA  MAESTA   DI   ANNA 

Serenma  REGINA  d'  Inghilterra,  di  Scotia, 
di  Francia,  et  d'  Irlanda,  etc. 

Che  si  pub  dir  di  voi,  somma  REGINA, 

Che  non  sia  detto  dell  e  piu  lodate 

Di  Magnanimita,  Virtu,  Beltate, 

Incomparabile,  Sopra-divina  ? 
Anzi,  die  stile  tanto  si  raffina, 

Che  non  sia  vinto  dalla  Maestate, 

I?  Altezza,  la  Chiarezza,  la  Bontate, 

A  lla  quaT  ogni  cuor  di-cuor  s"1  inchina  ? 
La  qual  di  tutti  honori  V  specchio  mostra, 

La  quaT  il  pregio  Sour  a  tutte  tiene ; 

ANNA,  T  a  nello  della  Gioia  nostra. 
La  nostra  sicurta.,  la  nostra  spene  ; 

VIEN  BALL"  ECCELSO  LA  GIIANDEZZA  vostra  ; 

Dalla  GRANDEZZA  vostra  7  nostro  bene. 

II  Candido. 


TO  THE  READER 

Enough,  if  not  too  much,  hath  beene  said  of  this  Translation. 
If  the  faults  found  even  by  my  selfe  in  the  first  impression,  be 
now  by  the  Printer  corrected,  as  he  was  directed,  the  worke  is 
much  amended  :  If  not,  know  that  through  mine  attendance 
on  her  Majesty,  I  could  not  intend  it;  and  blame  not  Neptune 
for  thy  second  shipwracke.  Let  me  conclude  with  this  worthy 
mans  daughter  of  alliance  :  Que  t'en  semble  done  lecteur  ? 

Still  resolute   IOHN  FLORIO. 


PREFATORY 


To  my  deare  brother  and  friend  M.  IOHN  FLORIO, 

one  of  the  Gentlemen  of  her  Majesties  most 

Royall  Privie  Chamber 

Books,  like  superfluous  humors  bred  with  ease, 
So  stuff  e  the  world,  as  it  becomes  opprest 
With  taking  more  than  it  can  well  digest ; 
And  now  are  turnd  to  be  a  great  disease. 

For  by  this  overcharging  we  coivfound 
The  appetite  of  skill  they  had  before  : 
There  beng  no  end  of  words,  nor  any  bound 
Set  to  conceit  the  Ocean  without  shore. 
As  if  man  laboured  with  himself  e  to  be 
As  infinite  in  writing,  as  intents ; 
And  draw  his  manifold  uncertaintie 
In  any  shape  that  passion  represents  : 
That  these  innumerable  images 
Andjigures  of  opinion  and  discourse 
Draw^n  out  in  leaves,  may  be  the  witnesses 
Of  our  dejects  much  rather  than  our  force. 
And  this  proud  frame  of  our  presumption, 
This  Babel  of  our  skill,  this  Towre  of  wit, 
Seemes  only  checkt  with  the  corifusion 
Of  our  mistakings  that  dissolveth  it. 
And  well  may  make  us  of  our  knowledge  doubt, 
Seeing  what  uncertainties  wee  build  upon, 
To  be  as  weake  within  booke  as  without ; 
Or  els  that  truth  hath  other  shapes  than  one. 

But  yet  although  wee  labour  with  this  store 
And  with  the  presse  of  writings  seeme  opprest, 
And  have  too  many  bookes,  yet  want  wee  more, 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

Feeling  great  dearth  and  scarcenesse  of  the  best ; 
Which  cast  in  choicer  shapes  have  beene  produced, 
To  give  the  best  proportions  to  the  minde 
Of  our  confusion,  and  have  introduced 
The  likeliest  images  frailtie  canjinde. 
And  wherein  most  the  skill-desiring  soule 
Takes  her  delight,  the  best  of  all  delight, 
And  where  her  motions  evenest  come  to  rowle 
About  this  doubt  full  center  of  the  right. 

Which  to  discover  this  great  Potentate, 
This  Prince  Montaigne  (if  he  be  not  more) 
Hath  more  adventured  of 'his  owne  estate 
Than  ever  man  did  of  himself e  before  : 
And  hath  made  such  bold  sallies  out  upon 
Custome,  the  mightie  tyrant  of  the  earth, 
In  whose  Seraglio  of  subjection 
Wee  all  seeme  bred-up,from  our  tender  birth  ; 
As  I  admire  his  powres,  and  out  of  love, 
Here  at  his  gate  doe  stand,  and  glad  I  stand 
So  neere  to  him  whom  I  doe  so  much  love, 
T"1  applaud  his  happy  setting  in  our  land  : 
And  safe  transpassage  by  his  studious  care 
Who  both  of  him  and  us  doth  merit  much, 
Having  as  sumptuously,  as  he  is  rare 
Plac'd  him  in  the  best  lodging  of  our  speech, 
And  made  him  now  as  free,  as  if  borne  here, 
And  as  well  ours  as  theirs,  who  may  be  proud 
That  he  is  theirs,  though  he  be  every  where 
To  have  the  franchise  of  his  worth  allowed. 
It  being  the  proportion  of  a  happy  Pen, 
Not  to  V  invassaTd  to  one  Monarchy, 
But  dwell  with  all  the  better  world  of  men 
Whose  spirits  all  are  of  one  communitie, 
Whom  neither  Ocean,  Desarts,  Roches  nor  Sands 
Can  heepefrom  th1  intertraffique  of  the  minde, 


PREFATORY 

But  that  it  vents  her  treasure  in  all  lands. 
And  doth  a  most  secure  commer  cement  jinde. 

Wrap  Excellencie  up  never  so  much, 
In  Hierogliphicques,  Ciphers,  Caracters, 
And  let  her  speake  never  so  strange  a  speech. 

J-  O  jt 

Her  Genius  yetfindes  apt  discipherers  : 
And  never  was  she  borne  to  dye  obscure, 
But  guided  by  the  Star  res  of  her  owne  grace, 
Makes  her  owne  fortune,  and  is  ever  sure 
In  mans  best  hold,  to  hold  the  strongest  place. 

And  let  the  Critich  say  the  worst  he  can, 
He  cannot  say  but  that  Montaigne  yet 
Yeelds  most  rich  peeces  and  extracts  of  man; 
Though  in  a  troubled  frame  coiifus^dly  set. 
Which  yet  h?  is  blest  that  he  hath  ever  seene, 
And  therefore  as  a  guest  in  gratefulnesse, 
For  the  great  good  the  house  yeelds  him  within 
Might  spare  to  tax  iK  unapt  convoyances. 
But  this  breath  hurts  not,  for  both  zvorke  and  frame, 
Whilst  England  English  speakes,  is  of  that  store 
And  that  choice  stuff e,  as  that  without  the  same 
The  richest  librarie  can  be  but  poore. 
And  they  unblest  who  letters  doe  prof esse 
And  have  him  not :  whose  owne  fate  beats  their  want 
With  more  sound  blowes,  than  Alcibiades 
Did  his  Pedante  that  did  Homer  want. 

By  SAM.  DANIEL  one  of  the  Gentlemen 

extraordinarie  of  her  Majesties  most 

royall  privie  Chamber. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CONCERNING  THE  HONOUR 
OF  BOOKES 

Since  Honour  from  the  Honorer  proceeds, 

How  well  doe  they  deserve  that  memorie 

And  leave  in  bookes  for  all  posterities 

The  names  of  worthies,  and  their  vertuous  deeds 

When  all  their  glorie  else,  like  water  weeds 

Without  their  element,  presently  dyes, 

And  all  their  greatnesse  quite  forgotten  lyes  : 

And  when,  and  how  they  florisht  no  man  heeds 

How  poore  remembrances,  are  statues,  Toomes, 

And  other  monuments  that  men  erect 

To  Princes,  which  remaine  in  closed  roomes 

Where  but  a  few  behold  them  ;  in  respect 

Of  bookes,  that  to  the  universall  eye 

Shew  how  they  liv'd,  the  other  where  they  lye. 


A  TABLE  OF  THE  CHAPTERS  OF 
THE  FIRST   BOOKE 

1.  By  divers  mean es  men  come  unto  a  like  end,         .  J3 

2.  Of  sadnesse  or  sorrowe,      .             .             .             .  17 

3.  Our  affections  are  transported  beyond  our  selves,  21 

4.  How  the  soule  dischargeth  her  passions  upon  false 

objects,  when  the  true  faile  it,  .  .  .  29 

5.  Whether  the  Captaine  of  a  place  besieged  ought 

to  sallie  forth  to  parlie, ....  32 

6.  That  the  houre  of  parlies  is  dangerous,       .  .  35 

7.  That  our  intention  judgeth  our  actions,      .  .  37 

8.  Ofidlenesse,  ...  .39 

9.  Of  lyers,      .  .  41 
8 


THE   TABLE 

10.  Of  readie  or  slow  speech,  .  46 

11.  Of  Prognostications,  49 

12.  Of  Constancie,         .  .  54 

13.  Of  ceremonies  in  the  enterview  of  Kings,  56 

14.  Men  are  punished  by  too-much  opiniating  them 

selves  in  a  place  without  reason,  .                            58 

15.  Of  the  punishment  of  cowardise,    .  59 

16.  A  tricke  of  certain e  Ambassadors,  .  6l 

17.  Offeare,     ...  65 

18.  That   we   should   not  judge   of   our  happinesse, 

untill  after  our  death,    .         —- 1__  ^8 

19.  That  to  Philosophic,  is  to  learne  how  to  die,  71 

20.  Of  the  force  of  Imagination,  90 

21.  The  profit  of  one  man  is  the  dammage  of  another,  102 

22.  Of  custome,  and  how  a  received  law  should  not 

easily  be  changed,          .  .103 

23.  Divers  events  from  one  selfe  same  counsell,  122 

24.  Of  Pedantisme,       .  134< 
V  25.  Of  the  institution  and  education  of  Children ;  to 

the  Ladie  Diana  of  Foix,  Countesse  of  Gurson,  148 

26.  It  is  follie  to  referre   Truth  or    Falshood  to  our 

sufficiencie, 

27.  Of  Friendship,  !96 

28.  Nine  and  twentie  Sonnets  of  Steven  de  la  Boetie, 

to  the  Lady  of  Grammont,  Countesse  of  Guissen, 
29-  Of  Moderation, 

30.  Of  the  Caniballes,  .  21? 

31.  That  a  man  ought  soberly  to  meddle  with  judging 

of  divine  lawes, 

32.  To  avoid  voluptuousnesse  in  regard  of  life,  234 

33.  That  fortune  is  oftentimes  met  withall  in  pursuit 

of  reason, 

34.  Of  a  defect  in  our  policies, 

35.  Of  the  use  of  Apparell,       .  241 

36.  Of  Cato  the  younger, 

37.  How  we  weepe  and  laugh  at  one  selfe-same  thing,  250 

38.  Of  Solitarinesse,     . 

39.  A  consideration  upon  Cicero, 

B  9 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

40.  That   the   taste   of  goods   or   evils  doth  greatly 

depend  on  the  opinion  we  have  of  them,            .  273 

41.  That  a  man  should  not  communicate  his  glorie,     .  295 

42.  Of  the  inequalitie  that  is  betweene  us,      .  298 

43.  Of  sumptuarie  Lawes,  or  Lawes  for  moderating  of 

expences,            .             .             .             .              .  310 

44.  Of  Sleeping,            .             .              .             .             .  313 

45.  Of  the  battell  of  Dreux,     .  .  .315 

46.  Of  Names,               .             .             .             .             .  317 

47.  Of  the  imcertaintie  of  our  judgement,       .             .  323 

48.  Of  Steeds,  called  in  French  Destriers,       .             .  331 

49.  Of  ancient  customes,           ....  342 

50.  Of  Democritus  and  Heraclitus,       .             .             .  348 

51.  Of  the  vanitie  of  Words,    .             .                           .  352 

52.  Of  the  parcimonie  of  our  Forefathers,        .              .  356 

53.  Of  a  saying  of  Caesar,           ....  357 

54.  Of  vaine  Subtilties,  or  subtill  Devices,        .             .  359 

55.  Of  Smels  and  Odors,           ....  362 

56.  Of  Praiers  and  Orisons.,      .              .                           .  365 

57.  Of  Age,      .  376 


10 


THE    ESSAYES    OF    MICHAEL 
LORD  OF  MONTAIGNE 

THE    FIRST    BOOKE 


THE  AUTHOR  TO  THE  READER 

READER,  loe  here  a  well-meaning  Booke.     It  doth  at  the  first 
entrance  forewarne  thee,  that  in  contriving  the  same,  I  have 
proposed  unto  my  selfe  no  other  than  a  familiar  and  private  end  : 
I  have  no  respect  or  consideration  at  all,  either  to  thy  service, 
or  to  my  glory :  my  forces  are  not  capable  of  any  such  desseigne. 
I  have  vowed   the  same  to  the   particular  commodity  of  my 
kinsfolks  and  friends  :  to  the  end,  that  losing  me  (which  they 
are  likely  to  doe  ere  long)  they  may  therein  find  some  linea 
ments  of  my  conditions   and   humours,   and   by  that   meanes 
reserve  more  whole,  and  more  lively  foster  the  knowledge  and 
acquaintance  they  have  had  of  me.     Had  my  intention  beene  to 
forestal  and  purchase  the  worlds  opinion  and  favour,  I  would 
surely  have  adorned  my  selfe  more  quaintly,  or  kept  a  more 
grave  and  solemne  march.     I  desire  therein  to  be  delineated  in 
mine   owne   genuine,    simple    and    ordinarie   fashion,    without 
contention,  art  or  study;  for  it  is  my  selfe  1  pourtray.     My 
imperfections  shall  therein  be  read  to  the  life,  and  my  naturall 
forme  discerned,  so  farre-forth  as  pub] ike  reverence  hath  per 
mitted  me.     For  if  my  fortune  had  beene  to  have  lived  among 
those  nations,  which  yet  are  said  to  live  under  the  sweet  liberty 
of  Natures  first  and  uncorrupted  lawes,  I  assure  thee,  I  would 
most  willingly  have  pourtrayed  my  selfe  fully  and  naked. 
Thus  gentle  Reader  my  selfe  am  the  groundworke  of  my 
booke  :  It  is  then  no  reason  thou  shouldest  employ 
thy  time  about  so  frivolous  and  vaine  a  Subject. 
Therefore  farewell.     From  Montaigne, 
the  first  of  March. 
1580. 


THE      FIRST      BOOKE 


THE    FIRST    CHAPTER 

By  divers  meanes  men  come  unto  a  like  end. 


HE  most  usuall  way  to  appease  those  minds 
we  have  offended  (when  revenge  lies  in 
their  hands,  and  that  we  stand  at  their 
mercy)  is,  by  submission  to  move  them 
to  commiseration  and  pitty:  Neverthe- 
lesse,  courage,  constancie,  and  resolution 
(meanes  altogether  opposite)  have  some 
times  wrought  the  same  effect.  Edward 
the  black  Prince  of  Wales  (who  so  long  governed  our  Country 
of  Guienne,  a  man  whose  conditions  and  fortune  were  accom 
panied  with  many  notable  parts  of  worth  and  magnanimitie) 
having  beene  grievously  offended  by  the  Limosins,  though 
he  by  maine  force  tooke  and  entred  their  Citie,  could 
by  no  meanes  be  appeased,  nor  by  the  wailefull  out-cries 
of  all  sorts  of  people  (as  of  men,  women,  and  children) 
be  moved  to  any  pitty,  they  prostrating  themselves  to  the 
common  slaughter,  crying  for  mercy,  and  humbly  submit 
ting  themselves  at  his  feet,  untill  such  time  as  in  triumphant 
manner  passing  thorow  their  Citie,  he  perceived  three  French 
Gentlemen,  who  alone,  with  an  incredible  and  undaunted 
boldnesse,  gainstood  the  enraged  violence,  and  made  head 
against  the  furie  of  his  victorious  armie.  The  consideration 
and  respect  of  so  notable  a  vertue,  did  first  abate  the  dint  of 
his  wrath,  and  from  those  three  began  to  relent,  and  shew 
mercy  to  all  the  other  inhabitants  of  the  said  towne.  Scan- 
derbeg,  Prince  of  Epirus,  following  one  of  his  souldiers, 

13 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  with  purpose  to  kill  him,  who  by  all  means  of  humilitie, 

I  and  submisse  entreatie,  had  first  assaied  to  pacific  him,  in 

By  divers  sucn  an  unavoidable  extremitie,  resolved  at  last,  resolutely 

meanes  men  t    encounter  him  with  his  sword  in  his  hand.     This  resolu- 

come  unto  a.        T  ,  .  •»•    ,   i  i  •    ^      ,    •       c  \  •       ^  • 

like  end      tion  did  immediately  stay  his  Captains  fury,  who  seeing  him 

undertake  so  honourable  an  attempt,  not  only  forgave,  but 
received  him  into  grace  and  favour.  This  example  may 
haply,  of  such  as  have  not  knowne  the  prodigious  force  and 
matchlesse  valour  of  the  said  Prince,  admit  another  interpre 
tation.  The  Emperour  Conradus,  third  of  that  name,  having 
besieged  Guelphe,  Duke  of  Bavaria,  what  vile  or  base  satis 
faction  soever  was  offered  him,  would  yeeld  to  no  other 
milder  conditions,  but  only  to  suffer  such  Gentlewomen  as 
were  with  the  Duke  in  the  Citie  (their  honours  safe)  to  issue 
out  of  the  Tovvne  afoot,  with  such  things  as  they  could  carry 
about  them.  They  with  an  unrelenting  courage  advised  and 
resolved  themselves  (neglecting  all  other  riches  or  jewels)  to 
carry  their  husbands,  their  children,  and  the  Duke  himselfe, 
on  their  backs  :  The  Emperour  perceiving  the  quaintnesse  of 
their  device,  tooke  so  great  pleasure  at  it,  that  hee  wept  for 
joy,  and  forthwith  converted  that  former  inexorable  rage, 
and  mortall  hatred  he  bare  the  Duke,  into  so  milde  a  relent 
ing  and  gentle  kindnesse,  that  thence  forward  he  entreated 
both  him  and  his  with  all  favour  and  courtesie.  Either  of 
these  wayes  might  easily  perswade  mee  :  for  I  am  much 
inclined  to  mercie,  and  affected  to  mildnesse.  So  it  is,  that 
in  mine  opinion,  I  should  more  naturally  stoope  unto  com 
passion,  than  bend  to  estimation.  Yet  is  pitty  held  a 
vicious  passion  among  the  Stoicks.  They  would  have  us 
aid  the  afflicted,  but  not  to  faint,  and  co-suffer  with  them. 
These  examples  seeme  fittest  for  mee,  forsomuch  as  these 
minds  are  scene  to  be  assaulted  and  environed  by  these  two 
meanes,  in  undauntedly  suffering  the  one,  and  stooping  under 
the  other.  It  may  peradventure  be  said,  that  to  yeeld  ones 
heart  unto  commiseration,  is  an  effect  of  facility,  tendernesse, 
and  meeknesse :  whence  it  proceedeth,  that  the  weakest 
natures,  as  of  women,  children,  and  the  vulgar  sort  are  more 
subject  unto  it.  But  (having  contemned  teares  and  wailings) 
to  yeeld  unto  the  onely  reverence  of  the  sacred  Image  of 
vertue,  is  the  effect  of  a  couragious  and  imployable  minde, 
14 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

holding  a  masculine  and  constant  vigour,  in  honour  and  CHAPTER 
affection.     Notwithstanding,  amazement  and  admiration  may  \ 

in  lesse  generous  minds  worke  the  like  effect.     Witnesse  the  meanes1Vmen 
Thebanes,  who  having  accused  and  indited  their  Captaines,  come  unto  a 
as  of  a  capitall  crime,  forsomuch  as  they  had  continued  their      like  end 
charge  beyond  the  time  prescribed  them,  absolved  and  quit 
Pelopidas  of  all  punishment,  because  he  submissively  yeelded 
under  the  burden  of  such  objections,  and  to  save  himselfe, 
imployed  no  other  meanes,  but  suing-requests,  and  demisse 
intreaties ;    where   on   the    contrary,    Epaminondas   boldly 
relating  the  exploits  atchieved  by  him,  and  with  a  fierce  and 
arrogant  manner  upbraiding  the  people  with  them,  had  not 
the  heart  so  much  as  to  take  their  lots  into  his  hands,  but 
went  his  way,  and  was  freely  absolved  ;  the  assembly  much 
commending  the  stoutnesse  of  his  courage.     Dionysius  the 
elder,  after  long-lingering  and  extreme  difficulties,  having 
taken  the  Citie  of  Reggio,  and  in  it  the  Captaine  Phyton,  (a 
worthy  honest  man)  who  had  so  obstinately  defended  the 
same,   would  needs   shew  a  tragicall   example    of  revenge. 
First,  he  told  him,  how  the  day  before,  he  had  caused  his 
sonne  and  all    his  kinsfolkes  to    be    drowned.     To   whom 
Phyton,  stoutly  out-staring  him,  answered  nothing,  but  that 
they  were  more  happy  than  himselfe  by  the  space  of  one 
day.     Afterward  he  caused  him  to  be  stripped,  and  by  his 
executioners    to  be  taken  and  dragged   thorow    the    Citie 
most   ignominiously,  and  cruelly  whipping   him,  charging 
him  besides  with  outragious  and  contumelious  speeches.    All 
which  notwithstanding,  as  one  no  whit  dismayed,  he  ever 
shewed  a  constant  and  resolute  heart ;  and  with  a  cheerefull 
and  bold  countenance  went  on  still,  loudly  recounting  the 
honourable  and  glorious  cause  of  his  death,  which  was,  that 
he  would  never  consent  to  yeeld  his  Country  into  the  hands 
of  a  cruell  tyrant,  menacing  him  with  an  imminent  punish 
ment  of  the  Gods.    Dionysius  plainly  reading  in  his  Souldiers 
lookes,  that  in  lieu  of  animating  them  with  braving  his  con 
quered  enemie,  they  in  contempt  of  him,  and  scorne  of  his 
triumph,  seemed  by  the  astonishment  of  so  rare  a  vertue, 
to  be  moved  with  compassion,  and  inclined  to  mutinie,  yea, 
and  to  free  Phyton  from  out  the  hands  of  his  Sergeants  or 
Guard,  caused  his  torture  to  cease,  and  secretly  sent  him 

15 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  be  drowned  in  the  sea.     Surely,  man  is  a  wonderfull, 
I  vaine,   divers,  and   wavering  subject :    it   is    very   hard    to 

By  diverse  ground  any  directly-constant  and  uniforme  judgement  upon 
meanes   men  P.  T»  IT  u  T»  i       p      i  ^         i     n    , i      ^-.-       n 

come  unto  a  nim<     Behold  rompey,  who  freely  pardoned  all  the  Citie  of 

like  end  the  Mamertines,  (against  which  he  was  grievously  enraged) 
for  the  love  of  the  magnanimitie,  and  consideration  of  the 
exceeding  vertue  of  Zeno,  one  of  their  fellow-citizens,  who 
tooke  the  publike  fault  wholly  upon  himselfe,  and  desired  no 
other  favour,  but  alone  to  beare  the  punishment  thereof ; 
whereas  Syllaes  host  having  used  the  like  vertue  in  the  Citie 
of  Perugia,  obtained  nothing,  neither  for  himselfe,  nor  for 
others.  And  directly  against  my  first  example,  the  hardiest 
amongst  men,  and  so  gracious  to  the  vanquished,  Alexander 
the  great,  after  many  strange  difficulties,  forcing  the  Citie 
of  Gaza,  encountred  by  chance  with  Betis,  that  commanded 
therein,  of  whose  valour  (during  the  siege)  he  had  felt  won 
derfull  and  strange  exploits,  being  then  alone,  forsaken  of 
all  his  followers,  his  armes  all-broken,  all-besmeared  with 
bloud  and  wounds,  fighting  amongst  a  number  of  Mace 
donians,  who  pell-mell  laid  still  upon  him ;  provoked  by  so 
deare  a  victorie,  (for  among  other  mishaps  he  had  newly 
received  two  hurts  in  his  body)  said  thus  unto  him  ;  '  Betis, 
'  thou  shalt  not  die  as  thou  wouldest :  for  make  account  thou 
'  must  indure  all  the  torments  may  possibly  bee  devised  or  in- 
4  flicted  upon  a  caitife  wretch,  as  thou  art.'  But  he,  for  all 
his  enemies  threats,  without  speaking  one  word,  returned 
only  an  assured,  sterne,  and  disdainefull  countenance  upon 
him  ;  which  silent  obstinacie  Alexander  noting,  said  thus 
unto  himselfe  :  '  What  ?  would  hee  not  bend  his  knee  ?  could 
'  he  not  utter  one  suppliant  voyce  ?  I  will  assuredly  vanquish 
'  his  silence,  and  if  I  cannot  wrest  a  word  from  him,  I  will  at 
6  least  make  him  to  sob  or  groane/  And  converting  his 
anger  into  rage,  commanded  his  heeles  to  bee  through- 
pierced,  and  so  all  alive  with  a  cord  through  them,  to  be 
torne,  mangled,  and  dismembred  at  a  carts-taile.  May  it 
be,  the  force  of  his  courage,  was  so  naturall  and  peculiar 
unto  him,  that  because  he  would  no- whit  admire  him,  he  re 
spected  him  the  lesse  ?  or  deemed  he  it  so  proper  unto  him 
selfe,  that  in  his  height,  he  could  not  without  the  spight  of 
envious  passion,  endure  to  see  it  in  an  other  ?  or  was  the 
16 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

naturall  violence  of  his  rage  incapable  of  any  opposition  ?  CHAPTER 
surely,  had  it  received  any  restraint,  it  may  be  supposed,  I 

that  in  the  ransacking  and  desolation  of  the  Citie  of  Thebes,  »7  diverge 


it  should  have  felt  the  same  ;  in  seeing  so  many  Worthies 

lost,  and  valiant  men  put  to  the  sword,  as  having  no  meanes       like  end 

of  publike  defence  ;  for  above  six  thousand  were  slaine  and 

massacred,  of  which  not  one  was  scene,  either  to  run  away, 

or  beg  for  grace.     But  on  the  contrary,  some  here  and  there 

seeking  to  affront,  and  endeavouring  to  check  their  victorious 

enemies,  urging  and  provoking  them  to  force  them  die  an 

honourable  death.     Not  one  was  scene  to  yeeld,  and  that 

to  his  last  gaspe  did  not  attempt  to  revenge  himselfe,  and 

with  all  weapons  of  dispaire,  with  the  death  of  some  enemie, 

comfort  and  sweeten  his  owne  miserie.     Yet  could  not  the 

affliction  of  their  vertue  find  any  ruth  or  pitie,  nor  might 

one  day  suffice  to  glut  or  asswage  his  revengefull  wrath. 

This  butcherous  slaughter  continued  unto  the  last  drop  of 

any  remaining  bloud  ;  where  none  were  spared  but  the  un 

armed  and  naked,  the  aged  and  unpotent,  the  women 

and  children  ;  that  so  from  amongst  them,  they 

might  get  thirtie  thousand  slaves. 


THE    SECOND    CHAPTER 

Of  Sadnesse  or  Sorrowe. 

O  man  is  more  free  from  this  passion  than  I, 
for  I  neither  love  nor  regard  it  :  albeit 
the  world  hath  undertaken,  as  it  were 
upon  covenant,  to  grace  it  with  a  parti 
cular  favour.  Therewith  they  adorne  age, 
vertue,  and  conscience.  Oh  foolish  and 
base  ornament  !  The  Italians  have  more 
properly  with  its  name  entitled  maligni- 
tie  :  for,  it  is  a  qualitie  ever  hurtfull,  ever  sottish  ;  and  as 
ever  base  and  coward,  the  Stoickes  inhibit  their  Elders  and 
Sages  to  be  therewith  tainted,  or  have  any  feeling  of  it. 
But  the  Storie  saith  ;  that  Psamneticus  king  of  ^Egypt, 
having  been  defeated  and  taken  by  Cambises  king  of  Persia, 
B  17 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  seeing  his  owne  daughter  passe  before  him  in  base  and  vile 
aray,  being  sent  to  draw  water  from  a  well,  his  friends  weep- 

or  SwrowT  inS   and  wailing    about   him  (he  with  his  eJes  fixed  on  the 
ground,  could  not  be  moved  to  utter  one  word),  and  shortly 

after  beholding  his  sonne  led  to  execution,  held  still  the 
same  undaunted  countenance  :  but  perceiving  a  familiar 
friend  of  his  haled  amongst  the  captives,  he  began  to  beat 
his  head,  and  burst  forth  into  extreame  sorrow.  This  might 
well  be  compared  to  that  which  one  of  our  Princes  was  lately 
scene  to  doe,  who  being  at  Trent,  and  receiving  newes  of  his 
elder  brothers  death ;  but  such  a  brother  as  on  him  lay  all 
the  burthen  and  honour  of  his  house  ;  and  shortly  after 
tidings  of  his  yonger  brothers  decease,  who  was  his  second 
hope ;  and  having  with  an  unmatched  countenance  and 
exemplar  constancie  endured  these  two  affronts  ;  it  fortuned 
not  long  after,  that  one  of  his  servants  dying,  he  by  this 
latter  accident  suffered  himselfe  to  be  so  far  transported, 
that  quitting  and  forgetting  his  former  resolution,  he  so 
abandoned  himselfe  to  all  manner  of  sorrow  and  griefe,  that 
some  argued,  only  this  last  mischance  had  toucht  him  to 
the  quicke :  but  verily  the  reason  was,  that  being  otherwise 
full,  and  over-plunged  in  sorrow,  the  least  surcharge  brake 
the  bounds  and  barres  of  patience.  The  like  might  (I  say) 
be  judged  of  our  storie,  were  it  not  it  folio weth,  that 
Cambises  inquiring  of  Psamneticus,  why  he  was  nothing 
distempered  at  the  misfortune  of  his  sonne  and  daughter, 
he  did  so  patiently  beare  the  disaster  of  his  friend  :  '  It  is,1 
answered  he,  '  because  this  last  displeasure  may  be  mani- 
4  fested  by  weeping,  whereas  the  two  former  exceed  by  much, 
'  all  meanes  and  compasse  to  bee  expressed  by  teares.'  The 
invention  of  that  ancient  Painter  might  happily  fit  this 
purpose,  who  in  the  sacrifice  of  Iphigenia,  being  to  represent 
the  griefe  of  the  by-standers,  according  to  the  qualitie  and 
interest  each  one  bare  for  the  death  of  so  faire,  so  young  and 
innocent  a  Lady,  having  ransacked  the  utmost  skill  and 
effects  of  his  art,  when  he  came  to  the  Virgins  father,  as  if 
no  countenance  were  able  to  represent  that  degree  of  sorrow, 
he  drew  him  with  a  vaile  over  his  face.  And  that  is  the 
reason  why  our  Poets  faine  miserable  Niobe,  who  first  having 
lost  seven  sonnes,  and  immediately  as  many  daughters,  as 
18 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

one  over-burthened  with  their  losses,  to  have  been  trans-  CHAPTER 
formed  into  a  stone ;  II 

Of  Sadnesse 
Diriguisse  malis :  or  Sorrowe 

And  grew  as  hard  as  stone,,  OVID.  Metam. 

By  miserie  and  moane.  V1-  3°3- 

Thereby  to  expresse  this  mournfull  silent  stupiditie,  which 
so  doth  pierce  us,  when  accidents  surpassing  our  strength 
orewhelme  us.  Verily  the  violence  of  a  griefe,  being  extreme, 
must  needs  astonie  the  mind,  and  hinder  the  liberty  of  her 
actions.  As  it  hapneth  at  the  sudden  alarum  of  some  bad 
tidings,  when  we  shall  feele  our  selves  surprised,  benummed, 
and  as  it  were  deprived  of  all  motion,  so  that  the  soule 
bursting  afterward  forth  into  teares  and  complaints,  seemeth 
at  more  ease  and  libertie,  to  loose,  to  cleare  and  dilate  it 
selfe. 

Et  via  vix  tandem  voci  laxata  dolore  est:  VIRG.  A  en.  xi. 

And  scarce  at  last  for  speach_, 
By  griefe  was  made  a  breach. 

In  the  warres  which  king  Ferdinando  made  against  the 
widow  of  John  king  of  Hungaria,  about  Buda;  a  man  at 
armes  was  particularly  noted  of  all  men,  forsomuch  as  in  a 
certaine  skirmish  he  had  shewed  exceeding  prowesse  of  his 
body,  and  though  unknowne,  being  slaine,  was  highly  com 
mended  and  much  bemoaned  of  all ;  but  yet  of  none  so 
greatly  as  of  a  Germane  Lord,  called  Raisciac,  as  he  that 
was  amased  at  so  rare  vertue  :  his  body  being  covered  and 
had  off,  this  Lord,  led  by  a  common  curiositie,  drew  neere 
unto  it,  to  see  who  it  might  be,  and  having  caused  him  to  be 
disarmed,  perceived  him  to  be  his  owne  sonne ;  which 
knowne,  did  greatly  augment  the  compassion  of  all  the 
camp  :  he  only  without  framing  word,  or  closing  his  eyes, 
but  earnestly  viewing  the  dead  body  of  his  sonne,  stood  still 
upright,  till  the  vehemencie  of  his  sad  sorrow,  having  sup 
pressed  and  choaked  his  vitall  spirits,  fell'd  him  starke  dead 
to  the  ground. 

Chi  puo  dir  com,'  egli  arde  e  in  picciolfuoco :  PET-  /•  *• 

Son.  140. 

He  that  can  say  how  he  doth  frie 
In  pettie-gentle  flames  doth  lie, 

19 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  say  those  Lovers  that  would  lively  represent  an  intolerable 


II 

Of    Sadnesse 
or  Sorrows 

CATUL.  Epig. 
xlviii.  5. 


passion. 

misero  quod  omnes 
Eripit  sensus  mihi ;  Nam  simul  te 
Lesbia  aspexi,  nihil  est  super  mi 

Quod  loquar  amens. 
Lingua  sed  torpet,  tennis  sub  artus 
Flamma  dimanat,  sonitu  suopte 
Tinniunt  aures,  gemina  teguntur 

Lumina  node. 

miserably  from  me 

This  bereaves  all  sense  :  for  I  can  no  sooner 
Eie  thee  my  sweet  heart,  but  I  wot  not  one  word  to  speak  amazed. 
Tongue-tide  as  in  trance,,  while  a  sprightly  thin  flame 
Flowes  in  all  my  joynts,  with  a  selfe-resounding 
Both  my  eares  tingle,  with  a  night  redoubled 
Both  mine  eies  are  veild. 

Nor  is  it  in  the  liveliest,  and  most  ardent  heat  of  the  fit 
that  wee  are  able  to  display  our  plaints  and  perswasions, 
the  soule  being  then  aggravated  with  heavie  thoughts,  and 
the  body  suppressed  and  languishing  for  love.  And  thence 
is  sometimes  engendered  that  casuall  faintnes,  which  so 
unseasonably  surpriseth  passionate  Lovers,  and  that  chil- 
nesse,  which  by  the  power  of  an  extreame  heat  doth  close  on 
them  in  the  verie  midst  of  their  joy  and  enjoying.  All 
passions  that  may  be  tasted  and  digested,  are  but  mean  and 
slight. 

Cures  leves  loquuntur,  ingentes  stupent. 

Light  cares  can  freely  speak, 
Great  cares  heart  rather  breake. 

The  surprize  of  an  unexpected  pleasure  astonieth  us  alike. 

VIRG.  ALntad.  Ut  me  conspexit  venientem,  et  Troja  circum 

iii.  306.  Arma  amens  vidit,  magnis  exterrita  monstris, 

Diriguit  visu  in  medio,  calor  ossa  reliquit, 

Labitur,  et  longo  vix  tandem  tempore  fatur. 

When  she  beheld  me  come,  and  round  about 
Senselesse  saw  Trojan  armes,  she  stood  afraid 
Stone-still  at  so  strange  sights  :  life  heat  flew  out  : 
She  faints  :  at  last,  with  long  pause  thus  she  said. 

Besides  the  Roman  Ladie,  that  died  for  joy  to  see  her 
sonne  returne  alive  from  the  battell  of  Cannae,  Sophocles  and 
20 


SEN.  Hip.  Act. 
ii.  Scena  2. 


II 

Of  Sadnesse 
or  Sorrowe 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Dionysius  the  Tyrant,  who  deceased  through  over-gladnes :    CHAPTER 
and  Talva,  who  died  in  Corsica,  reading  the  newes  of  the 
honours  the  Roman  Senate  had  conferred  upon  him :   It  is 
reported  that  in  our  age,  Pope  Leo  the  tenth  having  received 
advertisement  of  the  taking  of  the  Citie  of  Millane,  which 
he  had  so  exceedingly  desired,  entred  into  such  excesse  of  joy, 
that  he  fell  into  an  ague,  whereof  he  shortly  died.     And  for 
a  more  authenticall  testimonie  of  humane  imbecillitie,  it  is 
noted  by  our  Ancients,  that  Diodorus  the  Logician,  being 
surprized  with  an  extreme  passion  or  apprehension  of  shame, 
fell  downe  starke  dead,  because  neither  in  his  Schoole,  nor 
in  publique,  he  had  beene  able  to  resolve  an  argument  pro 
pounded  unto  him.     I  am  little  subject  to  these  violent 
passions.   I  have  naturally  a  hard  apprehension,  which 
by  discourse  I  daily  harden  more  and  more. 


THE    THIRD    CHAPTER 

Our  Affections  are  transported  beyond  our  selves. 

HOSE  which  still  accuse  men  for  ever  gap 
ing  after  future  things,  and  go  about  to 
teach  us,  to  take  hold  of  present  fortunes, 
and  settle  our  selves  upon  them,  as  having 
no  hold  of  that  which  is  to  come;  yea 
much  lesse  than  we  have  of  that  which  is 
already  past,  touch  and  are  ever  harping 
upon  the  commonest  humane  error,  if  they 
dare  call  that  an  error,  to  which  Nature  her  selfe,  for  the 
service  of  the  continuation  of  her  worke,  doth  addresse  us, 
imprinting  (as  it  doth  many  others)  this  false  imagination  in 
us,  as  more  jealous  of  our  actions,  than  of  our  knowledge. 
We  are  never  in  our  selves,  but  beyond.  Feare,  desire,  and 
hope,  draw  us  ever  towards  that  which  is  to  come,  and  re 
move  our  sense  and  consideration  from  that  which  is,  to 
amuse  us  on  that  which  shall  be,  yea  when  we  shall  be  no 
more.  Calamitosus  est  animus  futuri  anxius.  '  A  minde  in  SEN.  Epist.  98. 
6  suspense  what  is  to  come,  is  in  a  pittifull  case.1 

This  notable  precept  is  often  alleaged  in  Plato.     '  Follow 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  thy  businesse  and  know  thy  selfe.'  Each  of  these  two  mem- 
HI  .  bers,  doth  generally  imply  all  our  duty ;  and  likewise  enfolds 
arertmnspornt-  his  comPanion-  He  that  should  doe  his  businesse,  might 
ed  beyond  our  Perceive  that  his  first  lesson  is,  to  know  what  he  is,  and  what 
selves  is  convenient  for  him.  And  he  that  knoweth  himselfe,  takes 
no  more  anothers  matters  for  his  owne,  but  above  all  other 
things,  loveth  and  correcteth  himselfe,  rejecteth  superfluous 
occupations,  idle  imaginations,  and  unprofitable  propositions. 
As  if  you  grant  follie  what  it  desireth,  it  will  no-whit  be 
satisfied ;  so  is  wisdome  content  with  that  which  is  present, 
and  never  displeased  with  it  selfe.  Epicurus  doth  dispense 
with  his  age  touching  the  foresight  and  care  of  what  shal 
insue.  Amongst  the  lawes  that  regard  the  deceased,  that 
which  ties  the  actions  of  Princes  to  be  examined  when  they 
are  dead,  seemes  to  me  verie  solid.  They  are  companions,  if 
not  masters  of  the  lawes :  That  which  justice  could  not  worke 
on  their  heads,  it  is  reason  it  effect  upon  their  reputation, 
and  goods  of  their  successors  :  things  wee  many  times  preferre 
before  our  lives.  It  is  a  custome  brings  many  singular  com 
modities  unto  nations  that  observe  it,  and  to  be  desired  of 
all  good  Princes :  who  have  cause  to  complaine  that  the 
memorie  of  the  wicked  is  used  as  theirs.  Wee  owe  a  like 
obedience  and  subj  ection  to  all  Kings ;  for  it  respects  their 
office :  but  estimation  and  affection,  we  owe  it  only  to  their 
vertue.  If  they  be  unworthy,  wee  are  to  endure  them 
patiently,  to  conceale  their  vices,  and  to  aid  their  indifferent 
actions  with  our  commendations,  as  long  as  their  authoritie 
hath  need  of  our  assistance,  and  that  ought  to  be  ascribed 
unto  politike  order.  But  our  commerce  with  them  being 
ended,  there  is  no  reason  we  should  refuse  the  unfolding  of 
our  felt  wrongs  unto  justice  and  our  libertie.  And  specially 
to  refuse  good  subjects,  the  glory  to  have  reverently  and 
faithfully  served  a  master,  whose  imperfections  were  so  well 
knowne  unto  them  :  exempting  posteritie  from  so  profitable 
an  example.  And  such  as  for  the  respect  of  some  private 
benefit  or  interest,  doe  wickedly  embrace  the  memorie  of  an 
unworthy  Prince,  doe  particular  justice  at  the  charge  of 
publike  justice.  Titus  Livius  speaketh  truly,  where  he  saith, 
that  the  speech  of  men  brought  up  under  a  royaltie  is  ever 
full  of  vaine  ostentations,  and  false  witnesses;  every  man 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

indifferently  extolling  the  King,  to  the  furthest  straine  of   CHAPTER 
valour   and   soveraigne   greatnesse.      The   magnanimitie   of  HI 

those  two  Souldiers  may  be  reproved,  one  of  which  being  de-  ^ur  Affections 

II^TVT  iii         11-  IT-        L     i  •     are  transport- 

manded  of  Nero,  why  he  hated  him,  answered  him  to  his  e(j  beyond  our 

teeth ;  I  loved  thee  whilest  thou  wast  worthy  of  love,  but  selves 
since  thou  becamest  a  parricide,  a  fire-brand,  a  Juglar,  a 
Player,  and  a  Coach-man,  I  hate  thee,  as  thou  deservest. 
The  other  being  asked,  wherefore  he  sought  to  kill  him, 
answered,  Because  I  finde  no  other  course  to  hinder  thy 
uncessant  outrages  and  impious  deeds.  But  can  any  man, 
that  hath  his  senses  about  him,  justly  reprove  the  publike 
and  generall  testimonies  that  since  his  death  have  beene 
given,  and  so  shall  be  for  ever,  both  against  him  and  all  such 
like  reprobates,  of  his  tyrannicall  and  wicked  demeanours? 
I  am  sorrie  that  in  so  sacred  a  policie  as  the  Lacedemonian 
was,  so  fained  and  fond  a  ceremonie  at  the  death  of  their 
Kings  was  ever  devised  and  brought  in  use.  All  their  con 
federates  and  neighbours,  all  the  slave-Heotes,  men  and 
women  pell-mell,  for  a  testimonie  of  their  griefe  and  sorrow, 
did  mangle  and  gash  their  foreheads,  and  in  their  out-cries 
and  lamentations  exclaimed,  that  their  deceased  King,  how 
soever  he  had  lived,  was  and  had  beene  the  best  Prince  that 
ever  they  had,  ascribing  in  order  the  commendations  due 
unto  desert,  and  to  the  last  and  latter  ranke,  what  belongs 
unto  the  first  merit.  Aristotle  that  hath  an  oare  in  every 
water,  and  medleth  with  all  things,  makes  a  question  about 
Solons  speech,  who  saith,  that  no  man  can  truly  be  counted 
happy  before  his  death,  Whether  he  that  lived  and  died 
according  to  his  wish,  may  be  named  happy,  whether  his 
renowne  be  good  or  ill,  and  whether  his  posteritie  be  miser 
able  or  no.  Whilest  wee  stirre  and  remove,  wee  transport 
our  selves  by  preoccupation  wheresoever  wee  list:  but  no 
sooner  are  wee  out  of  being,  but  wee  have  no  communication 
at  all  with  that  which  is.  And  it  were  better  to  tell  Solon, 
that  never  man  is  happy  then,  since  he  never  is  so,  but  when 
he  is  no  more. 

—Quisquam  LUCRET.  Rer. 

Vix  radicitus  e  vita  se  tollit,  et  ejicit :  nat-  »»•  912- 

Sedfacit  esse  sui  quiddam  super  inscius  ipse, 

Nee  removet  satis  a  projecto  corpore  sese,  et 

Vindicat. — 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Scarce  any  rids  himselfe  of  life  so  cleere, 

jjj  But  leaves  unwitting  some  part  of  him  heere  : 

Our  affections  ^or  frees  or  quits  himselfe  sufficiently 

are  transport-  From  that  his  body  which  forlorne  doth  lie. 

r  Bertrand  of  Gelsquin  died  at  the  siege  of  the  castle  of 
Rancon,  neere  unto  Puy  in  Avergnee,  the  besieged  yeelding 
afterward,  were  forced  to  carry  the  keies  of  the  Castle,  upon 
the  deceased  of  the  Captaine.  Bartholomew  of  Alviano, 
Generall  of  the  Venetian  forces,  dying  in  their  service  and 
wars  about  Brescia,  and  his  bodie  being  to  be  transported  to 
Venice,  through  the  territory  of  Verona,  which  then  was 
enemie  unto  them,  the  greatest  part  of  the  army  thought  it 
expedient  to  demand  a  safe  conduct  for  their  passage  of  those 
of  Verona,  to  which  Theodoro  Trivulcio  stoutly  opposed  him 
selfe,  and  chose  rather  to  passe  it  by  maine  force,  and  to 
hazard  the  day,  saying  it  was  not  convenient,  that  he  who  in 
his  life  time  had  never  apprehended  feare  of  his  enemies  should 
now,  being  dead,  seeme  to  feare  them.  Verily  in  like  mat 
ters,  by  the  lawes  of  Greece,  hee  that  required  a  dead  body 
of  his  enemies,  with  intent  to  bury  the  same,  renounced  the 
victory,  and  might  no  more  erect  any  trophy  of  it :  and  he 
who  was  so  required,  purchased  the  title  of  honour  and  gaine. 
So  did  Nicias  lose  the  advantage  hee  had  clearely  gained  of 
the  Corinthians;  and  contrariwise,  Agesilaus  assured  that, 
hee  doubtfully  had  gotten  of  the  Boeotians.  These  actions 
might  bee  deemed  strange,  if  in  all  ages  it  were  not  a  com 
mon-received  opinion,  not  only  to  extend  the  care  of  our 
selves,  beyond  this  life,  but  also  to  beleeve,  that  heavenly 
favours  doe  often  accompany  us  unto  our  grave,  and  con 
tinue  in  our  posterity.  Whereof  there  are  so  many  examples 
(leaving  our  moderne  a  part)  that  I  need  not  wade  farre 
into  it. 

Edward  the  first  King  of  England,  in  the  long  wars  he  had 
with  Robert  King  of  Scotland,  having  by  triall  found  how 
greatly  his  presence  advantaged  the  successe  of  his  affaires,  and 
how  he  was  ever  victorious  in  any  enterprise  he  undertooke  in 
his  owne  person  ;  when  hee  died,  bound  his  sonne  by  solemne 
oath,  that  being  dead  he  should  cause  his  body  to  be  boy  led, 
untill  the  flesh  fell  from  the  bones,  which  he  should  cause  to 
be  interred,  and  carefully  keeping  the  bones,  ever  carry  them 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

about  him,  whensoever  hee  should  happen  to  have  wars  with   CHAPTER 
the  Scots  :  As  if  destiny  had  fatally  annexed  the  victory  unto  HI 

his  limmes.  lohn  Zisca,  who  for  the  defence  of  WicklifTs 
opinions  so  much  troubled  the  state  of  Bohemia,  commanded  e 
that  after  his  death  his  body  should  be  flead,  and  a  drum  selves 
made  of  his  skin,  to  be  carried  and  sounded  in  all  the  wars 
against  his  enemies  :  deeming  the  sound  of  it  would  be  a 
meanes  to  continue  the  advantages,  which  in  his  former 
warres  hee  had  obtained  of  them.  Certaine  Indians  did 
likewise  carry  the  bones  of  one  of  their  Captaines  in  the 
skirmishes  they  had  with  the  Spaniards,  in  regard  of  the 
good  successe  hee  had,  whilest  hee  lived,  against  them  :  And 
other  nations  of  that  new-found  world,  doe  likewise  carry  the 
bodies  of  such  worthy  and  fortunate  men  with  them,  as  have 
died  in  their  battels,  to  serve  them  in  stead  of  good  fortune 
and  encouragement.  The  first  examples  reserve  nothing  else 
in  their  tombes,  but  the  reputation  acquired  by  their  former 
atchievements  :  but  these  will  also  adj  oyne  unto  it  the  power 
of  working.  The  act  of  Captaine  Bayart  is  of  better  compo 
sition,  who  perceiving  himselfe  deadly  wounded  by  a  shot 
received  in  his  body,  being  by  his  men  perswaded  to  come  off 
and  retire  himselfe  from  out  the  throng,  answered,  he  would 
not  now,  so  neere  his  end,  begin  to  turne  his  face  from  his 
enemie  :  and  having  stoutly  foughten  so  long  as  he  could 
stand,  feeling  himselfe  to  faint  and  stagger  from  his  horse, 
commanded  his  steward  to  lay  him  against  a  tree,  but  in  such 
sort,  that  he  might  die  with  his  face  toward  the  enemie  ; 
as  indeed  hee  did.  I  may  not  omit  this  other  example,  as 
remarkable  for  this  consideration,  as  any  of  the  precedent. 
The  Emperour  Maximilian,  great  grand-father  to  Philip  now 
King  of  Spaine,  was  a  Prince  highly  endowed  with  many 
noble  qualities,  and  amongst  others  with  a  well-nigh  match- 
lesse  beauty  and  comelinesse  of  body  ;  but  with  other  cus- 
tomes  of  his,  hee  had  this  one  much  contrarie  to  other 
Princes,  who  to  dispatch  their  weightiest  affaires  make  often 
their  close  stoole,  their  regall  Throne  or  Councel-chamber, 
which  was,  that  hee  would  not  permit  any  groome  of  his 
chamber  (were  hee  never  so  neere  about  him)  to  see  him 
in  his  inner  chamber,  who  if  he  had  occasion  but  to  make 
water,  would  as  nicelv  and  as  religiously  with -draw  himselfe 

25 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  as  any  maiden,  and  never  suffer  so  much  as  a  Physitian, 
III  much  lesse  any  other  whatsoever,  to  see  those  privie  parts 
ar^trans^ort-  that  a11  in  mo<kstie  seeke  to  keepe  secret  and  unseene.  My 
ed  beyond  our  selfe,  that  am  so  broad-mouthed  and  lavish  in  speeches,  am 
selves  notwithstanding  naturally  touched  with  that  bashfulnesse. 
And  unlesse  it  bee  by  the  motion  of  necessity  or  of  voluptu- 
ousnesse,  I  never  willingly  imparted  those  actions  and  parts 
(which  custome  willeth  to  bee  concealed)  to  the  view  of  any 
creature.  I  endure  more  compulsion,  than  I  deeme' befit 
ting  a  man,  especially  of  my  profession.  But  hee  grew  to 
such  superstition,  that  by  expresse  words  in  his  last  will  and 
Testament,  hee  commanded,  that  being  dead,  hee  should 
have  linnen-flops  put  about  them.  Hee  should  by  codicile 
have  annexed  unto  it,  that  hee  who  should  put  them  on, 
might  have  his  eies  hood-winckt.  The  instruction  which 
Cyrus  giveth  his  children,  that  neither  they  nor  any  other 
should  either  see  or  touch  his  body,  after  the  breath  were 
once  out  of  it ;  I  ascribe  it  unto  some  motive  of  devotion  in 
him.  For  both  his  historian  and  himselfe,  amongst  many 
other  notable  qualities  they  are  endued  with,  have  through 
out  all  the  course  of  their  life  seemed  to  have  a  singular 
respect  and  awfull  reverence  unto  religion.  That  story 
displeased  mee  very  much,  which  a  noble-man  told  me  of  a 
kinsman  of  mine  (a  man  very  famous  and  well  known  both 
in  peace  and  warre)  which  is,  that  dying  very  aged  in  his 
court,  being  much  tormented  with  extreme  pangs  of  the 
stone,  hee  with  an  earnest  and  unwearied  care,  employed  all 
his  last  houres,  to  dispose  the  honour  and  ceremony  of  his 
funerals,  and  summoned  all  the  nobilitie  that  came  to  visit 
him,  to  give  him  assured  promise  to  be  as  assistants,  and  to 
convey  him  to  his  last  resting  place.  To  the  very  same 
Prince,  who  was  with  him  at  his  last  gasp,  he  made  very 
earnest  suit,  he  would  command  all  his  houshold  to  wait 
upon  him  at  his  interment,  inforcing  many  reasons,  and 
alleaging  divers  examples,  to  prove  that  it  was  a  thing  very 
convenient,  and  fitting  a  man  of  his  qualitie  :  which  assured 
promise  when  he  had  obtained,  and  had  at  his  pleasure 
marshalled  the  order  how  they  should  march,  he  seemed 
quietly  and  contentedly  to  yeeld  up  the  ghost.  I  have 
seldome  scene  a  vanitie  continue  so  long.  This  other  curi- 
26 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

ositie  meere  opposite  unto  it  (which  to  prove  I  need  not   CHAPTER 
labour   for   home-examples)  seemeth  in  my  opinion  cosen-          HI 
fferman  to  this,  that  is,  when  one  is  ever  ready  to  breathe  his          affections 
i     j_  i?  11  j  •        j_  i  j  i  i          are  transport- 

last,  carefully  and  passionately  to  endevour  how  to  reduce  e(j  beyond  our 

the  convoy  of  his  obsequies  unto  some  particular  and  un-  selves 
wonted  parcimonie,  to  one  servant  and  to  one  lanterne.  I 
heare  the  humour  and  appointment  of  Marcus  ^Emilius 
Lepidus  commended,  who  expresly  forbade  his  heires  to  use 
those  ceremonies  about  his  interment,  which  in  such  cases 
were  formerly  accustomed.  Is  it  temperance  and  frugalitie, 
to  avoid  charge  and  voluptuousnesse,  the  use  and  knowledge 
of  which  is  imperceptable  unto  us  ?  Loe  here  an  easie  refor 
mation,  and  of  small  cost.  Were  it  requisite  to  appoint  any, 
I  would  be  of  opinion,  that  as  well  in  that,  as  in  all  other 
actions  of  mans  life,  every  man  should  referre  the  rule  of  it 
to  the  qualitie  of  his  fortune.  And  the  Philosopher  Lycon 
did  wisely  appoint  his  friends  to  place  his  body  where  they 
should  thinke  it  fittest  and  for  the  best :  and  for  his  obsequies, 
they  should  neither  be  superfluous  and  over-costly,  nor  base 
and  sparing.  For  my  part,  I  would  wholly  relie  on  custome, 
which  should  dispose  this  ceremonie,  and  would  yeeld  my 
selfe  to  the  discretion  of  the  first  or  next  into  whose  hands  I 
might  chance  to  fall.  Totus  hie  locus  est  contemnendus  in 
nobis,  non  negligendus  in  nostris:  'All  this  matter  should  be 
'  despised  of  us,  but  not  neglected  of  ours.1  And  religiously 
said  a  holy  man  ;  Curatiofuneris,  conditio  sepultures,  pompa  AUG.  Civ.  Dei, 

exequiarum*  mag-is  sunt  vivorum  solatia*  quam  subsidia  mor-  *•     12>    verb- 
'„,     •"  .  p  ,>  1,1  e  i       •   11    apost.  scr.  32. 

tuorum.     •  1  he  procuration  of  funerals,  the  maner  of  bunall, 

'  the  pomp  of  obsequies,  are  rather  comforts  to  the  living,  than 
'  helps  to  the  dead.'  Therefore  Socrates  answered  Criton,  who 
at  the  houre  of  his  death  asked  him  how  he  would  be  buried  : 
4  Even  as  you  please,1  said  he.  Were  I  to  meddle  further 
with  this  subject,  I  would  deeme  it  more  gallant  to  imitate 
those  who  yet  living  and  breathing,  undertake  to  enjoy  the 
order  and  honour  of  their  sepulchres,  and  that  please  them 
selves  to  behold  their  dead  countenance  in  Marble.  Happy 
they  that  can  rejoyce  and  gratifie  their  senses  with  insensi- 
bilitie,  and  live  by  their  death  !  A  little  thing  would  make 
me  conceive  an  inexpiable  hatred  against  all  popular  domina 
tion  ;  although  it  seeme  most  naturall  and  just  unto  me  ; 

27 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  when  I  call  to  minde  that  inhumane  injustice  of  the 
H!  .  Athenians,  who  without  further  triall  or  remission,  yea 
^transport-  without  suffering  them  so  much  as  to  reply  or  answer  for 
ed  beyond  our  themselves,  condemned  those  noble  and  worthy  Captaines, 
selves  that  returned  victoriously  from  the  sea-battell,  which  they 
(neere  the  lies  Arginusae)  had  gained  of  the  Lacedemonians  ; 
the  most  contested,  bloodie  and  greatest  fight  the  Grecians 
ever  obtained  by  sea  with  their  owne  forces  :  forsomuch  as 
after  the  victory,  they  had  rather  followed  those  occasions, 
which  the  law  of  warre  presented  unto  them,  for  their  availe, 
than  to  their  prejudice  staid  to  gather  and  bury  their  dead 
men.  And  the  successe  of  Diomedon  makes  their  ruthlesse 
execution  more  hatefull,  who  being  a  man  of  notable  and 
exemplar  vertue,  both  military  and  politike,  and  of  them  so 
cruelly  condemned  ;  after  he  had  heard  the  bloudy  sentence, 
advancing  himselfe  forward  to  speake,  having  fit  opportunitie 
and  plausible  audience  ;  he,  I  say,  in  stead  of  excusing  him 
selfe,  or  endevouring  to  justifie  his  cause,  or  to  exasperate 
the  evident  iniquity  of  so  cruell  a  doome,  expressed  but  a 
care  of  the  Judges  preservation,  earnestly  beseeching  the 
Gods  to  turne  that  judgement  to  their  good,  praying  that 
for  want  of  not  satisfying  the  vowes  which  hee  and  his  com 
panions  had  vowed  in  acknowledgement  and  thanksgiving  for 
so  famous  a  victory,  and  honourable  fortune,  they  might  not 
draw  the  wrath  and  revenge  of  the  Gods  upon  them,  declar 
ing  what  their  vowes  were.  And  without  more  words,  or 
urging  further  reasons,  couragiously  addressed  himselfe  to  his 
execution.  But  fortune  some  yeares  after  punished  him  alike, 
and  made  him  taste  of  the  verie  same  sauce.  For  Chabrias, 
Captaine  Generall  of  their  sea-fleet,  having  afterward 
obtained  a  famous  victory  of  Pollis,  Admirall  of  Sparta, 
in  the  He  of  Naxos,  lost  absolutely  the  benefit  of  it,  and 
onely  contented  with  the  day  (a  matter  of  great  conse 
quence  for  their  affaires)  fearing  to  incurre  the  mischiefe  of 
this  example,  and  to  save  a  few  dead  carcasses  of  his  friends, 
that  floated  up  and  downe  the  sea,  gave  leasure  to  an 
infinite  number  of  his  living  enemies,  whom  he  might 
easily  have  surprized  to  saile  away  in  safety,  who  afterward 
made  them  to  purchase  their  importunate  superstition,  at 
a  deere-deere  rate. 


THE  FIRST  BOOKE 

SEN.  Troas.      Qiueris,  quo  jaceas,  post  obitum,  loco?  CHAPTER 

chor.  ii.  30.       Quo  non  nata  jacent.  jjj 

Where  shall  you  lie  when  you  are  dead  ?  Our  affections 

Where  they  lye  that  were  never  bred  :  are  transport 

ed  beyond  our 

This  other  restores  the  sense  of  rest  unto  a  body  without  a         selves 
soule. 

Neque  sepulchrum,  quo  recipiat,  habeat  portum  corporis.        QIC.  Tusc,  On. 

Vbi,  remissa  humana*  vita,  corpus  requiescat  a  mails.  i.  Enni. 

To  turne  in  as  a  hav'n,  have  he  no  grave, 

Where  life  left,  from  all  griefe  he  rest  may  have. 

Even  as  Nature  makes  us  to  see,  that  many  dead  things 

have  yet    certaine    secret  relations  unto  life.     Wine  doth 

alter  and  change  in  sellers,  according  to  the  changes  and 

alterations  of  the  seasons  of  its  vineyard.    And  the  flesh  of 

wilde  beasts  and  venison  doth  change  qualitie  and  taste  in 

the  powdering-tubs,  according  to  the  nature  of  living 

flesh,  as  some  say  that  have  observed  it. 

THE    FOURTH    CHAPTER 

How  the  soule  dischargeth  her  passions  upon 
false  objects,  when  the  true  faile  it. 

GENTLEMAN  of  ours  exceedingly  sub 
ject  to  the  gowt,  being  instantly  solicited 
by  his  Physitions,  to  leave  all  manner  of 
salt-meats,  was  wont  to  answer  pleasantly, 
that  when  the  fits  or  pangs  of  the  disease 
tooke  him,  hee  would  have  some  body  to 
quarell  with  ;  and  that  crying  and  cursing, 
now  against  Bolonie-sausege,  and  some 
times  by  railing  against  salt  neats-tongues,  and  gammons  of 
bakon,  he  found  some  ease.  But  in  good  earnest  even  as 
the  arme  being  lifted  up  to  strike,  if  the  stroke  hit  not,  but 
fall  void,  wee  feele  some  paine  in  it,  and  many  times  strike  it 
out  of  joynt;  and  that  to  yeeld  our  sight  pleasant,  it  must 
not  be  lost  and  dispiersed  in  the  vast  ayre,  but  ought  rather 
to  have  a  limited  bound  to  sustaine  it  by  a  reasonable 
distance. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER   Luc  AN,  iii       Ventus  ut  amittit  vires,  nisi  robore  densce 

IV  362.  Occurrant  silva,  spatio  diffusus  inani. 

How  the  soule  As  windes  in  emptie  ayre  diffus'd,  strength  lose, 

dischargetn  Unlesse  thick-old-growne  woods  of  their  strength  oppose, 

her     passions 

upon  false  ob-       go  seemes  it  that  the  soule  moved  and  tossed,  if  she  have 

not  S°me  h°ld  to  take'  J°seth  li  Sel/e  in  li  Selfe'  and  must  ever 
be  stored  with  some  object,  on  which  it  may  light  and  worke. 

Plutarch  saith  fitly  of  those  who  affectionate  themselves  to 
Monkies  and  little  Dogges,  that  the  loving  part  which  is  in 
us,  for  want  of  a  lawfull  hold,  rather  than  it  will  be  idle, 
doth  forge  a  false  and  frivolous  hold  unto  it  selfe.  And  wee 
see  that  the  soule  in  her  passions  doth  rather  deceive  it  selfe, 
by  framing  a  false  and  fantasticall  subject  unto  it  selfe,  yea 
against  her  owne  conceit,  than  not  to  worke  upon  something. 
So  doth  their  owne  rage  transport  beasts,  to  set  upon  the 
stone  or  weapon  that  hath  hurt  them ;  yea  and  sometimes 
with  irefull  teeth  to  revenge  themselves  against  themselves, 
for  the  hurt  or  smart  they  feele. 

LUCAN,    vi.  Pannonis  hand  aliter  post  ictum  savior  ursa 

220.  Cui  jaculum  parva  Lybis  amentavit  habena, 

Se  rotat  in  vulnus,  telumque  irata  receptum 
Impedit,  $  secumfugientem  circuit  hast  am. 

Even  so  the  wound-enraged  Austrian  beare, 
On  whom  a  Moore  hath  thir'ld  his  slinged  speare, 
Wheeles  on  her  wound,  and  raging  bites  the  dart, 
Circling  that  flies  with  her,  and  cannot  part. 

What  causes  doe  wee  not  invent,  for  the  crosses   that 

happen  unto  us  ?  bee  it  right,  or  wrong :  what  take  we  not 

hold  of,  to  have  something  to  strive  withall  ?     It  is  not  the 

golden  locks  thou  tearest,  nor  the  whitenesse  of  the  breast, 

which  thou  through  vexation   so  cruelly  dost  smite,  that 

have  by  meanes  of  an  unluckie  bullet,  lost  thy  deere-beloved 

brother :  on  something  else  shouldest  thou  wreake  thy  selfe. 

Livius  speaking  of  the  Romane  army  in  Spaine,  after  the 

Liv.  dec.  iii.      losse   of  two   great   Captaines   that  were   brethren.     Flere 

llb<  5-  omnes  repent^  et  offensare  capita :  '  They  all  wept  and  often 

'  beat  their  heades.'     It  is  an  ordinarie  custome :  And  the 

Philosopher  Byon  was  very  pleasant  with  the  king,  that  for 

griefe  tore  his  haire,  when  he  said,  '  Doth  this  man  thinke, 

'  that  baldnesse  will  asswage  his  griefe  ?  who  hath  not  scene 

30 


THE    FIRST   BOOKE 


'  some  to  chew  and  swallow  cardes,  and  wel-nigh  choake  them-   CHAPTER 
6  selves  with  bales  of  dice,  only  to  be  revenged  for  the  losse  of          IV 


<  some  money  ?  '     Xerxes  whipped  the  Sea,  and  writ  a  cartell 

of  defiance  to  the  hill  Athos  :  And  Cyrus  for  many  daies 

together  ammused  his  whole  armie  to  be  revenged  of  the  upon  false  ob- 

river  Gyndus,  for  the  feare  he  tooke  passing  over  the  same  :  jects,  when  the 

And  Caligula  caused  a  verie  faire  house  to  be  defaced,  for    true  falle  Lt 

the  pleasure  his  mother  had  received  in  the  same.     When  I 

was  young,  my  countrimen  were  wont  to  say,  That  one  of 

our  neighbour-  Kings,  having  received  a  blow  at  Gods  hand, 

sware  to  be  revenged  on  him,  and  ordained,  that  for  ten 

yeares  space  no  man  should  pray  unto  him,  nor  speak  of  him, 

nor  (so  long  as  he  were  in  authority,)  beleeve  in  him.     By 

which  report,  they  doe  not  so  much  publish  the  sottishnesse, 

as  the  ambitious  glorie,  peculiar  unto  that  nation  of  whom 

it  was  spoken.     They  are  vices  that  ever  goe  together  :  But 

in  truth  such  actions  encline  rather  unto  selfe-conceit,  than 

to    fondnes.     Augustus    Caesar   having  beene  beaten   by  a 

tempest  on  the  sea,  defied  the  God  Neptune,  and  in  the 

celebration  of  the  Circensian  games,  that  so  he  might  be 

avenged  on  him,  he  caused  his  image  to  be  removed  from 

out   the   place,    where   it   stood  amongst  the  other  Gods; 

wherein  he  is  also  lesse  excusable,  than  the  former,  and  lesse 

than  hee  was  afterward,  when  having  lost  a  battell,  under 

Quintilius  Varus  in  Germanie,  all  in  a  rage  and  desperate, 

he  went  up  and  downe  beating  his  head  against  the  walls, 

mainly  crying  out  :    Oh  !    Varus,  restore  me  my  Souldiers 

againe  :  For,  those  exceed,  all  follie,  (forsomuch  as  impietie 

is  joyned  unto  it)  that  will  wreake  themselves  against  God, 

or  fortune,  as  if  she  had  eares  subject  to  our  batterie  :  In 

imitation  of  the  Thracians,  who  when  it  lightens  or  thunders, 

begin   with    a  Titanian   revenge   to  shoot  against  heaven, 

thinking  by  shooting  of  arrowes  to  draw  God  to  some  reason. 

Now,  as  saith  that  ancient  Poet  in  Plutarch, 

Point  ne  sefaut  corroucer  aux  affaires,  PLUTAR. 

//  ne  leur  chaut  de  toutes  noz  choleres. 

We  ought  not  angry  be  at  what  God  dooth, 

For  he  cares  not  who  beares  an  angry  tooth. 

But  we  shall  never  raile  enough  against  the  disorder  and 
unrulinesse  of  our  minde. 

31 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


VIRG. 
390- 


THE    FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Whether  the  Captaine  of  a  place  besieged 
ought  to  sallie  forth  to  parlie. 

VCIUS  MARCIUS  Legate  of  the  Romans, 
in  the  warre  against  Perseus  King  of 
Macedon,  desirous  to  get  so  much  time, 
as  he  wanted  to  prepare  his  army,  gave 
out  some  motives  of  accord,  wherewith 
the  King  inveagled,  yeelded  unto  a  truce 
for  certaine  daies :  by  which  meanes  he 
furnished  his  enemie  with  opportunitie 
and  leasure  to  arme  himselfe :  wherof  proceeded  the  Kings 
last  ruine  and  over-throw.  Yet  is  it,  that  the  elders  of  the 
Senate,  mindfull  of  their  fore-fathers  customes,  condemned 
this  practice  as  an  enemie  to  their  ancient  proceedings,  which 
was,  said  they,  to  fight  with  vertue,  and  not  with  craft,  nor 
by  surprises,  or  stratagems  by  night,  nor  by  set-flights,  and 
unlookt-for  approches,  never  undertaking  a  warre,  but  after 
it  was  proclaimed,  yea  many  times  after  the  appointed  houre 
and  place  of  the  battell.  With  this  conscience  did  they 
send  backe  to  Pirrhus  his  traitorous  Physitian,  and  to  the 
Phalisci  their  disloyall  schoole-master.  These  were  true 
Romane  proceedings,  and  not  Grecian  policies,  nor  Punike 
wiles,  with  whom  to  vanquish  by  force  is  lesse  glorious  than 
to  conquer  by  treacherie.  To  deceive  may  serve  for  the 
instant,  but  hee  only  is  judged  to  be  overcome,  that  knowes 
he  was  not  vanquished  by  craft  or  deceit,  nor  by  fortune  or 
chance,  but  by  meere  valour,  betweene  troupe  and  troupe,  in 
an  overt  and  just  warre.  It  appeareth  manifestly  by  the 
speech  of  these  good  men,  they  had  not  yet  received  this 
sentence. 

Dolus,  an  virtus,  quis  in  hoste  required  ? 
Deceit,  or  vertue,  either,  in  foes,  it  skill's  not  whether. 

The  Achajans,  saith  Polibius,  detested  all  manner  of 
deceit  in  their  warres,  deeming  that  no  victorie,  where  their 
enemies  courages  were  not  quelled.  Earn  vir  sanetus,  et 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

sapiens  sciat  esse  victoriam  veram,  qua?  salva  Jide,  et  Integra  CHAPTER 

dignitate  parabitur.     '  A  wise  and  religious  man  will  know          V 

'  that  is  victorie  indeed,  which  shall  be  attained  with  credit  Whether  the 


unimpeached,  and  dignitie  untainted,1  saith  another.  piMebefie  ed 


Vos  ne  velit,  an  me  regnare  hem,  quid-veferatfors,  oughttosallie 

Virtute  experiamur.  forth  to 

parlie. 
If  fortune  will  have  you  to  raigne,,  or  me,  . 

And  what  chance  brink's,  let  vertues  triall  be.  ^IC*    f1^  l'  ?x 

Enn.  de  Pyrrh. 

In  the  Kingdome  of  Ternates,  among  those  nations,  which 
wee  so  full-mouthed,  call  Barbarous,  the  custome  beareth, 
that  they  never  undertake  a  warre,  before  the  same  be  de 
nounced;  thereunto  adding  an  ample  declaration  of  the 
meanes  they  have  to  employ  therein,  what  manner,  and  how 
many  men,  what  munition,  and  what  Armes  either  offensive 
or  defensive  :  which  done,  they  also  establish  as  a  law,  that 
without  reproach  or  imputation,  it  shall  be  lawfull  for  any 
man,  in  their  warres,  to  use  what  advantage  soever,  may  in 
any  sort  further  or  helpe  them  to  vanquish.  The  ancient 
Florentines  were  so  far  from  desiring  any  advantage  of  their 
enemies  by  sudden  surprises,  that  a  moneth  before  they 
could  bring  their  Armie  into  the  field,  they  would  give  them 
warning,  by  the  continuall  sound  of  their  common  bell,  which 
they  called  Martinella.  As  for  us,  who  are  lesse  super 
stitious,  and  deeme  him  to  have  the  honour  of  the  warre, 
that  hath  the  profit  of  it,  and  according  to  Lisander,  say, 
that  Where  the  Lions-skinne  will  not  suffice,  wee  must  adde 
a  scantling  of  the  Foxes;  the  most  ordinarie  occasions  of 
surprises  are  drawne  from  this  practice,  and  as  wee  say,  there 
is  no  time,  wherein  a  Captaine  ought  to  be  more  warie  and 
circumspect  to  looke  about  him,  than  that  of  parlies,  and 
treaties  of  accord  :  And  therefore  is  it  a  common  rule  in  the 
mouth  of  all  our  modern  men  of  warre,  that  the  Governour 
or  Commaunder  of  a  besieged  place,  ought  never  to  sallie 
forth  himselfe  to  parlie.  In  the  time  of  our  forefathers,  the 
same  was  cast  in  the  teeth,  (as  a  reproach)  unto  the  Lord  of 
Montmord  and  Assigni,  who  defended  Mouson,  against  the 
Earle  of  Nanseaw.  Yet  in  this  case  it  were  excusable  in 
him,  that  should  so  sallie  out,  that  the  assurance  and  advan 
tage,  might  still  be  on  his  side.  As  did  the  Earle  Guido 

C  33 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Rangoni  in  the  Citie  of  Reggio  (if  credit  may  be  given  to 
v  Bellay;    for    Guicciardin    affirmeth,    that   it   was   himselfe) 

Whether  the  wjien  as  ^he  Lord  of  Escute,  comming  to  parlie  made  his 
Captame  oi  a  ,  •  ,       />      i       1*1        T,,I     />        1 1      i  •     r>         .1 

place  besieged  approaches  unto  it;  tor  he  did  so  little  forsake  his  tort,  that 

ought  to  sallie  whilest  they  were  in  parlie,  a  commotion  being  raised,  the 
forth  to  Lord  of  Escute  and  the  troupes  which  came  with  him,  in 
parhe.  ^hat  tumult  found  himselfe  to  be  the  weakest,  so  that 
Alexander  Trivultio  was  there  slaine,  and  hee  deeming  it  the 
safest  way,  was  forced  to  follow  the  Earle,  and  on  his  word 
to  yeeld  himselfe  to  the  mercie  and  shelter  of  blowes,  into 
the  Citie.  Eumenes  in  the  Citie  of  Nera,  being  urged  by 
Antigonus,  that  besieged  him,  to  sallie  forth  to  parlie, 
alleaging  that  there  was  reason  he  should  come  to  him,  sith 
he  was  the  better  man,  and  the  stronger :  after  he  had  made 
this  noble  answer,  I  will  never  thinke  any  man  better  than 
my  selfe,  so  long  as  I  can  hold  or  rule  my  sword ;  nor  did  he 
ever  yeeld  untill  Antigonus  had  delivered  him  Ptolomey,  his 
owne  nephew  for  a  pledge,  whom  he  required.  Yet  shall  wee 
see  some  to  have  prospered  well  in  sallying  foorth  of  their 
holdes  to  parlie,  upon  the  word  and  honor  of  the  assailant ; 
witnes  Henrie  of  Vaulx,  a  knight  of  Champaigne,  who  being 
beleagred  by  the  English-men  in  the  Castle  of  Commercie, 
and  Bartholmew  of  Bones,  who  at  that  siege  commaunded  as 
Chiefe  having  caused  the  greatest  part  of  the  Castle  to  be 
undermined,  so  that  there  wanted  nothing  but  the  giving  of 
fire,  utterly  to  subvert  the  same,  under  the  ruines  of  it, 
summoned  the  said  Henrie  to  issue  out,  and  for  his  owne 
good  to  parlie  with  him,  which  he  did,  accompanied  but 
with  three  more,  who  manifestly  seeing  the  evident  ruine, 
wherein  he  was  undoubtedly  like  to  fall,  acknowledged  him 
selfe  infinitely  beholding  to  his  enemie,  unto  whose  discre 
tion,  after  he  had  yeelded  together  with  his  troup,  and  that 
fire  was  given  to  the  Mine,  the  maine  props  of  the  Castle 
failing,  it  was  utterly  overthrowne  and  carried  away.  I  am 
easily  perswaded  to  yeeld  to  other  mens  words  and  faith, 
but  hardly  would  I  doe  it,  when  I  should  give  other 
men  cause  to  imagine,  that  I  had  rather  done  it  through 
despaire  and  want  of  courage,  than  of  a  free  and 
voluntary  choise,  and  confidence  in  his  honestie 

and  well-meaning. 
34 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

THE   SIXTH   CHAPTER 

That  the  houre  of  parlies  is  dangerous. 

OTWITHSTANDING  I  saw  lately,  that 
those  of  Musidan,  a  place  not  farre  from 
mee,  who  with  others  of  their  partie,  were 
by  our  forces  compelled  to  dislodge  thence, 
exclaimed,  they  were  betraid,  because 
during  the  speech  of  accord,  and  the 
treatie  yet  continuing,  they  had  beene 
surprized  and  defeated;  which  thing 
might  haply  in  other  ages  have  had  some  apparence  of 
truth ;  but,  as  I  say,  our  manner  of  proceeding  in  such  cases, 
is  altogether  differing  from  these  rules,  and  no  man  ought 
to  expect  performance  of  promise  from  an  enemie,  except  the 
last  scale  of  bond  be  fully  annexed  thereunto,  wherein  not 
withstanding  is  then  much  care  and  vigilancie  required,  and 
much  adoe  shall  be  found.  And  it  was  ever  a  dangerous 
counsell  to  trust  the  performance  of  word  or  oath  given  unto 
a  Citie,  that  yeelds  unto  gentle  and  favourable  composition, 
and  in  that  furie  to  give  the  needie,  bloudthirstie,  and  prey- 
greedy  Souldier  free  entrance  into  it,  unto  the  free  choise 
and  licence  of  a  victorious  armie.  Lucius  ^Emilius  Regillus 
a  Romane  Praetor,  having  lost  his  time  in  attempting  by 
force  to  take  the  Citie  of  the  Phocens  by  reason  of  the 
singular  prowesse,  which  the  inhabitants  shewed,  in  stoutly 
defending  themselves,  covenanted  to  receive  them  as  friends 
unto  the  people  of  Rome,  and  to  enter  their  Citie  as  a  place 
confederate,  removing  all  feare  of  hostile-action  from  them. 
But  to  the  end  hee  might  appeare  more  glorious  and  dread- 
full,  having  caused  his  armie  to  enter  with  him,  doe  what  he 
might,  he  could  not  bridle  the  rage  of  his  Souldiers ;  and 
with  his  owne  eies  saw  most  part  of  the  Citie  ransacked  and 
spoiled  :  the  rights  of  covetousnesse  and  revenge  supplanting 
those  of  his  authoritie  and  militarie  discipline.  (Cleomenes 
was  wont  to  say,  that  '  What  hurt  soever  a  man  might  doe 
6  his  enemies  in  time  of  warre,  was  beyond  justice,  and  not 
'  subject  unto  it,  as  well  towards  the  Gods  as  towards  men1 : 
who  for  seven  dayes  having  made  truce  with  those  of  Argos, 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  third  night,  whilest  they  were  all  asleepe  mistrusting  no 
VI  harme,  hee  charged  and  overthrew  them,  alleaging  for  his 

fa/6*01186'  ^na^  *n  ^ne  ^ruce  no  mention  had  beene  made  of 

lies  danger-  nights.)  But  the  Gods  left  not  his  perfidious  policie  un- 
ous  revenged  :  For  during  their  enter-parlie  and  businesse  about 
taking  hostages,  the  Citie  of  Casilinum  was  by  surprise  taken 
from  him:  which  happened  in  the  times  of  the  justest 
Captaines,  and  of  the  most  perfect  Romane  discipline :  For 
it  is  not  said,  that  time  and  place  serving,  wee  must  not 
make  use  and  take  advantage  of  our  enemies  foolish  over 
sight,  as  we  doe  of  their  cowardise.  And  verily  warre  hath 
naturally  many  reasonable  privileges  to  the  prejudice  of 

Cic.  Ojfic.  iii.  reason.  And  here  failes  the  rule ;  Neminem  id  agere,  ut  ex 
altering  prcedetur  inscitia :  '  That  no  man  should  endevour  to 
'  prey  upon  another  mans  ignorance.'  But  I  wonder  of  the 
scope  that  Xenophon  allowes  them,  both  by  his  discourse, 
and  by  divers  exploits  of  his  perfect  Emperour :  an  Author 
of  wonderfull  consequence  in  such  things,  as  a  great  Captaine 
and  a  Philosopher,  and  one  of  Socrates  chiefest  Disciples,  nor 
doe  I  altogether  yeeld  unto  the  measure  of  his  dispensation. 
The  Lord  of  Aubigny  besieging  Capua,  after  he  had  given 
it  a  furious  batterie,  the  Lord  Fabritius  Colonna,  Captaine 
of  the  towne,  having  from  under  a  bastion  or  skonce  begunne 
to  parlie,  and  his  men  growing  negligent  and  carelesse  in 
their  offices  and  guard,  our  men  did  suddenly  take  the 
advantage  offered  them,  entered  the  towne,  over-ranne  it, 
and  put  all  to  the  sword.  But  to  come  to  later  examples, 
yea  in  our  memorie,  the  Lord  lulio  Romero  at  Yvoy,  having 
committed  this  oversight  to  issue  out  of  his  holde,  to  parlie 
with  the  Constable  of  France,  at  his  returne  found  the 
Towne  taken,  and  himselfe  jack-out-of-doores.  But  that 
wee  may  not  passe  unrevenged,  the  Marques  of  Pescara 
beleagering  Genova,  where  Duke  Octavian  Fregoso  com 
manded  under  our  protection,  and  an  accord  between  them 
having  so  long  been  treated,  and  earnestly  solicited,  that  it 
was  held  as  ratified,  and  upon  the  point  of  conclusion,  the 
Spanjards  being  entred  the  Towne,  and  seeing  themselves 
the  stronger,  tooke  their  opportunitie,  and  used  it  as  a  full 
and  compleate  victorie  :  and  since  at  Lygny  in  Barroe,  where 
the  Earle  of  Brienne  commanded,  the  Emperour  having  be- 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

sieged  him  in  person,  and  Bartholemy  Lieutenant  to  the  CHAPTER 
saide  Earle  being  come  foorth  of  his  hold  to  parlie,  was  no          v* 
sooner  out,  whilest  they  were  disputing,  but  the  Towne  was  kour^of  *  ar 
surprised,  and  he  excluded,  They  say,  jies  js  danger- 

Fu  il  vincer  sempre  mai  laudabil  cosa, 

Vincasi  perfortuna  a  per  ingegno.  ARIST.  cant. 

,_    ,  ,  xv.  stan.  I. 

To  be  victorious,  evermore  was  glorious, 

Be  we  by  fortune  or  by  wit  victorious. 

But  the  Philosopher  Chrysippus  would  not  have  beene  of 
that  opinion  ;  nor  I  neither,  for  he  was  wont  to  say,  '  That 
'  those  who  run  for  the  masterie  may  well  employ  all  their 
'  strength  to  make  speed,  but  it  is  not  lawful!  for  them  to 
'  lay  hands  on  their  adversaries,  to  stay  him,  or  to  crosse 
'  leggs,  to  make  him  trip  or  fall.'  And  more  generously 
answered  Alexander  the  great,  at  what  time  Polypercon  per- 
swaded  him  to  use  the  benefit  of  the  advantage  which  the  dark- 
nesse  of  the  night  afforded  him,  to  charge  Darius  ;  '  No,  no,1 
said  hee,  '  it  fits  not  mee  to  hunt  after  night-stolne  victories/ 
Malo  mefortuncepceniteat,  quam  victoricepudeat.  6 1  had  rather  CURT.  iv. 
'  repent  me  of  my  fortune,  than  be  ashamed  of  my  victorie.*1 

Atque  idemfugientem  haud  est  dignatus  Orodem  VIRG.  sEn.  x. 

Sternere,  necjacta  ccecum  dare  cuspide  vulnus :  732-  Mezent. 

Obvius  adversoque  occurrit,  segue  viro  vir 
Contulit,  haudfurto  melior,  sedfortibus  armis. 

He  deign'd  not  to  strike  downe  Orodes  flying, 

Or  with  his  throwne-launce  blindely-wound  him  running : 

But  man  to  man  afront  himselfe  applying, 

Met  him,  as  more  esteem'd  for  strength  than  cunning. 

THE     SEVENTH     CHAPTER 

That  our  intention  judgeth  our  actions. 

HE  common  saying  is,  that  Death  acquits  us  of 
all  our  bonds.  I  know  some  that  have  taken 
it  in  another  sence.  Henry  the  seventh,  King 
of  England,  made  a  composition  with  Philip 
son  to  Maximilian  the  Emperour  or  (to  give 
him  a  more  honorable  title)  father  to  the  Emperour  Charles 

37 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the    fifth,   that   the    said    Philip    should    deliver    into    his 

VII          hands,  the  Duke  of  Suffolke,  his  mortall  enemie,  who  was 

That  our  in-  fl  d        t     f    England,   and   saved   him   selfe   in   the   Low 

tention  judg-  .         ,  6         '.  -,    -,    ,      v.         u      u  4.1,- 

eth   our     countries,  alwayes  provided  the  King  should  attempt  nothing 

actions  against  the  Dukes  life ;  which  promise  notwithstanding, 
being  neere  his  end,  he  expresly  by  will  and  testament 
commanded  his  succeeding-sonne,  that  immediately  after 
his  decease,  he  should  cause  him  to  be  put  to  death.  In 
the  late  tragedie,  which  the  Duke  of  Alva  presented  us 
withall  at  Brussels,  on  the  Earles  of  Home  and  Egmond, 
were  many  remarkable  things,  and  worthy  to  be  noted  :  and 
amongst  others,  that  the  said  Count  Egmond  upon  whose 
faithfull  word  and  assurance,  the  Earle  of  Home  was  come  in 
and  yeelded  himselfe  to  the  Duke  of  Alva,  required  very 
instantly  to  be  first  put  to  death,  to  the  end  his  death  might 
acquit  and  free  him  of  the  word  and  bond,  which  he  ought 
and  was  engaged  for,  to  the  said  Earle  of  Home.  It  seemeth 
that  death  hath  no  whit  discharged  the  former  of  his  word 
given,  and  that  the  second,  without  dying,  was  quit  of  it. 
We  cannot  be  tied  beyond  our  strength  and  meanes.  The 
reason  is,  because  the  effects  and  executions  are  not  any  way 
in  our  power,  and  except  our  will,  nothing  is  truely  in  our 
power  :  on  it  onely  are  all  the  rules  of  man's  dutie  grounded 
and  established  by  necessitie.  And  therefore  Count  Egmond, 
deeming  his  minde  and  will  indebted  to  his  promise,  how  beit 
the  power  to  effect  it,  lay  not  in  his  hands,  was  no  doubt 
cleerely  absolved  of  his  debt  and  dutie,  although  he  had  sur 
vived  the  Count  Home.  But  the  King  of  England  failing 
of  his  word  by  his  intention,  cannot  be  excused,  though  hee 
delaide  the  execution  of  his  disloyaltie  untill  after  his  death. 
No  more  than  Herodotus  his  Mason  who  during  his  naturall 
life,  having  faithfully  kept  the  secret  of  his  Master  the  King 
of  Egypts  treasure,  when  he  died  discovered  the  same  unto 
his  children.  I  have  in  my  dayes  seene  many  convicted  by 
their  owne  conscience,  for  detaining  other  mens  goods,  yet  by 
their  last  will  and  testament  to  dispose  themselves,  after 
their  decease  to  make  satisfaction.  This  is  nothing  to  the 
purpose.  Neither  to  take  time  for  a  matter  so  urgent, 
nor  with  so  small  interest  or  shew  of  feeling,  to  goe  about 
to  establish  an  injurie.  They  are  indebted  somewhat 
38 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

more.     And  by  how  much  more  they  pay  incommodiously  CHAPTER 

and   chargeably,   so  much  the   more  just  and   meritorious 

is  their  satisfaction.     Penitence  ought  to  charge,  yet  doe 

they  worse,    who    reserve    the    revealing    of    some   heinous 

conceit  or  affection  towards  their  neighbour,  to  their  last  will       actions 

and  affection,  having  whilest  they  lived  ever  kept  it  secret. 

And  seeme  to  have  little  regard  of  their  owne  honour,  by 

provoking  the  partie  offended  against  their  owne  memory, 

and  lesse  of  their  conscience,  since  they  could  never  for  the 

respect  of  death  cancell  their  ill-grudging  affection,  and  in 

extending    life    beyond    theirs.      Oh    wicked   and  ungodly 

judges,  which    referre   the  judgement  of  a  cause   to   such 

time   as   they  have  no  more  knowledge  of  causes  !     I 

will  as   neere  as  I  can   prevent,    that   my   death 

reveale  or  utter  any  thing,  my  life  hath 

not  first  publickly  spoken. 


THE    EIGHTH    CHAPTER 
Of  Idlenesse. 

we  see  some  idle-fallow  grounds,  if  they 
'  be  fat  and  fertile,  to  bring  foorth  store 
'  and  sundrie  roots  of  wilde  and  unprofit- 
'  able  weeds,  and  that  to  keepe  them  in 
'  ure  we  must  subject  and  imploy  them 
6  with  certaine  seeds  for  our  use  and 
'  service.  And  as  wee  see  some  women, 
'  though  single  and  alone,  often  to  bring 
foorth  lumps  of  shapelesse  flesh,  whereas  to  produce  a  per 
fect  and  naturall  generation,  they  must  be  manured  with 
another  kinde  of  seed  :  So  is  it  of  mindes,  which  except 
they  be  busied  about  some  subject,  that  may  bridle  and 
keepe  them  under,  they  will  here  and  there  wildely  scatter 
themselves  through  the  vaste  field  of  imaginations.'* 

Sicut  aqua  tremulum  labris  ubi  lumen  ahenis 
Sole  repercussum,  aut  radiantis  imagine  Lunce, 
Omnia  pervolitat  latl  /oca,  jdmque  sub  auras 
Erigitur,  summiQue  ferit  laquearia  tecti. 


VIRG. 

viii.  22. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  As  trembling  light  reflected  from  the  Sunne, 

VIII  Or  radiant  Moone  on  water-fild  brasse  lavers, 

Of  Idlenesse  Flies  over  all,  in  aire  unpraised  soone, 

Strikes  house-top  beames,  betwixt  both  strangely  wavers. 

And  there  is  no  folly,  or  extravagant  raving,  they  produce 
not  in  that  agitation. 

HOR.  Art.  veluti  cegri  somnia,  vancB 

Poet.  vii.  Finguntur  species. 

Like  sicke  mens  dreames,  that  feigne 
Imaginations  vaine. 

The  minde  that  hath  no  fixed  bound,  will  easily  loose  it 
selfe  :  For,  as  we  say,  '  To  be  everie  where,  is  to  be  no 
where.1 

MART.  vii.  Quisquis  ubique  habitat,  Maxime,  nusquam  habitat. 

' 2)    '  Good  sir,  he  that  dwels  every  where, 

No  where  can  say,  that  he  dwells  there. 

It  is  not  long  since  I  retired  my  selfe  unto  mine  owne 
house,  with  full  purpose,  as  much  as  lay  in  me,  not  to  trouble 
my  selfe  with  any  businesse,  but  solitarily  and  quietly  to 
weare  out  the  remainder  of  my  well-nigh-spent  life ;  where 
me  thought  I  could  doe  my  spirit  no  greater  favour,  than  to 
give  him  the  full  scope  of  idlenesse,  and  entertaine  him  as  he 
best  pleased,  and  withall,  to  settle  him-selfe  as  he  best  liked : 
which  I  hoped  he  might  now,  being  by  time  become  more 
setled  and  ripe,  accomplish  very  easily :  but  I  finde, 


LUCAN,  iv. 

704. 


Variam  semper  dant  otia  mentem. 

Evermore  idlenesse, 

Doth  wavering  mindes  addresse. 

That  contrariwise  playing  the  skittish  and  loose-broken 

jade,  he  takes  a  hundred  times  more  cariere  and  libertie  unto 

himselfe,  than  hee  did  for  others ;  and  begets  in  me  so  many 

extravagant  Chimeraes,  and  fantasticall  monsters,  so  order- 

lesse,  and  without  any  reason,  one  hudling  upon  an  other, 

that  at  leasure  to  view  the  foolishnesse  and  monstrous 

strangenesse  of  them,  I  have  begun  to  keepe  a  register 

of  them,  hoping,  if  I  live,  one  day  to  make  him 

ashamed,  and   blush  at  himselfe. 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

THE    NINTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Lyers 

HERE  is  no  man  living,  whom  it  may  lesse 
beseeme  to  speake  of  memorie,  than  my 
selfe,  for  to  say  truth,  I  have  none  at  all : 
and  am  fully  perswaded  that  no  mans  can 
be  so  weake  and  forgetfull  as  mine.  All 
other  parts  are  in  me  common  and  vile, 
but  touching  memorie,  I  thinke  to  carrie 
the  prise  from  all  other,  that  have  it 
weakest,  nay  and  to  gaine  the  reputation  of  it,  besides  the 
naturall  want  I  endure  (for  truely  considering  the  necessitie 
of  it,  Plato  hath  reason  to  name  it  '  A  great  and  mighty 
'  Goddesse ').  In  my  countrie,  if  a  man  will  imply  that  one 
hath  no  sense,  he  will  say,  such  a  one  hath  no  memorie :  and 
when  I  complaine  of  mine,  they  reprove  me,  and  will  not  be- 
leeve  me,  as  if  I  accused  my  selfe  to  be  mad  and  senselesse. 
They  make  no  difference  betweene  memorie  and  wit ;  which 
is  an  empairing  of  my  market :  But  they  doe  me  wrong,  for 
contrariwise  it  is  commonly  scene  by  experience,  that  ex 
cellent  memories  do  rather  accompany  weake  judgements. 
Moreover  they  wrong  me  in  this  (who  can  do  nothing  so  well 
as  to  be  a  perfect  friend)  that  the  same  words  which  accuse 
my  infirmitie,  represent  ingratitude.  From  my  affection 
they  take  hold  of  my  memorie,  and  of  a  naturall  defect,  they 
infer  a  want  of  j  udgement  or  conscience.  Some  will  say,  he 
hath  forgotten  this  entreaty  or  request,  or  that  promise,  he 
is  not  mindfull  of  his  old  friends,  he  never  remembred  to  say, 
or  doe,  or  conceale  this  or  that,  for  my  sake.  Verily  I  may 
easily  forget,  but  to  neglect  the  charge  my  friend  hath  com 
mitted  to  my  trust,  I  never  do  it.  Let  them  beare  with  my 
infirmitie,  and  not  conclude  it  to  be  a  kind  of  malice ;  which 
is  so  contrarie  an  enemie  to  my  humor.  Yet  am  I  somewhat 
comforted.  First,  because  it  is  an  evill,  from  which  I  have 
chieflie  drawne  the  reason  to  correct  a  worse  mischiefe,  that 
would  easily  have  growen  upon  me,  that  is  to  say,  ambition ; 
which  defect  is  intolerable  in  them  that  meddle  with  worldly 
negotiations.  For  as  divers  like  examples  of  natures  pro- 
D  41 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  gresse,  say,  she  hath  happily  strengthned  other  faculties  in 
i-i-y  Hie,  according  as  it  hath  growne  weaker  and  weaker  in  me, 

and  I  should  easily  lay  downe  and  wire-draw  my  minde  and 
judgement,  upon  other  mens  traces,  without  exercising  their 
proper  forces,  if  by  the  benefit  of  memorie,  forren  inventions 
and  strange  opinions  were  present  with  me.  That  my  speech 
is  thereby  shorter :  For  the  Magazin  of  Memorie  is  perad- 
venture  more  stored  with  matter,  than  is  the  store-house  of 
Invention.  Had  it  held  out  with  me,  I  had  ere  this  wearied 
all  my  friends  with  pratling:  the  subjects  rouzing  the  meane 
facultie  I  have  to  manage  and  imploy  them,  strengthning 
and  wresting  my  discourses.  It  is  pitie ;  I  have  assayed  by 
the  trial  of  some  of  my  private  friends :  according  as  their 
memory  hath  ministred  them  a  whole  and  perfect  matter, 
who  recoile  their  narration  so  farre-backe,  and  stuff-it  with 
so  many  vaine  circumstances,  that  if  the  story  bee  good,  they 
smoother  the  goodnesse  of  it :  if  bad,  you  must  needs  either 
curse  the  good  fortune  of  their  memorie,  or  blame  the  mis 
fortune  of  their  j  udgement.  And  it  is  no  easie  matter,  being 
in  the  midst  of  the  cariere  of  a  discourse,  to  stop  cunningly, 
to  make  a  sudden  period,  and  to  cut  it  off.  And  there  is 
nothing  whereby  the  cleane  strength  of  a  horse  is  more 
knowne,  than  to  make  a  readie  and  cleane  stop.  Among  the 
skilfull  I  see  some,  that  strive,  but  cannot  stay  their  race. 
Whilest  they  labour  to  finde  the  point  to  stop  their  course, 
they  stagger  and  falter,  as  men  that  faint  through  weaknesse. 
Above  all,  old  men  are  dangerous,  who  have  onely  the 
memorie  of  things  past  left  them,  and  have  lost  the  remem 
brance  of  their  repetitions.  I  have  heard  some  very  pleasant 
reports  become  most  irkesome  and  tedious  in  the  mouth  of  a 
certaine  Lord,  forsomuch  as  all  the  by-standers  had  many 
times  beene  cloyed  with  them.  Secondly,  (as  said  an  ancient 
Writer)  that,  I  doe  not  so  much  remember  injuries  received. 
I  had  need  have  a  prompter  as  Darius  had,  who  not  to  forget 
the  wrong  he  had  received  of  the  Athenians,  whensoever  he 
sate  downe  at  his  table,  caused  a  page  to  sing  unto  him, 
'  Sir,  remember  the  Athenians,1  and  that  the  places  or  bookes 
which  I  read- over,  do  ever  smile  upon  me,  with  some  new 
noveltie.  It  is  not  without  reason,  men  say,  that  '  he  who 
'  hath  not  a  good  and  readie  memorie,  should  never  meddle 
42 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

'  with  telling  of  lies,  and  feare  to  become  a  liar.'     I  am  not  CHAPTER 
ignorant  how  the  Grammarians  make  a  difference  betweene          IX 
speaking  untrue  and  lying ;  and  say  that  to  speake  untruly,     Of  Lyers 
is  to  speake  that  which  is  false,  but  was  reputed  true ;  and 
that  the  definition  of  the  Latin  word,  mentiri,  whence  the 
French  word,  mentir,  is  derived,  which  in  English  is  to  lie, 
implieth  and  meaneth  to  goe  against  ones  conscience  :  and  by 
consequence  it  concerneth  onely  those,  who  speake  contrary 
to  that  which  they  know,  of  whom  I  speake.     Now,  these, 
either  invent,  scale,  stampe  and  all,  or  else  they  disguise  and 
change  a  true  ground.     When  they  disguise  or  change,  if 
they  be  often  put  to  the  repetition  of  one  thing,  it  is  hard 
for  them  to  keepe  still  in  one  path,  and  very  strange  if  they 
lose  not  themselves :  because  the  thing,  as  it  is,  having  first 
taken  up  her  stand  in  the  memory,  and  there  by  the  way  of 
knowledge  and  witting,  imprinted  it-selfe,  it  were  hard  it 
should  not  represent  it  selfe  to  the  imagination,  displacing 
and  supplanting  falshood,  which  therein  can  have  no  such 
footing,  or  setled  fastnesse :   and  that  the  circumstances  of 
the  first  learning,  still  diving  into  the  minde,  should  not 
cause  it  to  disperse  the  remembrance  of  all  false  or  bastardiz 
ing  parts  gotten  together.     Where  they  altogether  invent, 
forsomuch  as  there  is  no  certaine  impression,  to  front  their 
falshood,  they  seeme  to  have  so  much  the  lesser  feare  to 
mistake  or  forget  themselves,  which   also   notwithstanding 
being  an  airie  bodie,  and  without  hold-fast,  may  easily  escape 
the  memorie,  except  it  be  well  assured  :  whereof  I  have  often 
(to  my  no  small  pleasure)  scene  the  experience,  at  the  cost  of 
those,  who  professe  never  to  frame  their  speech,  but  as  best 
shall  fit  the  affaires  they  negotiate,  and  as  best  shall  please 
the  great  men  they  speake  unto.     For  the  circumstances  to 
which  they  will  subject  their  credit  and  conscience,  being 
subject  to  many  changes,  their  speech  must  likewise  diversifie 
and  change  with  them,  whence  it  followeth  that  of  one  selfe- 
same  subject  they  speak  diversly,  as  now  yellow,  now  gray, 
to  one  man  thus,  and  thus  to  another.     And  if  perad venture 
these  kind  of  men  hoard-up  their  so  contrarie  instructions, 
what  becomes  of  this  goodly  art  ?     Who  besides,  often  most 
foolishly  forget  themselves,  and  run  at  random :    For,  what 
memorie  shall  suffice  them,  to  remember  so  many  different 

43 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  formes  they  have  framed  to  one  same  subject?  I  have  in 
IX  mv  dayes  scene  divers  that  have  envied  the  reputation  of  this 
worthy  kind  of  wisedome,  who  perceive  not,  that  if  there  be 
a  reputation,  there  can  be  no  effect.  '  Verily,  lying  is  an  ill 
4  and  detestible  vice.  Nothing  makes  us  men,  and  no  other 
'  meanes  keeps  us  bound  one  to  another,  but  our  word  ;  knew 
'  we  but  the  horror  and  waight  of  it,  we  would  with  fire  and 
6  sword  pursue  and  hate  the  same,  and  more  j  ustly  than  any 
4  other  crime.'  I  see  all  men  generally  busied  (and  that  verie 
improperly)  to  punish  certaine  innocent  errours  in  children, 
which  have  neither  impression  nor  consequence,  and  chastice 
and  vex  them  for  rash  and  fond  actions.  Onely  lying,  and 
stubbornnesse  somewhat  more,  are  the  faults  whose  birth  and 
progresse  I  would  have  severely  punished  and  cut  off';  for 
they  grow  and  increase  with  them :  and  if  the  tongue  have 
once  gotten  this  ill  habit,  good  Lord  how  hard,  nay  how 
impossible  it  is  to  make  her  leave  it  ?  whereby  it  ensueth, 
that  we  see  many  very  honest  men  in  other  matters,  to  bee 
subject  and  enthralled  to  that  fault.  I  have  a  good  lad  to 
my  tailour,  whom  I  never  heard  speak  a  truth ;  no  not  when 
it  might  stand  him  in  stead  of  profit.  If  a  lie  had  no  more 
faces  but  one,  as  truth  hath,  we  should  be  in  farre  better 
termes  than  we  are :  For,  whatsoever  a  lier  should  say,  we 
would  take  it  in  a  contrarie  sense.  But  the  opposite  of  truth 
hath  many-many  shapes,  and  an  undefinite  field.  The  Pytha 
goreans  make  good  to  be  certaine  and  finite,  and  evill  to  bee 
infinite  and  uncertaine.  A  thousand  by-wayes  misse  the 
marke,  one  onely  hits  the  same.  Surely  I  can  never  assure 
my  selfe  to  come  to  a  good  end,  to  warrant  an  extreme  and 
evident  danger,  by  a  shamelesse  and  solemne  lie. 

An  ancient  Father  saith,  '  We  are  better  in  the  companie 

of  a  knowne  dogge,  than  in  a  mans  societie,  whose  speech  is 

PLIN.  Nat.       unknowne  to  us.1    Vt  extermis  alieno  non  sit  hominis  vice.    6  A 

Hist.  vn.  i.      <•  stranger  to  a  stranger  is  not  like  a  man."     And  how  much  is 

a  false  speech  lesse  sociable  than  silence  ?     King  Francis  the 

first,    vaunted   himselfe   to   have   by   this   meanes   brought 

Francis  Taverna,  Ambassador  to  Francis  Sforza,  Duke   of 

Millane,  to  a  non-plus;   a  man  very  famous  for  his  rare 

eloquence,  and  facilitie  in  speech,  who  had  beene  dispatched 

to  excuse  his  master,  toward  his  Majestic,  of  a  matter  of 

44 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

great  importance,  which  was  this.  The  King  to  keepe  ever  CHAPTER 
some  intelligence  in  Italy,  whence  he  had  lately  beene  ex-  IX 
pelled,  but  especially  in  the  Dukedome  of  Millane,  thought  Of  Lyers 
it  expedient  to  entertaine  a  Gentleman  of  his  about  the 
Duke,  in  effect  as  his  Ambassador,  but  in  apparance  as  a 
private  man ;  who  should  make  shew  to  reside  there  about 
his  particular  affaires,  forsomuch  as  the  Duke,  who  depended 
much  more  of  the  Emperour  (chiefely  then  that  he  was 
treating  a  mariage  with  his  niece,  daughter  of  the  King  of 
Denmarke,  who  is  at  this  day  Dowager  of  Loraine)  could 
not  without  great  prejudice  unto  himselfe  discover  to  have 
any  correspondencie  and  conference  with  us.  For  which 
commission  and  purpose  a  Gentleman  of  Millane,  named 
Merveille,  then  serving  the  King  in  place  of  one  of  the 
Quiers  of  his  Quierie,  was  deemed  fit.  This  man  being 
dispatched  with  secret  letters  of  credence,  and  instructions 
of  an  Ambassador,  together  with  other  letters  of  commenda 
tion  to  the  Duke  in  favour  of  his  particular  affaires,  as  a 
maske  and  pretence  of  his  proceedings,  continued  so  long 
about  the  Duke,  that  the  Emperour  began  to  have  some 
suspition  of  him ;  which  as  we  suppose  was  cause  of  what 
ensued,  which  was,  that  under  colour  of  a  murther  com 
mitted,  the  Duke  one  night  caused  the  said  Merveille  to  be 
beheaded,  having  ended  his  processe  in  two  dayes.  Master 
Francis  being  come  to  the  Court,  fraught  with  a  long 
counterfet  deduction  of  this  storie  (for  the  King  had  addressed 
himselfe  to  all  the  Princes  of  Christendome,  yea  and  to  the 
Duke  himselfe  for  j  ustice,  for  such  an  outrage  committed  upon 
his  servant)  had  one  morning  audience  in  the  Kings  councell- 
chamber :  who  for  the  foundation  of  his  cause  having  estab 
lished  and  to  that  end  projected  many  goodly  and  colour 
able  apparences  of  the  fact:  namely,  that  the  Duke  his' 
Master  had  never  taken  Merveille  for  other  than  a  private 
gentleman,  and  his  owne  subject,  and  who  was  come  thither 
about  his  private  busines,  where  he  had  never  lived  under 
other  name,  protesting  he  had  never  knowne  him  to  be  one 
of  the  Kings  houshold,  nor  never  heard  of  him,  much  lesse 
taken  him  for  his  Majesties  Agent.  But  the  King  urging 
him  with  divers  objections  and  demands,  and  charging  him 
on  every  side,  prest  him  so  farre  with  the  execution  done  by 

45 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  night,  and  as  it  were  by  stealth,  that  the  seely  man,  being 
IX          much  entangled  and  suddenly  surprised,  as  if  he  would  set 
Lyers     an  mnOcent  face  on  the  matter,  answered,  that  for  the  love 
and  respect  of  his  Majestic,  the  Duke  his  Master  would  have 
beene  very  loth  that  such  an  execution  should  have  beene 
done  by  day.     Heere  every  man  may  guesse  whether  he  were 
taken  short  or  no,  having  tripped  before  so  goodly  a  nose,  as 
was  that  of  our  King  Francis  the  first.     Pope  lulius   the 
second,  having  sent  an  Ambassador  to  the  King  of  England 
to  animate  him  against  our  foresaid  King :  the  Ambassador 
having  had  audience  touching  his  charge,  and  the  King  in 
his  answer  urging  and  insisting  upon  the  difficultie  he  found 
and  foresaw  in  levying  such  convenient  forces,  as  should  be 
required  to  withstand  so  mightie,  and  set  upon  so  puisant  a 
King,  and  alleaging  certaine  pertinent  reasons  :  The  Ambas 
sador  fondly  and  unfitly  replied,  that  himselfe  had  long  be 
fore  maturely  considered  them,  and  had  told  the  Pope  of 
them.     By  which  answer  so  farre  from  his  proposition  (which 
was  with  all  speed,  and  without  more  circumstances  to  under 
take  and  undergoe  a  dangerous  warre)  the  King  of  England 
tooke  hold  of  the  first  argument  which  in  effect  he  afterward 
found  true,  which  was,  that  the  said  Ambassador,  in  his 
owne  particular  intent,  was  more  affected  to  the  French 
side,  whereof  advertising  his  Master,  his  goods  were 
all  confiscate,  himselfe  disgraced,  and  he  very 
hardly  escaped  with  life. 

THE    TENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  readie  or  slow  speech. 

One  nefuren  a  tons  toutes  graces  donnes. 
4  All  Gods  good  graces  are  not  gone 
1  To  all,  or  of  all  any  one.' 

O  doe  we  see  that  in  the  gift  of  eloquence,  some 
have  such  a  facility  and  promptitude,  and 
that  which  we  call  utterance,  so  easie  and  at 
command,  that  at  all  assaies,  and  upon  everie 
occasion,  they  are  ready  and  provided;  and 
more  slow,  never  speake  any  thing  except  much 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

laboured  and  premeditated.     As  Ladies  and  daintie  Dames  CHAPTER 
are   taught   rules  to  take   recreations  and  bodily  exercises,          x  . 

according    to    the    advantage    of    what   they   have   fairest  °(  readie  °r 
i  T/>   T  i        •       ii      TI  i     •      ,1  slow  speech 

about  them.     If  I  were  to  give  the  like  counsel,  in  those 

two  different  advantages  of  eloquence  wherof  Preachers 
and  pleading-lawiers  of  our  age  seeme  to  make  profession ; 
the  slow  speaker  in  mine  opinion  should  be  the  better 
preacher,  and  the  other  the  better  lawier.  Forsomuch 
as  charge  of  the  first  allowes  him  as  much  leisure  as  he 
pleaseth  to  prepare  himselfe  ;  moreover  his  cariere  continueth 
still  in  one  kinde  without  interruption  :  whereas  the  Lawyers 
occasions  urging  him  still  upon  any  accident  to  be  ready  to 
enter  the  lists :  and  the  unexpected  replies  and  answers  of 
his  adverse  partie,  do  often  divert  him  from  his  purpose, 
wher  he  is  enforced  to  take  a  new  course.  Yet  is  it,  that  at 
the  last  enterview  which  was  at  Marseilles  betweene  Pope 
Clement  the  seventh,  and  Francis  the  first,  our  King,  it 
hapned  cleane  contrarie,  where  Monsieur  Poyet,  a  man  of 
chiefe  reputation,  and  all  dayes  of  his  life  brought  up  to 
plead  at  the  bar,  whose  charge  being  to  make  an  Oration 
before  the  Pope,  and  having  long  time  before  premeditated 
and  con'd  the  same  by  roat,  yea,  and  as  some  report,  brought 
it  with  him  ready  penned  from  Paris ;  the  very  same  day  it 
should  have  beene  pronounced;  the  Pope  suspecting  he 
might  haply  speake  something,  might  offend  the  other 
Princes  Ambassadors,  that  were  about  him,  sent  the  argu 
ment,  which  he  at  that  time  &  place  thought  fittest  to  be 
treated  of,  to  the  King,  but  by  fortune  cleane  contrarie  to 
that  which  Poyet,  had  so  much  studied  for :  So  that  his 
Oration  was  altogether  frustrate,  and  he  must  presently 
frame  another.  But  he  perceiving  himselfe  unable  for  it, 
the  Cardinall  Bellay  was  faine  to  supply  his  place  and  take 
that  charge  upon  him.  The  Lawyers  charge  is  much  harder 
than  the  Preachers  :  (yet  in  mine  opinion)  shall  we  find  more 
passable  Lawyers  than  commendable  Preachers,  at  least  in 
France.  It  seemeth  to  be  more  proper  to  the  mind,  to  have 
her  operation  ready  and  sudden,  and  more  incident  to  the 
judgement,  to  have  it  slow  and  considerate.  But  who 
remaineth  mute,  if  he  have  no  leisure  to  prepare  himselfe, 
and  he  likewise  to  whom  leisure  giveth  no  advantage  to  say 

47 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  better,  are  both  in  one  selfe  degree  of  strangenesse.     It  is 
x  reported  that  Severus  Cassius  spake  better  extempore,  and 

Ts  eech* witnout  premeditation.  That  he  was  more  beholding  to 
fortune,  than  to  his  diligence ;  that  to  be  interrupted  in  his 
speech  redounded  to  his  profit:  and  that  his  adversaries 
feared  to  urge  him,  lest  his  sudden  anger  should  redouble 
his  eloquence.  I  know  this  condition  of  nature  by  experience, 
which  cannot  abide  a  vehement  and  laborious  premeditation : 
except  it  hold  a  free,  a  voluntarie,  and  selfe  pleasing  course, 
it  can  never  come  to  a  good  end.  We  commonly  say  of 
some  compositions,  that  they  smell  of  the  oile,  and  of  the 
lampe,  by  reason  of  a  certaine  harshnesse,  and  rudenesse, 
which  long  plodding  labour  imprints  *in  them  that  be  much 
elaborated.  But  besides  the  care  of  well-doing,  and  the  con 
tention  of  the  minde,  overstretched  to  her  enterprise,  doth 
breake  and  impeach  the  same;  even  as  it  hapneth  unto 
water,  which  being  closely  pent  in,  through  it's  owne  violence 
and  abundance,  can  not  finde  issue  at  an  open  gullet.  In 
this  condition  of  nature,  whereof  I  now  speake,  this  also  is 
joyned  unto  it,  that  it  desireth  not  to  be  pricked  forward  by 
these  strong  passions,  as  the  anger  of  Cassius  (for  that  motion 
would  be  over-rude)  it  ought  not  to  be  violently  shaken,  but 
yeeldingly  solicited :  it  desireth  to  be  rouzed  and  prickt  for 
ward  by  strange  occasions,  both  present  and  casual  1.  If  it 
goe  all  alone,  it  doth  but  languish  and  loyter  behinde : 
agitation  is  her  life  and  grace.  I  cannot  well  containe  my 
selfe  in  mine  own  possession  and  disposition,  chance  hath 
more  interest  in  it  than  my  selfe;  occasion,  company,  yea 
the  change  of  my  voice,  drawes  more  from  my  minde  than  I 
can  finde  therein,  when  by  my  selfe  I  second  and  endevor  to 
employ  the  same.  My  words  likewise  are  better  than  my 
writings,  if  choice  may  be  had  in  so  worthlesse  things.  This 
also  hapneth  unto  me,  that  where  I  seeke  my  selfe,  I  finde  not 
my  selfe :  and  I  finde  my  selfe  more  by  chance,  than  by  the 
search  of  mine  owne  judgement.  I  shall  perhaps  have  cast 
foorth  some  suttletie  in  writing,  haply  dull  and  harsh  for 
another,  but  smooth  and  curious  for  my  selfe.  Let  us  leave 
all  these  complements  and  quaintnesse.  That  is  spoken  by 
everie  man,  according  to  his  owne  strength.  I  have  so  lost 
it,  that  I  wot  not  what  I  would  have  said,  and  strangers 
48 


Of  readie  or 
slow  speech 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

have  sometimes  found  it  before  me.     Had  I  alwayes  a  razor  CHAPTER 
about  me,  where  that  hapneth,  I  should  cleane  raze  my  selfe 
out.     Fortune  may  at    some  other  time  make  the  light 
thereof  appeare  brighter  unto  me,  than  that  of  mid 
day,  and  will  make  mee  wonder  at  mine  owne 
faltring  or  sticking  in  the  myre. 

THE    ELEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Prognostications. 

S  touching  Oracles  it  is  very  certaine,  that 
long -before  the  comming  of  our  Saviour 
Jesus  Christ,  they  had  begun  to  lose  their 
credit :  for  we  see  that  Cicero  laboureth 
to  finde  the  cause  of  their  declination  : 
and  these  be  his  words  :  Cur  isto  modo  Cic.  Divin.  ii. 
jam  oracula  Delphis  non  eduntur  non  modo 
nostra  oetate,  sed  jamdiu,  ut  nihil  possit 
esse  contemptius  f  '  Why  in  like  sort  are  not  Oracles  now 
'  uttered,  not  onely  in  our  times,  but  a  good  while  since,  so  as 
6  now  nothing  can  be  more  contemptible  ? '  But  as  for  other 
Prognostikes,  that  were  drawne  from  the  anatomic  of  beasts  in 
sacrifice,  to  which  Plato  doth  in  some  sort  ascribe  the  naturall 
constitution  of  the  internall  members  of  them,  of  the  scraping 
of  chickins,  of  the  flight  of  birds,  Aves  quasdam  rerum  ID.  Nat.  Deor. 
augurandarum  causa  natas  esse  putamus.  <  We  are  of 
4  opinion,  certain  birds  were  even  bred  to  prognosticate  some 
'  things ;  of  thunders,  of  turnings  and  backe-recourse  of  rivers.1 
Multa  cernunt  aruspices :  multa  augures  provident :  multa  ID.  Ib.  ii. 
oraculis  declarantur  :  multa  vaticinationibus  :  multa  somnijs: 
multa  portentis.  '  Soothsayers  see  much  :  bird-prophets  fore- 
'  see  as  much  :  much  is  foretold  by  Oracles  ;  much  by  pro- 
6  phecies  ;  much  by  portentuous  signes,'  and  others  upon 
which  antiquitie  grounded  most  of  their  enterprises,  as  well 
publike  as  private  :  our  religion  hath  abolished  them.  And 
albeit  there  remaine  yet  amongst  us  some  meanes  of  divina 
tion  in  the  starres,  in  spirits,  in  shapes  of  the  body,  in 
dreames,  and  elsewhere  a  notable  example  of  the  mad  and 
fond  curiositie  of  our  nature,  ammusing  it  selfe  to  preoccupate 
E  49 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  future  things,  as  if  it  had  not  enough  to  doe  to  digest  the 
XI  present. 

Of  Prognosti-  —cur  hanc  tibi  rector  Olympi  LUCAN,  ii.  4. 

Sollicitis  visum  mortalibus  addere  curam, 
Noscant  venturas  ut  dira  per  omnia  clades  ? 
Sit  subitum  quodcunque  paras ,  sit  caeca  futuri 
Mens  hominumfati,  liceat  sperare  timenti. 

Why  pleas'd  it  thee^  thou  ruler  of  the  spheares. 
To  adde  this  care  to  mortals  care-clog'd  minde, 
That  they  their  miserie  know  ere  it  appeares? 
Let  thy  drifts  sudden  come  ;  let  men  be  blinde 
T'wards  future  fate  :  oh  let  him  hope  that  feares. 

Cic.  Nat.  We  utile  quidem  est  scire  quid  juturum  sit :  Miserum  est 

enim  nihil  preficientem  angi.  c  It  is  not  so  much  as  profitable 
6  for  us,  to  know  what  is  to  come,  for  it  is  a  miserable  thing, 
4  a  man  should  fret  and  be  vexed,  and  do  no  good.1  Yet  is 
it  of  much  lesse  authoritie,  loe  here  wherefore  the  example  of 
Francis  Marquis  of  Saluzzo,  hath  seemed  remarkable  unto 
me  :  who  being  Lievtenant  General  unto  Francis  our  King, 
and  over  all  his  forces,  which  he  then  had  beyond  the  Moun- 
taines  in  Italic,  a  man  highly  favoured  in  al  our  court,  and 
otherwise  infinitly  beholding  to  the  King  for  that  very 
Marquisate,  which  his  brother  had  forfeited  :  and  having  no 
occasion  to  doe  it,  yea  and  his  minde  and  affections  contra 
dicting  the  same,  suffered  himselfe  to  be  frighted  and  deluded 
(as  it  hath  since  been  manifestly  prooved)  by  the  fond  prog 
nostications,  which  then  throughout  all  Europe  were  given 
out  to  the  advantage  of  the  Emperor  Charles  the  fift,  and  to 
our  prejudice  and  disadvantage  (but  specially  in  Italy,  where 
these  foolish  predictions  had  so  much  possessed  the  Italians, 
that  in  Rome  were  laid  great  wagers,  and  much  money  given 
out  upon  the  exchange,  that  we  should  utterly  be  overthrowne) 
that  after  he  had  much  condoled,  yea  and  complained  with 
his  secret  friends,  the  unavoidable  miseries  which  he  foresaw 
prepared  by  the  fates  against  the  Crowne  of  France,  and  the 
many  friends  he  had  there,  he  unkindly  revolted,  and  became 
a  turne-cote  on  the  Emperors  side,  to  his  intolerable  losse 
and  destruction,  notwithstanding  all  the  constellations  then 
reigning.  But  was  drawne  unto  it  as  a  man  encompassed  and 
beset  by  divers  passions  ;  for  having  both  strong  castles,  and 
all  maner  of  munition  and  strength  in  his  owne  hands,  the 
50 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

enemies  armie  under  Antonio  Leva  about  three  paces  from  CHAPTER 
him,  and  we  nothing  mistrusting  him,  it  was  in  his  power  to          XI 
do  worse  than  he  did.     For  notwithstanding  his  treason,  we  ®{ Prognosti- 
lost  neither  man  nor  towne,  except  Fossan,  which  long  after 
was  by  us  stoutly  contested  and  defended. 

Prudensfuturi  temporis  exitum  HOR.  iii.  Od. 

Caliginosa  nocte  premit  Deus,  xxix.  29. 

Ridetque,  si  mortalis  ultra 
Fas  trepidat. 

Our  wise  God  hides  in  pitch-darke  night 
Of  future  time  th'  event  decreed, 
And  laughes  at  man,  if  man  (affright) 
Feare  more  than  he  to  feare  hath  need. 

Ilk  potens  sui  41. 

Lcetusque  deget,  cui  licet  in  diem 
Dixisse,  vixi,  eras  vel  atrd 
Nube  polum  pater  occupato, 
Vel  sole  puro. 

He  of  himselfe  lives  merily, 

Who  each  day,  I  have  liv'd,  can  say, 

Tomorow  let  God  charge  the  skie 

With  darke  clouds,  or  faire  sun-shine-ray. 

Lcetus  in  prcesens  animus,  quod  ultra  est,  IB.  ii.  Od.  xvi. 

Oderit  curare,  25. 

For  present  time  a  mery  mind 
Hates  to  respect  what  is  behind. 

And  those  which  take  this  word  in  a  contrary  sense  are  in 
the  wrong.  Ista  sic  reciprocantur,  ut  et  si  divinatio  sit,  dij  Cic.  Div.  i.  p. 
sint,  et  si  dij  sint,  sit  divinatio.  6  This  consequence  is  so  recipro- 
'  call,  as  if  there  be  any  divination,  there  are  Gods  :  and  if 
'  there  be  Gods,  there  is  divination.1  Much  more  wisely 
Pacuvius. 

Nam  istis  qui  linguam  avium  intelligunt,  Ib.  f.  Pac. 

Plusque  ex  alieno  jecore  sapiunt,  quam  ex  suo, 

Magis  audiendum,  quam  auscultandum  censeo. 

Who  understand  what  language  birds  expresse, 
By  their  owne,  than  beasts-livers  knowing  lesse, 
They  may  be  heard,  not  hearkned  to,  I  guesse. 

This  so  famous  art  of  divination  of  the  Tuskanes  grew 
thus.  A  husband-man  digging  very  deepe  into  the  ground, 
with  his  plough-share,  saw  Tages,  a  demy-God  appeare  out  of 

51 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  it,  with  an  infantine  face,  yet  fraught  with  an  aged-like  wise- 
XI  dome.     All  men  ran  to  see  him,  and  both  his  words  and 

Ui  rrognosti-  knowledge  were  for  many  ages  after  remembred.  and  col- 
cations  -.  1        &     ,     •     •  •        •     1  _£.,!•  A 

lected,  containing  the  principles  and  meanes  of  this  art.  An 
of-spring  sutable  to  her  progresse.  I  would  rather  direct 
affaires  by  the  chance  of  dice,  than  by  such  frivolous  dreames. 
And  truly  in  all  common-wealths,  men  have  ever  ascribed 
much  authoritie  unto  lot.  Plato  in  the  policie  which  he 
imagineth  by  discretion,  ascribeth  the  deciding  of  many  im 
portant  effects  unto  it,  and  amongst  other  things  would  have 
marriages  betweene  the  good  to  bee  contrived  by  lot.  And 
giveth  so  large  privileges  unto  this  casuall  election,  that  he 
appoints  the  children  proceeding  from  them  to  bee  brought 
up  in  the  countrie  ;  and  those  borne  of  the  bad  to  be  banished 
and  sent  abroad.  Notwithstanding  if  any  of  those  so  exiled 
shall  by  fortune  happen,  whilest  he  is  growing,  to  show  some 
good  hope  of  him-selfe,  that  he  may  be  revoked  and  sent-for 
backe,  and  such  amongst  the  first  as  shall  in  their  youth  give 
small  hope  of  future  good  to  be  banished.  I  see  some  that 
studie,  plod,  and  glosse  their  Almanackes,  and  in  all  accidents 
alleage  their  authoritie.  A  man  were  as  good  to  say,  they 
Cic.  Div.  ii.  must  needs  speake  truth  and  lies.  Qms  est  enim  qui  totum  diem 
jaculans,  non  aliquando  conlineet  ?  '  For  who  is  he  that,  shoot- 
'  ing  all  day,  sometimes  hits  not  the  white  ? '  I  thinke  not  the 
better  of  them,  though  what  they  say  proove  sometimes  true. 
It  were  more  certaine,  if  there  were  either  a  rule  or  a  truth 
to  lie  ever.  Seeing  no  man  recordeth  their  fables,  because 
they  are  ordinarie  and  infinit ;  and  their  predictions  are  made 
to  be  of  credit,  because  they  are  rare,  incredible  and  prodigi 
ous.  So  answered  Diagoras  surnamed  the  Atheist  (being  in 
Samothrace)  to  him,  who  in  shewing  him  divers  vowes  and 
offrings  hanging  in  the  Temple,  brought  thither  by  such  as 
had  escaped  shipwracke,  said  thus  unto  him  :  c  You  that 
4  thinke  the  Gods  to  have  no  care  of  humane  things,  what 
'  say  you  by  so  many  men  saved  by  their  grace  and  helpe  ? ' 
'  Thus  is  it  done,"  answered  he  :  '  Those  which  were  drowned 
'  farre  exceeding  their  number,  are  not  here  set-forth."  Cicero 
saith,  '  That  among  all  other  Philosophers  that  have  avowed 
'  and  acknowledged  the  Gods,  onely  Xenophanes  the  Colo- 
'  phonian  hath  gone  about  to  root  out  all  maner  of  divination."1 
52 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

It  is  so  much  the  lesse  to  be  wondred  at,  if  at  any  time  we  CHAPTER 
have  scene  some  of  our  Princes  mindes  to  their  great  damage,  XI 
relie  upon  such  like  vanities.  I  would  to  God,  I  had  with  Of  Prognosti- 
mine  owne  eyes  scene  those  two  wonders,  mentioned  in  the 
booke  of  Joachin  the  Abbat  of  Calabria,  who  foretold  all  the 
Popes  that  should  ensue,  together  with  their  names  and 
shapes  :  And  that  of  Leo  the  Emperor,  who  fore-spake  all  the 
Emperors  and  Patriarkes  of  Greece.  This  have  I  scene  with 
mine  owne  eyes,  that  in  publike  confusions,  men  amazed  at 
their  owne  fortune,  give  themselves  head-long,  as  it  were  to 
all  maner  of  superstition,  to  search  in  heaven  the  causes  and 
ancient  threats  of  their  ill-lucke  ;  and  in  my  time  are  so 
strangely  successefull  therein,  as  they  have  perswaded  me,  that 
it  is  an  ammusing  of  sharpe  and  idle  wits,  that  such  as  are  in 
ured  to  this  subtletie,  by  folding  and  unfolding  them,  may  in 
all  other  writings  be  capable  to  finde  out  what  they  seeke- 
after.  But  above  all,  their  dark,  ambiguous,  fantasticall,  and 
propheticall  gibrish,  mends  the  matter  much,  to  which  their 
authors  never  give  a  plaine  sense,  that  posterity  may  apply 
what  meaning  and  construction  it  shall  please  unto  it.  The 
Dcemon  of  Socrates  was  peradventure  a  certaine  impulsion  or 
will,  which  without  the  advice  of  his  discourse  presented  it 
selfe  unto  him.  In  a  minde  so  well  purified,  and  by  con- 
tinuall  exercise  of  wisedome  and  vertue  so  wel  prepared,  as  his 
was,  it  is  likely,  his  inclinations  (though  rash  and  inconsider 
ate)  were  ever  of  great  moment,  and  worthie  to  be  followed. 
Every  man  feeleth  in  himselfe  some  image  of  such  agitations, 
of  a  prompt,  vehement,  and  casuall  opinion.  It  is  in  me  to 
give  them  some  authoritie,  that  affoord  so  little  to  our  wise- 
dome.  And  I  have  had  some,  equally  weake  in  reason,  and 
violent  in  perswasion  and  disswasion  (which  was  more 
ordinarie  to  Socrates)  by  which  I  have  so  happily  and  so 
profitably  suffered  my  selfe  to  be  transported,  as  they 
might  perhaps  be  thought  to  containe  some 
matter  of  divine  inspiration. 


53 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    TWELFTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Constancie. 


but 


HE  law  of  resolution  and  constancie  im- 
plieth  not,  we  should  not,  as  much  as 
lieth  in  our  power  shelter  our  selves  from 
the  mischiefes  and  inconveniences  that 
threaten  us,  nor  by  consequence  feare, 
they  should  surprise  us.  Contrariwise,  all 
honest  meanes  for  a  man  to  warrant  him- 
selfe  from  evils  are  not  onely  tolerable, 
commendable.  And  the  part  of  constancie  is  chiefly 


acted,  in  firmely  bearing  the  inconveniences,  against  which  no 
remedie  is  to  be  found.  So  that,  there  is  no  nimblenesse  of 
bodie,  nor  wealding  of  hand- weapons,  that  we  will  reject,  if 
it  may  in  any  sort  defend  us  from  the  blow,  meant  at  us. 
Many  most  warlike  nations  in  their  conflicts  and  fights,  used 
retreating  and  flight  as  a  principall  advantage,  and  shewed 
their  backs  to  their  enemie  much  more  dangerously  than 
their  faces.  The  Turkes  at  this  day  retaine  something  of 
that  humour.  And  Socrates  in  Plato  doth  mocke  at  Laches, 
because  he  had  denned  fortitude,  to  keepe  herselfe  steadie  in 
her  rancke  against  her  enemies ;  '  What,'  saith  hee,  '  were  it 
6  then  cowardise  to  beat  them  in  giving  them  place  ? '  And 
alleageth  Homer  against  him,  who  commendeth  in  ^Eneas 
his  skill  in  flying  and  giving  ground.  And  because  Laches 
being  better  advised,  avoweth  that  custome  to  be  amongst 
the  Scithians,  and  generally  amongst  all  horsemen,  he  al 
leageth  further  unto  him  the  example  of  the  Lacedemonian 
footmen  (a  nation  above  all  other  used  to  fight  on  foot)  who 
in  the  battell  of  Plateae,  unable  to  open  and  to  put  to  rowt 
the  Persian  Phalanx,  advised  themselves  to  scatter  and  put 
themselves  backe,  that  so  by  the  opinion  of  their  flight,  they 
might  if  they  should  pursue  them,  rush  in  upon  them,  and 
put  that  so  combined-masse  to  rout.  By  which  meanes  they 
gained  the  victorie.  Touching  the  Scithians,  it  is  reported, 
that  when  Darius  went  to  subdue  them,  he  sent  their  King 
many  reprochfull  speeches,  for  so  much  as  hee  ever  saw  him 
retire  and  give  ground  before  him,  and  to  avoid  the  maine 
54 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

battell.  To  whom  Indathirsez  (for  so  was  his  name)  answered,  CHAPTER 
that,  '  They  did  it  not  for  feare  of  him,  nor  any  other  man  ^11 
'  living,  but  that  it  was  the  fashion  of  his  nation  to  march 
4  thus :  as  having  neither  cities,  nor  houses,  nor  manured  land 
6  to  defend,  or  to  feare  their  enemies  should  reape  any  com- 
'  moditie  by  them.'  But  if  hee  had  so  great  a  desire  to  feed  on 
them,  he  might  draw  neerer  to  view  the  place  of  their  ancient 
Sepulchers,  and  there  hee  should  meet  with  whom  to  speake 
his  belly-full.  Notwithstanding  when  a  man  is  once  within 
reach  of  cannon-shot,  and  as  it  were  point-blancke  before 
them,  as  the  fortune  of  warre  doth  diverse  times  bring  men 
unto,  it  ill  beseemeth  a  resolute  minde  to  start-aside,  or  be 
daunted  at  the  threat  of  a  shot,  because  by  the  violence  and 
suddennesse  thereof  wee  deeme  it  inevitable  :  and  there  are 
some,  who  by  lifting  up  of  a  hand,  or  stooping  their  head, 
have  sometimes  given  their  fellowes  cause  of  laughter :  yet 
have  we  scene,  that  in  the  voyage,  the  Emperour  Charles  the 
fifth  made  against  us  in  Provence,  the  Marquis  of  Guasto, 
being  gone  out  to  survey  the  citie  of  Aries,  and  shewne  him- 
selfe  out  of  a  winde-mill,  under  colour  of  which  he  was  come 
somewhat  neere  the  Towne,  he  was  discovered  by  the  Lord  of 
Bonevall,  and  the  Seneshall  of  Agenois,  who  were  walking 
upon  the  Theatre  Aux  arenes  (so  called  in  French  because  it 
is  full  of  sand)  who  shewing  him  to  the  Lord  of  Villiers, 
Commissarie  of  the  Artillerie,  hee  mounted  a  culverin  so 
levell,  that  had  not  the  Marquis  perceived  the  fire,  and  so 
started  aside,  it  was  constantly  affirmed,  hee  had  beene  shot 
through  the  body.  Likewise  not  many  yeeres  before,  Lorence 
of  Medicis,  Duke  of  Vrbin,  and  father  to  the  Queene-mother 
of  France,  besieging  Mondolphe,  a  place  in  Italic,  in  the 
province  name  Yicariate,  seeing  fire  given  to  a  piece  that 
stood  upright  upon  him,  stooped  his  head,  and  well  befell 
him  that  he  plaide  the  ducke,  for  otherwise  the  bullet,  which 
went  right  over,  and  within  a  little  of  his  head,  had  doubt- 
lesse  shot  him  through  the  paunch.  But  to  say  truth,  I  will 
never  thinke  these  motions  were  made  with  discourse,  for 
what  judgement  can  you  give  of  an  aime,  either  high  or  low 
in  a  matter  so  sudden  ?  It  may  rather  be  thought  that  for 
tune  favoured  their  feare  :  and  which  an  other  time  might  as 
well  bee  a  meane  to  make  them  fall  into  the  cannons-mouth, 

55 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  as  to  avoid  the  same.     I  cannot  chuse,  if  the  cracke  of  a 

musket  doe  suddenly  streeke  mine  eares,  in  a  place  where  I 
Of  Constancie  for 


seene  happen  to  men  of  better  sort  than  my  self  'e.  Nor  doe 
the  Stoickes  meane,  that  the  Soule  of  their  wisest  man  in  any 
sort  resist  the  first  visions  and  sudden  fantasies,  that  sur 
prise  the  same  :  but  rather  consent  that,  as  it  were  unto  a 
naturall  subjection,  he  yeelds  and  shrinks  unto  the  loud 
clattering  and  roare  of  heaven,  or  of  some  violent  downefall  ; 
for  example-sake,  unto  palenesse,  and  contraction.  So  like 
wise  in  other  passions,  alwayes  provided,  his  opinion  remaines 
safe  and  whole,  and  the  situation  of  his  reason,  admit  no 
tainting  or  alteration  whatsoever  :  and  hee  no  whit  consent 
to  his  fright  and  sufferance.  Touching  the  first  part  ;  the 
same  hapneth  to  him,  that  is  not  wise,  but  farre  otherwise 
concerning  the  second.  For  the  impression  of  passions  doth 
not  remaine  superficiall  in  him  :  but  rather  penetrates  even 
into  the  secret  of  reason,  infecting  and  corrupting  the  same. 
He  judgeth  according  to  them,  and  conformeth  himselfe  to 
them.  Consider  precisely  the  state  of  the  wise  Stoicke  : 

VIRG.  ^En.  iv.  Mem  immota  manet,  lachrymce  voluuntur  inanes. 

449-  His  minde  doth  firme  remains^ 

Teares  are  distill'd  in  vaine. 

The  wise  Peripatetike  doth  not  exempt  himselfe  from  per 
turbations  of  the  mind,  but  doth  moderate  them. 


THE     THIRTEENTH     CHAPTER 

Of  Ceremonies  in  the  enterview  of  Kings 


HERE  is  no  subject  so  vaine,  that  deserveth  not 
a  place  in  this  rapsodie.  It  were  a  notable  dis- 
courtesie  unto  our  common  rules,  both  towards 
an  equall,  but  more  toward  a  great  person, 
not  to  meete  with  you  in  your  house,  if  he 
have  once  warned  you  that  he  will  come :  And  Margaret 
Queene  of  Navarre,  was  wont  to  say  to  this  purpose,  '  That 
4  it  was  a  kinde  of  incivilitie  in  a  gentleman,  to  depart 
4  from  his  house,  as  the  fashion  is,  to  meet  with  him  that 
56 


THE    FIRST   BOOKE 

'  is  comming  to  him,  how  worthy  soever  he  be :  and  that  CHAPTER 
c  it  more  agreeth  with  civilitie  and  respect,  to  stay  for  him  XIII 
6  at  home,  and  there  to  entertaine  him :  except  it  were  (  :  c.erem°- 
'  for  feare  the  stranger  should  misse  his  way :  and  that  it  enterview  of 
'  sufficeth  to  companie  and  wait  upon  him,  when  he  is  going  Kings 
'  away  againe.'  As  for  me,  I  oftentimes  forget  both  these 
vaine  offices ;  as  one  that  endevoureth  to  abolish  all  maner 
of  ceremonies  in  my  house.  Some  will  be  offended  at  it, 
what  can  I  doe  withall  ?  I  had  rather  offend  a  stranger  once, 
then  myeselfe  everie  day;  for  it  were  a  continuall  subjection. 
To  what  end  doe  men  avoid  the  servitude  of  Courts,  and 
entertaine  the  same  in  their  owne  houses  ?  Moreover  it  is  a 
common  rule  in  all  assemblies,  that  hee  who  is  the  meaner 
man,  commeth  first  to  the  place  appointed,  forsomuch  as  it 
belongs  to  the  better  man  to  be  staid-for,  and  waited  upon 
by  the  other.  Neverthelesse  we  saw  that  at  the  enterview, 
prepared  at  Merceilles  betweene  Pope  Clement  the  seventh, 
and  Francis  the  first,  King  of  France,  the  King  having 
appointed  all  necessarie  preparations,  went  him-selfe  out  of 
the  Towne,  and  gave  the  Pope  two  or  three  dayes  leasure,  to 
make  his  entrie  into  it,  and  to  refresh  himselfe,  before  he 
would  come  to  meet  him  there.  Likewise  at  the  meeting  of 
the  said  Pope  with  the  Emperour  at  Bologna,  the  Emperour 
gave  the  Pope  advantage  and  leasure  to  be  first  there,  and 
afterward  came  himselfe.  It  is  (say  they)  an  ordinarie  cere- 
monie  at  enterparlies  betweene  such  Princes,  that  the  better 
man  should  ever  come  first  to  the  place  appointed;  yea 
before  him  in  whose  countrey  the  assembly  is  :  and  they  take 
it  in  this  sence,  that  it  is,  because  this  complement  should 
testifie,  he  is  the  better  man,  whom  the  meaner  goeth  to 
seeke,  and  that  hee  sueth  unto  him.  Not  onely  each  coun 
trey,  but  every  Citie,  yea  and  every  vocation  hath  his  owne 
particular  decorum.  I  have  very  carefully  beene  brought  up 
in  mine  infancie,  and  have  lived  in  verie  good  company,  be 
cause  I  would  not  bee  ignorant  of  the  good  maners  of  our 
countrey  of  France,  and  I  am  perswaded  I  might  keepe  a 
schoole  of  them.  I  love  to  follow  them,  but  not  so  cowardly, 
as  my  life  remaine  thereby  in  subjection.  They  have  some 
painfull  formes  in  them,  which  if  a  man  forget  by  discretion, 
and  not  by  errour,  hee  shall  nowhit  bee  disgraced.  I  have 
F  57 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  often  seene  men  proove  unmanerly  by  too  much  maners,  and 
XIII        importunate  by  over-much  curtesie.     The  knowledge  of  enter- 
O.f   Ceremo-  ^amment  is  otherwise  a  profitable  knowledge.  It  is,  as  grace  and 
enterview  of  heautie  are>  the  reconciler  of  the  first  accoastings  of  society  and 
Kings  familiarity :  and  by  consequence,  it  openeth  the  entrance 

to  instruct  us  by  the  example  of  others,  and  to  exploit 
and  produce  our  example,  if  it  have  any  instruct 
ing  or  communicable  thing  in  it. 

THE    FOURTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Men  are  punished  by  too-much  opiniating  them 
selves  in  a  place  without  reason 

ALOUR  hath  his  limits,  as  other  vertues 
have :    which  if  a  man  out-go,  hee  shall 
find  himselfe  in  the  traine  of  vice :  in  such 
sort,  that  unlesse  a  man  know  their  right 
bounds,  which  in  truth  are  not  on  a  sud 
den,  easily  hit  upon,  he  may  fall  into  rash- 
nesse,   obstinacie,    and    folly.      For    this 
consideration  grew  the  custome  wee  hold 
in  warres,  to  punish,  and  that  with  death,  those  who  wilfully 
opiniate  themselves  to  defend  a  place,  which  by  the  rules  of 
warre,  cannot  be  kept.     Otherwise  upon  hope  of  impunitie, 
there  should  bee  no  cottage,  that  might  not  entertaine  an 
Armie.     The  Lord  Constable  Momorancie  at  the  siege  of 
Pa  via,  having  beene  appointed  to  passe  over  the  river  Tesine, 
and  to  quarter  himselfe  in  the  suburbs  of  Saint  Antonie, 
being  impeached  by  a  tower,  that  stood  at  the  end  of  the 
bridge,  and  which  obstinately  would  needs  hold  out,  yea  and 
to  be  battered,  caused  all  those  that  were  with-in  it,  to  be 
hanged.     The  same  man  afterward,  accompanying  my  Lord 
the  Dolphin  of  France  in  his  journey  beyond  the  Alpes,  hav 
ing  by  force  taken  the  Castle  of  Villane,  and  all  those  that 
were  within  the  same,  having  by  the  furie  of  the  Souldiers 
bin  put  to  the  sword,  except  the  Captaine,  and  his  Ancient, 
for  the  same  reason,  caused  them  both  to  be  hanged  and 
strangled:    As   did   also,   Captaine  Martin   du  Bellay,  the 
Governour  of  Turin,  in  the  same  countrey,  the  Captaine  of 
58 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Saint  Bony :  all  the  rest  of  his  men  having  beene  massacred 
at  the  taking  of  the  place.  But  for  somuch  as  the  judge 
ment  of  the  strength  or  weakenesse  of  the  place,  is  taken  by 
the  estimate  and  counterpoise  of  the  forces  that  assaile  it 
(for  som  man  might  justly  opinionate  himselfe  against  two 
culverins,  that  wold  play  the  mad-man  to  expect  thirtie 
cannons)  where  also  the  greatnesse  of  the  Prince  conquering 
must  be  considered,  his  reputation,  and  the  respect  that  is 
due  unto  him :  there  is  danger  a  man  should  somewhat  bend 
the  bal lance  on  that  side.  By  which  termes  it  hapneth,  that 
some  have  so  great  an  opinion  of  themselves,  and  their 
meanes,  and  deeming  it  unreasonable,  any  thing  should  be 
worthie  to  make  head  against  them,  that  so  long  as  their 
fortune  continueth,  they  overpasse  what  hill  or  difficultie 
soever  they  finde  to  withstand  or  resist  them  :  As  is  scene  by 
the  formes  of  sommonings  and  challenges,  that  the  Princes  of 
the  East,  and  their  successors  yet  remaining  have  in  use,  so 
fierce,  so  haughtie,  and  so  full  of  a  barbarous  kinde  of  com- 
mandement.  And  in  those  places  where  the  Portugales 
abated  the  pride  of  the  Indians,  they  found  some  states  ob 
serving  this  universall  and  inviolable  law,  that  what  enemie 
soever  he  be,  that  is  overcome  by  the  King  in  person,  or  by  his 
Lieutenant,  is  exempted  from  all  composition  of  ransome  or 
mercie.  So  above  all,  a  man  who  is  able  should  take 
heed,  lest  he  fall  into  the  hands  of  an  enemie- 
judge,  that  is  victorious  and  armed. 

THE    FIFTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  punishment  of  cowardise 

HAVE  heretofore  heard  a  Prince,  who  was 
a  very  great  Captaine,  hold  opinion,  that 
a  souldier  might  not  for  cowardise  of  heart 
be  condemned  to  death :  who  sitting  at 
his  table  heard  report  of  the  Lord  of 
Vervins  sentence,  who  for  yeelding  up  of 
Bollein,  was  doomed  to  lose  his  head. 
Verily  there  is  reason  a  man  should  make 
a  difference  between  faults  proceeding  from  our  weaknesse, 

59 


CHAPTER 
XIV 

Men  are  pun 
ished  by  too 
much  opiniat- 
ingthemselves 
in  a  place  with 
out  reason 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  those  that  grow  from  our  malice.     For  in  the  latter  we 

XV          are  directly  bandied  against  the  rules  of  reason,  which  nature 

Of  the  punish-  j^^  miprmted  in  us  ;  and  in  the  former  it  seemeth,  we  may 

ment  or  cow-       ,,  , ,     r  ,    ,  -,1.1    \  £i_        • 

ardise        ca^  ™ie  same  nature,  as  a  warrant,  because  it  hath  left  us  in 

such  imperfection  and  defect.  So  as  divers  nations  have 
judged,  that  no  man  should  blame  us  for  any  thing  we  doe 
against  our  conscience.  And  the  opinion  of  those  which 
condemne  heretikes  and  miscreants  unto  capitall  punish 
ments,  is  partly  grounded  upon  this  rule :  and  the  same 
which  establisheth,  that  a  Judge  or  an  advocate  may  not 
bee  called  to  account  for  any  man  committed  in  their  charge 
through  oversight  or  ignorance.  But  touching  cowardise,  it 
is  certain,  the  common  fashion  is,  to  punish  the  same  with 
ignominie  and  shame.  And  some  hold  that  this  rule  was 
first  put  in  practice  by  the  Law-giver  Charondas,  and  that 
before  him  the  lawes  of  Greece  were  wont  to  punish  those 
with  death,  who  for  feare  did  run  away  from  a  Battell :  where 
hee  onely  ordained,  that  for  three  dayes  together,  clad  in 
womens  attire,  they  should  be  made  to  sit  in  the  market 
place  :  hoping  yet  to  have  some  service  at  their  hands,  and 
by  meanes  of  this  reproch,  they  might  recover  their  courage 
againe.  Suffundere  mails  hominis  sanguinem  qudm  effundere : 
6  Rather  move  a  mans  bloud  to  blush  in  his  face,  than  remove 
'  it  by  bleeding  from  his  body.' 

It  appeareth  also  that  the  Roman  lawes  did  in  former 
times  punish  such  as  had  run  away,  by  death.  For  Am- 
mianus  Marcellinus  reporteth,  that  Julian  the  Emperor 
condemned  ten  of  his  Souldiers,  who  in  a  charge  against  the 
Parthians,  had  but  turned  their  backs  from  it ;  first  to  be 
degraded,  and  then  to  suffer  death,  as  he  saith,  according  to 
the  ancient  lawes,  who  neverthelesse,  condemneth  others  for 
a  like  fault,  under  the  ensigne  of  bag  and  baggage,  to  be 
kept  amongst  the  common  prisoners.  The  sharp  punishment 
of  the  Romans  against  those  Souldiers  that  escaped  from 
Cannae :  and  in  the  same  warre  against  those  that  accom 
panied  Cn.  Fulvius  in  his  defeat,  reached  not  unto  death,  yet 
may  a  man  feare,  such  open  shame  may  make  them  despaire, 
and  not  only  prove  faint  and  cold  friends,  but  cruell  and 
sharpe  enemies.  In  the  time  of  our  forefathers,  the  Lord  of 
Franget,  Whilom  Lievtenant  of  the  Marshall  of  Chastillions 

60 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

company,  having  by  the  Marshall  of  Chabanes  beene  placed  CHAPTER 
Governor  of  Fontarabie,  in  stead  of  the  Earle  of  Lude,  and          xv 
having  yeelded  the  same  unto  the  Spaniards,  was  condemned  Of  thepumsh- 
ii          i    i      j?     n   XT  i  •!•.!_•  i  IT-        IP     i     ,    ment  or  cow- 

to  be  degraded  of  all  Nobilitie,  and  not  onely  himselfe,  but        ardise 

all  his  succeeding  posteritie  declared  villains  and  clownes, 
taxable  and  incapable  to  beare  armes ;  which  severe  sentence 
was  put  in  execution  at  Lyons.     The  like  punishment  did 
afterward  all  the  Gentlemen  suffer,  that  were  within  Guise, 
when  the  Earle  of  Nansaw  entred  the  towne :  and  others 
since.     Neverthelesse  if  there  were  so  grosse  an  ignorance, 
and  so  apparant  cowardize,  as  that  it  should  exceed  all 
ordinary,  it  were  reason  it  should  be  taken  for  a  suffi 
cient  proofe  of  inexcusable  treacherie,  and  kna- 
verie,  and  for  such  to  be  punished. 


THE    SIXTEENTH    CHAPTER 

A  tricke  of  certaine  Ambassadors. 


N  all  my  travels  I  did  ever  observe  this 
custome,  that  is,  alwaies  to  learne  some 
thing  by  the  communication  of  others 
(which  is  one  of  the  best  schooles  that 
may  be)  to  reduce  those  I  confer  withall, 
to  speake  of  that  wherein  they  are  most 
conversant  and  skilfull. 


Basti  al  nochiero  ragionar  de'  venti,  Idem  PROPERT. 

Albifolco  de  tori,  e  le  sue  piaghe  "•  -^  *•  43- 

Conti  it  guerrier,  conti  il  pastor  gl'  armenti. 

Sailers  of  windes  plow-men  of  beasts  take  keepe, 
Let    Souldiers    count    their  wounds,   shepherds    their 
sheepe. 

For  commonly  we  see  the  contrary,  that  many  chuse  rather 
to  discourse  of  any  other  trade  than  their  owne ;  supposing 
it  to  be  so  much  new  reputation  gotten :  witnes  the  quip 
Archidamus  gave  Periander,  saying  that  he  fosooke  the 
credit  of  a  good  Physitian,  to  become  a  paltry  Poet.  Note 
but  how  Caesar  displaieth  his  invention  at  large,  when  he 
would  have  us  conceive  his  inventions  how  to  build  bridges, 

61 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  devices,  how  to  frame  other  war-like  engins;  and  in 
XVI  respect  of  that  how  close  and  succinct  he  writes,  when  he 
sPea^etn  °^  tne  °ffices  belonging  to  his  profession,  of  his 
"  valour,  and  of  the  conduct  of  his  war-fare.  His  exploits 
prove  him  a  most  excellent  Captaine,  but  he  would  be  known 
for  a  skilfull  Ingenier,  a  quality  somewhat  strange  in  him. 
Dionysius  the  elder  was  a  very  great  chieftaine  and  Leader 
in  warre,  as  a  thing  best  fitting  his  fortune :  but  he  greatly 
laboured  by  meanes  of  Poetry,  to  assume  high  commendation 
unto  himselfe,  howbeit  he  had  but  little  skill  in  it.  A 
certaine  Lawier  was  not  long  since  brought  to  see  a  study, 
stored  with  all  manner  of  bookes,  both  of  his  owne,  and  of 
all  other  faculties,  wherein  he  found  no  occasion  to  enter- 
taine  himselfe  withall,  but  like  a  fond  cunning  clarke 
earnestly  busied  himselfe  to  glosse  and  censure  a  fence  or 
barricade,  placed  over  the  screw  of  the  study,  which  a 
hundred  Captaines  and  Souldiers  see  everie  day,  without 
observing  or  taking  offence  at  them. 

HOR.  i.  Epist.  Optat  ephippia  bos  piger,  optat  arare  caballus. 

xiv-  43-  The  Oxe  would  trappings  weare, 

The  Horse,  ploughs-yoake  would  beare. 

By  this  course  you  never  come  to  perfection,  or  bring  any 
thing  to  good  passe.  Thus  must  a  man  endeavour  to  induce 
the  Architect,  the  Painter,  the  Shoomaker  to  speake  of  their 
owne  trade,  and  so  of  the  rest,  every  man  in  his  vocation. 
And  to  this  purpose  am  I  wont,  in  reading  of  histories 
(which  is  the  subject  of  most  men)  to  consider  who  are  the 
writers  :  If  they  be  such  as  professe  nothing  but  bare  learn 
ing,  the  chiefe  thing  I  learne  in  them,  is  their  style  and 
language :  if  Physitians,  I  beleeve  them  in  whatsoever  they 
shall  report  concerning  the  temperatenesse  of  the  aire,  the 
health  and  complexion  of  Princes,  or  of  hurts  and  infirmi 
ties  :  If  Lawiers,  we  should  observe  the  controversies  of 
rights,  titles,  and  pretenses  of  lawes  and  customes,  the 
establishments  of  policies,  and  such  like  things :  If  Divines, 
we  may  note  the  affaires  of  the  Church,  the  Ecclesiasticall 
censures,  dispensations,  cases  of  conscience,  and  marriages : 
If  Courtiers,  manners,  complements,  ceremonies,  and  enter 
tainments  :  If  Warriors,  what  belongs  unto  their  charge,  but 

62 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

chiefly  the  managing  and  conduct  of  the  atchievements  or  CHAPTER 
exploits  wherein  they  have  been  themselves  in  person:    If         XVI 
Ambassadors,  the  negotiations,  intelligences,  practices,  poli-  A  tncke   of 
cies,  and  manner  how  to  direct,  complot,  and  conduct  them,  ' 

And  therefore  what  in  another  Writer  I  should  peradventure 
have  cursorie  passed  over,  I  have  with  some  advisednesse 
considered  and  marked  the  same  in  the  historic  of  the  Lord 
of  Langey,  a  man  most  expert  and  intelligent  in  such 
matters :  which  is,  that  after  he  had  exactly  set  downe  and 
declared  those  glorious,  and  farre-fetcht  remonstrances  of 
the  Emperor  Charles  the  fifth  made  in  the  consistorie  of 
Rome,  in  the  presence  of  the  Bishop  of  Mascon,  and  the 
Lord  of  Velly,  our  Ambassadors;  wherein  he  entermixed 
many  bitter  and  outrageous  words  against  us ;  and  amongst 
others,  that  if  his  Captaines  and  Souldiers  were  not  of  much 
more  faithfulnesse  and  sufficiencie  in  the  art  of  warre  than 
our  Kings,  he  would  forthwith  tie  a  rope  about  his  necke, 
and  goe  aske  him  mercy :  whereof  he  seemed  to  beleeve  some 
thing:  for  afterward  whilest  he  lived,  he  chanced  twice  or 
thrice  to  utter  the  verie  same  words.  Moreover,  that  he  had 
challenged  the  King  to  fight  with  him,  man  to  man  in  his 
shirt,  with  Rapier  and  Dagger  in  a  boat.  The  said  Lord  of 
Langey,  following  his  storie,  addeth  that  the  said  Ambas 
sadors  making  a  dispatch  of  what  had  passed  unto  the  king, 
dissembled  the  chiefest  part  unto  him,  yea  and  concealed  the 
two  precedent  articles  from  him.  Now  me  thought  it  very 
strange,  that  it  should  lie  in  the  power  of  an  Ambassador  to 
dispence  with  any  point,  concerning  the  advertizements  he 
should  give  unto  his  Master,  namely  of  such  consequence, 
comming  from  such  a  person,  and  spoken  in  so  great  an 
assembly,  whereas  me  seemed  it  should  have  beene  the  office 
of  a  trustie  servant,  truly  and  exactly  to  set  downe  things  as 
they  were,  and  in  what  manner  they  had  succeeded :  to  the 
end  the  libertie  of  disposing,  judging  and  chusing,  might 
wholly  lie  in  the  master.  For  to  alter  and  conceale  the 
truth  from  him,  for  feare  he  should  conster  and  take  it  other 
wise  than  he  ought,  and  lest  that  might  provoke  him  to 
some  bad  resolution ;  and  in  the  meanewhile  to  suffer  him 
to  be  ignorant  of  his  owne  affaires,  mee  thought  should 
rather  have  appertained  to  him  that  giveth  the  law,  than  to 

63 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  him  that  receiveth  the  same ;  to  the  Master  or  over-seer  of 
XVI         the  schoole,  and  not  to  him  who  should  thinke  himselfe  in- 

A  tricke  of  ferjor  as  well  in  authority,  as  in  wisdome  and  good  counsell. 
certameAm-  TT  ..  T          i  i  i      i    •  i    i  i  •         • 

bassadors      Howsoever  it  were,  I  would  be  loth  be  so  used  in  mine  owne 

small  and  particular  businesse,  we  doe  so  willingly  upon 
every  slight  occasion  and  pretence  neglect  and  forgoe  com- 
mandement,  and  are  so  farre  from  obeying,  that  we  rather 
usurp  a  kinde  of  masterie,  and  free  power :  every  man  doth 
so  naturally  aspire  unto  liberty  and  authoritie,  that  no  profit 
ought  to  be  so  deare  unto  a  superiour,  proceeding  from  those 
that  serve  him  as  their  simple  and  naturall  obedience. 
Whosoever  obeyeth  by  discretion,  and  not  by  subjection, 
corrupteth  and  abuseth  the  office  of  commanding.  And 
P.  Crassus  he  whom  the  Romans  deemed  five  times  happy, 
when  he  was  Consull  in  Asia,  having  sent  a  Graecian  Inginer, 
to  bring  the  greatest  of  two  ship-masts  before  him,  which  he 
had  seene  in  Athens,  therewith  to  frame  an  engine  of 
batterie :  This  man  under  colour  of  his  skill,  presumed  to 
doe  otherwise  than  he  was  bidden,  and  brought  the  lesser  of 
the  two  masts  which  according  to  his  arts  reason  hee  deemed 
the  fittest.  Crassus  having  patiently  heard  his  reasons  and 
allegations,  caused  him  to  be  well  whipped ;  preferring  the 
interest  of  true  discipline,  before  that  of  the  worke.  On  the 
other  side  a  man  might  also  consider,  that  this  so  strict 
obedience  belongs  but  to  precise  and  prefixed  commande- 
ments.  Ambassadors  have  a  more  scopefull  and  free  charge, 
which  in  many  points  dependeth  chiefly  of  their  disposition. 
They  doe  not  meerely  execute,  but  frame  and  direct  by  their 
owne  advice  and  counsell,  the  will  of  their  Master.  I  have 
in  my  dayes  seene  some  persons  of  commandement,  checked 
and  found  fault  withall,  because  they  had  rather  obeyed  the 
literall  sense,  and  bare  words  of  the  Kings  letters,  than  the 
occasions  of  the  affaires  they  had  in  hand.  Men  of  under 
standing  and  experience  doe  yet  at  this  day  condemne  the 
custome  of  the  Kings  of  Persia,  which  was  to  mince  the  in 
structions  given  to  their  Agents,  and  Lievtenants  so  small, 
that  in  the  least  accident  they  might  have  recourse  to  their 
directions  and  ordinances  :  This  delay,  in  so  farre  reaching  a 
scope  of  domination,  having  often  brought  great  prejudice, 
and  notable  dammage  unto  their  affaires.  And  Crassus 
64 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

writing  unto  a  man  of  that  profession,  and  advertizing  him  CHAPTER 
of  the  use  whereto  he  purposed  the  foresaid  mast ;  seemeth  XVI 

he  not  to  enter  into  conference  with  him  concerning 
his  determination,  and  wish  him  to  interpose 
his  censure  or  advice  of  it. 


THE    SEVENTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  feare. 

Obstupui,  steteruntque  comes,  et  wxfaudbus  hcesit. 

I  stood  agast,  my  haire  on  end, 

My  jaw-tide  tongue  no  speech  would  lend. 


VIRG.  ALn.  ii. 
774- 


AM  no  good  Naturalist  (as  they  say)  and  I 
know  not  well  by  what  springs  feare  doth 
worke  in  us :  but  well  I  wot  it  is  a  strange 
passion:  and  as  Physitians  say,  there  is 
none  doth  sooner  transport  our  judge 
ment  out  of  his  due  seat.  Verily  I  have 
scene  divers  become  mad  and  senselesse 
for  feare :  yea  and  in  him,  who  is  most 
settled  and  best  resolved,  it  is  certaine  that  whilest  his  fit 
continueth,  it  begetteth  many  strange  dazelings,  and  terrible 
amazements  in  him.  I  omit  to  speake  of  the  vulgar  sort,  to 
whom  it  sometimes  representeth  strange  apparitions,  as  their 
fathers  and  grandfathers  ghosts,  risen  out  of  their  graves, 
and  in  their  winding  sheets :  and  to  others  it  somtimes 
sheweth  Larves,  Hobgoblins,  Robbin-good-fellowes,  and  such 
other  Bug-beares  and  Chimeraes.  But  even  amongst  Souldiers, 
with  whom  it  ought  to  have  no  credit  at  all,  how  often  hath 
she  changed  a  flocke  of  sheep  into  a  troupe  of  armed  men  ? 
Bushes  and  shrubs  into  men-at-armes  and  Lanciers?  our 
friends  into  our  enemies?  and  a  red  crosse  into  a  white? 
At  what  time  the  Duke  of  Bourbon  tooke  Rome,  an 
Ancient  that  kept  sentinell,  in  the  borough  Saint  Peter,  was 
at  the  first  alarum  surprised  with  such  terror,  that  with  his 
colours  in  his  hand,  he  suddenly  threw  himselfe  thorow  the 
hole  of  a  breach  out  of  the  Citie,  and  fell  just  in  the  midst 
of  his  enemies,  supposing  the  way  to  goe  straight  in  the 
G  65 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  heart  of  the  Citie :  but  in  the  end  he  no  sooner  perceived  the 
XVII  Duke  of  Burbons  troupes,  advancing  to  withstand  him, 
Of  feare  imagining  it  to  bee  some  sallie  the  Citizens  made  that  way, 
hee  better  bethinking  himselfe,  turned  head,  and  the  very 
same  way,  he  came  out,  he  went  into  the  towne  againe,  which 
was  more  than  three  hundred  paces  distance  towards  the 
fields.  The  like  happened,  but  not  so  succesfully  unto 
Captaine  lulius  his  ensigne-bearer  at  what  time  Saint  Paul 
was  taken  from  us  by  the  Earle  of  Bures,  and  the  Lord  of 
Reu,  who  was  so  frighted  with  feare,  that  going  about  to 
cast  himselfe  over  the  towne  wals,  with  his  Ancient  in  his 
hand,  or  to  creepe  thorow  a  spike-hole,  he  was  cut  in  peeces 
by  the  assailants.  At  which  siege  likewise,  that  horror  and 
feare  is  very  memorable,  which  so  did  choake,  seize  upon, 
and  freeze  the  heart  of  a  gentleman,  that  having  received  no 
hurt  at  all,  he  fell  downe  starke  dead  upon  the  ground  before 
the  breach.  The  like  passion  rage  doth  sometimes  possesse 
a  whole  multitude.  In  one  of  the  encounters  that  Germani- 
cus  had  with  the  Germanes,  two  mightie  troupes  were  at  one 
instant  so  frighted  with  feare,  that  both  betooke  themselves 
to  their  heeles,  and  ran  away  two  contrary  wayes,  the  one 
right  to  that  place  whence  the  other  fled.  It  sometimes 
addeth  wings  unto  our  heeles,  as  unto  the  first  named,  and 
other  times  it  takes  the  use  of  feet  from  us  :  as  we  may  reade 
of  Theophilus  the  Emperor,  who  in  a  battell  hee  lost  against 
the  Agarens,  was  so  amazed  and  astonied,  that  he  could  not 
resolve  to  scape  away  by  flight :  adeb  pavor  etiam  auxilia 
formidat :  'Feare  is  so  afraid  even  of  that  should  help."* 
Untill  such  time  as  Manuel,  one  of  the  chiefe  leaders  in  his 
armie,  having  rouzed  and  shaken  him,  as  it  were  out  of  a 
dead  sleepe,  said  unto  him,  '  Sir,  if  you  will  not  presently 
'  follow  me,  I  will  surely  kill  you,  for  better  were  it  you 
'  should  lose  your  life,  than  being  taken  prisoner,  lose  your 
4  Empire  and  all."  Then  doth  she  shew  the  utmost  of  her 
power,  when  for  her  owne  service,  she  casts  us  off  unto 
valour,  which  it  hath  exacted  from  our  duty  and  honor.  In 
the  first  set  battell,  the  Romans  lost  against  Hanibal,  under 
the  Consul  Sempronius,  a  troupe  of  wel-nigh  ten  thousand 
footmen,  was  so  surprised  with  feare,  that  seeing  no  other 
way  to  take,  nor  by  what  other  course  to  give  their  basenes 
66 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

free  passage,  they  headlong  bent  their  flight   toward   the  CHAPTER 

thickest  and  strongest  squadron  of  their  enemies,  which  with 

such  furie  it  rowted  and  brake  through,  as  it  disranked,  and 

slew  a  great  number  of  the  Carthaginians:    purchasing  a 

reproachfull  and  disgracefull  flight,  at  the  same  rate  it  might 

have  gained  a  most  glorious  victorie.     It  is  feare  I  stand 

most  in  feare  of.     For,  in  sharpnesse  it  surmounteth  all  other 

accidents.     What  affection  can  be  more  violent   and  just 

than  that  of  Pompeyes  friends,  who  in  his  owne  ship  were 

spectators  of  that  horrible  massacre  ?  yet  is  it,  that  the  feare 

of  the  ^Egyptian  sailes,  which  began  to  approach  them,  did 

in  such  sort  daunt  and  skare  them,  that  some  have  noted, 

they  only  busied  themselves  to  hasten  the  marriners,  to  make 

what  speed  they  could,  and  by  maine  strength  of  oares  to 

save  themselves,  untill  such  time,  as  being  arrived  at  Tyre, 

and  that  they  were  free  from  feare,  they  had  leasure  to 

bethinke  themselves  of  their  late  losse,  and  give  their  plaints 

and  teares  free  passage,  which  this  other  stronger  passion 

had  suspended  and  hindred. 

Turn  pavor  sapientiam  omnem  mihi  ex  animo  expectorat.      Cic.  Tusc. 
Feare  then  unbreasts  all  wit,  @u'  iv>  8»  ex 

That  in  my  minde  did  sit.  ^im  \..De 

J  Orat.  in. 

Those  who  in  any  skirmish  or  sudden  bickering  of  warre 
have  been  throughly  skared,  sore-hurt,  wounded,  and  gored 
as  they  be,  are  many  times  the  next  day  after,  brought  to 
charge  againe.  But  such  as  have  conceived  a  true  feare  of 
their  enemies,  it  is  hard  for  you  to  make  them  looke  them  in 
the  face  againe.  Such  as  are  in  continuall  feare  to  lose  their 
goods,  to  be  banished,  or  to  be  subdued,  live  in  uncessant 
agonie  and  languor ;  and  thereby  often  lose  both  their 
drinking,  their  eating,  and  their  rest.  Whereas  the  poore, 
the  banished,  and  seely  servants,  live  often  as  carelesly  and 
as  pleasantly  as  the  other.  And  so  many  men,  who  by  the 
impatience  and  urging  of  feare,  have  hanged,  drowned,  and 
headlong  tumbled  downe  from  some  rocke,  have  plainly 
taught  us,  that  feare  is  more  importunate  and  intolerable 
than  death.  The  Graecians  acknowledge  another  kinde  of 
it,  which  is  beyond  the  error  of  our  discourse :  proceeding, 
as  they  say,  without  any  apparent  cause,  and  from  an 

67 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  heavenly  impulsion.     Whole  Nations  and  Armies  are  often 

XVII        scene  surprised  with  it.     Such  was  that,  which  brought  so 

Of  feare      WOnderfull  a   desolation   to    Carthage,  where   nothing   was 

heard  but  lamentable  out-cries,  and  frightfull  exclamations  : 

the  inhabitants  were  scene  desperately  to  runne  out  of  their 

houses,  as  to  a  sudden  alarum,  and  furiously  to  charge,  hurt, 

and  enter-kill  one  another,  as  if  they  had  beene  enemies  come 

to  usurpe  and  possesse  their  Citie.     All  things  were  there 

in  a  disordered  confusion,  and  in  a  confused  furie,  untill 
ERAS.  Chil.  ii.         such   time   as   by   praiers   and   sacrifices   they   had 

cent  x.  ad.  19;  appeased  the  wrath  of  their  Gods.     They  call 

Chil.  in.  cent.  rr  .  J 

vii.  ad.  3.  it  to  this  day,  the  Panike  terror. 


THE    EIGHTEENTH    CHAPTER 

That  we  should  not  judge  of  our  happi- 
nesse,  untill  after  our  death 

OVID.  Met.  — scilicet  ultima  semper 

iii.  ^^  Expectanda  dies  homini  est,  dicique  beatus 

Ante  obitum  nemo,  supremaque  funera  debet. 

We  must  expect  of  man  the  latest  day, 
Nor  ere  he  die,  he  Js  happie,  can  we  say. 

HE  very  children  are  acquainted  with  the 
storie   of  Croesus  to   this   purpose:    who 
being  taken  by  Cyrus,  and  by  him  con 
demned   to   die,   upon   the   point  of  his 
execution,  cried  out  aloud :    '  Oh  Solon, 
4  Solon !  "*  which  words  of  his,  being  re 
ported  to  Cyrus,  who  inquiring  what  he 
meant  by  them,  told  him,  hee  now  at  his 
owne  cost  verified  the  advertisement  Solon  had  before  times 
given  him :    which  was,  '  that  no  man,  what  cheerefull  and 
'  blandishing  countenance  soever  fortune  shewed  them,  may 
'  rightly  deeme  himselfe  happie,  till  such  time  as  he  have 
c  passed  the  last  day  of  his  life,  by  reason  of  the  uncertaintie 
'  and  vicissitude  of  humane  things,  which  by  a  very  light 
'  motive,  and  slight  occasion,  are  often  changed  from  one  to 
'  another  cleane  contrary  state  and  degree.1     And  therefore 
68 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

Agesilaus  answered  one  that  counted  the  King  of  Persia  CHAPTER 
happy,  because  being  very  young,  he  had  gotten  the  garland      T?VI11 
of  so  mightie  and  great  a  dominion :  yea  but  said  he,  Priam    gjj^dnot 
at  the  same  age  was  not  unhappy.     Of  the  Kings  of  Mace-  judge  of  our 
don,  that  succeeded  Alexander  the  great,  some  were  after-    happinesse, 
ward  scene  to  become  Joyners  and  Scriveners  at  Rome :  and    untill  after 
of  Tyrants  of  Sicilie,  Schoolemasters  at  Corinth :    One  that     our  death 
had  conquered  halfe  the  world,  and  been  Emperour  over  so 
many  Armies,  became  an  humble,  and  miserable  suter  to  the 
raskally  officers  of  a  king  of  Mgypt :  At  so  high  a  rate  did 
that  great  Pompey  purchase  the  irkesome  prolonging  of  his 
life  but  for  five  or  six  moneths.     And  in  our  fathers  daies, 
Lodowicke  Sforze,  tenth  Duke  of  Millane,  under  whom  the 
state  of  Italic  had  so  long  beene  turmoiled  and  shaken,  was 
scene  to  die  a  wretched  prisoner  at  Loches  in  France,  but  not 
till  he  had  lived  and  lingered  ten  yeares  in  thraldome,  which 
was  the  worst  of  his  bargaine.     The  fairest  Queene,  wife  to 
the  greatest  King  of  Christendome,  was  she  not  lately  scene 
to  die  by  the  hands  of  an  executioner  ?     Oh  unworthie  and 
barbarous  crueltie !     And  a  thousand  such  examples.     For, 
it  seemeth  that  as  the  sea-billowes  and  surging  waves,  rage 
and  storme  against  the  surly  pride  and  stubborne  height  of 
our  buildings ;  So  are  there  above,  certaine  spirits  that  envie 
the  rising  prosperities  and  greatnesse  heere  below. 

Vsque  adeb  res  humanas  res  abdita  qucedam  Luc  RET.  v. 

Obterit,  et  pulchros  fasces  savdsque  secures  1243. 

Proculcare,  ac  ludibrio  sibi  habere  videtur. 

A  hidden  power  so  mens  states  hath  out-worne 

Faire  swords,  fierce  scepters,  signes  of  honours  borne, 

It  seemes  to  trample  and  deride  in  scorne. 

And  it  seemeth  Fortune  doth  sometimes  narrowly  watch 
the  last  day  of  our  life,  thereby  to  shew  her  power,  and  in 
one  moment  to  overthrow  what  for  many  yeares  together 
she  had  beene  erecting,  and  makes  us  crie  after  Laberius, 
Nimirum  hoc  die  una  plus  vixi^  mihi  quam  vive ndum  fuit. 
Thus  it  is,  '  I  have  lived  longer  by  this  one  day,  than  I  should.' 
So  may  that  good  advice  of  Solon  be  taken  with  reason. 
But  forsomuch  as  hee  is  a  Philosopher,  with  whom  the 
favours  or  disfavours  of  fortune,  and  good  or  ill  lucke  have 
no  place,  and  are  not  regarded  by  him ;  and  puissances  and 

69 


CHAPTER 
XVIII 

That  we 
should  not 
judge  of  our 
happinesse, 
untill  after 
our  death 


LUCRET.  iii. 
57- 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

greatnesses,  and  accidents  of  qualitie,  are  well  nigh  indif 
ferent  :  I  deeme  it  very  likely  he  had  a  further  reach,  and 
meant  that  the  same  good  fortune  of  our  life,  which  de- 
pendeth  of  the  tranquillitie  and  contentment  of  a  welborne 
minde,  and  of  the  resolution  and  assurance  of  a  well  ordered 
soule,  should  never  be  ascribed  unto  man,  untill  he  have 
beene  seene  play  the  last  act  of  his  comedie,  and  without 
doubt  the  hardest.  In  all  the  rest  there  may  be  some  maske  : 
either  these  sophisticall  discourses  of  Philosophie  are  not  in 
us  but  by  countenance,  or  accidents  that  never  touch  us  to 
the  quick,  give  us  alwaies  leasure  to  keep  our  countenance 
setled.  But  when  that  last  part  of  death,  and  of  our  selves 
comes  to  be  acted,  then  no  dissembling  will  availe,  then  is  it 
high  time  to  speake  plaine  English,  and  put  off  all  vizards : 
then  whatsoever  the  pot  containeth  must  be  shewne,  be  it 
good  or  bad,  foule  or  cleane,  wine  or  water. 

Nam  verfB  voces  turn  demum  pectore  ab  imo 
Ejiciuntur,  et  eripitur  persona,  manet  res. 

For  then  are  sent  true  speeches  from  the  heart, 
We  are  our  selves,  we  leave  to  play  a  part. 

Loe  heere,  why  at  this  last  cast,  all  our  lives  other  actions 
must  be  tride  and  touched.  It  is  the  master-day,  the  day 
that  judgeth  all  others:  it  is  the  day,  saith  an  auncient 
Writer,  that  must  judge  of  all  my  forepassed  yeares.  To 
death  doe  I  referre  the  essay  of  my  studies  fruit.  There 
shall  wee  see  whether  my  discourse  proceed  from  my  heart, 
or  from  my  mouth.  I  have  seene  divers,  by  their  death, 
either  in  good  or  evill,  give  reputation  to  all  their  forepassed 
life.  Scipio,  father  in  law  to  Pompey,  in  well  dying,  repaired 
the  ill  opinion  which  untill  that  houre  men  had  ever  held  of 
him.  Epaminondas  being  demanded,  which  of  the  three  he 
esteemed  most,  either  Chabrias,  or  Iphicrates,  or  himselfe ; 
fi  It  is  necessary,'  said  he, '  that  we  be  seene  to  die,  before  your 
'  question  may  well  be  resolved.1  Verily  we  should  steale 
much  from  him,  if  he  should  be  weighed  without  the  honour 
and  greatnesse  of  his  end.  God  hath  willed  it,  as  he  pleased: 
but  in  my  time  three  of  the  most  execrable  persons,  that  ever 
I  knew  in  all  abomination  of  life,  and  the  most  infamous, 
have  beene  seen  to  die  very  orderly  and  quietly,  and  in  every 

70 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

circumstance   composed  even   unto   perfection.      There  are  CHAPTER 
some  brave  and  fortunate  deaths.     I  have  seene  her  cut  the       XVIII 
twine  of  some  mans  life,  with  a  progresse  of  wonderful  ad-      iPI^jWe 
vancement,  and  with  so  worthie  an  end,  even  in  the  flowre  of  judge  o/our 
his  growth,  and  spring  of  his  youth,  that  in  mine  opinion,    happinesse, 
his  ambitious  and   haughtie   couragious   designes,    thought    untill  after 
nothing   so   high,  as  might  interrupt  them :    who  without     our  death 
going  to  the  place  where  he  pretended,  arived  there  more 
gloriously   and   worthily,    than    either    his   desire   or   hope 
aimed    at.      And    by   his    fall    fore-went    the    power    and 
name,  whither  by  his  course  he  aspired.     When  I  judge  of 
other  mens  lives,  I  ever  respect,  how  they  have  behaved 
themselves  in  their  end ;  and  my  chiefest  study  is,  I 
may  well  demeane  my  selfe  at  my  last  gaspe,  that 
is  to  say,  quietly,  and  constantly. 


THE    NINETEENTH    CHAPTER 

That  to  Philosophic,  is  to  learne  how  to  die 


ICERO  saith,  that  to  '  Philosophie  is  no 
'  other  thing,  than  for  a  man  to  prepare 
'  himselfe  to  death ' :  which  is  the  reason, 
that  studie  and  contemplation  doth  in 
some  sort  withdraw  our  soule  from  us,  and 
severally  employ  it  from  the  body,  which 
is  a  kind  of  apprentisage  and  resemblance 
of  death ;  or  else  it  is,  that  all  the  wis- 
dome  and  discourse  of  the  world,  doth  in  the  end  resolve 
upon  this  point,  to  teach  us,  not  to  feare  to  die.  Truly 
either  reason  mockes  us,  or  it  only  aimeth  at  our  con 
tentment,  and  in  fine,  bends  all  her  travell  to  make  us  live 
well,  and  as  the  holy  Scripture  saith,  '  at  our  ease.'  All  the 
opinions  of  the  world  conclude,  that  pleasure  is  our  end, 
howbeit  they  take  divers  meanes  unto,  and  for  it,  else  would 
men  reject  them  at  their  first  comming.  For,  who  would 
give  eare  unto  him,  that  for  it's  end  would  establish  our 
paine  and  disturbance?  The  dissentions  of  philosophicall 
sects  in  this  case,  are  verball :  Transcurramus  solertissimas 

71 


MONTAIGNES   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nugas:  '  Let  us  run  over  such  over-fine  fooleries,  and  subtill 
XIX  '  trifles.'  There  is  more  wilfulnesse  and  wrangling  among 
losopMe  is  to  ^em?  t^ian  pertaines  to  a  sacred  profession.  But  what  per- 
learnehow  son  a  man  undertakes  to  act,  he  doth  ever  therewithall 
to  die  personate  his  owne.  Allthough  they  say,  that  in  vertue 
it  selfe,  the  last  scope  of  our  aime  is  voluptuousnes.  It 
pleaseth  me  to  importune  their  eares  still  with  this  word, 
which  so  much  offends  their  hearing:  And  if  it  imply  any 
chiefe  pleasure  or  exceeding  contentments,  it  is  rather  due  to 
the  assistance  of  vertue,  than  to  any  other  supply,  volup 
tuousnes  being  more  strong,  sinnowie,  sturdie,  and  manly,  is 
but  more  seriously  voluptuous.  And  we  should  give  it  the 
name  of  pleasure,  more  favorable,  sweeter,  and  more  naturall ; 
and  not  terme  it  vigor,  from  which  it  hath  his  denomination. 
Should  this  baser  sensuality  deserve  this  faire  name,  it  should 
be  by  competencie,  and  not  by  privilege.  I  finde  it  lesse 
void  of  incommodities  and  crosses,  than  vertue.  And  besides 
that,  her  taste  is  more  fleeting,  momentarie,  and  fading,  she 
hath  her  fasts,  her  eves,  and  her  travels,  and  both  sweat  and 
bloud.  Furthermore  she  hath  particularly  so  many  wounding 
passions,  and  of  so  severall  sorts,  and  so  filthie  and  loathsome 
a  societie  waiting  upon  her,  that  shee  is  equivalent  to  peni- 
tencie.  Wee  are  in  the  wrong,  to  thinke  her  incommodities 
serve  her  as  a  provocation,  and  seasoning  to  her  sweetnes,  as 
in  nature  one  contrarie  is  vivified  by  another  contrarie :  and 
to  say,  when  we  come  to  vertue,  that  like  successes  and  dif 
ficulties  over-whelme  it,  and  yeeld  it  austere  and  inaccessible. 
Whereas  much  more  properly  then  unto  voluptuousnes,  they 
ennobled,  sharpen,  animate,  and  raise  that  divine  and  perfect 
pleasure,  which  it  meditates  and  procureth  us.  Truly  he  is 
verie  unworthie  her  acquaintance,  that  counter-ballanceth 
her  cost  to  his  fruit,  and  knowes  neither  the  graces  nor  use 
of  it.  Those  who  go  about  to  instruct  us,  how  her  pursuit 
is  very  hard  and  laborious,  and  her  jovisance  well  pleasing 
and  delightfull :  what  else  tell  they  us,  but  that  shee  is  ever 
unpleasant  and  irksome  ?  For,  what  humane  meane  did  ever 
attaine  unto  an  absolute  enjoying  of  it  ?  The  perfectest  have 
beene  content  but  to  aspire  and  approach  her,  without  ever 
possessing  her.  But  they  are  deceived ;  seeing  that  of  all 
the  pleasures  we  know,  the  pursute  of  them  is  pleasant.  The 
72 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

enterprise  is  perceived  by  the  qualitie  of  the  thing,  which  it  CHAPTER 
hath  regard  unto  :  for  it  is  a  good  portion  of  the  effect,  and         XIX 
consubstantiall.     That  happines  and  felicitie,  which  shineth  j^Jph*°  ™ 
in  vertue,  replenisheth  her  approaches  and  appurtenances,    iearnehow 
even  unto  the  first  entrance  and  utmost  barre.     Now  of  all        to  die 
the  benefits  of  vertue,  the  contempt  of  death  is  the  chiefest, 
a  meane  that  furnisheth  our  life  with  an  ease-full  tranquillitie, 
and  gives  us  a  pure  and  amiable  taste  of  it :  without  which 
every  other  voluptuousnes   is  extinguished.     Loe,  here  the 
reasons  why  all  rules  encounter  and  agree  with  this  article. 
And  albeit  they  all  leade  us  with  a  common  accord  to  despise 
griefe,  povertie,  and  other  accidentall  crosses,  to  which  mans 
life  is  subject,  it  is  not  with  an  equall  care :  as  well  because 
accidents  are  not  of  such  a  necessitie,  for  most  men  passe 
their  whole  life  without  feeling  any  want  or  povertie,  and 
other-some    without     feeling    any    griefe    or     sicknes,    as 
Xenophilus  the  Musitian,  who  lived  an  hundred  and  six 
yeares  in  perfect  and  continuall  health  :  as  also  if  the  worst 
happen,  death  may  at  all  times,  and  whensoever  it   shall 
please  us,  cut  off  all  other  inconveniences  and  crosses.     But 
as  for  death,  it  is  inevitable. 

Omnes  eodem  cogimur,  omnium  HOR.  ii.  Od. 

Versatur  urna,  serins,  ocyus  Hi.  25. 

Sors  exitura,  et  nos  in  ceternum 
Exilium  impositura  cyrriba. 

All  to  one  place  are  driv'n,  of  all 
Shak't  is  the  lot-pot,  where-hence  shall 
Sooner  or  later  drawne  lots  fall, 
And  to  deaths  boat  for  aye  enthrall. 

And  by  consequence,  if  she  make  us  affeard,  it  is  a  con 
tinual  subject  of  torment,  and  which  can  no  way  be  eased. 
There  is  no  starting-hole  will  hide  us  from  her,  she  will  finde 
us  wheresoever  we  are,  we  may  as  in  a  suspected  countrie 
start  and  turne  here  and  there :  quoe  quasi  saxum  Tantalo  Cic.  De  Flu. 
semper  impendet :  '  Which  evermore  hangs  like  the  stone  over 
'  the  head  of  Tantalus ' :  Our  lawes  doe  often  condemne  and 
send  malefactors  to  be  executed  in  the  same  place  where  the 
crime  was  committed  :  to  which  whilest  they  are  going,  leade 
them  along  the  fairest  houses,  or  entertaine  them  with  the 
best  cheere  you  can, 

H  73 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


CHAPTER 

XIX 

That  to   Phi 
losophic,  is  to 
learn e  how 
to  die 


CLAUD,  in 
Ruff.  ii.  137. 


LUCRET.  iv. 
474. 


non  SiculfB  dapes  HOR.  iii.  Od. 

Dulcem  elaborabunt  saporem :  i.  18. 

Non  avium,  citharaque  cantus 
Somnum  reducent. 

Not  all  King-  Denys  daintie  fare, 
Can  pleasing  taste  for  them  prepare  : 
No  song  of  birds,  no  musikes  sound 
Can  lullabie  to  sleepe  profound. 

Doe  you  thinke  they  can  take  any  pleasure  in  it  ?  or  be 
any  thing  delighted?  and  that  the  finall  intent  of  their 
voiage  being  still  before  their  eies,  hath  not  altered  and 
altogether  distracted  their  taste  from  all  these  commodities 
and  allurements  ? 

Audit  iter,  numeratque  dies,  spatioque  viarum 
Metitur  vitam,  torquetur  peste  futura. 

He  heares  his  journey,  counts  his  daies,  so  measures  he 
His  life  by  his  waies  length,  vext  with  the  ill  shall  be. 

The  end  of  our  cariere  is  death,  it  is  the  necessarie  obj  ect 
of  our  aime :  if  it  affright  us,  how  is  it  possible  we  should 
step  one  foot  further  without  an  ague  ?  The  remedie  of  the 
vulgar  sort  is,  not  to  thinke  on  it.  But  from  what  brutall 
stupiditie  may  so  grosse  a  blindnesse  come  upon  him?  he 
must  be  made  to  bridle  his  Asse  by  the  taile, 

Qui  capite  ipse  suo  instituit  vestigia  retro. 

Who  doth  a  course  contrarie  runne 
With  his  head  to  his  course  begunne. 

It  is  no  marvell  if  he  be  so  often  taken  tripping ;  some  doe 
no  sooner  heare  the  name  of  death  spoken  of,  but  they  are 
afraid,  yea  the  most  part  will  crosse  themselves,  as  if  they 
heard  the  Devill  named.  And  because  mention  is  made  of 
it  in  mens  wils  and  testaments,  I  warrant  you  there  is  none 
will  set  his  hand  to  them,  til  the  Physitian  have  given  his 
last  doome,  and  utterly  forsaken  him.  And  God  knowes, 
being  then  betweene  such  paine  and  feare,  with  what  sound 
judgement  they  endure  him.  For  so  much  as  this  syllable 
sounded  so  unpleasantly  in  their  eares,  and  this  voice  seemed 
so  ill-boding  and  unluckie,  the  Romans  had  learned  to  allay 
and  dilate  the  same  by  a  Periphrasis.  In  liew  of  saying,  he 
is  dead,  or  he  hath  ended  his  daies,  thev  would  say,  he  hath 

74 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

lived.     So  it  be  life,  be  it  past  or  no,  they  are  comforted:  CHAPTER 
from  whom  we  have  borowed  our  phrases  quondam,  alias,  or         XIX 

'  late  such  a  one.'     It  may  haply  be,  as  the  common  saying  is,  That  *°  P1"- 
,,  ,.        .  -[i     , V  J  ,,       .,    J  T&     '  losophie,  is  to 

the  time  we  live,  is  worth  the  mony  we  pay  for  it.     I  was    iearne  how 

borne  betweene  eleven  of  the  clocke  and  noone,  the  last  of  to  die 
Februarie  1533,  according  to  our  computation,  the  yeare 
beginning  the  first  of  Januarie.  It  is  but  a  fortnight  since 
I  was  39  yeares  old.  I  want  at  least  as  much  more.  If  in 
the  meane  time  I  should  trouble  my  thoughts  with  a  matter 
so  farre  from  me,  it  were  but  folly.  But  what  ?  we  see  both 
young  and  old  to  leave  their  life  after  one  selfe-same  condi 
tion.  No  man  departs  otherwise  from  it,  than  if  he  but  now 
came  to  it,  seeing  there  is  no  man  so  crazed,  bedrell,  or 
decrepit,  so  long  as  he  remembers  Methusalem,  but  thinkes 
he  may  yet  live  twentie  yeares.  Moreover,  seely  creature  as 
thou  art,  who  hath  limited  the  end  of  thy  daies  ?  Happily 
thou  presumest  upon  Physitians  reports.  Rather  consider 
the  effect  and  experience.  By  the  common  course  of  things, 
long  since  thou  livest  by  extraordinarie  favour.  Thou  hast 
alreadie  over-past  the  ordinarie  tearmes  of  common  life: 
And  to  prove  it,  remember  but  thy  acquaintances  and  tell 
me  how  many  more  of  them  have  died  before  they  came  to 
thy  age,  than  have  either  attained  or  outgone  the  same :  yea 
and  of  those  that  through  renoune  have  ennobled  their  life, 
if  thou  but  register  them,  I  will  lay  a  wager,  I  will  finde 
more  that  have  died  before  they  came  to  five  and  thirty 
yeares,  than  after.  It  is  consonant  with  reason  and  pietie, 
to  take  example  by  the  humanity  of  lesus  Christ,  who  ended 
his  humane  life  at  three  and  thirtie  yeares.  The  greatest 
man  that  ever  was  being  no  more  than  a  man,  I  meane 
Alexander  the  great,  ended  his  dayes,  and  died  also  of  that 
age.  How  many  severall  meanes  and  waies  hath  death  to 
surprise  us ! 

Quid  quisque  vitet,  nunquam  homini  satis  HOR.  ii.  Od. 

Cautum  est  in  horas.  xiii.  13. 

A  man  can  never  take  good  heed, 
Hourely  what  he  may  shun  and  speed. 

I  omit  to  speake  of  agues  and  pleurisies ;  who  would  ever 
have  imagined,  that  a  Duke  of  Brittanie  should  have  beene 

75 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  stifled  to  death  in  a  throng  of  people,  as  whilome  was  a 
XIXp}.  neighbour  of  mine  at  Lyons,  when  Pope  Clement  made  his 

loscfhie  is  to  en^rance  there  ?  Hast  thou  not  scene  one  of  our  late  Kings 
learne  how  slaine  in  the  middest  of  his  sports  ?  and  one  of  his  ancestors 
to  die  die  miserably  by  the  chocke  of  an  hog  ?  Eschilus  fore- 
threatned  by  the  fall  of  an  house,  when  he  stood  most  upon 
his  guard,  strucken  dead  by  the  fall  of  a  Tortoise  shell, 
which  fell  out  of  the  tallants  of  an  Eagle  flying  in  the  aire  ? 
and  another  choaked  with  the  kernell  of  a  grape  ?  And  an 
Emperour  die  by  the  scratch  of  a  combe,  whilest  he  was 
combing  his  head :  And  ^Emylius  Lepidus  with  hitting  his 
foot  against  a  doore-seele?  And  Aufidius  with  stumbling 
against  the  Consull-Chamber  doore  as  he  was  going  in 
thereat?  And  Cornelius  Gallus  the  Praetor,  Tigillinus 
Captaine  of  the  Romane  watch,  Lodowike  sonne  of  Guido 
Gonzaga,  Marquis  of  Mantua,  end  their  daies  betweene 
womens  thighs  ?  An4  of  a  farre  worse  example  Speusippus 
the  Plantonian  Philosopher  and  one  of  our  Popes  ?  Poore 
Bebius  a  Judge  whilest  he  demurreth  the  sute  of  a  plaintife 
but  for  eight  daies,  behold  his  last  expired;  And  Caius 
lulius  a  Physitian,  whilest  he  was  annointing  the  eies  of  one 
of  his  patients,  to  have  his  owne  sight  closed  for  ever  by 
death.  And  if  amongst  these  examples,  I  may  adde  one  of 
a  brother  of  mine,  called  Captaine  Saint  Martin,  a  man  of 
three  and  twentie  yeares  of  age,  who  had  alreadie  given  good 
testimonie  of  his  worth  and  forward  valour,  playing  at  tennis, 
received  a  blow  with  a  ball,  that  hit  him  a  little  above  the 
right  eare,  without  apparance  of  any  contusion,  bruse,  or 
hurt,  and  never  sitting  or  resting  upon  it,  died  within  six 
houres  after  of  an  Apoplexie,  which  the  blow  of  the  ball 
caused  in  him.  These  so  frequent  and  ordinary  examples, 
hapning,  and  being  still  before  our  eies,  how  is  it  possible 
for  man  to  forgo  or  forget  the  remembrance  of  death  ?  and 
why  should  it  not  continually  seeme  unto  us,  that  shee  is 
still  ready  at  hand  to  take  us  by  the  throat  ?  What  matter 
is  it,  will  you  say  unto  me,  how  and  in  what  manner  it  is,  so 
long  as  a  man  doe  not  trouble  and  vex  himselfe  therewith  ? 
I  am  of  this  opinion,  that  howsoever  a  man  may  shrowd  or 
hide  himselfe  from  her  dart,  yea  were  it  under  an  oxe-hide, 
I  am  not  the  man  would  shrinke  backe :  it  sufficeth  me  to 
76 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

live  at  my  ease;  and  the  best  recreation  I  can  have,  that  doe  CHAPTER 
I  ever  take;  in  other  matters,  as  little  vainglorious,  and        XIX 

exemplare  as  you  list. 

J  losophie,  is  to 

— prcetulerim  delirus  inersque  videri,  HOR.  ii.  Epi.      learne  how 

Dum  meet  delectent  mala  me,  vel  deniquefallant,      "•  126.  to  die 

Quam  sapere  et  ringi. 

A  dotard  I  had  rather  seeme,  and  dull, 
Sooner  my  faults  may  please  make  me  a  gull, 
Than  to  be  wise,  and  beat  my  vexed  scull. 

But  it  is  folly  to  thinke  that  way  to  come  unto  it.  They 
come,  they  goe,  they  trot,  they  daunce  :  but  no  speech  of 
death.  All  that  is  good  sport.  But  if  she  be  once  come, 
and  on  a  sudden  and  openly  surprise,  either  them,  their 
wives,  their  children,  or  their  friends,  what  torments,  what 
out-cries,  what  rage,  and  what  despaire  doth  then  overwhelme 
them  ?  saw  you  ever  any  thing  so  drooping,  so  changed,  and 
so  distracted  ?  A  man  must  looke  to  it',  and  in  better  times 
fore-see  it.  And  might  that  brutish  carelessenesse  lodge  in 
the  minde  of  a  man  of  understanding  (which  I  find  altogether 
impossible)  she  sels  us  her  ware  at  an  over-deere  rate :  were 
she  an  enemie  by  mans  wit  to  be  avoided,  I  would  advise 
men  to  borrow  the  weapons  of  cowardlinesse :  but  since  it 
may  not  be,  and  that  be  you  either  a  coward  or  a  runaway, 
an  honest  or  valiant  man,  she  overtakes  you, 

Nempe  et  fugacem  persequitur  virum,  In.  iii.  Qd.  ii. 

Nee  parcit  imbellis  juventce  14. 

Poplitibus,  timidoque  tergo. 

Shee  persecutes  the  man  that  flies, 
Shee  spares  not  weake  youth  to  surprise, 
But  on  their  hammes  and  backe  turn'd  plies. 

And  that  no  temper  of  cuirace  may  shield  or  defend  you, 

Hie  licet  ferro  cautus  se  condat  et  cere,  PROFERT.  iii. 

Mors  tamen  inclusum  protrahet  inde  caput.  EL  xviii.  25. 

Though  he  with  yron  and  brasse  his  head  empale, 
Yet  death  his  head  enclosed  thence  will  hale. 

Let  us  learne  to  stand,  and  combat  her  with  a  resolute 
minde.  And  being  to  take  the  greatest  advantage  she  hath 
upon  us  from  her,  let  us  take  a  cleane  contrary  way  from  the 
common,  let  us  remove  her  strangenesse  from  her,  let  us 

77 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  converse,  frequent,  and  acquaint  our  selves  with  her,  let  us 
XIX      .  have  nothing  so  much  in  minde  as  death,  let  us  at  all  times 

i    a  i--0  •   x1"  and  seasons,  and  in  the  ugliest  manner  that  may  be,  yea 
losophie,,  is  to     . , ,       ,,    »  '         ,  , ,  J        '  J 

learne  how    W1^h   all   faces   shapen   and   represent   the   same  unto  our 

to  die  imagination.  At  the  stumbling  of  a  horse,  at  the  fall  of 
a  stone,  at  the  least  prick  with  a  pinne,  let  us  presently 
ruminate  and  say  with  our  selves,  what  if  it  were  death 
it  selfe  ?  and  thereupon  let  us  take  heart  of  grace,  and  call 
our  wits  together  to  confront  her.  Amiddest  our  bankets, 
feasts,  and  pleasures,  let  us  ever  have  this  restraint  or  object 
before  us,  that  is,  the  remembrance  of  our  condition,  and 
let  not  pleasure  so  much  mislead  or  transport  us,  that  we 
altogether  neglect  or  forget,  how  many  waies,  our  joyes,  or 
our  feastings,  be  subject  unto  death,  and  by  how  many  hold 
fasts  shee  threatens  us  and  them.  So  did  the  ^Egyptians, 
who  in  the  middest  of  their  banquetings,  and  in  the  full  of 
their  greatest  cheere,  caused  the  anatomie  of  a  dead  man  to 
be  brought  before  them,  as  a  memorandum  and  warning  to 
their  guests. 

o 

HOR.  i.  Epi.  Omnem  crede  diem  tibi  diluxisse  supremum, 

lv<  I3-  Grata  superveniet,  quce  non  sperabitur  hora. 

Thinke  every  day  shines  on  thee  as  thy  last, 
Welcome  it  will  come,  whereof  hope  was  past. 

It  is  uncertaine  where  death  looks  for  us ;  let  us  expect 
her  everie  where :  the  premeditation  of  death,  is  a  fore- 
thinking  of  libertie.  He  who  hath  learned  to  die,  hath 
unlearned  to  serve.  There  is  no  evill  in  life,  for  him  that 
hath  well  conceived,  how  the  privation  of  life  is  no  evill. 
To  know  how  to  die,  doth  free  us  from  all  subjection  and 
constraint.  Paulus  JEmilius  answered  one,  whom  that  miser 
able  king  of  Macedon  his  prisoner  sent  to  entreat  him,  he 
would  not  lead  him  in  triumph,  let  him  make  that  request 
unto  him  selfe.  Verily,  if  Nature  afford  not  some  helpe,  in 
all  things,  it  is  very  hard  that  art  and  Industrie  should  goe 
farre  before.  Of  my  selfe,  I  am  not  much  given  to  melan 
choly,  but  rather  to  dreaming  and  sluggishnes.  There  is 
nothing  wherewith  I  have  ever  more  entertained  my  selfe, 
than  with  the  imaginations  of  death,  yea  in  the  most 
licentious  times  of  my  age. 

78 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

lucundum,  cum  (Etas  florida  ver  ageret.  CATUL.  Eleg.     CHAPTER 

When  my  age  flourishing  XIX 

Did  spend  it's  pleasant  spring.  That  to  Phi 

losophic,  is  to 

Being  amongst  faire  Ladies,  and   in  earnest   play,  some    learne  how 
have  thought  me  busied,  or  musing  with  my  selfe,  how  to        to  die 
digest  some  jealousie,  or  meditating  on  the  uncertaintie  of 
some  conceived  hope,  when  God  he  knowes,  I  was  entertain 
ing  my  selfe  with  the  remembrance  of  some  one  or  other, 
that  but  few  daies  before  was  taken  with  a  burning  fever, 
and  of  his  sodaine  end,  comming  from  such  a  feast  or  meet 
ing  where  I  was  my  selfe,  and  with   his  head  full  of  idle 
conceits,  of  love,  and  merry  glee ;  supposing  the  same,  either 
sicknes  or  end,  to  be  as  neere  me  as  him. 

lamfuerit,  nee  post,  unquam  revocare  licebit.  LUCR.  iii.  947. 

Now  time  would  be,  no  more 
You  can  this  time  restore. 

I  did  no  more  trouble  my  selfe  or  frowne  at  such  a  conceit, 
than  at  any  other.  It  is  impossible,  we  should  not  appre 
hend  or  feele  some  motions  or  starlings  at  such  imaginations 
at  the  first,  and  comming  sodainely  upon  us  :  but  doubtlesse, 
he  that  shall  manage  and  meditate  upon  them  with  an  im- 
partiall  eye,  they  will  assuredly,  in  tract  of  time,  become 
familiar  to  him :  Otherwise  for  my  part,  I  should  be  in  con- 
tinuall  feare  and  agonie  ;  for  no  man  did  ever  more  distrust 
his  life,  nor  make  lesse  account  of  his  continuance  :  Neither 
can  health,  which  hitherto  I  have  so  long  enjoied,  and  which 
so  seldome  hath  beene  crazed,  lengthen  my  hopes,  nor  any 
sicknesse  shorten  them  of  it.  At  every  minute  me  thinkes 
I  make  an  escape.  And  I  uncessantly  record  unto  my  selfe, 
that  whatsoever  may  be  done  another  day,  may  be  effected 
this  day.  Truly  hazards  and  dangers  doe  little  or  nothing 
approach  us  at  our  end  :  And  if  we  consider,  how  many  more 
there  remaine,  besides  this  accident,  which  in  number  more 
than  millions  seeme  to  threaten  us,  and  hang  over  us ;  we 
shall  find,  that  be  we  sound  or  sicke,  lustie  or  weake,  at  sea 
or  at  land,  abroad  or  at  home,  fighting  or  at  rest,  in  the 
middest  of  a  battell  or  in  our  beds,  she  is  ever  alike  neere 
unto  us.  Nemo  altero  fragilior  est,  nemo  in  crastinum  sui 
certior.  '  No  man  is  weaker  then  other  ;  none  surer  of  him- 

79 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER '  selfe  (to  live)  till  to  morrow.1  Whatsoever  I  have  to  doe 
XIX  before  death,  all  leasure  to  end  the  same,  seemeth  short  unto 

That  to  Phi-  me^  vea  were  ft  ]^u^  of  one  houre.  Some  body,  not  long 
w0  smce  turning  over  my  writing  tables,  found  by  chance  a 
to  die  memoriall  of  something  I  would  have  done  after  my  death  : 
I  told  him  (as  indeed  it  was  true,)  that  being  but  a  mile 
from  my  house,  and  in  perfect  health  and  lustie,  I  had  made 
haste  to  write  it,  because  I  could  not  assure  my  self  I  should 
ever  come  home  in  safety ;  As  one  that  am  ever  hatching  of 
mine  owne  thoughts,  and  place  them  in  my  selfe  :  I  am  ever 
prepared  about  that  which  I  may  be  :  nor  can  death  (come 
when  she  please)  put  me  in  mind  of  any  new  thing.  A  man 
should  ever,  as  much  as  in  him  lieth,  be  ready  booted  to 
take  his  journey,  and  above  all  things,  looke  he  have  then 
nothing  to  doe 'but  with  himselfe. 

HOR.  ii.  Od.  Quid  brevi  fortes  jaculamur  cevo 

xvi.  Multa  ? 

To  aime  why  are  we  ever  bold, 

At  many  things  in  so  short  hold  ? 

For  then  we  shall  have  worke  sufficient,  without  any  more 
accrease.  Some  man  complaineth  more  that  death  doth 
hinder  him  from  the  assured  course  of  an  hoped  for  victorie, 
than  of  death  it  selfe ;  another  cries  out,  he  should  give 
place  to  her,  before  he  have  married  his  daughter,  or  directed 
the  course  of  his  childrens  bringing  up ;  another  bewaileth 
he  must  forgoe  his  wives  company :  another  moaneth  the 
losse  of  his  children  the  chiefest  commodities  of  his  being. 
I  am  now  by  meanes  of  the  mercy  of  God  in  such  a  taking, 
that  without  regret  or  grieving  at  any  worldly  matter,  I  am 
prepared  to  dislodge,  whensoever  he  shall  please  to  call  me  : 
I  am  every  where  free :  my  farewell  is  soone  taken  of  all  my 
friends,  except  of  my  selfe.  No  man  did  ever  prepare  him 
selfe  to  quit  the  world  more  simply  and  fully,  or  more 
generally  spake  of  all  thoughts  of  it,  than  I  am  fully  assured 
I  shall  doe.  The  deadest  deaths  are  the  best. 

LUCR.  iii.  942.  — Miser,  6  miser  (aiunt)  omnia  ademit. 

Vna  dies  infesta  mihi  tot  prcemia  vitte : 

O  wretch,  O  wretch,  (friends  cry)  one  day, 
All  joyes  of  life  hath  tane  away  : 
80 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

And  the  builder,  CHAPTER 

XIX 

— manent  (saith  he)  opera  interrupta,  minceque,      VIRG.  j$Ln.       That  to  Phi- 
Murorum  ingentes.  iv.  88.  losophie,  is  to 

The  workes  unfinisht  lie,  learne  how 

And  walls  that  threatned  hie.  to  die 

A  man  should  designe  nothing  so  long  afore-hand,  or  at 
least  with  such  an  intent,  as  to  passionate  himselfe  to  see  the 
end  of  it ;  we  are  all  borne  to  be  doing. 

Ciim  mortar,  medium  solvar  et  inter  opus.  OVID.  Am. 

When  dying  I  my  selfe  shall  spend,  »•  E1-  x-  36. 

Ere  halfe  my  businesse  come  to  end. 

I  would  have  a  man  to  be  doing,  and  to  prolong  his  lives 
offices,  as  much  as  lieth  in  him,  and  let  death  seize  upon  me, 
whilest  I  am  setting  my  cabiges,  carelesse  of  her  dart,  but 
more  of  my  unperfect  garden.  I  saw  one  die,  who  being  at 
his  last  gaspe,  uncessantly  complained  against  his  destinie, 
and  that  death  should  so  unkindly  cut  him  off  in  the  middest 
of  an  historic  which  he  had  in  hand,  and  was  now  come  to 
the  fifteenth  or  sixteenth  of  our  Kings. 

Illud  in  his  rebus  non  addunt}  nee  tibi  earum,  LUCR.  iii.  944. 

lam  desiderium  rerum  super  insidet  una. 

Friends  adde  not  that  in  this  case,  now  no  more 
Shalt  thou  desire,  or  want  things  wisht  before. 

A  man  should  rid  himselfe  of  these  vulgar  and  hurtfull 
humours.  Even  as  Church-yards  were  first  placed  adjoyning 
unto  churches,  and  in  the  most  frequented  places  of  the  City, 
to  enure  (as  Lycurgus  said)  the  common  people,  women  and 
children,  not  to  be  skared  at  the  sight  of  a  dead  man,  and 
to  the  end  that  continuall  spectacle  of  bones,  sculs,  tombes, 
graves  and  burials,  should  forewarne  us  of  our  condition,  and 
fatall  end. 

Quin  etiam  exhilarare  viris  convivia  cade  SYL.  ItaL  xi. 

Mos  olim,  et  miscere  epulis  spectacula  dira.  51. 

Certantum  ferro ,  scepe  et  super  ipsa  cadentum 
Pocula,  respersis  non  parco  sanguine  mensis. 

Nay  more,  the  manner  was  to  welcome  guests, 
And  with  dire  shewes  of  slaughter  to  mix  feasts. 
Of  them  that  fought  at  sharpe,  and  with  bords  tainted 
Of  them  with  much  bloud,  who  o'er  full  cups  fainted. 
I  81 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  And  even  as  the  ^Egyptians  after  their  feastings  and 
XIX  .  carousings,  caused  a  great  image  of  death  to  be  brought  in 

loscfhie  is  to  anc^  snewe(^  to  the  guests  and  by-standers,  by  one  that  cried 
learnehow  aloud,  '  Drinke  and  be  mery,  for  such  shalt  thou  be  when 
to  die  thou  art  dead : '  So  have  I  learned  this  custome  or  lesson,  to 
have  alwaies  death,  not  only  in  my  imagination,  but  con 
tinually  in  my  mouth.  And  there  is  nothing  I  desire  more 
to  be  informed  of,  than  of  the  death  of  men  :  that  is  to  say, 
what  words,  what  countenance,  and  what  face  they  shew  at 
their  death ;  and  in  reading  of  histories,  which  I  so  atten 
tively  observe.  It  appeareth  by  the  shuffling  and  hudling 
up  of  my  examples,  I  affect  no  subject  so  particularly  as  this. 
Were  I  a  composer  of  books,  I  would  keepe  a  register,  com 
mented  of  the  divers  deaths,  which  in  teaching  men  to  die, 
should  after  teach  them  to  live.  Dicearcus  made  one  of  that 
title,  but  of  another  and  lesse  profitable  end.  Some  man 
will  say  to  mee,  the  effect  exceeds  the  thought  so  farre,  that 
there  is  no  fence  so  sure,  or  cunning  so  certaine,  but  a  man 
shall  either  lose  or  forget,  if  he  come  once  to  that  point ; 
let  them  say  what  they  list :  to  premeditate  on  it,  giveth  no 
doubt  a  great  advantage :  and  it  is  nothing,  at  the  least  to 
goe  so  farre  without  dismay  or  alteration,  or  without  an 
ague  ?  There  belongs  more  to  it :  Nature  her  selfe  lends 
her  hand,  and  gives  us  courage.  If  it  be  a  short  and  violent 
death,  wee  have  no  leisure  to  feare  it ;  if  otherwise,  I  per 
ceive  that  according  as  I  engage  my  selfe  in  sicknesse,  I  doe 
naturally  fall  into  some  disdaine  and  contempt  of  life.  I 
finde  that  I  have  more  adoe  to  digest  this  resolution,  that 
I  shall  die  when  I  am  in  health,  than  I  have  when  I  am 
troubled  with  a  fever :  forsomuch  as  I  have  no  more  such  fast 
hold  on  the  commodities  of  life,  whereof  I  begin  to  lose  the 
use  and  pleasure,  and  view  death  in  the  face  with  a  lesse 
undanted  looke,  which  makes  me  hope,  that  the  further  I 
goe  from  that,  and  the  nearer  I  approch  to  this,  so  much 
more  easily  doe  I  enter  in  composition  for  their  exchange. 
Even  as  I  have  tried  in  many  other  occurrences,  which  Caesar 
affirmed,  that  often  somethings  seeme  greater,  being  farre 
from  us,  than  if  they  bee  neere  at  hand :  I  have  found  that 
being  in  perfect  health,  I  have  much  more  beene  frighted 
with  sicknesse,  than  when  I  have  felt  it.  The  jollitie  wherein 
82 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

I  live,  the  pleasure  and  the  strength  make  the  other  seeme  CHAPTER 

so  disproportionate  from  that,  that  by  imagination  I  ampli-         XIXt.- 

fie  these  commodities  by  one  moitie,  and  apprehended  them 

much  more  heavie  and  burthensome,  than  I  feele  them  when 

I  have  them  upon  my  shoulders.     The  same  I   hope  will        to  die 

happen   to   me   of  death.     Consider   we   by   the   ordinary 

mutations,   and    daily   declinations   which   we    suffer,   how 

Nature  deprives  us  of  the  night  of  our  losse  and  empairing : 

what  hath  an  aged  man  left  him  of  his  youths  vigor,  and  of 

his  forepast  life  ? 

Heu  senibus  vita  portio  quanta  manet !  COR.  Gal.  i. 

Alas  to  men  in  yeares  how  small 

A  part  of  life  is  left  in  all  ? 

Caesar  to  a  tired  and  crazed  Souldier  of  his  guard,  who  in 
the  open  street  came  to  him,  to  beg  leave,  he  might  cause 
himselfe  to  be  put  to  death ;  viewing  his  decrepit  behaviour, 
answerd  plesantly :  '  Doest  thou  thinke  to  be  alive  then  ?  ** 
Were  man  all  at  once  to  fall  into  it,  I  doe  not  thinke  we 
should  be  able  to  beare  such  a  change,  but  being  faire  and 
gently  led  on  by  her  hand,  in  a  slow,  and  as  it  were  unper- 
ceived  descent,  by  little  and  little,  and  step  by  step,  she 
roules  us  into  that  miserable  state,  and  day  by  day  seekes  to 
acquaint  us  with  it.  So  that  when  youth  failes  in  us,  we 
feele,  nay  we  perceive  no  shaking  or  transchange  at  all  in 
our  selves  :  which  in  essence  and  veritie  is  a  harder  death, 
than  that  of  a  languishing  and  irkesome  life,  or  that  of  age. 
Forsomuch  as  the  leape  from  an  ill  being,  unto  a  not  being, 
is  not  so  dangerous  or  steepie ;  as  it  is  from  a  delightful! 
and  flourishing  being,  unto  a  painfull  and  sorrowful!  con 
dition.  A  weake  bending,  and  faint  stopping  bodie  hath 
lesse  strength  to  beare  and  undergoe  a  heavie  burden :  So 
hath  our  soule.  She  must  bee  rouzed  and  raised  against  the 
violence  and  force  of  this  adversarie.  For  as  it  is  impossible, 
she  should  take  any  rest  whilest  she  feareth :  whereof  if  she 
be  assured  (which  is  a  thing  exceeding  humane  condition) 
she  may  boast  that  it  is  impossible,  unquietnesse,  torment, 
and  feare,  mucn  lesse  the  least  displeasure  should  lodge  in 
her. 

Non  vultus  instantis  tyranni 

Mente  quatit  solida,  neque  Auster, 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Dux  inquieti  turbidus  A  dries, 

XIX  Nee  fulminantis  magna  Jovis  manus. 

That  to  Phi-  No  urging  tyrants  threatning  face, 

losophie,  is  to  Where  minde  is  sound  can  it  displace, 

learne  how  No  troublous  wind  the  rough  seas  Master, 

to  die  Nor  loves  great  hand  the  thunder-caster. 

She  is  made  Mistris  of  her  passions  and  concupiscence, 
Lady  of  indulgence,  of  shame  of  povertie,  and  of  all  fortunes 
injuries.  Let  him  that  can,  attaine  to  this  advantage : 
Herein  consists  the  true  and  soveraigne  liberty,  that  affords 
us  meanes  wherewith  to  jeast  and  make  a  scorne  of  force  and 
injustice,  and  to  deride  imprisonment,  gives,  or  fetters. 

HOR.  i.  Epi.  — in  manicis,  et 

xvi.  76.  Compedibus,  seevo  te  sub  custode  tenebo. 

Ipse  Deus  simul  atque  volam,  me  solvet :  opinor, 
Hoc  sentit  moriar,  mors  ultima  linea  rerum  est. 

In  gyves  and  fetters  I  will  hamper  thee, 
Under  a  Jayler  that  shall  cruell  be  : 
Yet,  when  I  will,  God  me  deliver  shall, 
He  thinkes,  I  shall  die  :  death  is  end  of  all. 

Our  religion  hath  had  no  surer  humane  foundation,  than  the 
contempt  of  life.  Discourse  of  reason  doth  not  only  call  and 
summon  us  unto  it.  For  why  should  we  feare  to  lose  a  thing, 
which  being  lost,  cannot  be  moaned  ?  but  also,  since  we  are 
threatned  by  so  many  kinds  of  death,  there  is  no  more  incon 
venience  to  feare  them  all,  than  to  endure  one :  what  matter 
is  it  when  it  commeth,  since  it  is  unavoidable?  Socrates 
answered  one  that  told  him,  The  thirty  Tyrants  have  con 
demned  thee  to  death  ;  '  And  Nature  them,1  said  he.  What 
fondnesse  is  it  to  carke  and  care  so  much,  at  that  instant  arid 
passage  from  all  exemption  of  paine  and  care  ?  As  our  birth 
brought  us  the  birth  of  all  things,  so  shall  our  death  the  end 
of  all  things.  Therefore  is  it  as  great  follie  to  weepe,  we 
shall  not  live  a  hundred  yeeres  hence,  as  to  waile  we  lived  not 
a  hundred  yeeres  agoe.  '  Death  is  the  beginning  of  another 
6  life.'  So  wept  we,  and  so  much  did  it  cost  us  to  enter  into 
this  life  ;  and  so  did  we  spoile  us  of  our  ancient  vaile  in  entr- 
ing  into  it.  Nothing  can  be  grievous  that  is  but  once.  Is 
it  reason  so  long  to  feare  a  thing  of  so  short  time  ?  Long 
life  or  short  life  is  made  all  one  by  death.  For  long  or  short 

84 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

is  not  in  things  that  are  no  more.     Aristotle  saith,  there  are  CHAPTER 
certaine  litle  beasts  alongst  the  river  Hyspanis,  that  live  but        XIX 

one  day;  she  which  dies  at  8  a  clocke  in  the  morning,  dies  ,    at J:0  Pjj" 
i       J       .  i          11      j.1     .   j  •         .    f  •     ^1        />,  & -i  •     losophie.  is  to 

in  her  youth,  and  she  that  dies  at  5  in  the  afternoon,  dies    iearne  how 

in  her  decrepitude,  who  of  us  doth  not  laugh,  when  we  shall  to  die 
see  this  short  moment  of  continuance  to  be  had  in  considera 
tion  of  good  or  ill  fortune  ?  The  most  and  the  least  in  ours, 
if  we  compare  it  with  eternitie,  or  equall  it  to  the  lasting  of 
mountaines,  rivers,  stars,  and  trees,  or  any  other  living  crea 
ture,  is  no  lesse  ridiculous.  But  nature  compels  us  to  it. 
c  Depart  (saith  she,)  out  of  this  world,  even  as  you  came  into 
'  it.  The  same  way  you  came  from  death  to  life,  returne 
'  without  passion  or  amazement,  from  life  to  death :  your 
'  death  is  but  a  peece  of  the  worlds  order,  and  but  a  parcell 
'  of  the  worlds  life.' 

— inter  se  mortales  mutua  vivunt,  LUCR.  ii.  74, 

Et  quasi  cursores  vital  lampada  tradunt.  77. 

Mortall  men  live  by  mutuall  entercourse  : 
And  yeeld  their  life-torch,  as  men  in  a  course. 

Shal  I  not  change  this  goodly  contexture  of  things  for  you  ? 
It  is  the  condition  of  your  creation  :  death  is  a  part  of  your 
selves  :  you  flie  from  your  selves.  The  being  you  enjoy,  is 
equally  shared  betweene  life  and  death.  The  first  day  of 
your  birth  doth  as  wel  addresse  you  to  die,  as  to  live. 

Prima  qua  vitam  dedit,  hora,  carpsit.  SEN.  Her.  Sur. 

The  first  houre,  that  to  men  chor-  iii- 

Gave  life,  strait,  cropt  it  then. 

Nascentes  morimur,  finisque  ab  origine  pendet :  MANIL.  Ast. 

As  we  are  borne  we  die  ;  the  end  iv' 

Doth  of  th'  originall  depend. 

All  the  time  you  live,  you  steale  it  from  death  :  it  is  at  her 
charge.  The  continuall  worke  of  your  life,  is  to  contrive 
death  ;  you  are  in  death,  during  the  time  you  continue  in 
life :  for,  you  are  after  death,  when  you  are  no  longer  living. 
Or  if  you  had  rather  have  it  so,  you  are  dead  after  life  :  but 
during  life,  you  are  still  dying :  and  death  doth  more  rudely 
touch  the  dying,  than  the  dead,  and  more  lively  and  essen 
tially.  If  you  have  profited  by  life,  you  have  also  beene  fed 
thereby,  depart  then  satisfied. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


CHAPTER     LUCR.  iii.       Cur  non  ut  plenus  vitas  conviva  recedis  ? 
That^Phi-    982'  Why  like  a  full-fed  guest, 

losophie,  is  to  DePart  y°u  not  to  rest  ? 

learne  how        If  you  have  not  knowne  how  to  make  use  of  it  :  if  it  were 
to  die        unprofitable  to  you,  what  need  you  care  to  have  lost  it  ?  to 
what  end  would  you  enjoy  it  longer  ? 

985.  —  cur  amplius  addere  quarts 

Rursum  quod  pereat  male,  et  ingratum  occidat  omne  ? 

Why  seeke  you  more  to  gaine,  what  must  againe 
All  perish  ill,  and  passe  with  griefe  or  paine  ? 

Life  in  it  selfe  is  neither  good  nor  evill  :  it  is  the  place  of 
good  or  evill,  according  as  you  prepare  it  for  them.  And  if 
you  have  lived  one  day,  you  have  scene  all  :  one  day  is  equal 
to  all  other  daies  :  There  is  no  other  light,  there  is  no  other 
night.  This  Sunne,  this  Moone,  these  Starres,  and  this  dis 
position,  is  the  very  same,  which  your  forefathers  enjoyed, 
and  which  shall  also  entertaine  your  posteritie. 

Non  alium  videre  patres,  aliumve  nepotes 
Aspicient. 

No  other  saw  our  Sires  of  old, 

No  other  shall  their  sonnes  behold. 

And  if  the  worst  happen,  the  distribution  and  varietie  of 
all  the  acts  of  my  comedie,  is  performed  in  one  yeare.  If  you 
have  observed  the  course  of  my  foure  seasons  ;  they  containe 
the  infancie,  the  youth,  the  virilitie,  and  the  old  age  of  the 
world.  He  hath  plaied  his  part  :  he  knowes  no  other  wili- 
nesse  belonging  to  it,  but  to  begin  againe,  it  will  ever  be  the 
same,  and  no  other. 

123.  —  Versamur  ibidem,  atque  insumus  usque. 

We  still  in  one  place  turne  about, 
Still  there  we  are,  now  in,  now  out. 

VIRG.  Georg.  Atque  in  se  sua  per  vestigia  volvitur  annus. 

"•  4°3-  The  yeare  into  it  selfe  is  cast 

By  those  same  steps,  that  it  hath  past. 

I  am  not  purposed  to  devise  you  other  new  sports. 


LUCR.  iii.  978. 


86 


Nam  tibi  prceterea  quod  machiner,  inveniamque 
Quod  placeat,  nihil  est,  eadem  sunt  omnia  semper. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Else  nothing,  that  I  can  devise  or  frame,  CHAPTER 

Can  please  thee,  for  all  things  are  still  the  same.  XIX 

Make    roome   for  others,  as  others  have  done  for   you.  losophie,  is  to 
'  Equalitie  is  the  chiefe  ground-worke  of  equitie,  who  can    learne  how 
'  complaine  to  be  comprehended  where  all  are  contained  ? '       to  die 
So  may  you  live  long  enough,  you  shall  never  diminish  any 
thing  from  the  time  you  have  to  die  :  it  is  bootlesse ;  so  long 
shall  you  continue  in  that  state,  which  you  feare,  as  if  you 
had  died  being  in  your  swathing-clothes,  and  when  you  were 
sucking. 

— licet,  quot  vis,  vivendo  vincere  secla,  LUCR.  ii.  1126. 

Mors  aterna  tamen,  nihilominus  ilia  manebit. 

Though  yeares  you  live,  as  many  as  you  will, 
Death  is  eternall,  death  remaineth  still. 

And  I  will  so  please  you,  that  you  shall  have  no  discontent. 

In  vera  nescis  nullumfore  morte  alium  te,  ID.  iii.  9. 

Qui  possit  vivus  tibi  te  lugere  peremptum, 
Stansque  jacentem. 

Thou  know'st  not  there  shall  be  not  other  thou, 
When  thou  art  dead  indeed,  that  can  tell  how 
Alive  to  waile  thee  dying, 
Standing  to  waile  thee  lying. 

Nor  shall  you  wish  for  life,  which  you  so  much  desire. 

Nee  sibi  enim  quisquam  turn  se  vitamque  requirit,  9^3- 

Nee  desiderium  nostri  nos  afficit  ullum.  9^6. 

For  then  none  for  himselfe  himselfe  or  life  requires  : 
Nor  are  we  of  our  selves  affected  with  desires. 

Death  is  lesse  to  be  feared  than  nothing,  if  there  were  any 
thing  lesse  than  nothing. 

— multo  mortem  minus  ad  nos  esse  putandum,  970. 

Si  minus  esse  potest  quam  quod  nihil  esse  videmus. 

Death  is  much  lesse  to  us,  we  ought  esteeme, 
If  lesse  may  be,  than  what  doth  nothing  seeme. 

Nor  alive,  nor  dead,  it  doth  concerne  you  nothing.  Alive, 
because  you  are  :  Dead,  because  you  are  no  more.  Moreover, 
no  man  dies  before  his  houre.  The  time  you  leave  behinde 
was  no  more  yours,  than  that  which  was  before  your  birth, 
and  concerneth  you  no  more. 

87 


CHAPTER 
XIX 

That  to  Phi 
losophic,  is  to 
learne  how 
to  die 


1012. 


IB.  ii.  587. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

LUCR.  iii.       Respice  enim  qudm  nil  ad  nos  anteacta  vetustas 
1016.  Temporis  ceterni  fuerit. 

For  marke,  how  all  antiquitie  fore-gone 
Of  all  time  ere  we  were,  to  us  was  none. 

Wheresoever  your  life  endeth,  there  is  it  all.  The  profit  of 
life  consists  not  in  the  space,  but  rather  in  the  use.  Some  man 
hath  lived  long,  that  hath  had  a  short  life.  Follow  it  whilest 
you  have  time.  It  consists  not  in  number  of  yeeres,  but  in 
your  will,  that  you  have  lived  long  enough.  Did  you  thinke 
you  should  never  come  to  the  place,  where  you  were  still  going  ? 
There  is  no  way  but  hath  an  end.  And  if  company  may 
solace  you,  doth  not  the  whole  world  walke  the  same  path  ? 
— Omnia  te  vita  perfuncta  sequentur. 

Life  past,  all  things  at  last 

Shall  follow  thee  as  thou  hast  past. 

Doe  not  all  things  move  as  you  doe,  or  keepe  your  course  ? 
Is  there  any  thing  grows  not  old  together  with  your  selfe  ? 
A  thousand  men,  a  thousand  beasts,  and  a  thousand  other 
creatures  die  in  the  very  instant  that  you  die. 

Nam  nox  nulla  diem,  neque  noctem  aurora  sequuta  est, 
Quce  non  audierit  mistos  vagitibus  cegris 
Ploratus  mortis  comites  etfuneris  atri. 

No  night  ensued  day  light :  no  morning  followed  night, 
Which  heard  not  moaning  mixt  with  sick-mens  groaning, 
With  deaths  and  funerals  joyned  was  that  moaning. 

To  what  end  recoile  you  from  it,  if  you  cannot  goe  backe  ? 
You  have  scene  many  who  have  found  good  in  death,  ending 
thereby  many  many  miseries.  But  have  you  seene  any  that 
hath  received  hurt  thereby  ?  Therefore  is  it  meere  simplici- 
tie  to  condemne  a  thing  you  never  proved,  neither  by  your 
selfe  nor  any  other.  Why  doest  thou  complaine  of  me  and 
of  destinie  ?  Doe  we  offer  thee  any  wrong  ?  is  it  for  thee  to 
direct  us,  or  for  us  to  governe  thee  ?  Although  thy  age  be 
not  come  to  her  period,  thy  life  is.  A  little  man  is  a  whole 
man  as  well  as  a  great  man.  Neither  men  nor  their  lives  are 
measured  by  the  Ell.  Chiron  refused  immortalitie,  being 
informed  of  the  conditions  thereof,  even  by  the  God  of  time 
and  of  continuance,  Saturne  his  father.  Imagine  truly  how 
much  an  ever-during  life  would  be  lesse  tolerable  and  more 

88 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

painfull  to  a  man,  than  is  the  life  which  I  have  given  him  :  CHAPTER 
Had  you  not  death,  you  would  then  uncessantly  curse,  and         XIX 
cry  out  against  me,  that  I  had  deprived  you  of  it.     I  have  That  to  Phi- 
of  purpose  and  wittingly  blended  some  bitternesse  amongst  °earn«f  how  ° 
it,  that  so  seeing  the  commoditie  of  it's  use,  I  might  hinder        to  die 
you  from  over-greedily  embracing,  or  indiscreetly  calling  for 
it.     To  continue  in  this  moderation,  that  is,  neither  to  flie 
from  life,  nor  to  run  to  death  (which  I  require  of  you)  I  have 
tempered  both  the  one  and  other  betweene   sweetnes  and 
sowrenes.     I  first  taught  Thales  the  chiefest  of  your  Sages 
and  Wisemen,  that  to  live  and  die,  were  indifferent,  which 
made  him  answer  one  very  wisely,  who  asked  him,  wherfore 
he  died  not ;    '  Because,1  said  he,   '  it  is  indifferent.     The 
'  water,  the  earth,  the  aire,  the  fire,  and  other  members  of 
'  this  my  universe,  are  no  more  the  instruments  of  thy  life, 
6  than  of  thy  death.     Why  fearest  thou  thy  last  day  ?     He 
'  is  no  more  guiltie,  and  conferreth  no  more  to  thy  death, 
c  than  any  of  the  others.    It  is  not  the  last  step  that  causeth 
'  wearinesse :  it  only  declares  it.     All  daies  march  towards 
'  death,  only  the  last  comes  to  it.'     Behold  heere  the  good 
precepts    of  our  universall   mother  Nature.     I  have  often 
times  bethought  my  selfe  whence  it  proceedeth,  that  in  times 
of  warre,  the  visage  of  death  (whether  wee  see  it  in  us  or  in 
others)  seemeth  without  all  comparison  much  lesse  dreadful 
and  terrible  unto  us,  than  in  our  houses,  or  in  our  beds, 
otherwise  it  should  be  an  armie  of  Physitians  and  whiners, 
and  she  ever  being  one,  there  must  needs  bee  much  more 
assurance   amongst  countrie-people  and   of  base  condition, 
than  in  others.     I  verily  beleeve,  these  fearefull  lookes,  and 
astonishing  countenances  wherewith  we  encompasse  it,  are 
those  that  more  amaze  and  terrific  us  than  death  :  a  new 
forme  of  life  ;    the  out-cries    of  mothers  ;   the   wailing  of 
women  and  children ;  the  visitation  of  dismaid  and  swoun- 
ing  friends  :  the  assistance  of  a  number  of  pale-looking,  dis 
tracted,   and  whining  servants ;   a  darke  chamber :  tapers 
burning  round  about ;  our  couch  beset  round  with  Physitians 
and  Preachers ;  and  to  conclude,  nothing  but  horror  and 
astonishment  on  every  side  of  us  :  are  wee  not  alreadie  dead 
and  buried  ?     The  very  children  are  afraid  of  their  friends, 
when  they  see  them  masked ;  and  so  are  we :  The  maske 
K  89 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  must  as  well  be  taken  from  things,  as  from  men,  which  being 
XIX         removed,  we  shall  finde  nothing  hid  under  it,  but  the  very 
same    death,   that   a    seely    varlet,   or   a    simple    maid- 
servant,  did  lately  suffer  without  amazement  or  feare. 
Happie  is  that  death,  which  takes  all  leasure 
from  the  preparations  of  such  an  equipage. 


That*° 


to  die 


THE    TWENTIETH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  force  of  Imagination. 

ORTIS  imaginatio  general  casum:  'A 
6  strong  imagination  begetteth  chance,1 
say  learned  clearks.  I  am  one  of  those 
that  feele  a  very  great  conflict  and  power 
of  imagination.  All  men  are  shockt  there 
with,  and  some  overthrowne  by  it.  The 
impression  of  it  pierceth  me,  and  for 
want  of  strength  to  resist  her,  my  en  de 
vour  is  to  avoid  it.  I  could  live  with  the  only  assistance 
of  holy  and  merry-hearted  men.  The  sight  of  others 
anguishes  doth  sensibly  drive  me  into  anguish ;  and  my 
sense  hath  often  usurped  the  sense  of  a  third  man.  If 
one  cough  continually,  he  provokes  my  lungs  and  throat.  I 
am  more  unwilling  to  visit  the  sicke  dutie  doth  engage  me 
unto,  than  those  to  whom  I  am  little  beholding,  and  regard 
least.  I  apprehend  the  evill  which  I  studie,  and  place  it  in 
me.  I  deeme  it  not  strange  that  she  brings  both  agues  and 
death  to  such  as  give  her  scope  to  worke  her  wil,  and 
applaud  e  her.  Simon  Thomas  was  a  great  Physitian  in  his 
daies.  I  remember  upon  a  time  comming  by  chance  to  visit 
a  rich  old  man  that  dwelt  in  Tholouse,  and  who  was  troubled 
with  the  cough  of  the  lungs,  who  discoursing  with  the  said 
Simon  Thomas  of  the  meanes  of  his  recoverie,  he  told  him, 
that  one  of  the  best  was,  to  give  me  occasion  to  be  delighted 
in  his  companie,  and  that  fixing  his  eyes  upon  the  livelines 
and  freshnes  of  my  face,  and  setting  his  thoughts  upon  the 
jolitie  and  vigor,  wherewith  my  youthfull  age  did  then 
flourish,  and  filling  all  his  senses  with  my  florishing  estate, 
90 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

his  habitude  might  thereby  be  amended,  and  his  health  re-  CHAPTER 
covered.    But  he  forgot  to  say,  that  mine  might  also  be  em-          XX 
paired  and  infected.    Gallus  Vibius  did  so  well  enure  his  °off 
minde  to  comprehend  the  essence  and  motions  of  folly,  that   ( 
he  so  transported  his  judgement  from  out  his  seat,  as  he 
could  never  afterward  bring  it  to  his  right  place  againe :  and 
might  rightly  boast,  to  have  become  a  foole  through  wisdome. 
Some  there  are,  that  through  feare  anticipate  the  hang-mans 
hand  ;  as  he  did,  whose  friends  having  obtained  his  pardon, 
and  putting  away  the  cloth  wherewith  he  was  hood-winkt, 
that  he  might  heare  it  read,  was  found  starke  dead  upon  the 
scaffold,  wounded  only  by  the  stroke  of  imagination.     Wee 
sweat,  we  shake,  we  grow  pale,  and  we  blush  at  the  motions 
of  our  imaginations  ;  and  wallowing  in  our  beds  we  feele  our 
bodies  agitated  and  turmoiled  at  their  apprehensions,  yea  in 
such  manner,  as  sometimes  we  are  ready  to  yeeld  up  the 
spirit.    And  burning  youth  (although  asleepe)  is  often  there 
with  so  possessed  and  enfolded,  that  dreaming  it  doth  satis- 
fie  and  enjoy  her  amorous  desires. 

Vt  quasi  transactis  sape  omnibu  rebu  profundant  LUCR.  iv. 

Fluminis  ingentes  fluctus ,  vestemque  cruentent.  1027. 

And  if  all  things  were  done_,  they  powre  foorth  streames, 
And  bloodie  their  night-garment  in  their  dreames. 

And  although  it  be  not  strange  to  see  some  men  have 
homes  growing  upon  their  head  in  one  night,  that  had  none 
when  they  went  to  bed  :  notwithstanding  the  fortune  or  suc- 
cesse  of  Cyppus  King  of  Italic  is  memorable,  who  because  the 
day  before  he  had  with  earnest  affection,  assisted  and  beene 
attentive  at  a  bul-baiting,  and  having  all  night  long  dreamed 
of  homes  in  his  head,  by  the  very  force  of  imagination  brought 
them  forth  the  next  morning  in  his  forehead.  An  earnest 
passion  gave  the  son  of  Croesus  his  voice,  which  nature  had 
denied  him.  And  Antiochus  got  an  ague,  by  the  excellent 
beautie  of  Stratonice  so  deepely  imprinted  in  his  minde. 
Plinie  reporteth  to  have  scene  Lucius  Cossitius  upon  his 
marriage  day  to  have  beene  transformed  from  a  woman  to  a 
man.  Pontanus  and  others  recount  the  like  Metamorphosies 
to  have  hapned  in  Italic  these  ages  past :  And  through  a 
vehement  desire  of  him  and  his  mother. 

91 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  OVID.  Metam.         Vota  puer  solvit,  qucefcemina  voverat  Iphis. 

XX  ix.  794-  T  I.-       i_        J.-L.  J.-L  -j 

Of  the   force  Ip^s  a  boy,  the  vowes  then  paid, 

of  Imaffina  Which  he  vow'd  when  he  was  a  maid. 

My  selfe  traveling  on  a  time  by  Vitry  in  France,  hapned  to 
see  a  man,  whom  the  Bishop  of  Soissons  had  in  confirmation, 
named  Germane,  and  all  the  inhabitants  thereabout  have 
both  knowne  and  scene  to  be  a  woman-childe,  untill  she  was 
two  and  twentie  yeares  of  age,  called  by  the  name  of  Marie. 
He  was,  when  I  saw  him,  of  good  yeares,  and  had  a  long 
beard,  and  was  yet  unmarried.  He  saith,  that  upon  a  time 
leaping,  and  straining  himselfe  to  overleape  another,  he  wot 
not  how,  but  where  before  he  was  a  woman,  he  suddenly  felt 
the  instrument  of  a  man  to  come  out  of  him ;  and  to  this 
day  the  maidens  of  that  towne  and  countrie  have  a  song  in 
use,  by  which  they  warne  one  another,  when  they  are  leap 
ing,  not  to  straine  themselves  overmuch,  or  open  their  legs  too 
wide,  for  feare  they  should  bee  turned  to  boies,  as  Marie 
Germane  was.  It  is  no  great  wonder,  that  such  accidents 
doe  often  happen,  for  if  imagination  have  power  in  such 
things,  it  is  so  continually  annexed,  and  so  forcibly  fastened 
to  this  subject,  that  lest  she  should  so  often  fall  into  the 
relaps  of  the  same  thought,  and  sharpnesse  of  desire,  it  is 
better  one  time  for  all,  to  incorporate  this  virile  part  unto 
wenches.  Some  will  not  sticke  to  ascribe  the  scarres  of 
King  Dagobert,  or  the  cicatrices  of  Saint  Francis  unto  the 
power  of  Imagination.  Othersome  will  say,  that  by  the 
force  of  it,  bodies  are  sometimes  removed  from  their  places. 
And  Celsus  reports  of  a  Priest,  whose  soule  was  ravished  into 
such  an  extasie,  that  for  a  long  time  the  body  remained  void 
of  all  respiration  and  sense.  Saint  Augustine  speaketh  of 
another,  who  if  hee  but  heard  any  lamentable  and  wailefull 
cries,  would  suddenly  fall  into  a  swowne,  and  bee  so  forcibly 
carried  from  himselfe,  that  did  any  chide  and  braule  never  so 
loud,  pinch  and  thumpe  him  never  so  much,  he  could  not  be 
made  to  stirre,  untill  hee  came  to  himselfe  againe.  Then 
would  he  say,  he  had  heard  sundry  strange  voyces,  comming 
as  it  were  from  a  farre,  and  perceiving  his  pinches  and  bruses, 
wondered  at  them.  And  that  it  was  not  an  obstinate  con 
ceit,  or  wilfull  humour  in  him,  or  against  his  feeling  sense,  it 

92 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

plainly   appeared   by   this,  because   during   his   extasie,  he  CHAPTER 
seemed  to  have  neither  pulse  nor  breath.     It  is  very  likely         XX 
that  the  principall  credit  of  visions,  of  enchantments,  and   of  l  ®    £™e 
such  extraordinary  effects,  proceedeth   from    the  power  of         tjon 
imaginations,  working  especially  in  the  mindes  of  the  vulgar 
sort,  as  the  weakest  and  seeliest,  whose  conceit  and  beleefe  is 
so  seized  upon,  that  they  imagine  to  see  what  they  see  not. 
I  am  yet  in  doubt,  these  pleasant  bonds,  wherewith   our 
world  is  so  fettered,  and  France  so  pestered,  that  nothing 
else  is  spoken  of,  are  haply  but  the  impressions  of  appre 
hension,  and  effects  of  feare.     For  I  know  by  experience, 
that  some  one,  for  whom  I  may  as  well  answer  as  for  my  selfe, 
and  in  whom  no  manner  of  suspition  either  of  weaknesse  or 
enchantment  might  fall,  hearing  a  companion  of  his  make 
report  of  an  extraordinary  faint  sowning,  wherein  he  was 
fallen,  at  such  a  time,  as  he  least  looked  for  it,  and  wrought 
him  no  small  shame,  whereupon  the  horrour  of  his  report 
did  so  strongly  strike  his  imagination,  as  he  ranne  the  same 
fortune,   and   fell   into  a  like  drooping:    And  was  thence 
forward  subject  to  fall  into  like  fits:  So  did  the  passionate 
remembrance  of  his   inconvenience   possesse   and   tyrannize 
him ;  but  his  fond  doting  was  in  time  remedied  by  another 
kinde  of  raving.     For  himselfe  avowing  and  publishing  afore- 
hand  the  infirmitie  he  was  subject  unto,  the  contention  of 
his  soule  was  solaced  upon  this,  that  bearing  his  evill  as  ex 
pected,  his  dutie  thereby  diminished,  and   he  grieved  lesse 
thereat.     And  when  at  his  choice,  he  hath  had  law  and 
power  (his  thought  being  cleered  and  unmasked,  his  body 
finding  it  selfe  in  his  right  due  and  place)  to  make  the  same 
to  be  felt,  seized  upon,  and  apprehended  by  others  know 
ledge  :  he  hath  fully  and  perfectly  recovered  himselfe.     If  a 
man  have  once  beene  capable,  he  cannot  afterward  be  incap 
able,  except  by  a  just  and  absolute  weaknesse.     Such  a  mis- 
chiefe  is  not  to  be  feared,  but  in  the  enterprises,  where  our 
minde  is  beyond  all  measure  bent  with  desire  and  respect ; 
and  chiefly  where  opportunitie   comes  unexpected,  and  re 
quires  a  sudden  dispatch.     There  is  no  meanes  for  a  man  to 
recover  himselfe  from  this  trouble ;  I  know  some,  who  have 
found  to  come  unto  it  with  their  bodies  as  it  were  halfe 
glutted  else-where,  thereby  to  stupifie  or  allay  the  heat  of 

93 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  that  furie,  and  who  through  age,  finde  themselves  lesse  un- 
Qf  .?Xf  able,  by  how  much  more  they  be  lesse  able :  And  another, 

of  Imagin™6  wno  ^ath  a^so  f°und  g°°d>  in  that  a  friend  of  his  assured  him 
tion  £  to  bee  provided  with  a  counter-battery  of  forcible  enchant 
ments,  to  preserve  him  in  any  such  conflict :  It  is  not  amisse 
I  relate  how  it  was.  An  Earle  of  very  good  place,  with 
whom  I  was  familiarly  acquainted,  being  married  to  a  very 
faire  Lady,  who  had  long  beene  solicited  for  love,  by  one 
assisting  at  the  wedding,  did  greatly  trouble  his  friends  ;  but 
most  of  all  an  old  Lady  his  kins-woman,  who  was  chiefe  at 
the  marriage,  and  in  whose  house  it  was  solemnized,  as  she 
that  much  feared  such  sorceries  and  witchcrafts :  which  shee 
gave  mee  to  understand,  I  comforted  her  as  well  as  I  could, 
and  desired  her  to  relie  upon  me :  I  had  by  chance  a  peece 
of  golden  plate  in  my  trunke,  wherein  were  ingraven  certaine 
celestiall  figures,  good  against  the  Sunne-beames,  and  for  the 
head-ach,  being  fitly  laid  upon  the  suture  of  the  head :  and 
that  it  might  the  better  be  kept  there,  it  was  sewed  to  a 
riband,  to  be  fastened  under  the  chin.  A  fond  doting  con 
ceit,  and  cosin-germane  to  that  wee  now  speake  of.  James 
Peletier  had  whilest  he  lived  in  my  house,  bestowed  that 
singular  gift  upon  mee ;  I  advised  my  selfe  to  put  it  to  some 
use,  and  told  the  Earle,  he  might  haply  be  in  danger,  and 
come  to  some  misfortune  as  others  had  done,  the  rather 
because  some  were  present,  that  would  not  sticke  to  procure 
him  some  ill  lucke,  and  which  was  worse,  some  spitefull 
shame  ;  but  neverthelesse  I  willed  him  boldly  to  goe  to  bed  : 
For  I  would  shew  him  the  part  of  a  true  friend,  and  in  his 
need,  spare  not  for  his  good  to  employ  a  miracle,  which  was 
in  my  power ;  alwaies  provided,  that  on  his  honour  he  would 
promise  me  faithfully  to  keepe  it  very  secret;  which  was 
only,  that  when  about  mid-night  he  should  have  his  candle 
brought  him,  if  he  had  had  no  good  successe  in  his  businesse, 
he  should  make  such  and  such  a  signe  to  me.  It  fel  out,  his 
mind  was  so  quailed,  and  his  eares  so  dulled,  that  by  reason 
of  the  bond  wherewith  the  trouble  of  his  imagination  had 
tied  him,  hee  could  not  run  on  poste:  and  at  the  houre 
appointed,  made  the  signe  agreed  upon  betweene  us,  I  came 
and  whispered  him  in  the  eare,  that  under  pretence  to  put 
us  all  out  of  his  chamber,  he  should  rise  out  of  his  bed,  and 
94 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

in  jesting  manner  take  my  night-go wne  which  I  had  on,  and  CHAPTER 
put  it  upon  himselfe  (which  he  might  well  doe,  because  wee         XX 

were  much  of  one  stature)  and  keepe  it  on  till  he  had  per-  Of,  *  e  .    ce 
.       i  '  i         r   .  i  i  i       111       of  Imaffina- 

formed  my  appointment,  which  was,  that  when  we  should  be 

gone  out  of  the  Chamber,  he  should  withdraw  himselfe  to 
make  water,  and  using  certaine  jestures,  I  had  shewed  him, 
speake  such  words  thrice  over.  And  every  time  hee  spake 
them  he  should  girt  the  ribband,  which  I  put  into  his  hands, 
and  very  carefully  place  the  plate  thereto  fastned,  just  upon 
his  kidneyes,  and  the  whole  figure,  in  such  a  posture.  All 
which  when  he  had  accordingly  done,  and  the  last  time  so 
fastened  the  ribband,  that  it  might  neither  be  untide  nor 
stirred  from  his  place,  he  should  then  boldly  and  confidently 
returne  to  his  charge,  and  not  forget  to  spread  my  night- 
gowne  upon  his  bed,  but  so  as  it  might  cover  them  both. 
These  fopperies  are  the  chiefe  of  the  effect.  Our  thought 
being  unable  so  to  free  it  selfe,  but  some  strange  meanes  will 
proceed  from  some  abstruse  learning :  Their  inanitie  gives 
them  weight  and  credit.  To  conclude,  it  is  most  certaine, 
my  Characters  proved  more  venerian  than  solare,  more  in 
action,  than  in  prohibition.  It  was  a  ready  and  curious 
humour  drew  me  to  this  effect,  farre  from  my  nature.  I  am 
an  enemie  to  craftie  and  fained  actions,  and  hate  all  suttletie 
in  my  hands,  not  only  recreative,  but  also  profitable.  If  the 
action  be  not  vicious,  the  course  unto  it  is  faultie.  Amasis 
King  of  ^Egypt,  tooke  to  wife  Laodice,  a  very  beauteous 
yong  virgin  of  Greece,  and  he  that  before  had  in  every  other 
place  found  and  shewed  himselfe  a  lustie  gallant,  found  him 
selfe  so  short,  when  he  came  to  grapple  with  her,  that  he 
threatned  to  kill  her,  supposing  it  had  beene  some  charme 
or  sorcerie.  As  in  all  things  that  consist  in  the  fantasie, 
she  addrest  him  to  devotion.  And  having  made  his  vowes 
and  promises  to  Venus,  he  found  himselfe  divinely  freed,  even 
from  the  first  night  of  his  oblations  and  sacrifices.  Now  they 
wrong  us,  to  receive  and  admit  us  with  their  wanton,  squeamish, 
quarellous  countenances,  which  setting  us  a  fire,  extinguish  us. 
Pythagoras  his  neece  was  wont  to  say,  'That  a  woman 
4  which  lies  with  a  man  ought,  together  with  her  petie-coate, 
'  leave  off  all  bashfulnesse,  and  with  her  petie-coate,  take  the 
'  same  againe.'  The  minde  of  the  assailant  molested  with 

95 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  sundry  different  alarums,  is  easily  dismaid.     And  he  whom 
XX         imagination  hath  once  made  to  suffer  this  shame  (and  she 
oflma  iSThath  caused  the  same  to  be  felt  ^ut  in  the  first  acquaint- 
tioif11  "   ances  ;  because  they  are  then  burning  and  violent,  and  in  the 
first  acquaintance  and  comming  together,  or  triall  a  man 
gives  of  himselfe,  he  is  much  more  afraid  and  quaint  to  misse 
the  marke  he  shoots  at)  having  begun  ill  he  fals  into  an  ague 
or  spite   of  this   accident,  which   afterward   continueth   in 
succeeding  occasions.     Married  men,  because  time  is  at  their 
command,  and  they  may  go  to  it  when  they  list,  ought  never 
to    presse   or   importune   their   enterprise,   unlesse   they  be 
readie.     And  it  is  better  undecently  to  faile  in  hanseling  the 
nuptiall  bed,  full  of  agitation  and  fits,  by  waiting  for  some 
or  other  fitter  occasion,  and  more  private  opportunitie,  lest 
sudden  and  alarmed,  than  to  fall  into  a  perpetuall  miserie, 
by  apprehending  an  astonishment  and  desperation  of  the  first 
refusall.     Before  possession  taken,  a  patient  ought  by  sallies, 
and   divers  times,  lightly  assay  and  offer  himselfe  without 
vexing  or  opiniating  himselfe,  definitively  to  convince  him 
selfe.     Such  as  know  their  members  docile  and  tractable  by 
nature,  let  them  only  endevour  to  countercosin  their  fantasie. 
Men   have   reason  to  checke   the   indocile   libertie  of  this 
member,  for  so  importunately  insinuating  himselfe  when  we 
have  no  need  of  him,  and  so  importunately,  or  as  I  may  say 
impertinently  failing,  at  what  time  we  have  most  need  of 
him;  and  so  imperiously  contesting  by  his  authority  with 
our  will,  refusing  with   such  fiercenes   and   obstinacie   our 
solicitations  both  mentall  and  manuall.     Neverthelesse  if  a 
man  inasmuch  as  he  doth  gormandize  and  devour  his  rebel 
lion,  and  drawes  a  triall  by  his  condemnation,  would  pay  me 
for  to  plead  his  cause,  I  would  peradventure  make  other  of 
our  members  to  be  suspected  to  have  (in  envy  of  his  import 
ance,  and  sweetnesse  of  his  use)  devised  this  imposture,  and 
framed  this  set  quarrell  against  him,  and  by  some  malicious 
complot  armed  the  world  against  him,  enviously  charging 
him  alone  with  a  fault  common  to  them  all.     For  I  referre 
it  to  your  thought,  whether  there  be  any  one  particular  part 
of  our  body,  that  doth  not  sometimes  refuse  her  particular 
operation  to  our  will  and  wish,  and  that  doth  not  often 
exercise  and  practise  against  our  will.     All  of  them  have 
96 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

their  proper  passions,  which  without  any  leave  of  ours  doe  CHAPTER 
either  awaken  or  lull  them  asleepe.  How  often  doe  the  XX 
forced  motions  and  changes  of  our  faces  witnesse  the  secretest  *  orce 
and  most  lurking  thoughts  we  have,  and  bewray  them  to 
by-standers  ?  The  same  cause  that  doth  animate  this 
member,  doth  also,  unwitting  to  us,  embolden  our  heart, 
our  lungs,  and  our  pulses.  The  sight  of  a  pleasing  object, 
reflecting  imperceptibly  on  us,  the  flame  of  a  contagious  or 
aguish  emotion.  Is  there  nought  besides  these  muscles  and 
veines,  that  rise  and  fall  without  the  consent,  not  only  of 
our  will,  but  also  of  our  thought  ?  We  cannot  command 
our  haire  to  stand  an  end,  nor  our  skinne  to  startle  for  desire 
or  feare.  Our  hands  are  often  carried  where  we  direct  them 
not.  Our  tongue  and  voice  are  sometimes  to  seeke  of  their 
faculties,  the  one  loseth  her  speech,  the  other  her  nimble- 
nesse.  Even  when  we  have  nothing  to  feed  upon,  we  would 
willingly  forbid  it :  the  appetites  to  eat,  or  list  to  drinke, 
doe  not  leave  to  move  the  parts  subject  to  them,  even  as 
this  other  appetite,  and  so,  though  it  be  out  of  season,  for- 
saketh  us,  when  he  thinks  good.  Those  instruments  that 
serve  to  discharge  the  belly,  have  their  proper  compressions 
and  dilatations,  besides  our  intent,  and  against  our  meaning, 
as  these  are  destined  to  discharge  the  kidneis.  And  that 
which,  the  better  to  authorize  our  wills  power,  Saint 
Augustin  alleageth,  to  have  scene  one,  who  could  at  all 
times  command  his  posterior,  to  let  as  many  scapes  as  he 
would,  and  which  Vives  endeareth  by  the  example  of  an 
other  in  his  daies,  who  could  let  tunable  and  organized  ones, 
following  the  tune  of  any  voice  propounded  unto  his  eares, 
inferreth  the  pure  obedience  of  that  member :  than  which, 
none  is  commonly  more  indiscreet  and  tumultuous.  Seeing 
my  selfe  know  one  so  skittish  and  mutinous,  that  these  fortie 
yeares  keepes  his  master  in  such  awe,  that  will  he,  or  nill  he, 
he  will  with  a  continuall  breath,  constant  and  unintermitted 
custome  breake  winde  at  his  pleasure,  and  so  brings  him  to 
his  grave.  And  would  to  God  I  knew  it  but  by  Histories, 
how  that  many  times  our  belly,  being  restrained  thereof, 
brings  us  even  to  the  gates  of  a  pining  and  languishing 
death :  And  that  the  Emperour,  who  gave  us  free  leave  to 
vent  at  all  times,  and  every  where,  had  also  given  us  the 
L  97 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  power  to  doe  it.  But  our  will,  by  whose  privilege  we 
XX  advance  this  reproch,  how  much  more  likely,  and  consonant 

Of  * he  orce  to  trueth  may  we  tax  it  of  rebellion,  and  accuse  it  of  sedition, 
^7  reason  of  its  unrulinesse  and  disobedience  ?  Will  shee  at 
all  times  doe  that,  which  we  would  have  her  willingly  to 
doe  ?  Is  shee  not  often  willing  to  effect  that,  which  we 
forbid  her  to  desire  ?  and  that  to  our  manifest  prej  udice  and 
dammage  ?  Doth  she  suffer  her  selfe  to  be  directed  by  the 
conclusions  of  our  reason  ?  To  conclude,  I  would  urge  in 
defence  of  my  client,  that  it  would  please  the  Judges  to 
consider,  that  concerning  this  matter,  his  cause  being  inseper- 
ably  conjoyned  to  a  consort,  and  indistinctly  :  yet  will  not 
a  man  addresse  himselfe  but  to  him,  both  by  the  arguments 
and  charges,  which  can  no  way  appertaine  to  his  said  consort. 
For,  his  effect  is  indeed  sometime  importunately  to  invite, 
but  to  refuse  never :  and  also  to  invite  silently  and  quietly. 
Therefore  is  the  sawcinesse  and  illegalitie  of  the  accusers 
scene.  Howsoever  it  be,  protesting  that  Advocates  and 
Judges  may  wrangle,  contend,  and  give  sentence,  what,  and 
how  they  please,  Nature  will  in  the  meane  time  follow  her 
course :  who,  had  she  endued  this  member  with  any  particular 
privilege,  yet  had  she  done  but  right,  and  shewed  but  reason. 
Author  of  the  only  immortall  worke,  of  mortall  men.  Divine 
worke  according  to  Socrates  ;  and  love,  desire  of  immortalitie, 
and  immortall  Daemon  himselfe.  Some  man  peradventure, 
by  the  effects  of  imagination  leaveth  the  pox  or  Kings  evill 
heere,  which  his  companion  carrieth  into  Spaine  againe  :  loe 
heere  why  in  such  cases  men  are  accustomed  to  require  a 
prepared  minde,  wherefore  doe  Physitians  labour  and  practise 
before  hand  the  conceit  and  credence  of  their  patients,  with 
so  many  false  promises  of  their  recoverie  and  health,  unlesse 
it  be  that  the  effect  of  imagination  may  supple  ar»d  prepare 
the  imposture  of  their  decoction  ?  They  knew  that  one  of 
their  trades-master  hath  left  written,  how  some  men  have 
been  found,  in  whom  the  only  sight  of  a  potion  hath  wrought 
his  due  operation  :  All  which  humor  or  caprice  is  now  come 
into  my  minde,  upon  the  report  which  an  Apothecarie, 
whilome  a  servant  in  my  fathers  house,  was  wont  to  tell  me, 
a  man  by  knowledge  simple,  and  by  birth  a  Switzer  ;  a 
nation  little  vaine-glorious,  and  not  much  given  to  lying, 
98 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

which  was,  that  for  a  long  time  he  had  knowne  a  Merchant  CHAPTER 
in  Tholouse,  sickish,  and  much  troubled  with  the  stone,  and  xx 
who  often  had  need  of  glisters,  who  according  to  the  fits  and  °Jf  ™a  r™6 
occurrences  of  his  evill,  caused  them  diversly  to  be  prescribed 
by  Physitians.  Which  being  brought  him,  no  accustomed 
forme  to  them  belonging  was  omitted,  and  would  often  taste 
whether  they  were  too  hot,  and  view  them  well,  and  lying 
along  upon  his  bed,  on  his  bellie,  and  all  complements  per 
formed,  only  injection  excepted,  which  ceremony  ended,  the 
Apothecarie  gone,  and  the  patient  lying  in  his  bed,  even  as 
if  he  had  received  a  glister  indeed,  he  found  and  felt  the 
very  same  effect,  which  they  doe  that  have  effectually  taken 
them.  And  if  the  Physitian  saw  it  had  not  wrought  suffi 
ciently,  he  would  accordingly  give  him  two  or  three  more 
in  the  same  manner.  My  witnesse  protesteth,  that  the  sicke 
mans  wife,  to  save  charges  (for  he  paid  for  them  as  if  he  had 
received  them)  having  sometimes  assaid  to  make  them  onely 
with  luke  warme  water,  the  effect  discovered  the  craft,  and 
being  found  not  to  worke  at  all,  they  were  forced  to  returne 
to  the  former,  and  use  the  Apothecarie.  A  woman  suppos 
ing  to  have  swallowed  a  pinne  with  her  bread,  cried  and 
vexed  her-selfe,  even  as  if  she  had  felt  an  intolerable  paine 
in  her  throat,  where  she  imagined  the  same  to  sticke ;  but 
because  there  appeared  neither  swelling  or  alteration,  a 
skilfull  man  deeming  it  to  be  but  a  fantasie  conceived,  or 
opinion,  apprehended  by  eating  of  some  gretty  peece  of 
bread,  which  haply  might  pricke  her  in  the  swallow,  made 
her  to  vomit,  and  unknowne  to  her,  cast  a  pinne  in  that 
which  she  had  vomited.  Which  the  woman  perceiving,  and 
imagining  she  had  cast  the  same,  was  presently  eased  of  her 
paine.  I  have  knowne  a  Gentleman,  who  having  feasted  a 
company  of  very  honest  Gentlemen  and  Gentlewomen,  in 
his  owne  house,  by  way  of  sport,  and  in  jest,  boasted  two  or 
three  daies  after  (for  there  was  no  such  thing)  that  he  had 
made  them  eat  of  a  baked  Cat ;  whereat  the  Gentlewoman 
of  the  companie  apprehended  such  horror,  that  falling  into 
a  violent  ague  and  distemper  of  her  stomacke,  she  could  by 
no  meanes  be  recovered.  Even  brute  beasts,  as  well  as  we, 
are  scene  to  be  subject  to  the  power  of  imagination  ;  witnesse 
some  Dogs,  who  for  sorrow  of  their  Masters  death  are  scene 

99 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  die,  and  whom  we  ordinarily  see  to  startle  and  barke  in 

xx         their  sleep,  and  horses  to  neigh  and  struggle.     But  all  this 

Of  the  force  mav  ^e  referred  to  the  narrow  future  of  the  Spirit  and  the 

tion   '     body,  entercommunicating  their  fortunes  one  unto  another. 

It  is  another  thing,  that  imagination  doth  sometimes  worke, 

not  only  against  her  owne  body,  but  also  against  that  of 

others.     And  even  as  one  body  ejecteth  a  disease  to  his 

neighbour,  as  doth  evidently  appeare  by  the  plague,  pox,  or 

sore  eies,  that  goe  from  one  to  another : 

OVID.  Am.  ii.  Dum  spectant  oculi  Icesos,  laeduntur  et  ipsi: 

219.  Multaque  corporibus  transitions  nocent. 

Eies  become  sore,,  while  they  looke  on  sore  eies  : 
By  passage  many  ills  our  limmes  surprise. 

Likewise  the  imagination  moved  and  tossed  by  some 
vehemence,  doth  cast  some  darts,  that  may  offend  a  strange 
object.  Antiquitie  hath  held,  that  certaine  women  of  Scithia, 
being  provoked  and  vexed  against  some  men,  had  the  power 
to  kill  them,  only  with  their  looke.  The  Tortoises  and  the 
Estriges  hatch  their  egges  with  their  looks  only,  a  signe  that 
they  have  some  ejaculative  vertue.  And  concerning  witches 
they  are  said  to  have  offensive  and  harme-working  eies. 
VIRG.  Buc.  Nescio  quis  teneros  oculus  mihi  fascinat  agnos. 

Eel.  iii.  103.  My  tender  Lambs  I  cannot  see, 

By  what  bad  eie,  bewitched  be. 

Magitians  are  but  ill  respondents  for  me.  So  it  is,  that  by 
experience  wee  see  women  to  transferre  divers  markes  of  their 
fantasies,  unto  children  they  beare  in  their  wombes :  witnes 
she  that  brought  forth  a  Blacke-a-more.  There  was  also 
presented  unto  Charles  King  of  Bohemia,  an  Emperour,  a 
young  girle,  borne  about  Pisa,  all  shagd  and  hairy  over  and 
over,  which  her  mother  said,  to  have  beene  conceived  so,  by 
reason  of  an  image  of  Saint  lohn  Baptist,  that  was  so 
painted,  and  hung  over  her  bed.  That  the  like  is  in  beasts, 
is  witnessed  by  Jacobs  sheepe,  and  also  by  partriges  and 
hares,  that  grow  white  by  the  snow  upon  mountaines.  There 
was  lately  scene  a  cat  about  my  owne  house,  so  earnestly  eye 
ing  a  bird,  sitting  upon  a  tree,  that  he  seeing  the  Cat,  they 
both  so  wistly  fixed  their  looks  one  upon  another,  so  long, 
that  at  last,  the  bird  fell  downe  as  dead  in  the  Cats  pawes, 
either  drunken  by  his  owne  strong  imagination,  or  drawne 

100 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

by  some  attractive  power  of  the  Cat.  Those  that  love  hawk-  CHAPTER 
ing,  have  haply  heard  the  Falkner  tale,  who  earnestly  fixing 
his  sight  upon  a  Kite  in  the  aire,  laid  a  wager  that  with  the 
only  force  of  his  looke,  he  would  make  it  come  stooping  ° 
downe  to  the  ground,  and  as  some  report  did  it  many  times. 
The  Histories  I  borrow,  I  referre  to  the  consciences  of  those 
I  take  them  from.  The  discourses  are  mine,  and  hold  to 
gether  by  the  proofe  of  reason,  not  of  experiences :  each  man 
may  adde  his  example  to  them :  and  who  hath  none,  con 
sidering  the  number  and  varietie  of  accidents,  let  him  not 
leave  to  think,  there  are  store  of  them.  If  I  come  not  well 
for  my  selfe,  let  another  come  for  me.  So  in  the  studie 
wherein  I  treat  of  our  manners  and  motions,  the  fabulous 
testimonies,  alwaies  provided  they  be  likely  and  possible, 
may  serve  to  the  purpose,  as  well  as  the  true,  whether  it 
hapned  or  no,  be  it  at  Rome,  or  at  Paris,  to  lohn  or  Peter, 
it  is  alwaies  a  tricke  of  humane  capacitie,  of  which  I  am 
profitably  advised  by  this  report.  I  see  it  and  reape  profit 
by  it,  as  well  in  shadow  as  in  bodie.  And  in  divers  lessons 
that  often  histories  afford,  I  commonly  make  use  of  that, 
which  is  most  rare  and  memorable.  Some  writers  there  are, 
whose  end  is  but  to  relate  the  events.  Mine,  if  I  could 
attaine  to  it,  should  be  to  declare,  what  may  come  to  passe, 
touching  the  same.  It  is  justly  allowed  in  schooles,  to 
suppose  similitudes,  when  they  have  none.  Yet  doe  not  I 
so,  and  concerning  that  point,  in  superstitious  religion,  I 
exceed  all  historicall  credit.  To  the  examples  I  here  set 
downe,  of  what  I  have  read,  heard,  done,  or  scene,  I  have 
forbid  my  selfe  so  much  as  to  dare  to  change  the  least,  or 
alter  the  idlest  circumstances.  My  conscience  doth  not 
falsifie  the  least  jot.  I  wot  not  whether  my  insight  doth. 
Concerning  this  subject  I  doe  sometimes  enter  into  conceit, 
that  it  may  well  become  a  Divine,  a  Philosopher,  or  rather 
men  of  exquisite  conscience,  and  exact  wisdome,  to  write 
histories.  How  can  they  otherwise  engage  their  credit  upon 
a  popular  reputation?  How  can  they  answer  for  the 
thoughts  of  unknowne  persons  ?  And  make  their  bare  con 
jectures  passe  for  currant  paiment  ?  Of  the  actions  of  divers 
members,  acted  in  their  presence,  they  would  refuse  to  beare 
witnes  of  them,  if  by  a  j  udge  they  were  put  to  their  corporall 

101 


CHAPTER 
XX 

°off  Ima  hia^ 
tion 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

oath.     And  there  is  no  man  so  familiarly  knowne  to  them, 
of  whose  inward  intention  they  would  undertake  to  answer 

at  fulL      *  h°ld   **  leSSG   hazardous   to  write   of  things   P8^ 
than  present  ;  forasmuch  as  the  writer  is  not  bound  to  give 

account  but  of  a  borrowed  trueth.  Some  perswade  mee  to 
write  the  affaires  of  my  time,  imagining  I  can  see  them  with 
a  sight  lesse  blinded  with  passion,  than  other  men,  and 
perhaps  neerer,  by  reason  of  the  accesse  which  fortune  hath 
given  me  to  the  chiefest  of  divers  factions.  But  they  will 
not  say,  how  for  the  glory  of  Salust,  I  would  not  take  the 
paines  ;  as  one  that  am  a  vowed  enemie  to  observance,  to 
assiduitie,  and  to  constancie,  and  that  there  is  nothing  so 
contrarie  to  my  stile,  as  a  continued  narration.  I  doe  so 
often  for  want  of  breath  breake  off  and  interrupt  mv  selfe. 
I  have  neither  composition  nor  explication  of  any  worth.  I 
am  as  ignorant  as  a  childe  of  the  phrases  and  vowels  belong 
ing  to  common  things.  And  therefore  have  I  attempted  to 
say  what  I  can,  accommodating  the  matter  to  my  power. 
Should  I  take  any  man  for  a  guide,  my  measure  might  differ 
from  his.  For,  my  libertie  being  so  farre,  I  might  haply 
publish  judgements,  agreeing  with  me,  and  consonant  to 
reason,  yet  unlawfull  and  punishable.  Plutarke  would  per- 
adventure  tell  us  of  that  which  he  hath  written,  that  it  is 
the  worke  of  others,  that  his  examples  are  in  all  and  everie 
where  true,  that  they  are  profitable  to  posteritie,  and  pre 
sented  with  a  lustre,  that  lights  and  directs  us  unto 
vertue,  and  that  is  his  worke.  It  is  not  dangerous, 
as  in  a  medicinable  drug,  whether  in  an  old  tale 
or  report,  be  it  thus  or  thus,  so  or  so. 

THE  TWENTY-FIRST  CHAPTER 

The  profit  of  one  man  is  the  dammage  of  another. 

lEMADES   the  Athenian    condemned  a  man  of 
the  Citie,  whose  trade  was  to  sell  such  neces 
saries  as  belonged  to  burials,  under  colour,  hee 
asked  too  much  profit  for  them  :  and  that  such 
profit  could  not  come  unto  him  without  the 
death   of  many   people.      This  judgement  seemeth   to   be 
102 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

ill  taken,  because  no  man  profiteth    but    by   the    losse  of  CHAPTER 
others  :  by  which  reason  a  man  should  condemne  all  manner         XXI 
of  gaine.     The    Merchant    thrives    not    but  by  the  licen- The  Profit  ?f 
tiousnesse  of  youth  ;    the  Husbandman  by  dearth  of  corne  ;  the  dammai 
the  Architect  but  by  the  mine  of  houses ;   the  Lawyer  by    of  another" 
suits   and    controversies  betweene    men :    Honour   it   selfe, 
and  practice  of  religious  Ministers,  is  drawne  from  our  death 
and  vices.    '  No  Physitian  delighteth  in  the  health  of  his  owne 
'  friend,1  saith  the  ancient  Greeke  Comike :  '  nor  no  Souldier 
6  is  pleased  with  the  peace  of  his  Citie,  and  so  of  the  rest.' 
And  which  is  worse,  let  every  man  sound  his  owne  conscience, 
hee  shall  finde,  that  our  inward  desires  are  for  the  most  part 
nourished  and  bred  in  us  by  the  losse  and  hurt  of  others;  which 
when  I  considered,  I  began  to  thinke,  how  Nature  doth  not 
gainesay  herselfe  in  this,  concerning  her  generall  policie :  for 
Physitians  hold,  that  '  The  birth,  increase,  and  augmentation 
4  of  every  thing,  is  the  alteration  and  corruption  of  another.1 

Nam  quodcunque  suis  mutatum  finibus  exit,  LUCR.  i.  687, 

Continue  hoc  mors  est  illius,  quodfuit  ante.  813  ;  ii.  762  ; 

What  ever  from  it's  bounds  doth  changed  passe, 
That  strait  is  death  of  that  which  erst  it  was. 

THE  TWENTY-SECOND  CHAPTER 

Of  custome,  and  how  a  received  law 
should  not  easily  be  changed. 

Y  opinion  is,  that  hee  conceived  aright  of 
the  force  of  custome,  that  first  invented 
this  tale;  how  a  country  woman  having 
enured  herselfe  to  cherish  and  beare  a 
young  calfe  in  her  armes,  which  continu 
ing,  shee  got  such  a  custome,  that  when 
he  grew  to  be  a  great  oxe,  shee  carried 
him  still  in  her  armes.  For  truly, 
'  Custome  is  a  violent  and  deceiving  schoole-mistris.''  She  by 
little  and  little,  and  as  it  were  by  stealth,  establisheth  the 
foot  of  her  authoritie  in  us ;  by  which  mild  and  gentle  begin 
ning,  if  once  by  the  aid  of  time,  it  have  setled  and  planted 

103 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  same  in  us,  it  will  soone  discover  a  furious  and  tyranni- 
XXII        call  countenance  unto  us,  against  which  we  have  no  more  the 

Of    custome,  iibeitje  to  lift  so  much  as  our  eies ;  wee  may  plainly  see  her 
and     how     a  .  ,,          , ,          , '        « XT  /  '        T7y        _ 

received    law  upon  every  occasion  to  force  the  rules  of  Nature  :    Vsus  efflca- 

should  not   cissimus  rerum  omnium  magister :  '  Use  is  the  most  effectuall 
easily  be     '  master  of  all  things.'     I  beleeve  Platoes  den  mentioned  in 
changed      j-^g  COmmon- wealth,  and  the  Physitians  that  so  often  quit 
?/M.  xx-  their  arts  reason  by  authoritie;  and  the  same  King  who  by 
meanes  of  her,  ranged  his  stomacke  to  be  nourished  with 
poyson;    and  the  mayden  that  Albert  mentioneth  to  have 
accustomed  herselfe  to  live  upon  spiders :  and  now  in  the 
new-found  world  of  the  Indians,  there  were  found  divers 
populous  nations,  in  farre  differing  climates,  that  lived  upon 
them ;  made  provision  of  them,  and  carefully  fed  them ;  as 
also  of  grasse-hoppers,  pissemires,  lizards,  and   night-bats; 
and  a  toad  was  sold  for  six  crownes  in  a  time  that  all  such 
meats  were  scarce  amongst   them,  which   they  boyle,  rost, 
bake,  and  dresse  with  divers  kinds  of  sawces.     Others  have 
beene  found  to  whom  our  usuall  flesh  and  other  meats  were 
Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  mortall  and  venomous.     Consuetudinis  magna  est  vis ;  Per- 
"•  noctant   venatores  in   nive,   in   montibus  uri  se  patiuntur : 

Pugiles  ccestibus  contusi,  ne  ingemiseunt  quidem.  '  Great  is 
'  the  force  of  custome :  Huntsmen  wil  watch  all  night  in 
'  snow,  and  endure  to  bee  scorched  on  the  hils :  Fencers 
'  brused  with  sand-bags  or  cudgels,  doe  not  so  much  as 
'  groane.1  These  forrein  examples  are  not  strange,  if  wee 
but  consider  what  we  ordinarily  finde  by  travell,  and  how 
custome  quaileth  and  weakeneth  our  customary  senses.  We 
need  not  goe  seeke  what  our  neighbours  report  of  the 
Cataracts  of  Nile ;  and  what  Philosophers  deeme  of  the 
celestiall  musicke,  which  is,  that  the  bodies  of  it's  circles, 
being  solid  smooth,  and  in  their  rowling  motion,  touching 
and  rubbing  one  against  another,  must  of  necessitie  produce 
a  wonderfull  harmonic :  by  the  changes  and  entercaprings  of 
which,  the  revolutions,  motions,  cadences,  and  carrols  of  the 
asters  and  planets  are  caused  and  transported.  But  that 
universally  the  hearing  senses  of  these  low  worlds  creatures, 
dizzied  and  lulled  asleepe,  as  those  of  the  ^Egyptians  are,  by 
the  continuation  of  that  sound,  how  loud  and  great  soever 
it  be,  cannot  sensibly  perceive  or  distinguish  the  same. 
104 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

Smiths,  Millers,  Forgers,  Armorers,  and  such  other,  could  CHAPTER 
not  possibly  endure  the  noise  that  commonly  rings  in  their        XXII 
eares,  if  it  did  pierce  them  as  it  doth  us.     My  perfumed      ,  custome, 
Jerkin  serveth  for  my  nose  to  smell  unto,  but  after  I  have  received  W!RW 
worne  it  three  or  foure  daies  together,  not  I,  but  others  have    should   not 
the  benefit  of  it.    This  is  more  strange,  that  notwithstanding    easily    be 
long  intermissions,   custome  may  joyne   and   establish  the      changed 
effect  of  her  impression  upon  our  senses ;  as  they  prove  that 
dwell  neere  to  bells  or  steeples.     I  have  my  lodging  neere 
unto  a  tower,  where  both  evening  and  morning  a  very  great 
bell  doth  chime  Ave  marie  and  Cover-few,  which  jangling 
doth  even  make  the  tower  to  shake ;  at  first  it  troubled  me 
much,  but  I  was  soone  acquainted  with  it,  so  that  now  I  am 
nothing  offended  with  it,  and  many  times  it  cannot  waken 
me  out  of  my  sleepe.     Plato  did  once  chide  a  child  for  play 
ing  with  nuts,  who  answered  him,  '  Thou  chidest  me  for  a 
'  small  matter.1    '  Custome'  (replied  Plato) ' is  no  small  matter.1 
I  finde  that  our  greatest  vices  make  their  first  habit  in  us, 
from  our  infancie,  and  that  our  chiefe  government  and  edu 
cation,  lieth  in  our  nurses  hands.     Some  mothers  thinke  it 
good  sport  to  see  a  childe  wring  off  a  chickens  necke,  and 
strive  to  beat  a  dog  or  cat.     And  some  fathers  are  so  fond- 
foolish,  that  they  will  conster  as  a  good  Augur  or  fore-boding 
of  a  martiall   minde   to   see   their  sonnes   misuse  a  poore 
peasant,  or  tug  a  lackey,  that  doth  not  defend  himselfe ;  and 
impute  it  to  a  ready  wit,  when  by  some  wily  disloyaltie, 
or  crafty  deceit,  they  see  them  cousin  and  over-reach  their 
fellowes :  yet  are  they  the  true  seeds  or  roots  of  cruelty,  of 
tyranny,  and  of  treason.     In  youth  they  bud,  and  afterward 
grow  to  strength,  and   come  to   perfection   by  meanes  of 
custome. 

And  it  is  a  very  dangerous  institution,  to  excuse  so  base 
and  vile  inclinations,  with  the  weaknesse  of  age,  and  light- 
nesse  of  the  subject.  First,  it  is  nature  that  speaketh,  whose 
voice  is  then  shriller,  purer,  and  more  native,  when  it  is 
tender,  newer,  and  youngest.  Secondly,  the  deformity  of 
the  crime  consisteth  not  in  the  difference  betweene  crownes 
and  pinnes;  it  depends  of  it  selfe.  I  finde  it  more  just  to 
conclude  thus  :  Why  should  not  hee  as  well  deceive  one  of  a 
crowne,  as  he  doth  of  a  pinne  ?  than  as  commonly  some  doe, 

M  105 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  saying,  alas,  it  is  but  a  pinne;  I  warrant  you,  he  will  not 
XXI1        doe  so  with  crownes.     A  man  would  carefully  teach  children 
Of    custome,,  ^Q  na^e  vjces  of  their  owne  genuity,  and  so  distinguish  the 
and     how     a  ,    „        .          Pll  .,  Jy  -.  ,       °. , 

received  law  deformity  of  them,  that  they  may  not  only  eschew  them  m 
should  not  their  actions,  but  above  all,  hate  them  in  their  hearts  :  and 
easily  be  what  colour  soever  they  beare,  the  very  conceit  may  seeme 
changed  oc[ious  unto  them.  I  know  well,  that  because  in  my  youth 
I  have  ever  accustomed  my  selfe  to  tread  a  plaine  beaten 
path,  and  have  ever  hated  to  entermeddle  any  manner  of 
deceipt  of  cousoning-craft,  even  in  my  childish  sports  (for 
truly  it  is  to  be  noted,  that  Childrens  playes  are  not  sports, 
and  should  be  deemed  as  their  most  serious  actions.)  There 
is  no  pastime  so  slight,  that  inwardlie  I  have  not  a  naturall 
propension,  and  serious  care,  yea  extreme  contradiction, 
not  to  use  any  deceipt.  I  shuffle  and  handle  the  cards,  as 
earnestly  for  counters,  and  keepe  as  strict  an  accompt,  as  if 
they  were  double  duckets,  when  playing  with  my  wife  or 
children,  it  is  indifferent  to  mee  whether  I  win  or  lose,  as  I 
doe  when  I  play  in  good  earnest.  How  and  wheresoever  it 
be,  mine  owne  eies  will  suffice  to  keepe  me  in  office ;  none 
else  doe  watch  mee  so  narrowly ;  not  that  I  respect  more. 
It  is  not  long  since  in  mine  owne  house,  I  saw  a  little  man, 
who  at  Nantes  was  borne  without  armes,  and  hath  so  well 
fashioned  his  feet  to  those  services,  his  hands  should  have 
done  him,  that  in  truth  they  have  almost  forgotten  their 
naturall  office.  In  all  his  discourses  he  nameth  them  his 
hands,  he  carveth  any  meat,  he  chargeth  and  shoots  off  a 
pistole,  he  threds  a  needle,  he  soweth,  he  writeth,  puts  off 
his  cap,  combeth  his  head,  plaieth  at  cards  and  dice ;  shuffleth 
and  handleth  them  with  a  great  dexteritie  as  any  other  man 
that  hath  the  perfect  use  of  his  hands:  the  monie  I  have 
sometimes  given  him,  he  hath  caried  away  with  his  feet,  as 
well  as  any  other  could  doe  with  his  hands.  I  saw  another, 
being  a  Childe,  that  with  the  bending  and  winding  of  his 
necke,  (because  hee  had  no  hands)  would  brandish  a  two- 
hand-Sword,  and  mannage  a  Holbard,  as  nimbly  as  any  man 
could  doe  with  his  hands :  he  would  cast  them  in  the  aire, 
then  receive  them  againe,  he  would  throw  a  Dagger,  and 
make  a  whip  to  yarke  and  lash,  as  cunningly  as  any  Carter 
in  France.  But  her  effects  are  much  better  discovered  in 
106 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

the  strange  impressions,  which  it  worketh  in  our  mindes  CHAPTER 
where  it  meetes  not  so  much  resistance.     What  cannot  she        XXII 

bring  to  passe  in  our  judgements,  and  in  our  conceits  ?     Is      ,  custome, 
.,      o          "     .    .  d     .to  , .     ,  ..  .and     how     a 

there  any  opinion  so  fantastical,  or  conceit  so  extravagant  received    law 

(I  omit  to  speake  of  the  grosse  imposture  of  religions,  where-  should  riot 
with  so  many  great  nations  and  so  many  worthy  and  sufficient  easily  be 
men  have  beene  besotted,  and  drunken  :  For,  being  a  thing  changed 
beyond  the  compasse  of  our  humane  reason,  it  is  more  excus 
able  if  a  man  that  is  not  extraordinarily  illuminated  there 
unto  by  divine  favour,  doe  lose  and  mis-carrie  himselfe 
therein)  or  of  other  opinions,  is  there  any  so  strange,  that 
custome  hath  not  planted  and  established  by  lawes  in  what 
regions  soever  it  hath  thought  good?  And  this  ancient 
exclamation  is  most  just:  Non  pudet  physicum,  id  est  specu-  Cic.Nat.De.  i. 
latorern  venatoremque  naturae^  ab  animis  consuetudine  imbutis 
qucerere  testimonium  veritatis  ?  '  Is  it  not  a  shame  for  a 
4  naturall  Philosopher,  that  is  the  watch-man  and  hunts-man 
6  of  nature,  to  seeke  the  testimonie  of  truth,  from  mindes 
'  endued  and  double  dide  with  custome  ? '  I  am  of  opinion, 
that  no  fantasie  so  mad  can  fall  into  humane  imagination, 
that  meetes  not  with  the  example  of  some  publike  custome, 
and  by  consequence  that  our  reason  doth  not  ground  and 
bring  to  a  stay.  There  are  certaine  people,  that  turne  their 
backs  towards  those  they  salute,  and  never  looke  him  in  the 
face  whom  they  would  honour  or  worship.  There  are  others, 
who  when  the  King  spitteth,  the  most  favoured  Ladie  in  his 
court  stretcheth  forth  her  hand ;  and  in  another  countrey, 
where  the  noblest  about  him,  stoope  to  the  ground  to  gather 
his  ordure  in  some  fine  linnen  cloth :  Let  us  here  by  the  way 
insert  a  tale.  A  French  Gentleman  was  ever  wont  to  blow 
his  nose  in  his  hand,  (a  thing  much  against  our  fashion) 
maintaining  his  so  doing ;  and  who  in  wittie  jesting  was  very 
famous.  He  asked  me  on  a  time,  what  privilege  this  filthie 
excrement  had,  that  wee  should  have  a  daintie  linnen  cloth 
or  handkercher  to  receive  the  same ;  and  which  is  worse,  so 
carefully  fold  it  up,  and  keepe  the  same  about  us,  which 
should  be  more  loathsome  to  ones  stomacke,  than  to  see  it 
cast  away,  as  wee  doe  all  our  other  excrements  and  filth. 
Mee  thought  he  spake  not  altogether  without  reason :  and 
custome  had  taken  from  me  the  discerning  of  this  strange- 

107 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nesse,  which  being  reported  of  an  other  countrie  we  deeme 
XXII        so  hideous.     Miracles  are  according  to  the  ignorance  wherein 

Of ,  custome,,  we  are  by  nature,  and  not  according  to  natures  essence  ;  use 
and     how     a  ,    .         ,  i        •    i  .      /»  i  ,        i  mi      i      i 

received    law  brings  the  sight  01  our  judgement  asleepe.      Ihe  barbarous 

should  not  heathen  are  nothing  more  strange  to  us,  than  we  are  to 
easily  be  them  :  nor  with  more  occasion,  as  every  man  would  avow,  if 
changed  after  he  had  travelled  through  these  farre-fetcht  examples, 
hee  could  stay  himselfe  upon  the  discourses,  and  soundly 
conferre  them.  Humane  reason  is  a  tincture  in  like  weight 
and  measure,  infused  into  all  our  opinions  and  customes, 
what  form  soever  they  be  of :  infinite  in  matter :  infinite  in 
diversitie.  But  I  will  returne  to  my  theme.  There  are 
certaine  people,  where,  except  his  wife  and  children,  no  man 
speaketh  to  the  King,  but  through  a  trunke.  Another 
nation,  where  virgins  shew  their  secret  parts  openly,  and 
married  women  diligently  hide  and  cover  them.  To  which 
custome,  this  fashion  used  in  other  places,  hath  some  relation : 
where  chastitie  is  nothing  regarded  but  for  marriage  sake ; 
and  maidens  may  at  their  pleasure  lie  with  whom  they  list ; 
and  being  with  childe,  they  may  without  feare  of  accusation, 
spoyle  and  cast  their  children,  with  certaine  medicaments, 
which  they  have  only  for  that  purpose.  And  in  another 
country,  if  a  Merchant  chance  to  marrie,  all  other  Merchants 
that  are  bidden  to  the  wedding,  are  bound  to  lie  with  the 
bride  before  her  husband,  and  the  more  they  are  in 
number,  the  more  honour  and  commendation  is  hers,  for 
constancie  and  capacitie :  the  like  if  a  gentleman  or  an 
officer  marrie ;  and  so  of  all  others :  except  it  be  a  day- 
labourer,  or  some  other  of  base  condition;  for  then  must 
the  Lord  or  Prince  lie  with  the  bride;  amongst  whom 
(notwithstanding  this  abusive  custome)  loyaltie  in  married 
women  is  highly  regarded,  and  held  in  speciall  account, 
during  the  time  they  are  married.  Others  there  are, 
where  publike  brothel-houses  of  men  are  kept,  and  where 
open  mart  of  marriages  are  ever  to  be  had :  where  women 
goe  to  the  warres  with  their  husbands,  and  have  place, 
not  onely  in  fight,  but  also  in  command,  where  they  doe  not 
onely  weare  jewels  at  their  noses,  in  their  lip  and  cheekes, 
and  in  their  toes,  but  also  big  wedges  of  gold  through  their 
paps  and  buttocks,  where  when  they  eat,  they  wipe  their 
108 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

fingers  on  their  thighs,  on  the  bladder  of  their  genitories,  CHAPTER 
and  the  soles  of  their  feet,  where  not  children,  but  brethren  XXII 
and  nephewes  inherit ;  and  in  some  places,  the  nephewes  and 
onely,  except  in  the  succession  of  the  Prince.  Where  to  received  law 
order  the  communitie  of  goods,  which  amongst  them  is  should  not 
religiously  observed,  certaine  Soveraigne  Magistrats  have  the  easily  be 
generall  charge  of  husbandry  and  tilling  of  the  lands,  and  of  changed 
the  distribution  of  the  fruits,  according  to  every  mans  need : 
where  they  howle  ano^  weepe  at  their  childrens  deaths,  and 
joy  and  feast  at  their  old  mens  decease.  Where  ten  or 
twelve  men  lie  all  in  one  bed  with  all  their  wives,  where  such 
women  as  lose  their  husbands,  by  any  violent  death,  may 
marrie  againe,  others  not :  where  the  condition  of  women  is 
so  detested,  that  they  kill  all  the  maiden  children,  so  soone 
as  they  are  borne,  and  to  supply  their  naturall  need,  they 
buy  women  of  their  neighbours.  Where  men  may  at  their 
pleasure,  without  alleaging  any  cause,  put  away  their  wives, 
but  they  (what  just  reason  soever  they  have)  can  never  put 
away  their  husbands.  Where  husbands  may  lawfully  sell 
their  wives,  if  they  be  barren.  Where  they  cause  dead 
bodies  first  to  be  boyled,  and  then  to  be  brayed  in  a  morter, 
so  long  till  it  come  to  a  kind  of  pap,  which  afterward  they 
mingle  with  their  wine,  and  so  drinke  it.  Where  the  most 
desired  sepulcher  that  some  wish  for,  is  to  bee  devoured  of 
dogges,  and  in  some  places  of  birds.  Where  some  thinke, 
that  blessed  soules  live  in  all  liberty,  in  certaine  pleasant 
fields  stored  with  al  commodities,  and  that  from  them  pro 
ceeds  that  Eccho,  which  we  heare.  Where  they  fight  in  the 
water,  and  shoot  exceeding  true  with  their  bowes  as  they  are 
swimming.  Where  in  signe  of  subjection  men  must  raise 
their  shoulders,  and  stoope  with  their  heads,  and  put  off' 
their  shooes  when  they  enter  their  Kings  houses.  Where 
Eunuchs  that  have  religious  women  in  keeping,  because 
they  shall  not  be  loved,  have  also  their  noses  and  lips  cut  off. 
And  Priests  that  they  may  the  better  acquaint  themselves 
with  their  Demons,  and  take  their  Oracles,  put  out  their 
eyes.  Where  every  man  makes  himselfe  a  God  of  what  he 
pleaseth :  the  hunter  of  a  Lion  or  a  Fox ;  the  fisher,  of  a 
certaine  kinde  of  Fish ;  and  frame  themselves  Idols  of  every 
humane  action  or  passion :  the  Sunne,  the  Moone,  and  the 

109 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  earth  are  their  chiefest  Gods:  the  forme  of  swearing  is,  to 
XXII        touch  the  ground,  looking  upon  the  Sunne,  and  where  they 

?nd  C  hSowmea  eat  b°th  flesh  and  fish  raw'  Where  the  greatest  oath  is  to 
received  law  sweare  ^J  the  name  of  some  deceased  man,  that  hath  lived  in 
should  not  good  reputation  in  the  countrie,  touching  his  grave  with  the 
easily  be  hand.  Where  the  new-yeares  gifts  that  Kings  send  unto 
changed  Princes  their  vassals  every  yeare,  is  some  fire,  which  when  it 
is  brought,  all  the  old  fire  is  cleane  put  out :  of  which  new 
fire  all  the  neighbouring  people  are  bound  upon  paine  Icesce 
majestatis,  to  fetch  for  their  uses.  Where,  when  the  King 
(which  often  commeth  to  passe)  wholly  to  give  himselfe  unto 
devotion,  giveth  over  his  charge,  his  next  successor  is  bound 
to  doe  like,  and  convayeth  the  right  of  the  Kingdome  unto 
the  third  heire.  Where  they  diversifie  the  forme  of  policie, 
according  as  their  affaires  seeme  to  require :  and  where  they 
depose  their  Kings,  when  they  thinke  good,  and  appoint 
them  certaine  ancient  grave  men  to  undertake  and  weald 
the  Kingdoms  government,  which  sometimes  is  also  com 
mitted  to  the  communaltie.  Where  both  men  and  women 
are  equally  circumcised,  and  alike  baptised.  Where  the 
Souldier,  that  in  one  or  divers  combats  hath  presented  his 
King  with  seven  enemies  heads,  is  made  noble.  Where 
some  live  under  that  so  rare  and  unsociable  opinion  of  the 
mortalitie  of  soules.  Where  women  are  brought  a  bed 
without  paine  or  griefe.  Where  women  on  both  their  legs 
weare  greaves  of  Copper :  and  if  a  louse  bite  them,  they  are 
bound  by  duty  of  magnanimitie  to  bite  it  againe :  and  no 
maid  dare  marrie,  except  she  have  first  made  offer  of  her 
Virginitie  to  the  King.  Where  they  salute  one  another 
laying  the  forefinger  on  the  ground,  and  then  lifting  it  up 
toward  heaven  :  where  all  men  beare  burthens  upon  their 
head,  and  women  on  their  shoulders.  Where  women  pisse 
standing,  and  men  cowring.  Where  in  signe  of  true  friend 
ship  they  send  one  another  some  of  their  owne  bloud,  and 
offer  incense  to  men  which  they  intend  to  honour,  as  they 
doe  to  their  Gods :  where  not  onely  kindred  and  consan- 
guinitie  in  the  fourth  degree,  but  in  any  furthest  off,  can  by 
no  meanes  be  tolerated  in  marriages :  where  children  sucke 
till  they  be  four,  and  sometimes  twelve  yeares  old,  in  which 
place  they  deeme  it  a  dismall  thing  to  give  a  childe  sucke 
110 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

the  first  day  of  his  birth.  Where  fathers  have  the  charge  CHAPTER 
to  punish  their  male-children,  and  mothers  onely  maid-  XXII 
children,  and  whose  punishment  is  to  hang  them  up  by  the  ^nd  Cl^me^ 
feet  and  so  to  smoke  them.  Where  women  are  circumcised ;  received  law 
where  they  eat  all  manner  of  herbes,  without  other  distinc-  should  not 
tion,  but  to  refuse  those  that  have  ill  favour:  where  all  easily  be 
things  are  open,  and  how  faire  and  rich  soever  their  houses 
be,  they  have  neither  doores  nor  windowes,  nor  any  chests  to 
locke;  yet  are  all  theeves  much  more  severely  punished 
there,  than  any  where  else ;  where,  as  monkies  doe,  they  kill 
lice  with  their  teeth,  and  thinke  it  a  horrible  matter  to  see 
them  crusht  between  their  nailes ;  where  men  so  long  as 
they  live  never  cut  their  haire,  nor  paire  their  nailes : 
another  place  where  they  onely  paire  the  nailes  of  their 
right  hand,  and  those  of  the  left  are  never  cut,  but  very 
curiously  maintained :  where  they  indevour  to  cherish  all 
the  haire  growing  on  the  right  side,  as  long  as  it  will  grow : 
and  very  often  shave  away  that  of  the  left-side :  where  in 
some  Provinces  neere  unto  us,  some  women  cherish  their 
haire  before,  and  other  some  that  behinde,  and  shave  the  con- 
trarie  :  where  fathers  lend  their  children,  and  husbands  their 
wives  to  their  guests,  so  that  they  pay  ready  mony :  where 
men  may  lawfully  get  their  mothers  with  childe :  where 
fathers  may  lie  with  their  daughters,  and  with  their  sonnes : 
where,  in  solemne  assemblies  and  banquets,  without  any 
distinction  of  bloud  or  alliance,  men  will  lend  one  another 
their  children.  In  some  places  men  feede  upon  humane  flesh, 
and  in  others,  where  it  is  deemed  an  office  of  pietie  in 
children  to  kill  their  fathers  at  a  certaine  age :  in  other 
places  fathers  appoint  what  children  shall  live,  and  be  pre 
served,  and  which  die  and  be  cast  out,  whilest  they  are  yet 
in  their  mothers  wombe :  where  old  husbands  lend  their 
wives  to  yong  men,  for  what  use  soever  they  please:  In 
other  places,  where  al  women  are  common  without  sinne  or 
offence :  yea  in  some  places,  where  for  a  badge  of  honour, 
they  weare  as  many  frienged  tassels,  fastened  to  the  skirt  of 
their  garment  as  they  have  laine  with  severall  men.  Hath 
not  custome  also  made  a  severall  common-wealth  of  women  ? 
hath  it  not  taught  them  to  manage  Armes  ?  to  levie  Armies, 
to  marshall  men,  and  to  deliver  battles  ?  And  that  which 

111 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  strict-searching  Philosophic  could  never  perswade  the  wisest, 
XXII  doth  she  not  of  her  owne  naturall  instinct  teach  it  to  the 
A  cVstomej  grosest  headed  vulgar  ?  For  we  know  whole  nations,  where 
received  W!RW  death  is  not  only  condemned,  but  cherished  ;  where  children 
should  not  of  seven  yeares  of  age,  without  changing  of  countenance,  or 
easily  be  shewing  any  signe  of  dismay,  endured  to  be  whipped  to 
changed  death  ;  where  riches  and  worldly  pelfe  was  so  despised  and 
holden  so  contemptible,  that  the  miserablest  and  neediest 
wretch  of  a  Citie  would  have  scorned  to  stoope  for  a  purse 
full  of  gold.  Have  we  not  heard  of  divers  most  fertile 
regions,  plenteously  yeelding  al  maner  of  necessary  victuals, 
where  neverthelesse  the  most  ordinary  cates  and  daintiest 
dishes,  were  but  bread,  water-cresses,  and  water  ?  Did  not 
custome  worke  this  wonder  in  Chios,  that  during  the  space 
of  seven  hundred  yeres  it  was  never  found  or  heard  of,  that 
any  woman  or  maiden  had  her  honor  or  honestie  called  in 
question  ?  And  to  conclude,  there  is  nothing  in  mine  opinion, 
that  either  she  doth  not,  or  cannot :  and  with  reason  doth 
Pindarus,  as  I  have  heard  say,  'Call  her  the  Queene  and 
'  Empresse  of  all  the  world.1  He  that  was  met  beating  of 
his  father,  answered,  '  It  was  the  custome  of  his  house ;  that 
'  his  father  had  so  beaten  his  grandfather,  and  he  his  great- 
6  grandfather,  and  pointing  to  his  sonne,  said,  this  child  shall 
'  also  beat  mee,  when  he  shall  come  to  my  age.1  And  the 
father,  whom  the  sonne  haled  and  dragged  through  thicke 
and  thinne  in  the  street,  commanded  him  to  stay  at  a 
certaine  doore,  for  himself  had  dragged  his  father  no  further: 
which  were  the  bounds  of  the  hereditarie  and  injurious 
demeanours  the  children  of  that  family  were  wont  to  shew 
their  fathers.  '  By  custome,1  saith  Aristotle,  '  as  often  as  by 
(  sicknesse,  doe  we  see  women  tug  and  teare  their  haires,  bite 
4  their  nailes,  and  eat  cole  and  earth  :  and  more  by  custome 
6  than  by  nature  doe  men  meddle  and  abuse  themselves  with 
6  men.1  The  lawes  of  conscience,  which  we  say  to  proceed 
from  nature,  rise  and  proceed  of  custome :  every  man  hold 
ing  in  special  regard,  and  inward  veneration  the  opinions 
approved,  and  customes  received  about  him,  cannot  without 
remorse  leave  them,  nor  without  applause  applie  himselfe 
unto  them  :  when  those  of  Greet  would  in  former  ages  curse 
any  man,  they  besought  the  Gods  to  engage  him  in  some 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

bad  custome.  But  the  chiefest  effect  of  her  power  is  to  CHAPTER 
seize  upon  us,  and  so  to  entangle  us,  that  it  shall  hardly  lie  XXII 
in  us,  to  free  our  selves  from  her  hold-fast,  and  come  into  ®f,  custome,, 
our  wits  againe,  to  discourse  and  reason  of  her  ordinances ;  received  W!EW 
verily,  because  wee  sucke  them  with  the  milke  of  our  birth,  should  not 
and  forasmuch  as  the  worlds  visage  presents  it  selfe  in  easily  be 
that  estate  unto  our  first  view,  it  seemeth  we  are  borne  changed 
with  a  condition  to  follow  that  course.  And  the  common 
imaginations  we  finde  in  credit  about  us,  and  by  our 
fathers  seed  infused  in  our  soule,  seeme  to  be  the 
generall  and  naturall.  Whereupon  it  folio weth,  that 
whatsoever  is  beyond  the  compasse  of  custome,  wee  deeme 
likewise  to  bee  beyond  the  compasse  of  reason ;  God 
knowes  how  for  the  most  part,  unreasonably.  If  as  we,  who 
study  our  selves,  have  learned  to  doe,  every  man  that  heareth 
a  just  sentence,  would  presently  consider,  how  it  may  in  any 
sort  belonging  unto  his  private  state,  each  man  should  finde, 
that  this  is  not  so  much  a  good  word,  as  a  good  blow  to  the 
ordinary  sottishnesse  of  his  judgement.  But  men  receive  the 
admonitions  of  truth  and  her  precepts,  as  directed  to  the 
vulgar,  and  never  to  themselves;  and  in  Hew  of  applying 
them  to  their  maners,  most  men  most  foolishly  and  un- 
profitably  apply  them  to  their  memorie.  But  let  us  returne 
to  customes  soveraignty  :  such  as  are  brought  up  to  libertie, 
and  to  command  themselves,  esteeme  all  other  forme  of 
policie,  as  monstrous  and  against  nature.  Those  that  are 
enured  to  Monarchie  doe  the  like.  And  what  facilitie  soever 
fortune  afFoordeth  them  to  change,  even  when  with  great 
difficultie  they  have  shaken  off  the  importunitie  of  a  tutor, 
they  run  to  plant  a  new  one  with  semblable  difficulties, 
because  they  cannot  resolve  themselves  to  hate  tutorship. 
It  is  by  the  meditation  of  custome,  that  every  man  is  con 
tented  with  the  place  where  nature  hath  setled  him  :  and  the 
savage  people  of  Scotland  have  nought  to  doe  with  Touraine, 
nor  the  Scithians  with  Thessalie.  Darius  demanded  of 
certaine  Grecians,  '  For  what  they  would  take  upon  them 
'  the  Indians  custome,  to  eat  their  deceased  fathers.1  (For 
such  was  their  maner,  thinking  they  could  not  possibly  give 
them  a  more  noble  and  favourable  tombe,  than  in  their  owne 
bowels)  they  answered  him,  'That  nothing  in  the  world 
N  113 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  *  should  ever  bring  them  to  embrace  so  inhumane  a  custome  :** 

XXII        But  having  also  attempted  to  perswade  the  Indians  to  leave 

^    custome,,  their  fashion,  and  take  the  Graecians,  which  was  to  burne 

received  W\aw  their  corpes,  they  were  much  more  astonied  thereat.     Every 

should    not  man  doth  so,  forsomuch  as  custome  doth  so  bleare  us  that 

easily    be     we  cannot  distinguish  the  true  visage  of  things. 

Nil  adeo  magnum,  nee  tarn  mirabile  quicquam 

LUCR.  ii.  1037.  Principle,  quod  non  minuant  mirarier  omnes 

Paulatim. 

Nothing  at  first  so  wondrous  is,  so  great, 
But  all,  t'admire,  by  little  slake  their  heat. 

Having  other  times  gone  about  to  endeare,  and  make 
some  one  of  our  observations  to  be  of  force,  and  which  was 
with  resolute  auctoritie  received  in  most  parts  about  us,  and 
not  desiring,  as  most  men  doe,  onely  to  establish  the  same 
by  the  force  of  lawes  and  examples,  but  having  ever  bin  from 
her  beginning,  I  found  the  foundation  of  it  so  weak,  that  my 
selfe,  who  was  to  confirme  it  in  others,  had  much  adoe  to 
keepe  my  countenance.  This  is  the  receipt  by  which  Plato 
undertaketh  to  banish  the  unnaturall  and  preposterous  loves 
of  his  time,  and  which  hee  esteemeth  Soveraigne  and  prin- 
cipall :  To  wit,  that  publike  opinion  may  condemne  them ; 
that  Poets,  and  all  men  else  may  tell  horrible  tales  of  them. 
A  receit  by  meanes  whereof  the  fairest  Daughters  winne  no 
more  the  love  of  their  fathers,  nor  brethren  most  excellent 
in  beautie,  the  love  of  their  sisters.  The  very  fables  of 
Thyestes,  of  Oedipus,  and  of  Macareus,  having  with  the 
pleasure  of  their  songs  infused  this  profitable  opinion,  in  the 
tender  conceit  of  children.  Certes,  chastitie  is  an  excellent 
vertue,  the  commoditie  whereof  is  very  well  knowne  :  but  to 
use  it,  and  according  to  nature  to  prevaile  with  it,  is  as  hard 
as  it  is  easie,  to  endeare  it  and  to  prevaile  with  it  according 
to  custome,  to  lawes  and  precepts.  The  first  and  universal! 
reasons  are  of  a  hard  perscrutation.  And  our  Masters  passe 
them  over  in  gleaning,  or  in  not  daring  so  much  as  to  taste 
them,  at  first  sight  cast  themselves  headlong  into  the  libertie 
or  sanctuarie  of  custome.  Those  that  will  not  suffer  them 
selves  to  be  drawne  out  of  his  originall  source,  do  also  commit 
a  greater  error,  and  submit  themselves  to  savage  opinions : 
witnesse  Chrysippus ;  who  in  so  many  severall  places  of  his 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

compositions,  inserted  the  small  accompt  he  made  of  con-  CHAPTER 
junctions,  how  incestuous  soever  they  were.  Hee  that  will  XXII 
free  himselfe  from  this  violent  prejudice  of  custome,  shall °*,  c£stome.< 
find  divers  things  received  with  an  undoubted  resolution,  Deceived W law 
that  have  no  other  anker  but  the  hoarie  head  and  frowning  should  not 
wrimples  of  custome,  which  ever  attends  them  :  which  maske  easily  be 
being  pulled  off,  and  referring  all  matters  to  truth  and 
reason,  he  shall  perceive  his  judgement,  as  it  were  overturned, 
and  placed  in  a  much  surer  state.  As  for  example,  I  wil 
then  aske  him,  what  thing  can  be  more  strange  than  to  see 
a  people  bound  to  follow  lawes,  he  never  understood  ?  Being 
in  all  his  domestical  affaires,  as  marriages,  donations,  testa 
ments,  purchases,  and  sales,  necessarily  bound  to  customary 
rules,  which  forsomuch  as  they  were  never  written  nor 
published  in  his  owne  tongue,  he  cannot  understand,  and 
whereof  he  must  of  necessity  purchase  the  interpretation 
and  use.  Not  according  to  the  ingenious  opinion  of  Isocrates, 
who  counselleth  his  King  '  to  make  the  Trah'kes  and  negotia- 
'  tions  of  his  subjects,  free,  enfranchized  and  gaineful,  and 
'  their  debates,  controversies,  and  quarrels  burthensome,  and 
6  charged  with  great  subsidies,  and  impositions ' :  But  accord 
ing  to  a  prodigious  opinion,  to  make  open  sale,  and  trafficke 
of  reason  it  selfe,  and  to  give  lawes  a  course  of  merchandize, 
is  very  strange.  I  commend  fortune,  for  that  (as  our 
Historians  report)  it  was  a  Gentleman  of  Gaskonie,  and  my 
Countriman,  that  first  opposed  himselfe  against  Charles  the 
great,  at  what  time  he  went  about  to  establish  the  Latine 
and  Imperiall  lawes  amongst  us.  What  is  more  barbarous 
than  to  see  a  nation,  where  by  lawful  custome  the  charge  of 
judging  is  sold,  and  judgements  are  paid  for  with  readie 
money;  and  where  justice  is  lawfully  denied  him,  that  hath 
not  wherewithall  to  pay  for  it ;  and  that  this  merchandize 
hath  so  great  credit,  that  in  a  politicall  government  there 
should  be  set  up  a  fourth  estate  of  Lawyers,  breath-sellers, 
and  pettifoggers,  and  joyned  to  the  three  ancient  states,  to 
wit,  the  Clergie,  the  Nobility,  and  the  Communaltie ;  which 
fourth  state  having  the  charge  of  lawes,  and  sometimes 
auctoritie  of  goods  and  lives,  should  make  a  body,  apart, 
and  severall  from  that  of  Nobilitie,  whence  double  Lawes 
must  follow ;  those  of  honour,  and  those  of  justice ;  in  many 

115 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  things  very  contrarie  do  those  as  rigorously  condemne  a  lie 
XXII  pocketed  up,  as  these  a  lie  revenged  :  by  the  law  and  right 
°*d  c£stome.j>  of  armes  he  that  putteth  up  an  injurie  shall  be  degraded  of 
receivec^law  honour  and  nobilitie  ;  and  he  that  revengeth  himselfe  of  it, 
should  not  shall  by  the  civill  Law  incurre  a  capitall  punishment.  Hee 
easily  be  that  shall  addresse  himselfe  to  the  Lawes  to  have  reason  for 
changed  some  offence  done  unto  his  honour,  dishonoreth  himselfe. 
And  who  doth  not  so,  is  by  the  Lawes  punished  and 
chastised.  And  of  these  so  different  parts,  both  neverthe- 
lesse  having  reference  to  one  head  ;  those  having  peace,  these 
war  committed  to  their  charge  ;  those  having  the  gaine,  these 
the  honor ;  those  knowledge,  these  vertue :  those  reason, 
these  strength  :  those  the  word,  these  action  :  those  justice, 
these  valour  :  those  reason,  these  force  :  those  a  long  gowne, 
and  these  a  short  coat,  in  partage  and  share.  Touching 
indifferent  things,  as  clothes  and  garments,  whosoever  will 
reduce  them  to  their  true  end,  which  is  the  service  and 
commodity  of  the  bodie,  whence  dependeth  their  originall 
grace  and  comlines,  for  the  most  fantasticall  to  my  humour 
that  may  be  imagined,  amongst  others  I  will  give  them  our 
square  caps ;  that  long  hood  of  plaited  velvet,  that  hangs 
over  our  womens  heads,  with  his  parti-coloured  traile,  and 
that  vaine  and  unprofitable  modell  of  a  member,  which  we 
may  not  so  much  as  name  with  modestie,  whereof  not 
withstanding  we  make  publike  shew,  and  open  demonstration. 
These  considerations  do  neverthelesse  never  distract  a  man  of 
understanding  from  following  the  common  guise.  Rather  on 
the  contrary,  me  seemeth,  that  all  severall,  strange,  and 
particular  fashions  proceed  rather  of  follie,  or  ambitious 
affectation,  than  of  true  reason :  and  that  a  wise  man  ought 
inwardly  to  retire  his  minde  from  the  common  presse,  and 
hold  the  same  liberty  and  power  to  judge  freely  of  all  things, 
but  for  outward  matters,  he  ought  absolutely  to  follow  the 
fashions  and  forme  customarily  received.  Publike  societie 
hath  nought  to  do  with  our  thoughts ;  but  for  other  things, 
as  our  actions,  our  travel,  our  fortune,  and  our  life,  that 
must  be  accommodated  and  left  to  it's  service  and  common 
opinions :  as  that  good  and  great  Socrates,  who  refused  to 
save  his  life  by  disobeying  the  magistrate,  yea  a  magistrate 
most  wicked  and  unjust.  For  that  is  the  rule  of  rules,  and 
116 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

generall  law  of  lawes,  for  every  man  to  observe  those  of  the  CHAPTER 

place  wherein  he  liveth.  XXII 

Of    custome, 

NO/JOIS  erreo-Qai  iroi<nv  ey^wpioty  KO\OV.  Gnom.  Grcec.      and     how     a 

Lawes  of  the  native  place,  vn-  received    law 

To  follow,  is  a  grace.  should     not 

Loe  here  some  of  another  kind.  There  riseth  a  great  eaf  *  ^  i6 
doubt,  whether  any  so  evident  profit  may  be  found  in  the 
change  of  a  received  law,  of  what  nature  soever,  as  there  is 
hurt  in  removing  the  same ;  forsomuch  as  a  well  setled 
policie  may  be  compared  to  a  frame  or  building  of  divers 
parts  joyned  together  with  such  a  ligament  as  it  is  impossible 
to  stirre  or  displace  one,  but  the  whole  body  must  needes  be 
shaken,  and  shew  a  feeling  of  it.  The  Thurians  Law-giver 
instituted,  that,  'whosoever  would  goe  about,  either  to 
*  abolish  any  one  of  the  old  Lawes,  or  attempt  to  establish 
'  a  new,  should  present  himself  before  the  people  with  a  roape 
'  about  his  necke,  to  the  end,  that  if  his  invention  were  not 
'  approved  of  all  men,  he  should  presently  bee  strangled.1 
And  he  of  Lacedaemon  laboured  all  his  life  to  get  an  assured 
promise  of  his  citizens,  that  they  would  never  infringe  any 
one  of  his  ordinances.  That  Ephore  or  Tribune,  who  so 
rudely  cut  off  the  two  strings,  that  Phrinis  had  added  unto 
musicke,  respecteth  not  whether  musicke  be  better  or  no 
with  them,  or  whether  the  accords  of  it  be  better  filled,  he 
hath  sufficient  reason  to  condemne  them,  because  it  is  an 
alteration  of  the  old  forme.  It  is  that  which  the  old  rustic 
sword  of  justice  of  Marseille  did  signifie.  I  am  distasted 
with  noveltie,  what  countenance  soever  it  shew :  and  I  have 
reason  so  to  be,  for  I  have  scene  very  hurtfull  effects  follow 
the  same.  That  which  so  many  yeares  since  doth  so  presse 
us,  hath  not  yet  exploited  all.  But  some  may  alleage  with 
apparance,  that  by  accident,  it  hath  produced  and  engendred 
all,  yea  both  the  mischiefes  and  ruines,  that  since  are  com 
mitted  without  and  against  it :  it  is  that  a  man  should 
blame  and  finde  fault  with. 

Heupatior  telis  vulnera  facta  meis.  OVID.  Epist. 

Alas  I  suffer  smart  phyl>  4&. 

Procur'd  by  mine  owne  dart. 

Those  which  attempt  to  shake  an  Estate,  are  commonly 

117 


CHAPTER 
XXII 

Of    custome, 

and     how     a 

received    law 

should    not 

easily    be 

changed 


TEREN.  And. 
act  i.  sc.  i. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

the  first  overthrowne  by  the  fall  of  it :  he  that  is  first  mover 
of  the  same,  reapeth  not  alwayes  the  fruit  of  such  troubles ; 
he  beats  and  troubleth  the  water  for  others  to  fish  in.  The 
contexture  and  combining  of  this  monarchic,  and  great 
building,  having  bin  dismist  and  disolved  by  it,  namely  in 
her  old  yeares,  giveth  as  much  overture  and  entrance  as  a  man 
will  to  like  injuries.  Roy  all  Majestic  doth  more  hardly  fall 
from  the  top  to  the  middle,  than  it  tumbleth  downe  from  the 
middle  to  the  bottom.  But  if  the  inventors  are  more  dam 
ageable,  the  imitators  are  more  vicious,  to  cast  themselves 
into  examples,  of  which  they  have  both  felt  and  punished 
the  horror  and  mischiefe.  And  if  there  be  any  degree  of 
honour,  even  in  ill  doing,  these  are  indebted  to  others  for  the 
glory  of  the  invention,  and  courage  of  the  first  attempt. 
All  sorts  of  new  licentiousnesse  doe  haply  draw  out  of  this 
originall  and  fruitfull  source,  the  images  and  patterns  to 
trouble  our  common-wealth.  We  may  reade  in  our  very 
lawes,  made  for  the  remedie  of  the  first  evill,  the  apprenti- 
sage  and  excuse  of  all  sorts  of  wicked  enterprises :  And  in 
favour  of  publike  vices,  they  are  named  with  new  and  more 
pleasing  words  for  their  excuses,  bastardizing  and  allaying 
their  true  titles  :  yet  it  is  to  reforme  our  consciences  and  our 
conceits,  Honesta  oratio  est.  '  It  is  an  honest  speech  and  well 
6  said.'  But  the  best  pretence  of  innovation  or  noveltie  is 
most  dangerous  :  Adeo  nihil  motum  ex  antiquo  probabile  est. 
'  So  nothing  moved  out  of  the  first  place  is  allowable ' :  Yet 
me  seemeth  (if  I  may  speake  boldly)  that  it  argueth  a  great 
selfe-love  and  presumption,  for  a  man  to  esteeme  his  opinions 
so  far,  that  for  to  establish  them,  a  man  must  be  faine  to 
subvert  a  publike  peace,  and  introduce  so  many  inevitable 
mischiefes,  and  so  horrible  a  corruption  of  manners,  as  civill 
warres,  and  alterations  of  a  state  bring  with  them,  in  matters 
of  such  consequence,  and  to  bring  them  into  his  owne  coun- 
trie.  Is  it  not  ill  husbanded  to  advance  so  many  certaine 
and  knowne  vices,  for  to  combate  contested  and  debatable 
errors  ?  Is  there  any  worse  kinde  of  vices,  than  those  which 
shocke  a  mans  owne  conscience  and  naturall  knowledge?  The 
Senate  durst  give  this  defeate  in  payment  about  the  contro 
versies  betweene  it  and  the  people  for  the  mysterie  of  their 
religion :  Ad  deos,  id  magis  quam  ad  se  pertinere :  ipsos 
118 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

visuros,  ne   sacra   sua  polluantur  :    <  That  that  did  rather  CHAPTER 
'  belong  to  the  Gods  than  to  them,  and  the  Gods  should        XXII 
6  looke   at   it,   that    their   due    rites   were    not    polluted.1  ^  ^j^™6;; 
Agreeing  with    that,  which  the   Oracle  answered  those  of  received    law 
Delphos,  in  the  Median  warre,  fearing  the  invasions  of  the  should    not 
Persians.    They  demanded  of  that  God  what  they  should  doe     easily    be 
with  the  treasures  consecrated  to  his  Temple,  whether  hide,      changed 
or  cary  them  away :  who  answered  them,  that  they  should 
remove  nothing,  but  take  care  of  themselves,  for  he  was  able 
to  provide  for  all  things  that  were  fit  for  him.    Christian  re 
ligion  hath  all  the  markes  of  extreme  justice  and  profit,  but 
none  more  apparent  than  the  exact  commendation  of  obedi 
ence  due  unto  magistrates,  and  manutention  of  policies:  what 
wonderfull  example  hath  divine  wisdome  left  us,  which  to 
establish  the  wel-fare  of  humane  kinde,  and  to  conduct  this 
glorious  victorie  of  hers  against  death  and  sinne,  would  not 
do  it  but  at  the  mercy  of  our  politik  order,  and  hath  sub 
mitted  the  progresse  of  it,  and  the  conduct  of  so  high  and 
worthie  effect,  to  the  blindnesse  and  injustice  of  our  observa 
tions  and  customes,  suffering  the  innocent  bloud  of  so  many 
her  favored  elect  to  run,  and  allowing  a  long  losse  of  yeares 
for  the  ripening  of  this  inestimable  fruit  ?     There  is  much 
difference  betweene   the  cause  of  him  that  followeth  the 
formes  and  lawes  of  his  countrie,  and  him  that  undertaketh 
to  governe  and  change  them.    The  first  alleageth  for  his  ex 
cuse,  simplicitie,  obedience,  and  example  ;  whatsoever  he  doth 
cannot  be  malice,  at  the  most  it  is  but  ill  lucke.     Quis  est  GIG.  Div.  i. 
enim,  quern  non  moveat  clarissimis  monumentis  testata  consig- 
nataqne  antiquitas  ?     '  For  who  is  he  whom  antiquitie  will 
'  not  move,  being  witnessed  and  signed  with  former  monu- 
6  ments  ? '     Besides  that  which  Isocrates  saith,  that  '  defect 
'  hath  more  part  in  moderation,  than  hath  excesse."*     The 
other  is  in  much  worse  case.    For  he  that  medleth  with  chus- 
ing  and  changing,  usurpeth  the  authoritie  of  judging  :  and 
must  resolve  himselfe  to  see  the  fault  of  what  he  hunteth  for, 
and  the  good  of  what  he  bringeth  in.     This  so  vulgar  con 
sideration  hath  confirmed  me  in  my  state,  and  restrained  my 
youth,  that  was  more  rash,  from  burthening  my  shoulders 
with  so  filthie  a  burthen,  as  to  make  my  selfe  respondent  of 
so  important  a  science.     And  in  this  to  dare,  what  in  sound 

119 


CHAPTER 

XXII 

Of    custome, 

and     how     a 

received    law 

should    not 

easily    be 

changed 


Cic.  De  Nat. 
Hi.  p. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

judgement  I  durst  not  in  the  easiest  of  those  wherein  I  had 
beene  instructed,  and  wherein  the  rashnes  of  judging  is  of  no 
prejudice.  Seeming  most  impious  to  me,  to  goe  about  to 
submit  publike  constitutions  and  unmoveable  observances,  to 
the  instabilitie  of  a  private  fantasie  (private  reason  is  but  a 
private  jurisdiction)  and  to  undertake  that  on  divine-lawes, 
which  no  policie  would  tolerate  in  civill  law.  Wherein 
although  mans  reason  have  much  more  commerce,  yet  are 
they  soveraignly  judges  of  their  judges  :  and  their  extreme 
sufficiencie  serveth  to  expound  custome  and  extend  the  use, 
that  of  them  is  received,  and  not  to  divert  and  innovate  the 
same.  If  at  any  time  divine  providence  hath  gone  beyond 
the  rules,  to  which  it  hath  necessary  constrained  us,  it  is  not 
to  give  us  a  dispensation  from  them.  They  are  blowes  of  her 
divine  hand,  which  we  ought  not  imitate,  but  admire :  as 
extraordinarie  examples,  markes  of  an  expresse  and  particular 
avowing  of  the  severall  kinds  of  wonders,  which  for  a  testi- 
monie  of  her  omnipotencie  it  offereth  us,  beyond  our  orders 
and  forces,  which  it  is  follie  and  impietie  to  goe  about  to 
represent,  and  which  we  ought  not  follow  but  contemplate 
with  admiration,  and  meditate  with  astonishment.  Acts  of 
her  personage,  and  not  of  ours.  Cotta  protesteth  very 
opportunely ;  Quum  de  religione  agitur,  T.  Coruncanum, 
P.  Scipionem,  P.  Sccevolam,  Pontifices  maximos,  non  Zenonem, 
aut  Cleanthem,  aut  Chrysippum,  sequor.  '  When  we  talke 
'  of  religion,  I  follow  Titus  Coruncanus,  Publius  Scipio,  P. 
'  Scaevola,  and  the  professors  of  religion,  not  Zeno,  Cleanthes, 
'  or  Chrysippus.1 

May  God  know  it  in  our  present  quarell,  wherein  are  a 
hundred  articles,  yea,  great  and  deepe  articles,  to  be  removed 
and  altered,  although  many  there  are,  who  may  boast  to  have 
exactly  survaid  the  reasons  and  foundations  of  one  and  other 
faction.  It  is  a  number,  if  it  be  a  number,  that  should  have 
no  great  meane  to  trouble  us.  But  whither  goeth  all  this 
other  throng  ?  Under  what  colours  doth  it  quarter  it  selfe? 
It  followeth  of  theirs,  as  of  other  weake  and  ill  applied 
medicines,  the  humors,  that  it  would  have  purged  in  us,  it 
hath  enflamed,  exasperated,  and  sharpned,  by  her  conflict, 
and  still  do  remaine  in  our  bodies.  It  could  not  by  reason 
of  her  weaknesse  purge  us,  but  hath  rather  weakned  us ;  so 

120 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

that  we  cannot  now  void  it,  and  by  her  operation  we  reap  CHAPTER 
nothing  but  long,  continuall,  and  intestine  griefes  and  aches,        XXII 
yet  is  it,  that  fortune,  ever  reserving  her  authoritie  above  our  Of    custome, 
discourses,  doth  somtimes  present  us  the  urgent  necessitie,  receivecT^law 
that  lawes  must  needs  yeeld  her  some  place  :  And  when  a  should    not 
man  resisteth  the  increase  of  an  innovation,  brought  in  by    easily    be 
violence,  to  keepe  himselfe  each-where  and  altogether  in  rule      changed 
and  bridle  against  those  that  have  the  keyes  of  fields,  to  whom 
all  things  are  lawfull,  that  may  in  any  sort  advance  their  des- 
seigne,  that  have  not  law,  nor  order,  but  to  follow  their  advan 
tage,  it  is  a  dangerous  obligation,  and  prejudiciall  inequalitie. 

Aditum  nocendi  perfido  preestat  fides.  SEN.  Oed. 

Trust  in  th'  untrustie,  may  act  llh  sc*  l' 

To  hurt  make  open  way. 

For  so  much  as  the  ordinarie  discipline  of  an  estate,  that 
hath  his  perfect  health,  doth  not  provide  for  these  extraordi- 
narie  accidents,  it  presupposeth  a  bodie  holding  it  selfe  in 
his  principall  members  and  offices,  and  a  common  consent  to 
observe  and  obey  it.  Lawfull  proceeding  is  a  cold,  dull, 
heavie  and  forced  proceeding :  and  is  not  like  to  hold  out 
against  a  licentious  and  unbridled  proceeding.  It  is  yet  as 
all  men  know,  a  reproach  to  those  two  great  personages, 
Octavius  and  Cato,  in  their  civill  warres  ;  the  one  of  Scilla, 
the  other  of  Caesar,  because  they  rather  suffered  their  coun- 
trie  to  incur  all  extremities,  than  by  her  lawes  to  aid  her,  or 
to  innovate  any  thing.  For  truly  in  these  last  necessities, 
where  nothing  is  left  to  take  hold  by,  it  were  peradventure 
better,  to  shrug  the  shoulders,  stoope  the  head,  and  some 
what  yeeld  to  the  stroke,  than  beyond  possibilitie  to  make 
head  and  resist,  and  be  nothing  the  better,  and  give  violence 
occasion  to  trample  all  underfoot :  and  better  were  it  to  force 
the  lawes  to  desire  but  what  they  may,  since  they  may  not 
what  they  would.  So  did  he  that  ordained  them  to  sleep 
foure  and  twentie  houres  :  And  he  who  for  a  time  removed 
one  day  from  the  Calender  :  And  another  who  of  the  moneth 
of  lune  made  a  second  May.  The  Lacedemonians  themselves, 
so  strict  observers  of  their  countries  ordinances,  being  urged 
by  their  Lawes,  which  precisely  forbad  and  inhibited  to  chuse 
one  man  twice  to  be  their  Admirall,  and  on  the  other  side 

O 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  their  affaires  necessarily  requiring,  that  Lysander  should  once 
XXII        more  take  that  charge  upon  him,  they  created  one  Aracus 
^d  Cl^stome>  Admirall,   but  instituted   Lysander  superintendent   of  all 
received^law  maritine  causes.     And  with  the  same  sutteltie,  one  of  their 
should    not  Ambassadors   being   sent  to  the  Athenians  for  to  obtaine 
easily    be    the  change  of  some   ordinance,  Pericles  alleaging,  that  'it 
changed      <  was  expresly  forbid  to   remove  the  table,  wherein  a  law 
4  had  once  beene  set  downe,"*  perswaded  him  but  to  turne  it, 
for  that  was  not  forbidden.     It  is  that  whereof  Plutarke 
commendeth  Philopaemen,  who  being  borne  to  com 
mand,  could  not  onely  command  according  to  the 
lawes,  but  the  lawes  themselves,  whensoever 
publike  necessitie  required  it. 


THE  TWENTY-THIRD  CHAPTER 
Divers  events  from  one  selfe  same  counsell. 

AMES  AMIOT,  great  Almoner  of  France, 
did  once  tell  me  this  storie,  to  the  honour  of 
one  of  our  Princes,  (and  so  he  was  indeed 
by  very  good  tokens,  albeit  by  off- spring 
he  were  a  stranger)  that  during  our  first 
troubles,  at  the  siege  of  Roane,  the  said 
Prince  being  advertised  by  the  Queene- 
mother  of  a  conspiracie  and  enterprise, 
that  should  be  attempted  against  his  life,  and  by  letters 
particularly  informed  him  of  the  partie  that  should  performe 
it,  who  was  a  gentle-man  of  Anjow,  or  Manse,  and  who  to 
that  purpose  did  ordinarily  frequent  the  said  Princes  court ; 
he  never  imparted  that  secret  or  communicated  that  warn 
ing  to  any  man,  but  the  next  morrow  walking  upon  Saint 
Catherins  hill,  whence  our  batterie  played  against  the  towne 
(for  it  was,  at  what  time  we  laid  siege  to  Roane)  with  the 
said  Lord  great  Almoner :  and  another  Bishop  by  his  side, 
he  chanced  to  descrie  the  said  gentleman,  whom  the  Queene- 
mother  had  described  unto  him,  and  caused  him  to  be  called, 
who  being  come  before  his  presence,  said  thus  unto  him, 
perceiving  him  alreadie  to  wax  pale,  and  tremble  at  the 
128 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

alarums  of  his  conscience  :  '  Master,  such  a  one,  I  am  fully  CHAPTER 
6  perswaded  you  fore-imagine  what  I  will  charge  you  with,       XXIII 

4  and  your  countenance  doth  plainly  shew  it,  you  can  con-  Plvers  events 
i*7,!-       p  /•      T  n  •     i       i.   j     j?  from  one  selfe 

4  ceale  nothing  from  me :  for  I  am  so  well  instructed  of  your   game  coun. 

4  businesse,  that  would  you  goe  about  to  hide  it,  you  should  sell 
4  but  marre  all,  you  have  perfect  knowledge  of  this  and  this 
4  thing,1  (which  were  the  chiefest  props  and  devices  of  the 
secretest  drifts  of  his  complot  and  conspiracie)  'faile  not 
4  therefore  as  you  tender  your  life,  to  confesse  the  truth  of 
4  all  your  purpose."  When  the  silly  man  saw  himselfe  so 
surprized  and  convicted  (for  the  whole  matter  had  beene 
discovered  unto  the  Queene  by  one  of  the  complices)  he  had 
no  other  way,  but  to  lift  up  his  hands,  and  beg  for  grace 
and  mercie  at  the  Princes  hands,  at  whose  feete  he  would 
have  prostrated  himselfe,  but  that  he  would  not  let  him : 
thus  following  his  discourse ;  4  Come  hither  my  friend,'  said 
he,  6  Did  I  ever  doe  you  any  displeasure  ?  Have  I  ever 
4  through  any  particular  hatred,  wronged  or  offended  any 
4  friend  of  yours  ?  It  is  not  yet  three  weekes  since  I  knew 
4  you,  what  reason  might  move  you  to  conspire  and  enter- 
4  prise  my  death  ? '  The  Gentleman  with  a  faint-trembling 
voyce,  and  selfe-accusing  looke,  answered  him,  that  no  par 
ticular  occasion  had  ever  moved  him  to  that,  but  the  interest 
of  the  generall  cause  of  his  faction,  and  that  some  of  them 
had  perswaded  him,  that  to  root  out,  and  in  what  manner 
soever,  to  make  away  so  great  an  enemy  of  their  religion, 
would  be  an  execution  full  of  pietie,  and  a  worke  of  superero 
gation.  Then  said  the  Prince,  '  I  will  shew  you  how  much 
4  the  religion  which  I  professe  is  more  milde,  than  that 
4  whereof  you  make  profession :  yours  hath  perswaded  you 
4  to  kill  me,  without  hearing  me,  having  never  been  offended 
4  by  me :  and  mine,  commands  me  to  pardon  you,  convicted 
4  as  you  are,  that  you  would  so  treacherously  and  without 
4  cause  have  killed  me.  Goe  your  way,  withdraw  your  selfe, 
4  let  mee  never  see  you  here  againe,  and  if  you  be  wise, 
4  hence-forward  in  your  enterprises  take  honester  men  for 
4  your  counsellers,  than  those  of  your  religion.'  The  Emperour 
Augustus  being  in  Gaule,  received  certaine  advertisement  of 
a  conspiracie,  that  L.  Cinna  complotted  against  him,  whereof 
he  purposed  to  be  avenged,  and  for  that  purpose  sent  to  all 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  his  friends  against  the  next  morrow  for  advice  and  counsell, 

XXIII       but  passed  the  fore-going   night  with  great   anxietie   and 

Divers  eveuts  unresf    considering;   that  following*   his   intent,   he   should 

from  one  selfe  i    •  /-<      ii  n   i  *  111  j 

same  coun-    °rmg  a  yong  Gentleman,  well  borne,  of  a  noble  house,  and 

sell         great   Pompeyes  nephew,  to  his  death :    which  perplexitie 
produced  divers  strange  discourses  and  consideration  in  him. 
What?1  said  he  unto  himselfe,  'Shall  it  ever  be  reported, 
that  I  doe  live  in  feare,  and  suffer  mine  enemie  to  walke 
at  his  pleasure  and  libertie  ?     Shall  he  then  go  free,  that 
hath  attempted  and   resolved  to  deprive  me  of  my  life, 
which  both  by  sea  and  land  I  have  saved  from  so  many 
civill  warres,  and  from  so  many  battels  ?     And  now  that  I 
have  established  an  universall  peace  in  the  world,  shall  he 
be  absolved  and  goe  unpunished,  that  hath  not  only  deter 
mined  to  murther,  but  to  sacrifice  me?^     (For,  the  corn- 
plot  of  the  conspiracie  was  to  murther  him,  when  he  should 
be  at  sacrifice.)     After  that,  having  taken  some  rest  with 
himselfe,  he  with  a  lowder  voice  began  to  exclaime  and  cry 
out  against  himselfe,  saying,  '  Why  livest  thou,  if  the  lives 
'  of  so  many  depend  on  thy  death  ?     Shall  thy  vengeance 
4  and  cruelties  never  have  an  end  ?     Is  thy  life  of  that  worth, 
4  as  it  may  countervaile  the  sundry  mischiefes  that  are  like 
*•  to  ensue,  if  it  be  preserved  ? '     Li  via  his  wife  being  in  bed 
with  him,  perceiving  his  agonie,  and  hearing  his  speeches, 
said  thus  unto  him :   4  And  may  not  womens  counsels  be 
4  admitted  ?     Doe  as  Physitians  are  wont,  who  when  their 
4  ordinarie  receipts  will  not  worke,  have  recourse  to  the  con- 
4  trarie.     Hitherto  thou  could est  never  doe  any  good  with 
4  severitie :  Lepidus  hath  followed  Savidienus,  Murena  Le- 
4  pidus,   Ccepio  Murena,  Egnatius  Scoepio ;    begin  now  to 
4  prove  what  good  lenitie  and  clemencie  will  doe  thee.    Cinna 
4  is  convicted,  pardon  him :  To  annoy  or  hurt  thee  now,  he 
4  is  not  able,  and  thou  shalt  thereby  increase  thy  glory/ 
Augustus  seemed  very  glad  to  have  found  an  Advocate  of 
his  humour,   and   having   thanked   his  wife,   and  counter 
manded  his  friends,  whom  he  had  summoned  to  the  Counsell, 
commanded  Cinna  to  be  brought  before  him  alone.     Then 
sending  all  men  out  of  his  chamber,  and  a  chaire  prepared 
for  Cinna  to  sit  in,  he  thus  bespake  him :  4  First  Cinna,  I 
4  require  to  have  gentle  audience,  and  that  thou  wilt  not 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

4  interrupt  my  speech,  which  ended,  I  will  give  thee  time  CHAPTER 
4  and  leasure  to  answer  me :  Thou  knowest  (oh  China)  that     .  XXIII 

*  when  1  had  taken  thee  prisoner  in  mine  enemies  campe,  ~lvers  events 

,    ,   ,  „        T          j  *rom  oue  se"e 

4  who  wast  not  only  become,  but  borne  my  foe ;  I  saved    same  coun. 

4  thee,  then  put  thee  in  quiet  possession  of  thy  goods,  and         sell 
4  at  last,  have  so  enriched  thee,  and  placed  thee  in  so  high  a 
4  degree,  that  even  the  conquerours  are  become  envious  over 

*  the  conquered.     The  Priests  office,  which  thou   beggedst 
4  at  my  hands,  I  freely  bestowed  on  thee,  having  first  refused 
4  the  same  to  others,  whose  fathers  and  friends  had  in  many 
4  battels  shed  their  bloud  for  me :  After  all  which  benefits, 
4  and  that  I  had  in  dutie  tied  thee  so  fast  unto  me,  thou 
4  hast  notwithstanding  undertaken  to  kill  me.1     To  whom 
Cinna  replied,  crying  alowd,  4  That  he  had  never  so  much  as 
4  conceived  so  wicked  a  thought,  much  lesse  entertained  the 
4  same.'     '  Oh  Cinna,  this  is  not  according  to  thy  promise," 
answered  then  Augustus,  'which  was,  that   thou  wouldest 
4  not  interrupt  me :  What  I  say,  is  true,  thou  has  under- 
4  taken  to  murther  me,  in  such  a  place,  on  such  a  day,  in 
4  such  a  company,  and  in  such  manner  : '  and  seeing  him  so 
amazed   in   heart,   and   by   his   evidence    strucken    dumbe, 
moved  thereunto,  not  by  the  condition  of  his  promise,  but 
by  the  guilt  of  his  selfe-accusing  conscience  ;  4  why  wouldest 
4  thou  doe  it,1  replied  he,  4  is  it  because  thou  wouldest  be 
4  Emperour  ?    Truely  the  commonwealth  is  but  in  hard  con- 
4  dition,  if  none  but  my  selfe  hinder  thee  from  the  Empire. 
4  Thou  canst  not  so  much  as  defend  thine  owne  house,  and 
4  didst  but  lately  lose  a  processe,  only  by  the  favor  of  a  seely 
4  libertine.     What  ?  hast  thou   no  meane  or  power  in  any 
4  other  matter,  but  to  attempt  Caesars  life  ?     I  quit  it,  if 
4  there  be  no  man  but  my  selfe  to  impeach  thy  hopes.     Sup- 
4  posest  thou  that  Paulus,  that  Fabius,  that  the  Cossenians, 
4  or  the  Servillianes  will  ever  permit  thee  ?     And  so  great  a 
4  troupe  of  noble  men,  noble,  not  only  in  name,  but  such  as 
4  by  their  vertues  honour  their  nobilitie,  will  ever  suffer  it."1 
After  many  other  such  like  discourses  (for  he  talked  with 
him  more  than  2  houres)  he  said   unto   him ;  4  Away,  oh 
4  Cinna,  that  life  which  once  I  gave  thee,  as  to  an  enemie,  I 
4  now  give  thee  againe,  as  to  a  traitour,  and  a  patricide : 
4  let  a  true  friendship  from  this  day  forward  begin  betweene 

125 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  us,  let  us  strive  together,  which  of  us  two  with  a  better 
XXIII       '  faith  shall  out-goe  the  other,  and  whether  I  have  given 

fromoSneVsdfe  '  th?  life>  °r  th°U  hast  received  the  same  with  great  con' 
same  coun-  '  fidence  : '  and  so  left  him.  Shortly  after  he  gave  him  the 
sell  Consulship,  blaming  him  that  he  durst  not  aske  it  of  him. 
And  ever  after  held  him  as  his  deere  friend,  and  made  him 
alone,  heire  and  executor  of  his  goods.  Now  after  this 
accident,  which  hapned  to  Augustus  in  the  xl.  yeare  of 
his  age,  there  was  never  any  conspiracie  or  enterprise 
attempted  against  him;  and  he  received  a  just  reward 
for  his  so  great  clemency.  But  the  like  succeeded  not  to 
our  Prince,  for  his  mildnesse  and  lenitie  could  not  so  warrant 
him,  but  that  afterward  he  fell  into  the  snares  of  the  like 
treason  :  so  vaine  and  frivolous  a  thing  is  humane  wisdome  : 
and  contrary  to  all  projects,  devices,  counsels,  and  precautions, 
fortune  doth  ever  keepe  a  full  sway  and  possession  of  all 
events.  We  count  those  Physitians  happy  and  successeful, 
that  successfully  end  a  desperate  cure,  or  come  to  a  good 
issue :  as  if  there  were  no  other  art  but  theirs,  that  could 
not  subsist  of  it  selfe,  and  whose  foundations  were  too  feeble 
to  stand  and  relie  upon  her  owne  strength  :  and  as  if  there 
were  none  but  it,  that  stands  in  need  of  fortunes  helpe- 
affoording  hand,  for  the  effecting  of  her  operations.  My 
conceit  of  it,  is  both  the  worst  and  the  best  a  man  may 
imagine:  for  thankes  be  to  God,  there  is  no  commerce 
betweene  us  :  I  am  contrary  to  others ;  for  I  ever  despise  it, 
and  when  I  am  sick,  in  stead  of  entring  into  league  or  com 
position  with  it,  I  then  beginne  to  hate  and  feare  it  most : 
and  answer  such  as  urge  mee  to  take  Physicke,  that  at  least 
they  will  tarie  till  such  time  as  I  have  recovered  my  health 
and  strength  againe ;  that  then  I  may  the  better  be  enabled 
to  endure  the  violence  and  hazard  of  their  potions.  I  let 
nature  worke,  and  presuppose  unto  my  selfe,  that  she  hath 
provided  her  selfe,  both  of  teeth  and  clawes,  to  defend  her 
self  from  such  assaults  as  shall  beset  her,  and  to  maintaine 
this  contexture  or  frame,  whose  dissolution  it  so  much  hateth. 
In  liew  of  bringing  helpe  unto  her,  when  shee  most  striveth, 
and  is  combated  by  sicknesse,  I  greatly  feare  lest  I  bring 
succor  unto  her  adversarie,  and  surcharge  her  with  new 
enemies.  Now  I  conclude,  that  not  onely  in  Physicke,  but 
126 


same  coun- 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

likewise  in  sundry  more  certaine  arts,  fortune  hath  great  CHAPTER 
share  in  them.     The  Poeticall  furies,  which  ravish  and  trans-       XXIII 
port  their  Author  beyond  himselfe,  why  shall  we  not  ascribe  Plvers  events 
ii  i  •  j    r    j.  •          I.-        ir  £       it.     j.1.    ,  from  one  selfe 

them  to  his  good  tortune,  since  himselle  coniessetn,  that    same  co 

they  exceed  his  strength  and  sufficiencie,  and  acknowledgeth  sell 
to  proceed  from  elsewhere,  than  from  himselfe,  and  that  they 
are  not  in  his  power,  no  more  than  Orators  say  to  have  those 
strange  motions  and  extraordinary  agitations,  that  in  their 
art  transport  them  beyond  their  purpose  ?  The  like  wee  see 
to  bee  in  painting,  for  sometimes  the  Painters  hand  shall 
draw  certaine  lines  or  draughts,  so  farre  exceeding  his  con 
ception  or  skill,  that  himselfe  is  forced  to  enter  into  admira 
tion  and  amazement.  But  fortune  yet  doth  much  more 
evidently  shew,  the  share  shee  hath  in  all  their  workes,  by 
the  graces  and  beauties  that  often  are  found  in  them,  not 
onely  beyond  the  intent,  but  besides  the  very  knowledge 
of  the  workman.  A  heedy  Reader  shall  often  discover  in 
other  mens  compositions,  perfections  farre-differing  from  the 
Authors  meaning,  and  such  as  haply  he  never  dreamed  of, 
and  illustrateth  them  with  richer  senses,  and  more  excellent 
constructions.  As  for  military  enterprises,  no  man  is  so 
blinde  but  seeth  what  share  fortune  hath  in  them :  even  in 
our  counsels  and  deliberations,  some  chance  or  good  lucke 
must  needs  be  joyned  to  them,  for  whatsoever  our  wisdome 
can  effect,  is  no  great  matter.  The  sharper  and  quicker  it 
is,  more  weaknesse  findes  it  in  it  selfe,  and  so  much  the  more 
doth  it  distrust  it  selfe.  I  am  of  Sillaes  opinion  :  and  when 
I  nearest  consider  the  most  glorious  exploits  of  warre,  me 
thinkes  I  see,  that  those  who  have  the  conduct  of  them, 
employ  neither  counsell  nor  deliberation  about  them,  but 
for  fashion-sake,  and  leave  the  best  part  of  the  enterprise  to 
fortune,  and  on  the  confidence  they  have  in  her  ayd,  they 
still  go  beyond  the  limits  of  all  discourse.  Casuall  rejoy- 
cings,  and  strange  furies  ensue  among  their  deliberations, 
which  for  the  most  induce  them  to  take  the  counsell  least 
grounded  upon  apparance  or  reason,  and  which  quaile  their 
courage  beyond  reason  ;  whence  it  hath  succeeded  unto 
divers  great  Captaines,  by  giving  credit  to  such  rash  counsels, 
and  alleaging  to  their  souldiers,  that  by  some  divine  inspira 
tion,  and  other  signes  and  prognostications,  they  were 

127 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  encouraged  to  such  and  such  enterprises.  Loe  here  where- 
XXIII  fore  in  this  uncertainty  and  perplexitie,  which  the  impuis- 
SGVe^fS  sances  anc^  inabilitie  doth  bring  us  to  see  and  chuse  what 
un-6  *s  most  commodious,  for  the  difficulties  which  the  divers 
sell  accidents  and  circumstances  of  everie  thing  draw  with  them  : 
the  surest  way,  if  other  considerations  did  not  invite  us 
thereto,  is,  in  my  conceit,  to  follow  the  partie,  wherein  is 
most  honestie  and  justice  ;  and  since  a  man  doubteth  of  the 
nearest  way,  ever  to  keepe  the  right.  As  in  these  two 
examples  I  have  lately  mentioned,  there  is  no  doubt,  but 
that  it  was  more  commendable  and  generous  in  him,  who 
had  received  the  offence,  to  remit  and  pardon  the  same, 
than  to  have  done  otherwise.  If  the  first  had  but  ill  successe, 
his  good  intent  is  not  to  be  blamed ;  and  no  man  knoweth, 
had  he  taken  the  contrary  way,  whether  he  should  have 
escaped  the  end,  to  which  his  destinie  called  him ;  and  then 
had  he  lost  the  glorie  and  commendations  of  so  seld-seene 
humanitie.  Sundrie  men  possessed  with  this  feare,  are  read- 
of  in  ancient  Histories  ;  the  greatest  part  of  which  have 
followed  the  way  of  fore-running  the  conspiracies,  which 
were  complotted  against  them,  by  revenge  or  tortures,  but 
I  see  very  few,  that  by  this  remedy  have  received  any  good ; 
witnesse  so  many  Romane  Emperours.  Hee  that  perceiveth 
himselfe  to  bee  in  this  danger,  ought  not  much  to  relie  upon 
his  power,  or  hope  in  his  vigilancie.  For,  how  hard  a  matter 
is  it,  for  a  man  to  warrant  and  safeguard  himselfe  from  an 
enemie,  that  masks  under  the  visage  of  the  most  officious 
and  heartie-seeming  friend  we  have  ?  And  to  know  the 
inward  thoughts  and  minde-concealed  meanings  of  such  as 
daily  attend,  and  are  continually  with  us?  It  will  little 
availe  him  to  have  forraine  nations  to  his  guard,  and  ever  to 
be  encircled  about  with  troupes  of  Armed  men  ?  whosoever 
he  be  that  resolveth  to  condemne  his  owne  life,  may  at  any 
time  become  Master  of  other  mens  lives. 

Moreover  that  continuall  suspition,  which  makes  the 
Prince  to  mistrust  every  body,  should  be  a  wonderfull  vexa 
tion  to  his  minde.  And  therefore  when  Dion  was  advertised 
that  Calippus  watched  to  kill  him,  could  never  finde  in  his 
heart  to  informe  himselfe  of  it :  affirming ;  '  He  had  rather 
'  die  once,  than  ever  live  in  feare  and  miserie,  and  to  guard 

128 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

4  himselfe  not  onely  from  his  enemies,  but  from  his  very  CHAPTER 
'  friends/    Which  thing  Alexander  presented  more  lively  and       XXIII 

undauntedly  by  effect,  who  by  a  letter  of  Parmenio  having  Plvers  events 
T       i       ,  •  1 1     .     -rii  -V       i  •  i    i     ?  from  one  selfe 

received   advertisement,   that   Philip   his  neerest   and  best    __.„_  __..„ 

•        i  •    l  i  i  -i  odllltJ  COUI1- 

regarded  Physitian,  had  with  money  beene  suborned  and  sell 
corrupted  by  Darius,  to  poison  him,  who  at  the  very  instant 
that  he  gave  Philip  the  letter  to  reade,  swallowed  downe  a 
potion  he  had  given  him :  was  it  not  to  expresse  his  resolu 
tion,  that  if  his  friends  would  kill  him,  he  would  not  shun 
them,  but  consent  to  their  treachery  ?  This  Prince  is  the 
Soveraigne  patterne  of  hazardous  attempts  :  yet  know  I  not 
whether  in  all  his  life,  he  shewed  an  act  of  more  resolute 
constancie,  than  this,  nor  an  ornament  so  many  wayes 
famous.  Those  which  daily  preach  and  buzze  in  Princes 
eares,  under  colour  of  their  safetie,  a  heedy  diffidence  and 
ever-warie  distrustfulnesse,  doe  nought  but  tell  them  of 
their  ruine,  and  further  their  shame  and  downefall.  No 
noble  act  is  atchieved  without  danger.  I  know  one  by  his 
owne  complexion  of  a  right  martial  courage,  and  ready  for 
any  resolution,  whose  good  and  hopefull  fortune  is  dayly 
corrupted  by  such  verball  perswasions  ;  as  first  to  keepe  close 
with  his  friends ;  never  to  listen  to  any  reconciliation  with 
his  old  enemies :  to  stand  upon  his  owne  guard  ;  never  to 
commit  himselfe  to  any  stronger  than  himselfe,  what  faire 
promise  soever  they  make  him,  or  whatsoever  apparant 
profit  they  seeme  to  containe.  I  also  know  another,  who 
because  he  did  ever  follow  the  contrarie  counsell,  and  would 
never  listen  to  such  schoole-reasons,  hath  beyond  all  hope 
raised  his  fortune  above  the  common  reach.  That  boldnesse 
wherewith  they  so  greedily  gape  after  glory,  is  alwayes  at 
hand,  when  ever  need  shall  be,  as  gloriously  in  a  doublet  as 
in  an  armour ;  in  a  cabinet  as  in  a  campe ;  the  arme  held 
downe,  as  lifted  up.  A  wisdome  so  tenderly  precise,  and  so 
precisely  circumspect,  is  a  mortall  enemie  to  haughty  execu 
tions.  Scipio,  to  sound  the  depth  of  Siphax  intent,  and  to 
discover  his  minde ;  leaving  his  armie,  and  abandoning  the 
yet  unsetled  country  of  Spaine,  which  under  his  new  conquest 
of  it,  was  likely  to  be  suspected,  he  I  say,  could  passe  into 
Affrike  onely  with  two  simple  ships  or  small  barkes,  to 
commit  himselfe  in  a  strange  and  foe  countrie,  to  engage  his 
P  129 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  person,   under  the  power  of  a  barbarous  King,  under  an 

XXIII        unknowne  faith,  without  either  hostage,  or  letters  of  cre- 

JJivers  events  jence.  yea  without  any  body,  but  onely  upon  the  assurance 

from  one  selfe     ,,    , ,  '  J  c  {•         J  e  I-  c  11  j 

same  coun-    °*  the  greatnesse  of  his  courage,  of  his  successefull  good 

sell  fortune,  and  of  the  promise  of  his  high-raised  hopes. 
Habita [fides  ipsamplerumquejidem  obligat.  '  Most  commonly 
4  trusting  obligeth  trustinesse.  To  an  ambitious  and  fame- 
aspiring  minde,  contrariwise,  a  man  must  yeeld  little,  and 
cary  a  hard  hand  against  suspitions  :  Feare  and  distrust 
draw  on  offences  and  allure  them.  The  most  mistrustfull  of 
our  Kings  established  his  affaires,  and  setled  his  estate, 
especially  because  he  had  voluntarily  given  over,  abandoned 
and  committed  his  life  and  libertie,  to  the  hands  and  mercy 
of  his  enemies  :  Seeming  to  put  his  whole  confidence  in  them, 
that  so  they  might  likewise  conceive  an  undoubted  affiance 
in  him.  Caesar  did  onely  confront  his  mutinous  legions,  and 
oppose  his  hardly-ruled  Armies,  with  the  min de-quelling 
authoritie  of  his  countenance,  and  awe-moving  fiercenesse  of 
his  words :  and  did  so  much  trust  himselfe  and  his  fortune, 
that  he  no  whit  feared  to  abandon  and  commit  himselfe  to  a 
seditious  and  rebellious  Armie. 

LUCAN.  v.  296.  — stetit  aggerefulti 

Gcespitis,  intrepidus  vultu,  meruitque  timeri 
Nil  metuens. 

He  on  a  rampart  stood  of  turfe  uprear'd, 
Fearelesse,  and  fearing1  none  was  to  be  fear'd. 

True  it  is,  that  this  undaunted  assurance  cannot  so  fully 
and  lively  be  represented,  but  by  those  in  whom  the  imagina 
tion  or  apprehension  of  death,  and  of  the  worst  that  may 
happen,  can  strike  no  amazement  at  all :  for,  to  represent  it 
fearefully-trembling,  doubtfull  and  uncertaine,  for  the  ser 
vice  of  an  important  reconciliation,  is  to  effect  no  great 
matter :  It  is  an  excellent  motive  to  gaine  the  heart  and 
good  will  of  others,  for  a  man  to  go  and  submit  himselfe  to 
them,  provided  it  be  done  freely,  and  without  constraint  of 
any  necessitie,  and  in  such  sort,  that  a  man  bring  a  pure  and 
unspotted  confidence  with  him,  and  at  least  his  countenance 
void  of  all  scruple.  Being  yet  a  childe,  I  saw  a  gentleman, 
who  had  the  command  of  a  great  Citie,  and  by  a  commotion 

130 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

of  a  seditiously  furious  people  greatly  put  to  his  plunges,  CHAPTER 
who  to  suppresse  the  rising  fire  of  this  tumult,  resolved  to  XXIII 
sally  out  from  a  strongly  assured  place,  where  he  was  safe,  jplvers  events 
and  yeeld  himselfe  to  that  many-headed  monster  mutinous  sameooun-6 
rowt;  thrived  so  ill  by  it,  that  he  was  miserably  slaine  sell 
amongst  them  :  yet  deeme  I  not  his  oversight  to  have  beene 
so  great  in  issuing  out,  his  memorie  being  of  most  men  con 
demned,  as  because  he  tooke  a  way  of  submission,  and  re- 
missenesse,  and  attempted  to  extinguish  that  rage  and  hurly- 
burly,  rather  by  way  of  following,  than  of  guiding,  and  by 
requiring  sute,  than  by  demonstrative  resolution :  and  I 
deeme,  a  gratiously  milde  severitie,  with  a  militarie  com- 
mandement,  full  of  confidence  and  securitie,  beseeming  his 
ranke,  and  the  dignitie  of  his  charge,  had  better  availed  him, 
had  beene  more  successefull,  at  least  with  more  honour,  and 
well  seeming  comlinesse.  There  is  nothing  lesse  to  bee  ex 
pected  or  hoped  for  at  the  hands  of  this  monstrous  faced 
multitude,  thus  agitated  by  furie,  than  humanitie  and 
gentlenesse ;  it  will  much  sooner  receive  reverence,  and 
admit  feare.  I  might  also  blame  him,  that  having  under 
taken  a  resolution  (in  my  judgement,  rather  brave  than  rash) 
to  cast  himselfe  inconsiderately,  weake  and  unarmed,  amidst 
a  tempestuous  Ocean  of  senselesse  and  mad  men,  he  should 
have  gone  through  stitch  with  it,  and  not  leave  the  person 
he  represented  in  the  briers,  whereas  after  he  had  perceived 
the  danger  at  hand,  he  chanced  to  bleed  at  the  nose ;  and 
then  to  change  that  demisse  and  flattering  countenance  he 
had  undertaken,  into  a  dismaid  and  drooping  looke,  filling 
both  voice  and  eyes  with  astonishment  and  repentance  :  and 
seeking  to  squat  himselfe,  hee  the  more  enflamed,  and  called 
them  upon  him.  It  was  determined,  there  should  be  a 
generall  muster  made  of  divers  troupes  of  armed  men  (a 
place  fittest  for  secret  revenges,  and  where  they  may  safest 
be  atchieved)  there  were  most  apparant  reasons,  that  the 
place  was  very  unsure,  or  at  least,  to  be  suspected,  by  such 
as  were  to  have  the  principall  and  necessary  charge  to  survey 
them.  Divers  counsels  were  proposed,  sundry  opinions  heard, 
as  in  a  subject  of  great  difficultie,  and  on  which  depended  so 
many  weigh  tie  consequences.  My  advice  was,  they  should 
carefully  avoid  to  give  any  testimonie  of  suspition,  or  shew 

131 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  of  doubt,  and  that  our  troupes  should  be  as  full  as  might  be, 

XXIII       and  the  Fyles  orderly  ranked,  and  every  Souldier  shew  an 

Divers  events  un(launted  carriage,  and  undismayed  countenance,   and  in 

from  one  selfe    ,       i     ^  i         •        e  e          /»  i      i      /    i  •  i    .  i  • 

same  coun-    s^eaa  or  keeping  some  01  our  iorces  backe  (which  thing  most 

sell  opinions  aimed  at)  all  Captaines  should  be  put  in  minde  to 
admonish  their  Souldiers  to  make  their  sallies  as  orderly  and 
as  strong  as  might  be,  in  honour  of  the  assistance;  and 
spare  no  powder,  which  would  serve  as  a  gratification  toward 
these  suspectfull  troupes,  which  afterward  caused  a  mutuall 
and  profitable  confidence.  I  finde  the  course  that  lulius 
Caesar  held  to  be  the  best  a  man  may  take :  First  he  assayed 
by  clemencie  to  purchase  the  love  of  his  very  enemies,  con 
tenting  himselfe  in  the  conspiracies  that  were  discovered 
unto  him,  simply  to  shew  they  were  not  unknowen  to  him, 
but  had  perfect  notice  of  them.  That  done,  he  tooke  a 
most  noble  resolution,  which  was,  without  dread  or  dismay, 
or  any  care-taking,  to  attend  whatsoever  might  betide  him, 
wholy  abandoning  and  remitting  himselfe  into  the  hands  of 
the  Gods  and  of  fortune.  For  certainely,  it  is  the  state 
wherein  he  was,  when  he  was  murthered  in  the  Senate.  A 
stranger  having  published  every  where,  that  he  could  teach 
Dionysius  the  tyrant  of  Siracusa  a  way  to  understand  and 
discover  the  very  certaintie  of  all  the  practices,  his  subjects 
or  any  else  should  practise  against  him,  if  he  would  bestow 
a  good  summe  of  money  upon  him :  Dionysius  being  therof 
advertised,  sent  for  him,  to  discover  the  secret  and  under 
stand  the  truth  of  so  necessarie  an  art  for  his  preservation  : 
the  stranger  told  him,  there  was  no  other  skill  in  his  art, 
but  that  he  should  deliver  him  a  talent,  and  then  boast  hee 
had  learned  the  use  of  so  unvaluable  a  secret  of  him. 
Dionysius  allowed  of  his  invention,  and  forthwith  caused  six 
hundred  crownes  to  be  delivered  him.  It  is  not  likely  that 
ever  he  would  have  given  so  great  a  summe  of  mony  to  an 
unknowne  man,  but  in  reward  of  a  most  profitable  instruc 
tion  ;  for  by  way  of  this  reputation  he  kept  his  enemies  still 
in  awe.  And  therefore  doe  Princes  wisely  publish  such 
advertisements  as  they  receive  of  the  plots  conspired,  and 
treasons  practised  against  their  lives  and  states,  thereby  to 
make  men  beleeve,  that  nothing  can  be  attempted  against 
them,  but  they  shall  have  knowledge  of  it.  The  Duke  of 
132 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Athens  committed  many  fond  oversights  in  the  establishing  CHAPTER 
of  his   late   tyrannic    upon   the   Florentines,  but  this   the        XXIII 

chiefest,  that  having  received  the  first  advertisement  of  the  ^ivers  everf*s 
T  ^  ^  &    i  ±    ^      T-.I         ,•  ,   •      i         •     .  from  one  selfe 

Monopolies  and  Complots  the  Florentines  contrived  against    samc  coun. 

him,  by  Mathew,  surnamed  Morozo,  one  of  the  complices,  sell 
thinking  to  suppresse  this  warning,  and  conceale  that  any  in 
the  Citie  were  offended  at  him,  or  grudged  at  his  rule,  caused 
him  immediatly  to  be  put  to  death.  I  remember  to  have 
heretofore  read  the  storie  of  a  Romane  (a  man  of  speciall 
dignitie)  who  flying  the  tyrannic  of  the  Triumvirate,  had 
many  times  by  the  sutteltie  of  his  invention,  escaped  those 
who  pursued  him.  It  fortuned  upon  a  day,  that  a  troupe 
of  horse-men,  who  had  the  charge  to  apprehend  him,  passing 
alongst  a  hedge,  under  which  he  lay  lurking,  had  well-nigh 
discovered  him ;  which  he  perceiving,  and  considering  the 
dangers  and  difficulties  he  had  so  long  endured,  thinking  to 
save  him  selfe  from  the  continuall  and  daily  searches  that 
every  where  were  made  after  him,  and  calling  to  minde  the 
small  pleasure  he  might  hope  of  such  a  life,  and  how  much 
better  it  were  for  him  to  die  once,  than  live  in  such  con 
tinuall  feare  and  agonie,  himselfe  called  them,  and  volun 
tarily  discovered  his  lurking  hole,  and  that  he  might  rid 
them  and  himselfe  from  further  pursuit  and  care,  did  will 
ingly  yeeld  unto  their  crueltie.  For  a  man  to  call  his 
enemies  to  aid  him,  is  a  counsell  somewhat  rash,  yet  thinke 
I,  it  were  better  to  embrace  it,  than  remaine  still  in  the  con 
tinuall  fit  of  such  a  fever  that  hath  no  remedie.  But  since 
the  provisions  of  man  may  apply  unto  it,  are  full  of  un- 
quietnesse  and  uncertaintie,  much  better  is  it  with  a  full 
assurance  to  prepare  himselfe  patiently  to  endure  what 
soever  may  happen,  and  draw  some  comfort  from  that, 
which  a  man  is  never  sure  shall  come  to  passe. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    TWENTY-FOURTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Pedantisme. 

HAVE  in  my  youth  oftentimes  beene  vexed, 
to  see  a  Pedant  brought  in,  in  most  of 
Italian  comedies,  for  a  vice  or  sport-maker, 
and  the  nicke-name  or  Magister  to  be  of 
no  better  signification  amongst  us.  For, 
my  selfe  being  committed  to  their  tuition, 
how  could  I  chuse  but  be  somewhat  jea 
lous  of  their  reputation  ?  In  deed  I  sought 
to  excuse  them  by  reason  of  the  naturall  disproportion  that  is 
betweene  the  vulgar  sort,  and  rare  and  excellent  men,  both 
in  judgement  and  knowledge:  forsomuch  as  they  take  a 
cleane  contrarie  course  one  from  another.  But  when  I  con 
sidered,  the  choysest  men  were  they,  that  most  contemned 
them,  I  was  far  to  seeke,  and  as  it  were  lost  my  selfe. 
witnesse  our  good  Bellay  : 

BELLA.Y.  Mais  je  hay  par  sur  tout  un  scavoir  pedantesque. 

A  pedant  knowledge,  I 
Detest  out  of  all  cry. 

Yet  is  this  custome  very  ancient ;  for  Plutarch  saith, '  that 
'  Greeke  and  Scholer,  were  amongst  the  Romans,  words  of 
'  reproach  and  imputation."  And  comming  afterwards  to 
yeares  of  more  discretion,  I  have  found  they  had  great 
reason,  and  that  magis  magnos  clericos,  non  sunt  magis 
magnos  sapientes :  '  The  most  great  Clerkes  are  not  the 
6  most  wisest  men.1  But  whence  it  may  proceed,  that  a  minde 
rich  in  knowledge,  and  of  so  many  things,  becommeth 
thereby  never  livelier  nor  more  qui eke-sighted  ;  and  a  grose- 
headed  and  vulgar  spirit  may  without  amendment  containe 
the  discourse  and  judgement  of  the  most  excellent  wits  the 
world  ever  produced,  I  still  remaine  doubtfull.  To  receive 
so  many,  so  strange,  yea  and  so  great  wits,  it  must  needs 
follow  (said  once  a  Lady  unto  me,  yea  one  of  our  chiefest 
Princesses,  speaking  of  some  body)  '  that  a  mans  owne  wit, 
4  force,  droope,  and  as  it  were  diminish  it  selfe,  to  make 

134 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

6  roome  for  others.1  I  might  say,  that  as  plants  are  choked  CHAPTER 
by  over-much  moisture,  and  lamps  dammed  with  too  much  XXIV 
oyle,  so  are  the  actions  of  the  mind  over-whelmed  by  over-  ( )f  Pedant- 
abundance  of  matter  and  studie  :  which  occupied  and  in- 
tangled  with  so  great  a  diversitie  of  things,  loseth  the  meane 
to  spread  and  cleare  it  selfe  ;  and  that  surcharge  keepeth  it 
low-drooping  and  faint.  But  it  is  otherwise,  for  our  mind 
stretcheth  the  more  by  how  much  more  it  is  replenished. 
And  in  examples  of  former  times,  the  contrary  is  scene,  of 
sufficient  men  in  the  managing  of  publike  affaires,  of  great 
Captaines,  and  notable  Counsellers  in  matters  of  estate,  to 
have  been  therewithal!  excellently  wise.  And  concerning 
Philosophers,  retired  from  all  publike  negotiations,  they  have 
indeed  sometimes  been  vilified,  by  the  comike  libertie  of  their 
times,  their  opinions  and  demeanors  yeelding  them  ridicu 
lous.  Will  you  make  them  Judges  of  the  right  of  a  processe, 
or  of  the  actions  of  a  man  ?  They  are  readie  for  it.  They 
enquire  whether  there  be  any  life  yet  remaining,  whether  any 
motion.  Whether  man  be  any  thing  but  an  Oxe,  what  work 
ing  or  suffering  is ;  what  strange  beasts  law  and  justice  are. 
Speake  they  of  the  Magistrate,  or  speake  they  unto  him ; 
they  do  it  with  an  unreverent  and  uncivill  libertie.  Heare 
they  a  Prince  or  a  King  commended  ?  Hee  is  but  a  shepherd 
to  them,  as  idle  as  a  Swaine  busied  about  milking  of  his 
cattell,  or  shearing  of  his  sheepe  :  but  yet  more  rudely. 
Esteeme  you  any  man  the  greater  for  possessing  two  hun 
dred  acres  of  land  ?  They  scoffe  at  him,  as  men  accustomed 
to  embrace  all  the  world,  as  their  possession.  Do  you  boast 
of  your  Nobilitie,  because  you  can  blazon  your  descent  of 
seven  or  eight  rich  Grandfathers  ?  They  will  but  little  regard 
you,  as  men  that  conceive  not  the  universall  image  of  nature, 
and  how  many  predecessors  every  one  of  us  hath  had,  both 
rich  and  poore,  Kings  and  groomes,  Greekes  and  Barbarians. 
And  were  you  lineally  descended  in  the  fiftieth  degree  from 
Hercules,  they  deeme  it  a  vanitie  to  vaunt  or  alleage  this 
gift  of  fortune.  So  did  the  vulgar  sort  disdaine  them  as 
ignorant  of  the  first  and  common  things,  and  as  presump 
tuous  and  insolent.  But  this  Platonicall  lustre  is  far  from 
that  which  our  men  stand  in  need  of.  They  were  envied  as 
being  beyond  the  common  sort,  as  despising  publike  actions, 

135 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  as  having  proposed  unto  themselves  a  particular  and  inimit- 
XXIV  able  life,  aiming  and  directed  at  certaine  high  discourses, 
)f  Pedant-  an(j  from  the  common  use :  these  are  disdained  as  men  beyond 
the  ordinary  fashion,  as  incapable  of  publike  charges,  as  lead 
ing  an  unsociable  life,  and  professing  base  and  abject  cus- 
PACUVIUS,  tomes,  after  the  vulgar  kind.  Odi  homines  ignavos  opera, 
Lips.  i.  io.  Philosoplios  sententia.  '  I  hate  men  that  are  fooles  in  work- 
'  ing,  and  Philosophers  in  speaking. '  As  for  those  Philoso 
phers,  I  say,  that  as  they  were  great  in  knowledge,  so  were 
they  greater  in  all  action.  And  even  as  they  report  of  that 
Syracusan  Geometrician,  who  being  taken  from  his  bookish 
contemplation,  to  shew  some  practice  of  his  skill,  for  the 
defence  of  his  countrie,  reared  sodainly  certaine  terror-moving 
engines,  and  shewed  effects  farre  exceeding  all  mens  conceit, 
himselfe  notwithstanding  disdaining  all  this  his  handie- 
worke.  supposing  he  had  thereby  corrupted  the  dignitie  of 
his  art ;  his  engines  and  manuall  works  being  but  the  appren- 
tiships,  and  trials  of  his  skill  in  sport :  So  they,  if  at  any 
time  they  have  been  put  to  the  triall  of  any  action,  they 
have  been  seen  to  flie  so  high  a  pitch,  and  with  so  loftie  a 
flight,  that  men  might  apparantly  see  their  minds  and 
spirits  were  through  the  intelligence  of  things,  become  won 
derfully  rich  and  great.  But  some  perceiving  the  seat  of 
politike  government  possessed  by  unworthy  and  incapable 
men,  have  withdrawne  themselves  from  it.  And  hee  who 
demanded  of  Crates,  how  long  men  should  Philosophize, 
received  this  answer,  Untill  such  time  as  they  who  have  the 
conduct  of  our  Armies  be  no  longer  blockish  asses.  Heracli- 
tus  resigned  the  royaltie  unto  his  brother.  And  to  the 
Ephesians,  who  reproved  him  for  spending  his  time  in  play 
ing  with  children  before  the  temple  :  hee  answered,  And  is 
it  not  better  to  doe  so,  than  to  governe  the  publike  affaires 
in  your  companie  ?  Others  having  their  imagination  placed 
beyond  fortune  and  the  world,  found  the  seat  of  justice,  and 
the  thrones  of  Kings,  to  be  but  base  and  vile.  And  Empe- 
docles  refused  the  royaltie,  which  the  Agrigentines  offered 
him.  Thales  sometimes  accusing  the  carke  and  care  men 
tooke  about  good  husbandry,  and  how  to  grow  rich  ;  some 
replied  unto  him,  that  he  did  as  the  Fox,  because  he  could 
not  attaine  unto  it  himselfe  :  which  hearing,  by  way  of  sport 
136 


XXIV 

Of  Pedant- 
isme 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

he  would  needs  shew  by  experience  how  he  could  at  his  CHAPTER 
pleasure  become  both  thriftie  and  rich  ;  and  bending  his  wits 
to  gaine  and  profit,  erected  a  traffike,  which  within  one  yeare 
brought  him  such  riches,  as  the  skilfullest  in  the  trade  of 
thriving,  could  hardly  in  all  their  life  devise  how  to  get  the 
like.  That  which  Aristotle  reporteth  of  some,  who  called 
both  him,  and  Anaxagoras,  and  such  like  men,  wise,  and  not 
prudent,  because  they  cared  not  for  things  more  profitable : 
besides,  I  doe  not  verie  well  digest  this  nice  difference  of 
words,  that  serveth  my  find-fault  people  for  no  excuse  :  and 
to  see  the  base  and  needie  fortune,  wherewith  they  are  con 
tent,  we  might  rather  have  just  cause  to  pronounce  them, 
neither  wise  nor  prudent.  I  quit  this  first  reason,  and  thinke 
it  better  to  say,  that  this  evill  proceedeth  from  the  bad 
course  they  take  to  follow  sciences  ;  and  that  respecting  the 
manner  we  are  instructed  in  them,  it  is  no  wonder  if  neither 
Schollers  nor  Masters,  howbeit  they  prove  more  learned,  be 
come  no  whit  more  sufficient.  Verily  the  daily  care,  and 
continuall  charges  of  our  fathers,  ay meth  at  nothing  so  much, 
as  to  store  our  heads  with  knowledge  and  learning  ;  as  for 
judgement  and  vertue,  that  is  never  spoken  of.  If  a  man 
passe  by,  crie  out  to  our  people  ;  '  Oh  what  a  wise  man  goeth 
'  yonder  ! '  And  of  another  :  '  Oh  what  a  good  man  is 
6  yonder  !  "*  He  will  not  faile  to  cast  his  eyes  and  respect 
toward  the  former.  A  third  crier  were  needfull,  to  say,  '  Oh 
'  what  blocke-heads  are  those  ! '  We  are  ever  readie  to  aske, 
'  Hath  he  any  skill  in  the  Greeke  and  Latine  tongue  ?  can 
'  lie  write  well  ?  doth  hee  write  in  prose  or  verse  ? '  But 
whether  hee  be  growne  better  or  wiser,  which  should  be  the 
chiefest  of  his  drift,  that  is  never  spoken  of,  we  should  rather 
enquire  who  is  better  wise,  than  who  is  more  wise.  We 
labour,  and  toyle,  and  plod  to  fill  the  memorie,  and  leave 
both  understanding  and  conscience  emptie.  Even  as  birds 
flutter  and  skip  from  field  to  field  to  pecke  up  corne,  or  any 
graine,  and  without  tasting  the  same,  carrie  it  in  their  bils, 
therewith  to  feed  their  little  ones  ;  so  doe  our  pedants  gleane 
and  picke  learning  from  bookes,  and  never  lodge  it  further 
than  their  lips,  only  to  degorge  and  cast  it  to  the  wind.  It 
is  strange  how  fitly  sottishnesse  takes  hold  of  mine  example. 
Is  not  that  which  I  doe  in  the  greatest  part  of  this  composi- 
Q  137 


CVlll. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  tion,  all  one  and  selfe  same  thing  ?  I  am  ever  heere  and  there 
XXIV  picking  and  culling,  from  this  and  that  booke,  the  sentences 
)f  Pedant-  ^^  please  me,  not  to  keepe  them  (for  I  have  no  store-house 
to  reserve  them  in)  but  to  transport  them  into  this  :  where, 
to  say  truth,  they  are  no  more  mine,  than  in  their  first  place : 
we  are  (in  mine  opinion)  never  wise,  but  by  present  learning, 
not  by  that  which  is  past,  and  as  little  by  that  which  is  to 
come.  But  which  is  worse,  their  Schollers,  and  their  little 
ones  are  never  a  whit  the  more  fed  or  better  nourished  :  but 
passeth  from  hand  to  hand,  to  this  end  only,  thereby  to 
make  a  glorious  shew,  therewith  to  entertaine  others,  and 
with  it's  helpe  to  frame  some  quaint  stories,  or  prettie  tales, 
as  of  a  light  and  counterfeit  coyne,  unprofitable  for  any  use 

SEN.  Epist.  or  imployment,  but  to  reckon  and  cast  accompts.  Apud  olios 
loqui  didicerunt)  non  ipsi  secum.  Non  cst  loquendum,  sed 
gubernandum.  6  They  have  learned  to  speake  with  others, 
'  not  with  themselves  :  speaking  is  not  so  requisite  as  govern- 
'  ment.1  Nature,  to  shew  that  nothing  is  savage  in  whatso 
ever  she  produceth,  causeth  oftentimes,  even  in  rudest  and 
most  unarted  nations,  productions  of  spirits  to  arise,  that 
confront  and  wrestle  with  the  most  artist  productions.  As 
concerning  my  discourse,  is  not  the  Gaskonie  proverbe, 
drawne  from  a  bag-pipe,  prettie  and  quaint  ?  Bouha  prou 
bouha,  mas  a  remuda  lous  dits  quern.  '  You  may  blow  long 
'  enough,  but  if  once  you  stirre  your  fingers,  you  may  go 
4  seeke.'  Wee  can  talke  and  prate,  Cicero  saith  thus,  These 
are  Platoes  customes,  These  are  the  verie  words  of  Aristotle ; 
but  what  say  we  our  selves  ?  what  doe  we  ?  what  j  udge  we  ? 
A  Peroquet  would  say  as  much.  This  fashion  puts  me  in 
mind  of  that  rich  Romane,  who  to  his  exceeding  great  charge 
had  beene  verie  industrious  to  finde  out  the  most  sufficient 
men  in  all  sciences,  which  he  continually  kept  about  him, 
that  if  at  any  time  occasion  should  bee  moved  amongst  his 
friends  to  speake  of  any  matter  pertaining  to  Scholarship, 
they  might  supplie  his  place,  and  be  readie  to  assist  him  : 
some  with  discourse,  some  with  a  verse  of  Homer,  othersome 
with  a  sentence,  each  one  according  to  his  skill  or  profes 
sion  ;  who  perswaded  himselfe  that  all  such  learning  was  his 
owne,  because  it  was  contained  in  his  servants  minds.  As 
they  doe  whose  sufficiencie  is  placed  in  their  sumptuous 
138 


Of  Pedant- 
isme 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

libraries.     I  know  some,  whom  if  I  aske  what  he  knoweth,  CHAPTER 
hee  will  require  a  booke  to  demonstrate  the  same,  and  durst        XXIV 

-  .  .         nf  B«J«^ 

not  dare  to  tell  me  that  his  posteriors  are  scabious,  except  he 
turne  over  his  Lexicon  to  see  what  posteriors  and  scabious  is, 
wee  take  the  opinions  and  knowledge  of  others  into  our  pro 
tection,  and  that  is  all :  I  tell  you  they  must  be  infeoffed  in 
us,  and  made  our  owne.  Wee  may  verie  well  be  compared 
unto  him,  who  having  need  of  fire,  should  goe  fetch  some  at 
his  neighbours  chimney,  where  finding  a  good  fire,  should 
there  stay  to  warme  himselfe,  forgetting  to  carrie  some 
home,  what  availes  it  us  to  have  our  bellies  full  of  meat, 
if  it  be  not  digested  ?  If  it  bee  not  transchanged  in  us  ? 
except  it  nourish,  augment,  and  strengthen  us?  May 
we  imagine  that  Lucullus,  whom  learning  made  and  framed 
so  great  a  Captaine  without  experience,  would  have  taken  it 
after  our  manner  ?  We  relie  so  much  upon  other  mens 
armes,  that  we  disanull  our  owne  strength.  Will  I  arme 
my  selfe  against  the  feare  of  death  ?  it  is  at  Senecaes  cost : 
will  I  draw  comfort  either  fov  my  selfe,  or  any  other?  I 
borrow  the  same  of  Cicero.  I  would  have  taken  it  in  my 
selfe,  had  I  been  exercised  unto  it :  I  love  not  this  relative 
and  begd-for  sufficiencie.  Suppose  we  may  be  learned  by 
other  mens  learning.  Sure  I  am,  we  can  never  be  wise,  but 
by  our  owne  wisdome. 

Microi  (ro<pi(TTf)v,  ocrns  ov%  avrto  croc^os1.  Proverb. 

That  wise  man  I  cannot  abide, 
That  for  himself  cannot  provide. 

Ex  quo  Ennius :   Neqiddquam  sapere  sapientem,  qui  ipsi  ENNIUS. 
sibi  prodesse  non  quiret.     Whereupon  saith  Ennius :  '  That 
4  wise  man  is  vainly  wise,  who  could  not  profit  himselfe.' 

— si  cupidus,  si  I u VENAL.  Sat. 

Vanus,  et  Euganed  quantumvis  vilior  agnd.  viii.  14. 

If  covetous,  if  vaine  (not  wise) 

Than  any  lambe  more  base,  more  nice. 

Non  enim  paranda  nobis  solum,  sed  fruenda  sapientia  est.  Cic.  Finib.  i. 
'  For,  wee  must  not  only  purchase  wisdome,  but  enjoy  and  P- 
4  employ  the  same.1     Dionysius  scofFeth  at  those  Gramarians, 
who  ploddingly  labour  to  know  the  miseries  of  Ulysses,  and 
are  ignorant  of  their  owne ;  mocketh  those  Musitians,  that 

139 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  so  attentively  tune  their  instruments,  and  never  accord  their 
XXIV        manners ;  derideth  those  Orators,  that  studie  to  speake  of 
Of  Pedant-   justice,  and  never  put  it  in  execution.     Except  our  mind  be 
the  better,  unlesse  our  judgement  be  the  sounder,  I  had 
rather  my  scholler  had  imployed    his  time  in   playing  at 
Tennis ;  I  am  sure  his  bodie  would  be  the  nimbler.     See  but 
one  of  these  our  universitie  men  or  bookish  schollers  returne 
from  schole,  after  he  hath  there  spent  ten  or  twelve  yeares 
under  a  Pedants  charge :  who  is  so  unapt  for  any  matter  ? 
who  so  unfit  for  any  companie  ?  who  so  to  seeke  if  he  come 
into  the  world  ?  all  the  advantage  you  discover  in  him,  is, 
that  his  Latine  and  Greeke  have  made  him  more  sottish, 
more  stupid,  and  more  presumptuous,  then  before  he  went 
from  home.     Whereas  he  should  returne  with  a  mind  full- 
fraught,  he  ret  urn  es  with  a  wind-puft  conceit :  in  stead  of 
plum-feeding  the  same,  he  hath  only  spunged  it  up  with 
vanitie.     These  Masters,   as  Plato  speaketh  of  Sophisters 
(their  cosin  Germanes)  of  all  men,  are  those  that  promise 
to  be  most  profitable  unto  men,  and  alone,  amongst  all, 
that  not  only  amend  not  what  is  committed  to  their  charge, 
as  doth  a  carpenter  or  a  mason,  but  empaire  and  destroy 
the  same,  and  yet  they  must  full  dearely  be  paied.     If  the 
law  which  Protagoras  proposed  to  his  disciples,  were  fol 
lowed,  which  was,  that  either  they  should  pay  him  according 
to   his   word,   or   sweare   in   the   temple,   how  much   they 
esteemed  the  profit  they  had  received  by  his  discipline,  and 
accordingly  satisfie  him  for  his  paines,  my  Pedagogues  would 
be  aground,  especially  if  they  would  stand  to  the  oath  of  my 
experience.     My  vulgar  Perigordin-speech  doth  verie  pleas- 
antly  terme  such  selfe-conceited  wisards,  Letter-ferits,  as  if 
they  would  say  letter-strucken  men,  to  whom  (as  the  common 
saying  is)  letters  have  given  a  blow  with  a  mallet.     Verily 
for  the  most  part  they  seeme  to  be  distracted  even  from 
common  sense.     Note  but  the  plaine  husbandman,  or  the 
unwilie  shoemaker,  and  you  see  them  simply  and  naturally 
plod  on  their  course,  speaking  only  of  what  they  know,  and 
no  further ;  whereas  these  letter-puft  pedants,  because  they 
would   faine  raise  themselves  aloft,  and  with   their  literall 
doctrine  which  floteth  up  and  downe  the  superficies  of  their 
braine,  arme  themselves  beyond  other  men,  they  uncessantlv 
140 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

intricate  and  entangle  themselves:  they  utter  loftie  words,  CHAPTER 
and  speake  golden  sentences,  but  so  that  another  man  doth  XXIV 
place,  fit,  and  applie  them.  They  are  acquainted  with  ( )f  l^ui' 
Galen,  but  know  not  the  disease.  They  will  stuffe  your 
head  with  lawes,  when  God  wot  they  have  not  yet  conceived 
the  ground  of  the  case.  They  know  the  Theorike  of  all 
things,  but  you  must  seeke  who  shall  put  it  in  practice.  I 
have  scene  a  friend  of  mine,  in  mine  owne  house,  who  by  way 
of  sport  talking  with  one  of  these  pedanticall  gulls,  counter 
feited  a  kind  of  fustian  tongue,  and  spake  a  certain  gibrish, 
without  rime  or  reason,  sans  head  or  foot,  a  hotch-pot  of 
divers  things,  but  that  he  did  often  enterlace  it  with  inke- 
pot  termes,  incident  to  their  disputations,  to  ammuse  the 
bookish  sot  for  a  whole  day  long  with  debating  and  con 
tending  ;  ever  thinking  he  answered  the  Objections  made 
unto  him ;  yet  was  he  a  man  of  letters  and  reputation,  a 
graduate,  and  wore  a  goodly  formall  long  gowne. 

Vos  6  patritius  sanguis  quos  vivere  par  est  PERS.  Sat.  i. 

Occipiti  ctECO,  posticfB  occurrite  sannce.  61. 

You  noble  blouds,  who  with  a  noddle  blind, 

Should  live,  meet  with  the  mocke  that 's  made  behind. 

Whosoever  shall  narrowly  looke  into  this  kind  of  people, 
which  far  and  wide  hath  spred  it  selfe,  he  shall  find  (as  I 
have  done,)  that  for  the  most  part,  they  neither  understand 
themselves,  nor  others,  and  that  their  memorie  is  many  times 
sufficiently  full  fraught,  but  their  judgement  ever  hollow 
and  emptie :  except  their  natural  inclination  have  of  it  selfe 
otherwise  fashioned  them.  As  I  have  seene  Adrianus  Tur- 
nebus,  who  having  never  professed  any  thing  but  studic  and 
letters,  wherein  he  was,  in  mine  opinion,  the  worthiest  man 
that  lived  these  thousand  yeares,  and  who  notwithstanding 
had  no  Pedanticall  thing  about  him,  but  the  wearing  of  his 
gowne,  and  some  externall  fashions,  that  could  not  well  be 
reduced,  and  incivilized  to  the  courtiers  cut ;  things  of  no 
consequence.  And  I  naturally  hate  our  people,  that  will 
more  hardly  endure  a  long  robe  uncuriously  worne,  than  a 
crosse  skittish  mind  :  and  that  observe  what  leg,  or  reverence 
he  makes,  note  his  garbe  or  demeanor,  view  his  boots,  or  his 
hat,  and  marke  what  manner  of  man  he  is.  For  his  inward 
parts,  I  deeme  him  to  have  been  one  of  the  most  unspotted 

141 


XXIV 

Of  Pedant- 
isme 


IUVEN.  Saf. 
xiv.  34. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  truly  honest  minds  that  ever  was.  I  have  sundry  times 
of  purpose  urged  him  to  speak  of  matters  furthest  from  his 
study,  wherin  he  was  so  cleare-sighted,  and  could  with  so 
quicke  an  apprehension  conceive,  and  with  so  sound  a  judge 
ment  distinguish  them,  that  he  seemed  never  to  have  pro 
fessed  or  studied  other  factiltie  than  warre,  and  matters  of 
state.  Such  spirits,  such  natures  may  be  termed  worthy, 
goodly,  and  solid. 

— queis  arte  benigna 
Et  meliore  luto  finxit  pracordia  Titan. 

Whose  bowels  heavens-bright-Sunne  composed 
Of  better  mold,  art  wel  disposed. 

That  maintaine  themselves  against  any  bad  institution. 
Now  it  sufficeth  not  that  our  institution  marre  us  not,  it 
must  change  us  to  the  better.  There  are  some  of  our  Par 
liaments  and  Courts,  who  when  they  are  to  admit  of  any 
officers,  doe  only  examine  them  of  their  learning;  others, 
that  by  presenting  them  the  judgement  of  some  law  cases, 
endevour  to  sound  their  understanding.  Me  thinks  the 
latter  keep  the  better  stile :  And  albeit  these  two  parts  are 
necessarie,  and  both  ought  to  concur  in  one,  yet  truly  should 
that  of  learning  be  lesse  prized  than  judgement,  this  may 
well  be  without  the  other,  and  not  the  other  without  this. 
For  as  the  Greeke  verse  saith, 


Comm.  Gr<zc. 
IT.  ct  0.  tilt. 


ovdev  77 


s,  TJV 


SEN.  Epist. 
cvi.  f. 


vovs  napr. 

Learning  nought  worth  doth  lie, 
Be  not  discretion  by. 

Whereto  serveth  learning,  if  understanding  be  not 
joyned  to  it  ?  Oh  would  to  God,  that  for  the  good  of  our 
justice,  the  societies  of  Lawyers  were  as  wel  stored  with 
judgement,  discretion,  and  conscience,  as  they  are  with  learn 
ing  and  wit.  Non  vitce,  sed  scholce  disclmus.  '  We  learne 
'  not  for  our  life,  but  for  the  schooled  It  is  not  enough  to 
joyne  learning  and  knowledge  to  the  minde,  it  should  be 
incorporated  unto  it  :  it  must  not  be  sprinckled,  but  dyed 
with  it  ;  and  if  it  change  not  and  better  her  estate  (which  is 
imperfect)  it  were  much  better  to  leave  it.  It  is  a  dangerous 
Sword,  and  which  hindreth  and  ofFendeth  her  master,  if  it 
be  in  a  weake  hand,  and  which  hath  not  the  skill  to  manage 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

the  same:  Vt  fuerit  rnelius  non  didicisse :  'So  as  it  were  CHAPTER 
'  better  that  we  had  not  learned. '  It  is  peradventure  the  XXIV 
cause,  that  neither  we,  nor  divinitie  require  not  much  learn-  ' 
ing  in  women ;  and  that  Francis  Duke  of  Britannic,  sonne 
to  John  the  fifth,  when  he  was  spoken  unto  for  a  marriage 
betweene  him  and  Isabel  a  daughter  of  Scotland  ;  and  some 
told  him  she  was  but  meanly  brought  up,  and  without  any 
instruction  of  learning,  answered,  hee  loved  her  the  better  for 
it,  and  that  a  woman  was  wise  enough,  if  she  could  but 
make  a  difference  between  the  shirt  and  dublet  of  her 
husbands.  It  is  also  no  such  wonder  (as  some  say)  that  our 
auncesters  did  never  make  any  great  accompt  of  Letters,  and 
that  even  at  this  day  (except  it  be  by  chaunce)  they  are  not 
often  found  in  our  Kings  or  Princes  chiefest  councels  and 
consultations :  And  if  the  end  to  grow  rich  by  them,  which 
now  adaies  is  altogether  proposed  unto  us  by  the  studie  of 
Law,  of  Phisicke,  of  Pedantisme,  and  of  Divinitie ;  did  not 
keep  them  in  credit,  without  doubt  you  should  see  them 
as  beggarly  and  needy,  and  as  much  vilified  as  ever  they 
were.  And  what  hurt  I  pray  you,  since  they  neither  teach 
us  to  think  well,  nor  doe  well  ?  Postquam  docti  prodierunt,  SEN.  Epist. 
boni  desunt.  'Since  men  became  learned,  good  men  failed/  xcv- 
Each  other  science  is  prejudiciall  unto  him,  that  hath  not 
the  science  of  goodnesse.  But  may  not  the  reason  I  whilom 
sought  for,  also  proceed  thence  ?  That  our  studie  in  France, 
having  as  it  were  no  other  aime  but  profit,  but  those  lesse 
whom  nature  hath  produced  to  more  generous  offices,  than 
lucrative,  giving  themselves  unto  learning,  or  so  briefely 
(before  they  have  apprehended  any  liking  of  them,  retired 
unto  a  profession  that  hath  no  communitie  with  bookes) 
there  are  then  none  left,  altogether  to  engage  themselves  to 
studie  and  Bookes,  but  the  meaner  kind  of  people,  and  such 
as  are  borne  to  base  fortune,  and  who  by  learning  and  letters 
seek  some  meane  to  live,  and  enrich  themselves.  The  minds 
of  which  people  being  both  by  natural!  inclination,  by 
example,  and  familiar  institution,  of  the  basest  stampe,  doe 
falsly  reap  the  fruit  of  learning.  For  it  is  not  in  her  power 
to  give  light  unto  the  mind,  that  hath  none,  nor  to  make 
a  blind  man  to  see.  The  mysterie  of  it  is  not  to  affoord  him 
sight,  but  to  direct  it  for  him,  to  addresse  his  goings,  alwaies 

143 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  provided  he  have  feet  of  his  owne,  and  good,  strait,  and 
XXIV  capable  legs.  Knowledge  is  an  excellent  drug,  but  no  drug 
)f  Pedant-  -g  sufficiently  strong  to  preserve  it  selfe  without  alteration 
or  corruption,  according  to  the  fault  of  the  vessel!,  that  con- 
taines  it.  Some  man  hath  a  cleare  sight,  that  is  not  right- 
sighted  ;  and  by  consequence  seeth  what  good  is,  and  doth 
not  follow  it ;  and  seeketh  knowledge,  but  makes  no  use  of 
it.  The  chiefest  ordinance  of  Plato  in  his  common  wealth 
is,  to  give  unto  his  Citizens  their  charge,  according  to  their 
nature.  Nature  can  doe  all,  and  doth  all.  The  crookt 
backt,  or  deformed,  are  unfit  for  any  exercise  of  the  bodie, 
and  crooked  and  mis-shapen  minds  unproper  for  exercises  of 
the  minde.  The  bastard  and  vulgar  sort  are  unworthy  of 
Philosophic.  When  we  see  a  man  ill  shod,  if  he  chance  to 
be  a  Shoemaker,  wee  say  it  is  no  wonder,  for  commonly 
none  goes  worse  shod  than  they.  Even  so  it  seemes,  that 
experience  doth  often  shew  us,  a  Physitian  lesse  healthy, 
a  Divine  lesse  reformed,  and  most  commonly  a  Wiseman 
lesse  sufficient  than  another.  Aristo  Chius  had  heretofore 
reason  to  say,  that  Philosophers  did  much  hurt  to  their 
auditors,  forasmuch  as  the  greatest  number  of  minds  are  not 
apt  to  profit  by  such  instructions,  which,  if  they  take  not 
Cic.  Nat.  a  good,  they  will  follow  a  bad  course  :  aa^rov^  ex  Aristippi, 
Deo>\  iii.  acerbos  ex  Zenonis  schola  exire.  '  They  proceed  licentious 
4  out  of  the  Schoole  of  Aristippus,  but  bitter  out  of  the 
*  Schoole  of  Zeno.1  In  that  excellent  institution  which 
Zenophon  giveth  the  Persians,  wee  find,  that  as  other  Nations 
teach  their  children  Letters,  so  they  taught  theirs  vertue. 
Plato  said  the  eldest  borne  sonne,  in  their  royall  succession, 
was  thus  taught.  '  As  soone  as  he  was  borne,  he  was 
4  delivered,  not  to  women,  but  to  such  Eunuchs,  as  by 
'  reason  of  their  vertue  were  in  chiefest  authoritie  about  the 
'  King.  Their  speciall  charge  was  first  to  shapen  his  limmes 
'  and  bodie,  goodly  and  healthy  ;  and  at  seven  yeares  of  age, 
'  they  instructed  and  inured  him  to  sit  on  horsebacke,  and  to 
'  ride  a  hunting  :  when  he  came  to  the  age  of  fourteene,  they 
'  delivered  him  into  the  hands  of  foure  men,  that  is  to  say, 
4  the  wisest,  the  justest,  the  most  temperate,  and  the  most 
6  valiant  of  all  the  nation.  The  first  taught  him  religion ; 
4  the  second,  to  be  ever  upright  and  true ;  the  third,  to 
144 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

4  become  Master  of  his  owne  desires  ;  and  the  fourth,  to  feare  CHAPTER 
6  nothing.'  It  is  a  thing  worthy  great  consideration,  that  in  XXIV 
that  excellent,  and  as  I  may  terme  it,  matchlesse  policie  (  ?  edant- 
of  Lycurgus,  and  in  truth,  by  reason  of  her  perfection, 
monstrous,  yet  notwithstanding,  so  carefull  for  the  education 
of  children,  as  of  her  principall  charge,  and  even  in  the 
Muses  bosome  and  resting-place,  there  is  so  little  mention 
made  of  learning :  as  if  that  generous  youth  disdaining  all 
other  yokes  but  of  vertue,  ought  only  be  furnished,  in  liew 
of  tutors  of  learning,  with  masters  of  valour,  of  justice,  of 
wisdome,  and  of  temperance.  An  example  which  Plato 
hath  imitated  in  his  Lawcs.  The  manner  of  their  discipline 
was,  to  propound  questions  unto  them,  teaching  the  judge 
ment  of  men  and  of  their  actions :  and  if  by  way  of  reason 
or  discourse,  they  condemned  or  praised,  either  this  man,  or 
that  deed,  they  must  be  told  the  truth  and  best :  by  which 
meanes  at  once  they  sharpned  their  wits,  and  learned  the 
right.  Astiages  in  Zenophon  calleth  Cyrus  to  an  accompt 
of  his  last  lesson :  It  is  (faith  he)  that  a  great  lad  in  our 
Schoole,  having  a  little  coat,  gave  it  to  one  of  his  fellowes, 
that  was  of  lesser  stature  than  himselfe,  and  tooke  his  coat 
from  him,  which  was  too  big  for  him  :  our  Master  having 
made  me  judge  of  that  difference,  I  judged  that  things 
must  be  left  in  the  state  they  were  in,  and  that  both  seemed 
to  be  better  fitted  as  they  were ;  whereupon  he  shewed  me, 
I  had  done  ill ;  because  I  had  not  only  considered  the 
comelinesse  where  I  should  chiefly  have  respected  justice, 
which  required,  that  none  should  be  forced  in  any  thing 
which  properly  belonged  to  him,  and  said,  he  was  whipt  for 
it,  as  we  are  in  our  countrie-townes,  when  we  have  forgotten 
the  first  preterperfect  tense  or  Aoriste  of  TUTTTO).  My 
Regent  might  long  enough  make  me  a  prolixe  and  cunning- 
Oration  in  genere  demonstrative),  '  in  the  oratorie  kind  of 
'  praise  or  dispraise,1  before  ever  hee  should  perswade  me  his 
Schoole  is  worth  that.  They  have  gone  about  to  make  the 
way  shorter :  and  since  Sciences  (even  when  they  are  right 
taken)  can  teach  us  nothing  but  wisdome,  honestie,  integritie, 
and  resolution  ;  they  have  at  first  sight,  attempted  to  put 
their  children  to  the  proper  of  effects,  and  instruct  them, 
not  by  heare-say,  but  by  assay  of  action,  lively  modelling 
R  '  145 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  framing  them,  not   only  by  precepts  and  words,  but 
XXIV        principally  by  examples  and  works,  that  it  might  not  be 
Of  Pedant-    a  Science  jn   their  mind,  but   rather  his  complexion   and 
habitude ;  not  to  purchase,  but  a  naturall  inheritance. 

To  this  purpose  when  Agesilaus  was  demanded,  what  his 
opinion  was,  children  should  learne :  answered,  '  What  they 
'  should  doe  being  men.1  It  is  no  marvell,  if  such  an  institu 
tion  have  produced  so  admirable  effects.  Some  say,  that  in 
other  Cities  of  Greece  they  went  to  seeke  for  Rhetoricians, 
for  Painters,  and  for  Musicians;  whereas  in  Lacedemon, 
they  sought  for  Law-givers,  for  Magistrates,  and  Generals  of 
armies :  In  Athens  men  learned  to  say  well,  but  here,  to  doe 
well :  there  to  resolve  a  sophisticall  argument,  and  to  con 
found  the  imposture  and  amphibologie  of  words,  captiously 
enterlaced  together;  here  to  shake  off  the  allurements  of 
voluptuousnesse,  and  with  an  undanted  courage  to  contemne 
the  threats  of  fortune,  and  reject  the  menaces  of  death : 
those  busied  and  laboured  themselves  about  idle  words, 
these  after  martiall  things :  there  the  tongue  was  ever  in 
continuall  exercise  of  speaking,  here  the  minde  in  an 
uncessant  practice  of  well-doing.  And  therfore  was  it  not 
strange,  if  Antipater  requiring  fiftie  of  their  children  for 
hostages,  they  answered  cleane  contrarie  to  that  we  would 
doe, '  that  they  would  rather  deliver  him  twice  so  many  men ' ; 
so  much  did  they  value  and  esteeme  the  losse  of  their 
countries  education.  When  Agesilaus  inviteth  Xenophon 
to  send  his  children  to  Sparta,  there  to  be  brought  up ;  it 
is  not,  because  they  should  learne  Rhetorike,  or  Logike,  but, 
as  himselfe  saith,  '  to  the  end  they  may  learne  the  worthiest 
c  and  best  science  that  may  bee,  to  wit,  the  knowledge  how 
'  to  obey,  and  the  skill  how  to  command/  It  is  a  sport  to 
see  Socrates,  after  his  blunt  manner,  to  mocke  Hippias,  who 
reporteth  unto  him,  what  great  summes  of  money  he  had 
gained,  especially  in  certaine  little  Cities,  and  small  townes 
of  Sicily,  by  keeping  schoole,  and  teaching  letters,  and  that 
at  Sparta  he  could  not  get  a  shilling.  That  they  were  but 
Idiots  and  foolish  people,  who  can  neither  measure  nor 
esteeme ;  nor  make  no  accompt  of  Grammer,  or  of  Rythmes  ; 
and  who  only  ammuse  themselves  to  know  the  succession  of 
Kings,  the  establishing  and  declination  of  estates,  and  such 
146 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

like  trash  of  flim-flam  tales.     Which  done,  Socrates  forcing  CHAPTER 
him  particularly  to  allow  the  excellencie  of  their  forme  of       XXIV 
publike   government,   the   happinesse  and    vertue    of  their    ( 
private  life,  remits  unto  him  to  guesse  the  conclusion  of  the 
unprofitablenesse  of  his  arts.     Examples  teach  us  both  in 
this  martiall  policie,  and  in  all  such  like,  that  the  studie  of 
sciences  doth  more  weaken  and  effeminate  mens  minds,  than 
corroborate  and  adapt  them  to  warre.     The  mightiest,  yea 
the  best  setled  estate,  that  is  now  in  the  world,  is  that  of 
the  Turkes,  a  nation  equally  instructed  to  the  esteeme  of 
armes,  and  disesteeme  of  letters.     I  find  Rome  to  have  beene 
most  valiant,  when  it  was  least  learned.     The  most  warlike 
nations  of  our  daies,  are  the  rudest  and  most  ignorant.    The 
Scithians,  the  Parthians,  and  Tamburlane,  serve  to  verifie 
my  saying.    When  the  Gothes  over-ran  and  ravaged  Greece  ; 
that  which  saved  all  their  Libraries  from  the  fire,  was,  that 
one  among  them,  scattered  this  opinion,  that  such  trash  of 
bookes  and  papers  must  be  left  untoucht  and  whole  for  their 
enemies,  as  the  only  meane,  and  proper  instrument  to  divert 
them  from  all  militarie  exercises,  and  ammuse  them  to  idle, 
secure,  and  sedentarie  occupations.    When  our  King  Charles 
the  eight,  in  a  manner  without  unsheathing  his  sword,  saw 
himselfe  absolute  Lord  of  the  whole  Kingdome  of  Naples, 
and  of  a  great  part  of  Thuscanie,  the  Princes  and  Lords  of 
his  traine  ascribed  this  sodaine,  and  unhoped  for  victorie, 
and  facilitie  of  so  noble  and  prodigious  a  conquest,  only  to 
this,  that  most  of  the  Princes  and  nobilitie  of  Italic 
ammused    themselves    rather   to   become    ingenious 
and    wise    by    learning,   than    vigorous    and 
warriers  by  militarie  exercises. 


147 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    TWENTY-FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  institution  and  education  of  Children ;  to 
the  Ladie  Diana  of  Foix,  Countesse  of  Gurson 

NEVER  knew  father,  how  crooked  and  de 
formed  soever  his  sonne  were,  that  would 
either  altogether  cast  him  off,  or  not 
acknowledge  him  for  his  owne :  and  yet 
(unlesse  he  be  meerely  besotted  or  blinded 
in  his  affection)  it  may  not  be  said,  but 
he  plainly  perceiveth  his  defects,  and  hath 
a  feeling  of  his  imperfections.  But  so  it 
is,  he  is  his  owne.  So  is  it  in  my  selfe.  I  see  better  than 
any  man  else,  that  what  I  have  set  downe,  is  nought  but 
the  fond  imaginations  of  him,  who  in  his  youth  hath  tasted 
nothing  but  the  paring,  and  seen  but  the  superficies  of  true 
learning :  whereof  he  hath  retained  but  a  generall  and 
shapelesse  forme :  a  smacke  of  every  thing  in  generall,  but 
nothing  to  the  purpose  in  particular  :  After  the  French 
manner.  To  be  short,  I  know  there  is  an  art  of  Phisicke ; 
a  course  of  lawes  ;  foure  parts  of  the  Mathematikes  ;  and  I 
am  not  altogether  ignorant,  what  they  tend  unto.  And 
perhaps  I  also  know  the  scope  and  drift  of  Sciences  in 
generall,  to  be  for  the  service  of  our  life.  But  to  wade 
further,  or  that  ever  I  tired  my  selfe  with  plodding  upon 
Aristotle  (the  Monarch  of  our  moderne  doctrine)  or  obsti 
nately  continued  in  the  search  of  any  one  science  :  I  confesse 
I  never  did  it.  Nor  is  there  any  one  art,  whereof  I  am  able 
so  much  as  to  draw  the  first  lineaments.  And  there  is  no 
scholler  (be  he  of  the  lowest  forme)  that  may  not  repute 
himselfe  wiser  than  I,  who  am  not  able  to  appose  him  in  his 
first  lesson :  and  if  I  be  forced  to  it,  I  am  constrained  verie 
impertinently  to  draw  in  matter  from  some  generall  dis 
course,  whereby  I  examine,  and  give  a  guesse  at  his  naturall 
judgement :  a  lesson  as  much  unknowne  to  them,  as  theirs 
is  to  me.  I  have  not  dealt  or  had  commerce  with  any 
excellent  booke,  except  Plutarke  or  Seneca,  from  whom  (as 
148 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

the  Danaides)  I  draw  my  water,  uncessantly  filling,  and  as  CHAPTER 
fast  emptying :  some  thing  whereof  I  fasten  to  this  paper,  nfXXV. 
but  to  my  selfe  nothing  at  all.  And  touching  bookes :  g^^®  "^ 
Historic  is  my  chiefe  studie,  Poesie  my  only  delight,  to  education  of 
which  I  am  particularly  affected  :  for  as  Clean thes  said,  that  Children 
as  the  voice  being  forciblie  pent  in  the  narrow  gullet  of  a 
trumpet,  at  last  issueth  forth  more  strong  and  shriller,  so 
me  seemes,  that  a  sentence  cunningly  and  closely  couched  in 
measure-keeping  Posie,  darts  it  selfe  forth  more  furiously, 
and  wounds  me  even  to  the  quicke.  And  concerning  the 
naturall  faculties  that  are  in  me,  (whereof  behold  here  an 
essay)  I  perceive  them  to  faint  under  their  owne  burthen ; 
my  conceits,  and  my  judgement  march  but  uncertaine,  and 
as  it  were  groping,  staggering,  and  stumbling  at  every  rush  : 
And  when  I  have  gone  as  far  as  I  can,  I  have  no  whit 
pleased  my  selfe :  for  the  further  I  saile,  the  more  land  I 
descrie,  and  that  so  dimmed  with  fogges,  and  over-cast  with 
clouds,  that  my  sight  is  so  weakned,  I  cannot  distinguish 
the  same.  And  then  undertaking  to  speake  indifferently 
of  all  that  presents  it  selfe  unto  my  fantasie,  and  having 
nothing  but  mine  owne  naturall  meanes  to  imploy  therein, 
if  it  be  my  hap  (as  commonly  it  is)  among  good  Authors, 
to  light  upon  those  veric  places  which  I  have  undertaken 
to  treat  off,  as  even  now  I  did  in  Plutarke,  reading  his  dis 
course  of  the  power  of  imagination,  wherein  in  regard  of 
those  wise  men,  I  acknowledge  my  selfe  so  weake,  and  so 
poore,  so  dull  and  grose-headed,  as  I  am  forced  botli  to 
pittie  and  disdaine  my  selfe,  yet  am  I  pleased  with  this,  that 
my  opinions  have  often  the  grace  to  jump  with  theirs,  and 
that  I  follow  them  a  loofe-off,  and  thereby  possesse  at  least, 
that  which  all  other  men  have  not ;  which  is,  that  I  know 
the  utmost  difference  betweene  them  and  my  selfe  :  all  which 
notwithstanding  I  suffer  my  inventions  to  run  abroad,  as 
weake  and  faint,  as  I  have  produced  them,  without  bungling 
and  botching  the  faults,  which  this  comparison  hath  dis 
covered  to  me  in  them.  A  man  had  need  have  a  strong 
backe,  to  undertake  to  march  foot  to  foot  with  these  kind 
of  men.  The  indiscreet  writers  of  our  age,  amidst  their 
triviall  compositions,  intermingle  and  wrest  in  whole  sen 
tences  taken  from  ancient  Authors,  supposing  by  such  filch- 

149 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ing-theft  to  purchase  honour  and  reputation  to  themselves, 
x^v.  doe  cleane  contrarie.  For,  this  infinite  varietie  and  dissem- 
stitution  and  ^^ance  °f  lustres,  makes  a  face  so  wan,  so  il-favored,  and  so 
education  of  uglie?  *n  respect  of  theirs,  that  they  lose  much  more  than 
Children  gaine  thereby.  These  were  two  contrarie  humours :  The 
Philosopher  Chrisippus  was  wont  to  foist-in  amongst  his 
bookes,  not  only  whole  sentences,  and  other  long-long  dis 
courses,  but  whole  bookes  of  other  Authors,  as  in  one,  he 
brought  in  Euripides  his  Medea.  And  Apollodorus  was 
wont  to  say  of  him,  that  if  one  should  draw  from  out  his 
bookes,  what  he  had  stolne  from  others,  his  paper  would 
remaine  blanke.  Where  as  Epicurus  cleane  contrarie  to 
him  in  three  hundred  volumes,  he  left  behind  him,  had  not 
made  use  of  one  allegation.  It  was  my  fortune  not  long 
since  to  light  upon  such  a  place :  I  had  languishingly  traced 
after  some  French  words,  so  naked  and  shallow,  and  so  void 
either  of  sence  or  matter,  that  at  last  I  found  them  to  be 
nought  but  meere  French  words ;  and  after  a  tedious  and 
wearisome  travell,  I  chanced  to  stumble  upon  an  high,  rich, 
and  even  to  the  clouds-raised  piece,  the  descent  whereof  had 
it  been  somewhat  more  pleasant  or  easie,  or  the  ascent 
reaching  a  little  further,  it  had  been  excusable,  and  to  be 
borne- withall ;  but  it  was  such  a  steepie  downe-fall,  and  by 
meere  strength  hewen  out  of  the  maine  rocke,  that  by  read 
ing  of  the  first  six  words,  me  thought  I  was  carried  into 
another  world :  whereby  I  perceive  the  bottome  whence  I 
came  to  be  so  low  and  deep,  as  I  durst  never  more  adventure 
to  go  through  it ;  for,  if  I  did  stuffe  any  one  of  my  dis 
courses  with  those  rich  spoiles,  it  would  manifestly  cause 
the  sottish nesse  of  others  to  appeare.  To  reprove  mine 
owne  faults  in  others,  seemes  to  me  no  more  unsufferable, 
than  to  reprehend  (as  I  doe  often)  those  of  others  in  my 
selfe.  They  ought  to  be  accused  every  where,  and  have  all 
places  of  Sanctuarie  taken  from  them  :  yet  do  I  know  how 
over-boldly,  at  all  times  I  adventure  to  equall  my  selfe  unto 
my  filchings,  and  to  march  hand  in  hand  with  them ;  not 
without  a  fond-hardie  hope,  that  I  may  perhaps  be  able  to 
bleare  the  eyes  of  the  Judges  from  discerning  them.  But  it 
is  as  much  for  the  benefit  of  my  application,  as  for  the  good 
of  mine  invention  and  force.  And  I  doe  not  furiously  front, 
150 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

and  bodie  to  bodie  wrestle  with  those  old  champions:  it  is  CHAPTER 
but  by  sleights,  advantages,  and  false-offers  I  seek  to  come  xxv . 
within  them,  and  if  I  can,  to  give  them  a  fall.  I  doe  not  g^^n  arid 
rashly  take  them  about  the  necke,  I  doe  but  touch  them,  education  of 
nor  doe  I  go  so  far  as  by  my  bargaine  I  would  seeme  to  doe  ;  Children 
could  I  but  keepe  even  with  them,  I  should  then  be  an 
honest  man ;  for  I  seeke  not  to  venture  on  them,  but  where 
they  are  strongest.  To  doe  as  I  have  seen  some,  that  is,  to 
shroud  themselves  under  others  armes,  not  daring  so  much 
as  to  show  their  fingers  ends  unarmed,  and  to  botch  up  all 
their  works  (as  it  is  an  easie  matter  in  a  common  subject, 
namely  for  the  wiser  sort)  with  ancient  inventions,  here  and 
there  hudled-up  together.  And  in  those  who  endevoured 
to  hide  what  they  have  filched  from  others,  and  make  it 
their  owne,  it  is  first  a  manifest  note  of  injustice,  than  a 
plaine  argument  of  cowardlinesse ;  who  having  nothing  of 
any  worth  in  themselves  to  make  show  of,  will  yet  under  the 
countenance  of  others  sufficiencie  goe  about  to  make  a  faire 
offer :  Moreover  (oh  great  foolishnesse)  to  seek  by  such 
cosening  tricks  to  forestall  the  ignorant  approbation  of  the 
common  sort,  nothing  fearing  to  discover  their  ignorance  to 
men  of  understanding  (whose  praise  only  is  of  value)  who 
will  soone  trace  out  such  borrowed  ware.  As  for  me,  there 
is  nothing  I  will  doe  lesse.  I  never  spake  of  others,  but 
that  I  may  the  more  speake  of  my  selfe.  This  concerneth 
not  those  mingle-mangles  of  many  kinds  of  stuffe,  or  as  the 
Grecians  call  them  Rapsodies,  that  for  such  are  published, 
of  which  kind  I  have  (since  I  came  to  yeares  of  discretion) 
seen  divers  most  ingenious  and  wittie ;  amongst  others,  one 
under  the  name  of  Capilupus ;  besides  many  of  the  ancient 
stampe.  These  are  wits  of  such  excellence,  as  both  here  and 
elsewhere  they  will  soone  be  perceived,  as  our  late  famous 
writer  Lipsius,  in  his  learned  and  laborious  work  of  the 
Politikes :  yet  whatsoever  come  of  it,  for  so  much  as  they 
are  but  follies,  my  intent  is  not  to  smother  them,  no  more 
than  a  bald  and  hoarie  picture  of  mine,  where  a  Painter 
hath  drawne  not  a  perfect  visage,  but  mine  owne.  For, 
howsoever,  these  are  but  my  humors  and  opinions,  and  I 
deliver  them  but  to  show  what  my  conceit  is,  and  not  what 
ought  to  be  beleeved.  Wherin  I  ayme  at  nothing  but  to 

151 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  display  my  selfe,  who   peradventure  (if  a   new  prentiship 
XXV        change  me)  shall  be  another  to  morrow.     I  have  no  authoritie 
the  in-    j.0  purchase  beliefe,   neither  do  I  desire   it ;   knowing  well 
stitution   and  .,     f  T  «•   •      .1  •  °^ 

education  of  tnat  *•  am  n°t  sufficiently  taught  to  instruct  others.  Some 
Children  having  read  my  precedent  Chapter,  told  me  not  long  since 
in  mine  owne  house,  I  should  somewhat  more  have  extended 
my  selfe  in  the  discourse  concerning  the  institution  of 
children.  Now  (Madam)  if  there  were  any  sufficiencie  in 
me,  touching  that  subject,  I  could  not  better  employ  the 
same,  than  to  bestow  it  as  a  present  upon  that  little  lad, 
which  ere  long  threatneth  to  make  a  happie  issue  from  out 
your  honorable  wombe :  for  (Madame)  you  are  too  generous 
to  begin  with  other  than  a  man  childe.  And  having  had 
so  great  a  part  in  the  conduct  of  your  successefull  marriage, 
I  may  challenge  some  right  and  interest  in  the  greatnesse 
and  prosperitie  of  all  that  shall  proceed  from  it :  moreover, 
the  ancient  and  rightfull  possession,  which  you  from  time  to 
time  have  ever  had,  and  still  have  over  my  service,  urgeth 
me  with  more  than  ordinarie  respects,  to  wish  all  honour, 
well-fare  and  advantage  to  whatsoever  may  in  any  sort 
concern e  you  and  yours.  And  truly,  my  meaning  is,  but  to 
shew,  that  the  greatest  difficultie,  and  importing  all  humane 
knowledge,  seemeth  to  be  in  this  point,  where  the  nurture 
and  institution  of  young  children  is  in  question.  For,  as  in 
matters  of  husbandrie,  the  labor  that  must  be  used  before 
sowing,  setting,  and  planting,  yea  in  planting  it  selfe,  is 
most  certaine  and  easie.  But  when  that  which  was  sowen, 
set  and  planted,  commeth  to  take  life  ;  before  it  come  to 
ripenesse,  much  adoe,  and  great  varietie  of  proceeding 
belongeth  to  it.  So  in  men,  it  is  no  great  matter  to  get 
them,  but  being  borne,  what  continual!  cares,  what  diligent 
attendance,  what  doubts  and  feares,  doe  daily  wait  on  their 
parents  and  tutors,  before  they  can  be  nurtured  and  brought 
to  any  good  ?  The  fore-shew  of  their  inclination  whilest 
they  are  young  is  so  uncertaine,  their  humours  so  variable, 
their  promises  so  changing,  their  hopes  so  false,  and  their 
proceedings  so  doubtful,  that  it  is  very  hard,  (yea  for  the 
wisest)  to  ground  any  certaine  judgement,  or  assured  successe 
upon  them.  Behold  Cymon,  view  Themistocles,  and  a 
thousand  others,  how  they  have  differed,  and  fallen  to  better 
152 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

from  themselves,  and  deceive  the  expectation  of  such  as  CHAPTER 
knew  them.     The  young  whelps  both  of  Dogges  and  Beares,        XXV 

at  first  sight  shew  their  naturall  disposition,  but  men  head-   ,.,   ,.  e  m", 
,  .     ,&     .          ...  /   ,  .         '     „  ,1     ,  stitution   and 

long   imbracing    this   custome   or   fashion,    following    that  education    of 

humor  or  opinion,  admitting  this  or  that  passion,  allowing  Children 
of  that  or  this  law,  are  easily  changed,  and  soone  disguised; 
yet  is  it  hard  to  force  the  naturall  propension  or  readinesse 
of  the  mind,  whereby  it  followeth,  that  for  want  of  heedie 
fore-sight  in  those  that  could  not  guide  their  course  well, 
they  often  employ  much  time  in  vaine,  to  addresse  young 
children  in  those  matters,  whereunto  they  are  not  naturally 
addicted.  All  which  difficulties  notwithstanding,  mine 
opinion  is,  to  bring  them  up  in  the  best  and  proh'tablest 
studies,  and  that  a  man  should  slightly  passe  over  those  fond 
presages,  and  deceiving  prognostikes,  which  we  over  precisely 
gather  in  their  infancie.  And  (without  offence  be  it  said) 
me  thinks,  that  Plato  in  his  common-wealth  alloweth  them 
too-too  much  authoritie. 

Madame,  Learning  joyned  with  true  knowledge  is  an 
especiall  and  gracefull  ornament,  and  an  implement  of 
wonderfull  use  and  consequence,  namely  in  persons  raised  to 
that  degree  of  fortune,  wherein  you  are.  And  in  good 
truth,  learning  hath  not  her  owne  true  forme,  nor  can  she 
make  shew  of  her  beauteous  lineaments,  if  she  fall  into  the 
hands  of  base  and  vile  persons.  [For,  as  famous  Torquato 
Tasso  saith ;  '  Philosophic  being  a  rich  and  noble  Queene, 
'  and  knowing  her  owne  worth,  graciously  smileth  upon,  and 
'  lovingly  embraceth  Princes  and  noble  men,  if  they  become 
'  suters  to  her,  admitting  them  as  her  minions,  and  gently 
4  affbording  them  all  the  favours  she  can  ;  whereas  upon  the 
6  contrarie,  if  she  be  wooed,  and  sued  unto  by  clownes, 
'  mechanicall  fellowes,  and  such  base  kind  of  people,  she 
'  helds  her  selfe  disparaged  and  disgraced,  as  holding  no 
'  proportion  with  them.  And  therfore  see  we  by  experi- 
'  ence,  that  if  a  true  Gentleman,  or  nobleman  follow  her 
'  with  any  attention,  and  wooed  her  with  importunitie,  he 
'  shall  learne  and  know  more  of  her,  and  prove  a  better 
6  scholler  in  one  yeare,  than  an  ungentle  or  base  fellow  shall 
4  in  seven,  though  he  pursue  her  never  so  attentively.1]  She 
is  much  more  readie  and  fierce  to  lend  her  furtherance  and 

S  153 


MONTAIGNES    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  direction  in  the  conduct  of  a  warre,  to  attempt  honorable 
OfXt^Jin  actions,  to  command  a  people,  to  treat  a  peace  with  a 
stitution  and  Prmce  of  forraine  nation,  than  she  is  to  forme  an  argument 
education  of  in  Logick,  to  devise  a  Syllogisme,  to  canvase  a  case  at  the 
Children  barre,  or  to  prescribe  a  receit  of  pills.  So  (noble  Ladie) 
forsomuch  as  I  cannot  perswade  my  selfe,  that  you  will 
either  forget  or  neglect  this  point,  concerning  the  institu 
tion  of  yours,  especially  having  tasted  the  sweetnesse  thereof, 
and  being  descended  of  so  noble  and  learned  a  race.  For 
we  yet  possesse  the  learned  compositions  of  the  ancient  and 
noble  Earles  of  Foix,  from  out  whose  heroicke  loynes  your 
husband  and  you  take  your  of-spring.  And  Francis  Lord 
of  Candale  your  worthie  uncle,  doth  daily  bring  forth  such 
fruits  thereof,  as  the  knowledge  of  the  matchlesse  qualitie  of 
your  house  shall  hereafter  extend  it  selfe  to  many  ages ;  I 
will  therefore  make  you  acquainted  with  one  conceit  of 
mine,  which  contrarie  to  the  common  use  I  hold,  and  that 
is  all  I  am  able  to  affoord  you,  concerning  that  matter. 
The  charge  of  the  Tutor,  which  you  shall  appoint  your 
sonne,  in  the  choice  of  whom  consisteth  the  whole  substance 
of  his  education  and  bringing-up ;  on  which  are  many 
branches  depending,  which  (forasmuch  as  I  can  adde  nothing 
of  any  moment  to  it)  I  will  not  touch  at  all.  And  for  that 
point,  wherein  I  presume  to  advise  him,  he  may  so  far  forth 
give  credit  unto  it,  as  he  shall  see  just  cause.  To  a  gentle 
man  borne  of  noble  parentage,  and  heire  of  a  house,  that 
aymeth  at  true  learning,  and  in  it  would  be  disciplined,  not 
so  much  for  gaine  or  commoditie  to  himselfe  (because  so 
abject  an  end  is  far  un worthie  the  grace  and  favour  of  the 
Muses,  and  besides,  hath  a  regard  or  dependencie  of  others) 
nor  for  externall  shew  and  ornament,  but  to  adorne  and  en 
rich  his  inward  minde,  desiring  rather  to  shape  and  institute 
an  able  and  sufficient  man,  than  a  bare  learned  man.  My 
desire  is  therefore,  that  the  parents  or  overseers  of  such  a 
gentleman  be  very  circumspect,  and  carefull  in  chusing  his 
director,  whom  I  would  rather  commend  for  having  a  well 
composed  and  temperate  braine,  than  a  full  stuft  head,  yet 
both  will  doe  well.  And  I  would  rather  prefer  wisdome, 
judgement,  civill  customes,  and  modest  behaviour,  than  bare 
and  meere  literall  learning ;  and  that  in  his  charge  he  hold 
154 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

a  new  course.     Some  never  cease  brawling  in  their  schollers  CHAPTER 
eares  (as  if  they  were  still  pouring  in  a  tonell)  to  follow  their        xxv . 
booke  yet  is  their  charge  nothing  else,  but  to  repeat,  what^™  ^ 
hath    beene  told  them  before.     I  would  have  a  tutor  to  education    of 
correct  this  part,  and  that  at  first  entrance,  according  to  the     Children 
capacitie  of  the  wit  he  hath   in  hand,  he  should  begin  to 
make  shew  of  it,  making  him  to  have  a  smacke  of  all  things, 
and  how  to  chuse  and   distinguish  them,  without  helpe  of 
others,  sometimes  opening  him  the  way,  other  times  leaving 
him  to  open  it  by  himselfe.     I  would  not  have  him  to  invent 
and  speake  alone,  but  suffer  his  disciple  to  speake  when  his 
turne  commeth.     Socrates,  and  after  him  Arcesilaus,  made 
their  schollers  to  speak  first,  and  then  would  speake  them 
selves.      Obest  plerumque  Us   qui   dlscere  voluut^  auctoritas  Cic.  DC  Nat.  \. 
eorum  qui  docent.     '  Most  commonly  the  authentic  of  them 
'  that  teach,  hinders  them  that  would  learne.1 

It  is  therefore  meet,  that  he  make  him  first  trot-on  before 
him,  whereby  he  may  the  better  judge  of  his  pace,  and  so 
guesse  how  long  he  will  hold  out,  that  accordingly  he  may 
fit  his  strength :  for  want  of  which  proportion,  we  often 
marre  all.  And  to  know  how  to  make  a  good  choice,  and 
how  far  forth  one  may  proceed  (still  keeping  a  due  measure) 
is  one  of  the  hardest  labours  I  know.  It  is  a  signe  of  a 
noble,  and  effect  of  an  undanted  spirit,  to  know  how  to 
second,  and  how  far  forth  he  shall  condescend  to  his  childish 
proceedings,  and  how  to  guide  them.  As  for  my  selfe,  I  can 
better  and  with  more  strength  walke  up,  than  downe  a  hill. 
Those  which  according  to  our  common  fashion,  undertake 
with  one  selfe-same  lesson,  and  like  maner  of  education,  to 
direct  many  spirits  of  divers  formes  and  different  humours, 
it  is  no  marvell  if  among  a  multitude  of  children,  they 
scarse  meet  with  two  or  three,  that  reap  any  good  fruit  by 
their  discipline,  or  that  come  to  any  perfection.  I  would 
not  only  have  him  to  demand  an  accompt  of  the  words  con 
tained  in  his  lesson,  but  of  the  sense  and  substance  thereof, 
and  j  udge  of  the  profit  he  hath  made  of  it,  not  by  the  testi- 
monie  of  his  memorie,  but  by  the  witnesse  of  his  life.  That 
what  he  lately  learned,  he  cause  him  to  set  forth  and  pour- 
tray  the  same  into  sundrie  shapes^  and  then  to  accommodate 
it  to  as  many  different  and  severall  subjects ;  whereby  he 

155 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  shal  perceive,  whether  he  have  yet  apprehended  the  same, 
xxv  .       and  therein  enfeoffed  himselfe,  at  due  times  taking  his  in- 

Of  the  m-    struction  from  the  institution  given  by  Plato.     It  is  a  signe 
stitution    and     „         ,.,.  ,   .    j.        ,.         „    a  , -,          ,  .         & 

education    of  °*  cruditie  and  indigestion  lor  a  man  to  yeeld  up  his  meat, 

Children  even  as  he  swallowed  the  same:  the  stomacke  hath  not 
wrought  his  full  operation,  unlesse  it  have  changed  forme, 
and  altered  fashion  of  that  which  was  given  him  to  boyle 
and  concoct. 

[Wee  see  men  gape  after  no  reputation  but  learning,  and 
when  they  say,  such  a  one  is  a  learned  man,  they  thinke 
they  have  said  enough ;]  Our  minde  doth  move  at  others 
pleasure,  as  tyed  and  forced  to  serve  the  fantasies  of  others, 
being  brought  under  by  authoritie,  and  forced  to  stoope  to 
the  lure  of  their  bare  lesson ;  wee  have  beene  so  subjected 
to  harpe  upon  one  string,  that  we  have  no  way  left  us  to 
descant  upon  voluntarie :  our  vigor  and  libertie  is  cleane 
extinct.  Nunquam  tutelos  sucejiunt.  '  They  never  come  to 
'  their  owne  tuition.1  It  was  my  hap  to  bee  familiarlie 
acquainted  with  an  honest  man  at  Pisa,  but  such  an  Aristo 
telian,  as  he  held  this  infallible  position ;  that  a  conformitie 
to  Aristotles  doctrine  was  the  true  touchstone  and  squire  of 
all  solid  imaginations,  and  perfect  veritie ;  for,  whatsoever 
had  no  coherencie  with  it,  was  but  fond  Chimeraes,  and  idle 
humours ;  in  asmuch  as  he  had  knowne  all,  seene  all,  and 
said  all.  This  proposition  of  his,  being  somewhat  over 
amply  and  injuriously  interpreted  by  some,  made  him  a  long 
time  after  to  be  troubled  in  the  inquisition  of  Rome.  I 
would  have  him  make  his  scholler  narrowly  to  sift  all  things 
with  discretion,  and  harbour  nothing  in  his  head  by  meere 
authoritie,  or  upon  trust.  Aristotles  principles  shall  be  no 
more  axiomes  unto  him,  than  the  Stoikes  or  Epicurians. 
Let  this  diversitie  of  judgements  be  proposed  unto  him,  if 
he  can,  he  shall  be  able  to  distinguish  the  truth  from  false 
hood,  if  not,  he  will  remaine  doubtfull. 

Che  non  men  ehe  saper  dubUar  maggrada. 

No  lesse  it  pleaseth  me^ 
To  doubt,  than  wise  to  be. 

For  if  by  his  owne  discourse  he  embrace  the  opinions  of 
Xenophon,  or  of  Plato,  they  shall  be  no  longer  theirs,  but 
156 


DANTE,  In 
ferno,  cant, 
xii.  48. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

his.  He  that  meerely  followeth  another,  traceth  nothing,  CHAPTER 
and  seeketh  nothing :  Non  sumus  sub  Rege,  sibi  quisque  se  xxv . 
vindicet.  '  We  are  not  under  a  Kings  command,  every  one  Jj^t*|[®  ^"^ 
c  may  challenge  himselfe,  for  let  him  at  least  know  that  he  education  of 
'  knoweth.1  It  is  requisite  he  endevour  as  much  to  feed  Children 
himselfe  with  their  conceits,  as  labour  to  learne  their  precepts;  SEN.  Epist. 
which,  so  he  know  how  to  applie,  let  him  hardly  forget,  xxxiii. 
where,  or  whence  he  had  them.  Truth  and  reason  are  com 
mon  to  all,  and  are  no  more  proper  unto  him  that  spake  them 
heretofore,  than  unto  him  that  shall  speake  them  hereafter. 
And  it  is  no  more  according  to  Platoes  opinion,  than  to  mine, 
since  both  he  and  I  understand  and  see  alike.  The  Bees  doe 
here  and  there  sucke  this,  and  cull  that  flower,  but  afterward 
they  produce  the  hony,  which  is  peculiarly  their  owne,  then 
is  it  no  more  Thyme  or  Majoram.  So  of  peeces  borrowed 
of  others,  he  may  lawfully  alter,  transforme,  and  confound 
them,  to  shape  out  of  them  a  perfect  peece  of  worke,  alto 
gether  his  owne ;  alwaies  provided,  his  judgement,  his  travell, 
studie,  and  institution  tend  to  nothing,  but  to  frame  the 
same  perfect.  Let  him  hardly  conceale,  where,  or  whence  he 
hath  had  any  helpe,  and  make  no  shew  of  any  thing,  but  of 
that  which  he  hath  made  himselfe.  Pirates,  filchers,  and 
borrowers,  make  a  shew  of  their  purchaces  and  buildings, 
but  not  of  that  which  they  have  taken  from  others  :  you  see 
not  the  secret  fees  or  bribes  Lawyers  take  of  their  Clients, 
but  you  shall  manifestly  discover  the  alliances  they  make, 
the  honours  they  get  for  their  children,  and  the  goodly 
houses  they  build.  No  man  makes  open  shew  of  his  receits, 
but  every  one  of  his  gettings.  The  good  that  comes  of 
studie  (or  at  least  should  come)  is  to  prove  better,  wiser,  and 
honester.  It  is  the  understanding  power  (said  Epicharmus) 
that  seeth  and  heareth,  it  is  it,  that  profiteth  all,  and  dis- 
poseth  all,  that  moveth,  swayeth,  and  ruleth  all :  all  things 
else  are  but  blind,  senselesse,  and  without  spirit.  And  truly 
in  barring  him  of  libertie  to  doe  any  thing  of  himselfe,  we 
make  him  thereby  more  servile  and  more  coward.  Who 
would  ever  enquire  of  his  scholler  what  he  thinketh  of 
Rhetorike,  of  Grammar,  of  this,  or  of  that  sentence  of  Cicero  ? 
Which  things  throughly  fethered  (as  if  they  were  oracles)  are 
let  flie  into  our  memorie  ;  in  which  both  letters  and  syllables 

157 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  are  substantiall  parts  of  the  subject.     To  know  by  roat  is 

XXV         no  perfect  knowledge,  but  to  keep  what  one  hath  committed 

Of  the  m-    J.Q  njs  memories  charge,  is  commendable  :  what  a  man  directly 

fducaUonof  knoweth'  that  Y111  he  dispose-of,  without  turning  still  to  his 
Children  booke,  or  looking  to  his  pattern.  A  meere  bookisli  suffi- 
ciencie  is  unpleasant.  All  I  expect  of  it,  is  an  imbellishing 
of  my  actions,  and  not  a  foundation  of  them,  according  to 
Platoes  mind,  who  saith,  constancie,  faith,  and  sinceritie,  are 
true  Philosophic  ;  as  for  other  Sciences,  and  tending  else 
where,  they  are  but  garish  paintings.  I  would  faine  have 
Paluel  or  Pompey,  those  two  excellent  dauncers  of  our  time, 
with  all  their  nimblenesse,  teach  any  man  to  doe  their  loftie 
tricks,  and  high  capers,  only  with  seeing  them  done,  and 
without  stirring  out  of  his  place,  as  some  Pedanticall  fel- 
lowes  would  instruct  our  minds  without  moving  or  putting 
it  in  practice.  And  glad  would  I  be  to  find  one,  that  would 
teach  us  how  to  manage  a  horse,  to  tosse  a  pike,  to  shoot-off 
a  peece,  to  play  upon  the  lute,  or  to  warble  with  the  voice, 
without  any  exercise,  as  these  kind  of  men  would  teach  us 
to  judge,  and  how  to  speake  well,  without  any  exercise  of 
speaking  or  judging.  In  which  kind  of  life,  or  as  I  may 
terme  it,  Prentiship,  what  action  or  object  soever  presents  it- 
selfe  unto  our  eies,  may  serve  us  in  stead  of  a  sufficient  booke. 
A  prettie  pranke  of  a  boy,  a  knavish  tricke  of  a  page,  a  fool 
ish  part  of  a  lackey,  an  idle  tale  or  any  discourse  else, 
spoken  either  in  jest  or  earnest,  at  the  table  or  in  companie, 
are  even  as  new  subjects  for  us  to  worke-upon  :  for  further 
ance  whereof,  commerce  or  common  societie  among  men, 
visiting  of  forraine  countries,  and  observing  of  strange 
fashions,  are  verie  necessary,  not  only  to  be  able  (after  the 
manner  of  our  yong  gallants  of  France)  to  report  how 
many  paces  the  Church  of  Santa  Rotonda  is  in  length  or 
breadth,  or  what  rich  garments  the  curtezan  Signora  Livia 
weareth,  and  the  worth  of  her  hosen  ;  or  as  some  do,  nicely 
to  dispute  how  much  longer  or  broader  the  face  of  Nero 
is,  which  they  have  seene  in  some  old  ruines  of  Italic,  than 
that  which  is  made  for  him  in  other  old  monuments  else- 
'  where.  But  they  should  principally  observe,  and  be  able 
to  make  certaine  relation  of  the  humours  and  fashions  of 
those  countries  they  have  seene,  that  they  may  the  better 
158 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

know  how  to  correct  and  prepare  their  wits  by  those  of  others.  CHAPTER 
I  would  therefore  have  him  begin  even  from  his  infancie  to       xxv  t 

travell  abroad ;  and  first,  that  at  one  shoot  he  may  hit  two   ,9/  J*16  m" j 

i        i       i_      ij  -11  ,    •  i      J-,         i         stitution   and 

markes,  he  should  see  neighbour-countries,  namely  where  Ian-  education    of 

guages  are  most  different  from  ours ;    for,  unlesse  a  mans     Children 

tongue  be  fashioned  unto  them  in  his  youth,  he  shall  never 

attaine  to  the  true  pronuntiation  of  them,  if  he  once  grow 

in  yeares.    Moreover,  we  see  it  received  as  a  common  opinion 

of  the  wiser  sort,  that  it  agreeth  not  with  reason,  that  a 

childe  be  alwaies  nuzzled,  cockered,  dandled,  and  brought  up 

in  his  parents  lap  or  sight ;     forsomuch  as  their   naturall 

kindnesse,  or  (as  I  may  call  it)  tender  fondnesse,  causeth 

often,  even  the  wisest  to  prove  so  idle,  so  over-nice,  and  so 

base-minded.    For  parents  are  not  capable,  neither  can  they 

find  in  their  hearts  to  see  them  checkt,  corrected,  or  chastised, 

nor  indure  to  see  them  brought  up  so  meanly,  and  so  far  from 

daintinesse,  and  many  times  so  dangerously,  as  they  must 

needs  be.     And  it  would  grieve  them  to  see  their  children 

come  home  from  those  exercises,  that  a  Gentleman  must 

necessarily  acquaint  himselfe  with,  sometimes  all  wet  and 

bemyred,  other  times  sweatie,  and  full  of  dust,  and  todrinke 

being  either  extreme  hot,  or  exceeding  cold  ;  and  it  would 

trouble  them  to  see  him  ride  a  rough-untamed  horse,  or  with 

his  weapon  furiously  incounter  a  skilfull  Fencer,  or  to  handle 

and  shoot-off  a  musket;  against  which  there  is  no  remedy,  if 

he  will  make  him  prove  a  sufficient,  compleat,  or  honest  man : 

he  must  not  be  spared  in  his  youth  ;  and  it  will  come  to 

passe,  that  he  shall  many  times  have  occasion  and  be  forced 

to  shocke  the  rules  of  Physicke. 

Vitamque  sub  dio  et  trepidis  agat  HOR.  iii.  Oil.  ii. 

In  rebus. —  5. 

Leade  he  his  life  in  open  aire, 
And  in  affaires  full  of  despaire. 

It  is  not  sufficient  to  make  his  minde  strong,  his  muskles 
must  also  be  strengthned :  the  minde  is  over-borne  if  it  be 
not  seconded :  and  it  is  too  much  for  her  alone  to  discharge 
two  offices.  I  have  a  feeling  how  mine  pan teth,  being  joyned 
to  so  tender  and  sensible  a  bodie,  and  that  lieth  so  heavie 
upon  it.  And  in  my  lecture,  I  often  perceive  how  my 

159 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Authors  in  their  writings  sometimes  commend  examples  for 
x^v  •       magnanimitie  and  force,  that  rather  proceed  from  a  thicke 

stitution  and  s^n  an<^  nar(Ines  of  the  bones.     I  have  knowne  men,  women 

education  ofan(^  children  borne  of  so  hard  a  constitution,  that  a  blow 
Children  with  a  cudgell  would  lesse  hurt  them,  than  a  filip  would  doe 
me,  and  so  dull  and  blockish,  that  they  will  neither  stir 
tongue  nor  eye-browes,  beat  them  never  so  much.  When 
wrestlers  goe  about  to  counterfeit  the  Philosophers  patience, 
they  rather  shew  the  vigor  of  their  sinnewes,  than  of  their 
heart.  For  the  custome  to  beare  travell,  is  to  tolerate  griefe: 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  Labor  callum  obducit  dolori  :  '  Labour  worketh  a  hardnesse 
'  upon  sorrow."  Hee  must  be  enured  to  suffer  the  paine  and 
hardnesse  of  exercises,  that  so  he  may  be  induced  to  endure 
the  paine  of  the  colicke,  of  cauterie,  of  fals,  of  sprains,  and 
other  diseases  incident  to  mans  bodie  :  yea,  if  need  require, 
patiently  to  beare  imprisonment,  and  other  tortures,  by 
which  sufferance  he  shall  come  to  be  had  in  more  esteeme  and 
accompt :  for  according  to  time  and  place,  the  good  as  well 
as  the  bad  man  may  haply  fall  into  them  ;  we  have  seen  it 
by  experience.  Whosoever  striveth  against  the  lawes, 
threats  good  men  with  mischiefe  and  extortion.  Moreover, 
the  authoritie  of  the  Tutor  (who  should  be  soveraigne  over 
him)  is  by  the  cockering  and  presence  of  the  parents,  hindred 
and  interrupted  :  besides  the  awe  and  respect  which  the 
houshold  beares  him,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  meanes, 
possibilities,  and  greatnesse  of  his  house,  are  in  my  judge-". 
I  ment,  no  small  lets  in  a  young  Gentleman.  In  this  schoole 
of  commerce,  and  societie  among  men,  I  have  often  noted 
this  vice,  that  in  lieu  of  taking  acquaintance  of  others,  we 
only  endevour  to  make  our  selves  knowne  to  them  :  and  we 
are  more  ready  to  utter  such  merchandize  as  we  have,  than 
to  ingrosse  and  purchase  new  commodities.  Silence  and 
modestie  are  qualities  verie  convenient  to  civil  conversation. 
It  is  also  necessary,  that  a  young  man  be  rather  taught 
to  be  discreetly-sparing,  and  close -handed,  than  prodigally- 
wastfull  and  lavish  in  his  expences,  and  moderate  in  husband 
ing  his  wealth  when  he  shall  come  to  possesse  it.  And  not 
to  take  pepper  in  the  nose  for  every  foolish  tale  that  shal  be 
spoken  in  his  presence,  because  it  is  an  uncivil  importunity, 
to  contradict,  whatsoever  is  not  agreeing  to  our  humour : 
160 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

let  him  be  pleased  to  correct  himselfe.     And  let  him  not  CHAPTER 
seeme  to  blame  that  in  others,  which  he  refuseth  to  doe        XXV 
himselfe,  nor    goe    about   to    withstand    common  fashions.  g^^JJ^  ™~d 
Licet  sapere  sine  pompa,  sine  invidia.     6  A  man  may  bee  wise  education    of 
6  without  ostentation,  without  envie.'     Let  him  avoid  those     Children 
imperious  images  of  the  world,  those  uncivil  behaviours,  and  SEN.  Epist. 
childish   ambition,   wherewith    God  wot,  too- too   many   are Clllt  ft 
possest :  that  is,  to  make  a  faire  shew  of  that,  which  is  not 
in  him  :  endevouring  to  be  reputed  other  than  indeed  he  is ; 
and  as  if  reprehension  and  new  devices  were  hard  to  come 
by,  he  would  by  that  meane  acquire  unto  himselfe  the  name 
of  some  peculiar  vertue.     As  it  pertaineth  but  to  great 
Poets  to  use  the  libertie  of  arts ;  so  is  it  tolerable  but  in 
noble  minds,  and  great  spirits  to  have  a  preheminence  above 
ordinarie  fashions.     SI  quid  Socrates  et  Aristippus  contra  Cic.  Off.  \. 
morem  et  comuetudinemfecerunt,  idem  sibine  arbitretur  licere : 
Magis  enim  illi  et  divinis  bonis  hanc  Ucentiam  assequebantur . 
4  If  Socrates  and  Aristippus  have  done  ought  against  custome 
'  or  good  manner,  let  not  a  man  thinke  he  may  doe  the 
4  same :    for    they    obtained    this    licence    by    their    great 
'  and  excellent  good  parts ' :    He  shall  be  taught,  not  to 
enter  rashly  into  discourse  or  contesting,  but  when  he  shall 
encounter  with   a   Champion,  worthie  his  strength  ;   And 
then  would  I  not  have  him  imploy  all  the  tricks  that  may 
fit  his  turne,  but  only  such  as  may  stand  him  in  most  stead. 
That  he  be  taught  to  be  curious  in  making  choice  of  his 
reasons,    loving   pertinency,    and   by   consequence   brevitie. 
(That  above  all,  he  be  instructed  to  yeeld,  yea  to  quit  his  N 
i weapons  unto  truth,  as  soone  as  he  shall  discerne  the  same, 
whether  it  proceed  from  his  adversarie,  or  upon  better  advice 
from  himselfe,  for,  he  shall  not  be  preferred  to  any  place  of 
eminencie  above  others,  for  repeating  of  a  prescript  part ; 
and  he  is  not  engaged  to  defend  any  cause,  further  than  he 
may  approove  it ;  nor  shall  he  bee  of  that  trade,  where  the 
libertie  for  a  man  to  repent  and  re-advise  himselfe  is  sold 
for  readie  money.     Neque,    ut  omnia,    quce   prcescripta    et  Cic.  Acad.  Qu. 
imperata  sint,  defendat,  necessitate  idla  cogitur.     '  Nor  is  he  iv« 
'  inforced  by  any  necessitie  to  defend  and  make  good  all 
'  that  is  prescribed    and   commanded    him.'      If  his  tutor 
agree  with  my  humour,  he  shall  frame  his  affection,  to  be 
T  161 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  a  most  loyall  and  true  subject  to  his  Prince,  and  a  most 
XXV  affectionate  and  couragious  Gentleman,  in  al  that  may 

Of  the  in-  concerne  the  honor  of  his  Soveraiffne,  or  the  ffood  of  his 
stitution  and  ,  •  ATI  •  i  •  n  f 

education  of  countne.  And  endevour  to  suppresse  in  him  all  maner  of 

Children  affection  to  undertake  any  action  otherwise  than  for  a 
publike  good  and  dutie.  Besides  many  inconveniences, 
which  greatly  prejudice  our  libertie,  by  reason  of  these 
particular  bonds ;  the  judgement  of  a  man  that  is  waged 
and  bought,  either  it  is  lesse  free  and  honest,  or  else  it  is 
blemisht  with  oversight  and  ingratitude.  A  meere  and 
precise  Courtier  can  neither  have  law  nor  will  to  speake  or 
thinke,  otherwise  than  favourablie  of  his  Master,  who  among 
so  many  thousands  of  his  subjects,  hath  made  choice  of  him 
alone,  to  institute  and  bring  him  up  with  his  owne  hand. 
These  favours,  with  the  commodities  that  follow  minion 
Courtiers,  corrupt  (not  without  some  colour  of  reason)  his 
libertie,  and  dazle  his  judgement.  It  is  therefore  com 
monly  seene,  that  the  Courtiers-language  differs  from  other 
mens,  in  the  same  state,  and  to  be  of  no  great  credit  in  such 
matters.  Let  therefore  his  conscience  and  vertue  shine  in 
his  speech,  and  reason  be  his  chiefe  direction.  Let  him  be 
taught  to  confesse  such  faults  as  he  shall  discover  in  his 
owne  discourses,  albeit  none  other  perceive  them  but  him- 
selfe ;  for  it  is  an  evident  shew  of  j  udgement,  and  effect  of 
sinceritie,  which  are  the  chiefest  qualities  he  aymeth  at. 
That  wilfully  to  strive,  and  obstinately  to  contest  in  words, 
are  common  qualities,  most  apparent  in  basest  mindes : 
That  to  re-advise  and  correct  himselfe,  and  when  one  is 
most  earnest,  to  leave  an  ill  opinion,  are  rare,  noble,  and 
Philosophicall  conditions.  Being  in  companie,  he  shall  be 
put  in  minde,  to  cast  his  eyes  round  about,  and  every 
where :  For  I  note,  that  the  chiefe  places  are  usually  seazed 
upon  by  the  most  unworthie,  and  lesse  capable ;  and  that 
height  of  fortune  is  seldome  joyned  with  sufficiencie.  I  have 
seene,  that  whilst  they  at  the  upper  end  of  a  board  were 
busie  entertaining  themselves,  with  talking  of  the  beautie  of 
the  hangings  about  a  chamber,  or  of  the  taste  of  some  good 
cup  of  wine,  many  good  discourses  at  the  lower  end,  have 
utterly  been  lost.  He  shall  weigh  the  carriage  of  every  man 
in  his  calling,  a  Heardsman,  a  Mason,  a  Stranger,  or  a 
162 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

traveller;  all  must  be  imployed  ;  every  one  according  to  his  CHAPTER 
worth;  for  all  helps  to  make  up  houshold  ;  yea,  the  follie    OfX?V. 
and  the  simplicitie  of  others  shall  be  as  instructions  to  him.  Stitutj0^  ^"^ 
By  controlling  the  graces  and  manners  of  others,  he  shall  education    of 
acquire  into  himselfe  envie  of  the  good,  and  contempt  of  the     Children 
bad.    Let  him  hardly  be  possest  with  an  honest  curiositie  to 
search  out  the  nature  and  causes  of  all  things  :   let  him 
survay  what-soever  is  rare  and  singular  about  him  ;  a  build 
ing,  a  fountaine,  a  man,  a  place  where  any  battell  hath  been 
fought,  or  the  passages  of  Caesar  or  Charlemaine. 


tellus  sit  lenta  gelu,  quce  putris  ab  cestu, 
Ventus  in  Italiam  quis  bene  velaferat.  IUi  39- 

What  land  is  parent  with  heat,  what  clog'd  with  frost, 
What  wind  drives  kindly  to  th'  Italian  coast. 

He  shall  endevour  to  be  familiarly  acquainted  with  the 
customes,  with  the  meanes,  with  the  state,  with  the  depend- 
ances  and  alliances  of  all  Princes  ;  they  are  things  soone  and 
pleasant  to  be  learned,  and  most  profitable  to  be  knowne. 
In  this  acquaintance  of  men,  my  meaning  is,  that  hee  chiefely 
comprehend  them,  that  live  but  by  the  memorie  of  bookes. 
He  shall,  by  the  help  of  Histories,  informe  himselfe  of  the 
worthiest  minds  that  were  in  the  best  ages.  It  is  a  frivolous 
studie,  if  a  man  list,  but  of  unvaluable  worth,  to  such  as  can 
make  use  of  it.  And  as  Plato  saith,  the  onely  studie  the 
Lacedemonians  reserved  for  themselves.  What  profit  shall 
he  not  reap,  touching  this  point,  reading  the  lives  of  our 
Plutark?  Alwayes  conditioned,  the  master  bethinke  him 
selfe  whereto  his  charge  tendeth,  and  that  he  imprint  not 
so  much  in  his  schollers  mind  the  date  of  the  ruine  of 
Carthage,  as  the  manners  of  Hanniball  and  Scipio,  nor  so 
much  where  Marcellus  died,  as  because  he  was  unworthy  of 
his  devoire  he  died  there  :  that  he  teach  him  not  somuch 
to  know  Histories,  as  to  judge  of  them.  It  is,  amongst 
things  that  best  agree  with  my  humour,  the  subject  to  which 
our  spirits  doe  most,  diversly  applie  themselves.  I  have  read 
in  Titus  Livius  a  number"  of  things,  which  peradventure 
others  never  read,  in  whom  Plutarke  haply  read  a  hundred 
more,  than  ever  I  could  read,  and  which  perhaps  the  author 
himselfe  did  never  intend  to  set  downe.  To  some  kind  of 

163 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  men,  it  is  a  meere  gramaticall  studie,  but  to  others  a  perfect 
X?V  •  anatomic  of  Philosophic ;  by  meanes  whereof,  the  secretest 
stitution  and  Par^  °^  our  na^ure  *s  searched-into.  There  are  in  Plutarke 
education  of  many  ample  discourses  most  worthy  to  be  knowne :  for  in 
Children  my  judgement,  he  is  the  chiefe  work-master  of  such  works, 
whereof  there  are  a  thousand,  whereat  he  hath  but  slightly 
glanced ;  for  with  his  finger  he  doth  but  point  us  out  a  way 
to  walke  in,  if  we  list ;  and  is  sometimes  pleased  to  give  but 
a  touch  at  the  quickest  and  maine  point  of  a  discourse,  from 
whence  they  are  by  diligent  studie  to  be  drawne,  and  so 
brought  into  open  market.  As  that  saying  of  his.  That 
the  inhabitants  of  Asia  served  but  one  alone,  because  they 
could  not  pronounce  one  onely  syllable,  which  is  Non,  gave 
perhaps  both  subject  and  occasion  to  my  friend  Beotie  to 
compose  his  booke  of  voluntarie  servitude.  If  it  were  no 
more  but  to  see  Plutarke  wrest  a  slight  action  to  mans  life  ; 
or  a  word  that  seemeth  to  beare  no  such  sence,  it  will  serve 
for  a  whole  discourse.  It  is  pittie  men  of  understanding 
should  so  much  love  brevitie,  without  doubt  their  reputation 
is  thereby  better,  but  we  the  worse.  Plutarke  had  rather 
we  should  commend  him  for  his  judgement,  than  for  his 
knowledge,  he  loveth  better  to  leave  a  kind  of  longing- 
desire  in  us  of  him,  than  a  sacietie.  He  knew  verie  well, 
that  even  in  good  things,  too  much  may  be  said  :  and  that 
Alexandridas  did  justly  reprove  him,  who  spake  verie  good 
sentences  to  the  Ephores,  but  they  were  over  tedious.  Oh 
stranger,  quoth  he,  thou  speakest  what  thou  oughtest, 
otherwise  then  thou  shouldest.  Those  that  have  leane  and 
thin  bodies  stuffe  them  up  with  bumbasting.  And  such  as 
have  but  poore  matter,  will  puffe  it  up  with  loftie  words. 
There  is  a  marvelous  cleerenesse,  or  as  I  may  terme  it  an 
enlightning  of  mans  judgement  drawne  from  the  commerce  of 
men,  and  by  frequenting  abroad  in  the  world  :  we  are  all  so 
contrived  and  compact  in  our  selves,  that  our  sight  is  made 
shorter  by  the  length  of  our  nose.  When  Socrates  was 
demaunded  whence  he  was,  he  answered,  not  of  Athens,  but 
of  the  world ;  for  he,  who  had  his  imagination  more  full, 
and  farther  stretching,  embraced  all  the  world  for  his  native 
Citie,  and  extended  his  acquaintance,  his  societie,  and  affec 
tions  to  all  man-kind  :  and  not  as  we  do,  that  looke  no 
164 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

further  than  our  feet.     If  the  frost  chance  to  nip  the  vines  CHAPTER 
about  my  village,  my  Priest  doth  presently  argue,  that  the        XXV  . 
wrath  of  God  hangs  over  our  head,  and  threatneth  all  man-  st^t^  ")~cl 
kind  :  and  judgeth  that  the  Pippe  is  alreadie  falne  upon  the  ec[ucatioii    of 
Canibals.  Children 

In  viewing  these  intestine  and  civill  broiles  of  ours,  who 
doth  not  exclaime,  that  this  worlds  vast-frame  is  neere  unto 
a  dissolution,  and  that  the  day  of  judgement  is  readie  to  fall 
on  us  ?  never  remembring  that  many  worse  revolutions 
have  been  scene,  and  that  whilest  we  are  plunged  in  griefe, 
and  overwhelmed  in  sorrow,  a  thousand  other  parts  of  the 
world  besides  are  blessed  with  all  happinesse,  and  wallow  in 
pleasures,  and  never  thinke  on  us  ?  whereas,  when  I  behold 
our  lives,  our  licence,  and  impunitie,  I  wonder  to  see  them 
so  milde  and  easie.  He  on  whose  head  it  haileth,  thinks 
all  the  Hemispheare  besides  to  be  in  a  storme  and  tempest. 
And  as  that  dull-pated  Savoyard  said,  that  if  the  seelie 
King  of  France  could  cunningly  have  managed  his  fortune, 
he  might  verie  well  have  made  himselfe  chiefe  Steward  of  his 
Lords  houshold,  whose  imagination  conceived  no  other  great- 
nesse  than  his  Masters ;  we  are  all  insensible  of  this  kind  of 
errour:  an  errour  of  great  consequence  and  prejudice.  But 
whosoever  shall  present  unto  his  inward  eyes,  as  it  were  in  a 
Table,  the  Idea  of  the  great  image  of  our  universall  mother 
Nature,  attired  in  her  richest  robes,  sitting  in  the  throne  of 
her  Majestic,  and  in  her  visage  shall  read,  so  generall,  and 
so  constant  a  varietie ;  he  that  therein  shall  view  himselfe, 
not  himselfe  alone,  but  a  whole  Kingdome,  to  be  in  respect 
of  a  great  circle;  but  the  smallest  point  that  can  be  im 
agined,  he  onely  can  value  things  according  to  their  essentiall 
greatnesse  and  proportion.  This  great  universe  (which  some 
multiplie  as  Species  under  one  Genus)  is  the  true  looking- 
glasse  wherin  we  must  looke,  if  we  will  know  whether  we  be 
of  a  good  stamp,  or  in  the  right  byase.  To  conclude,  I 
would  have  this  worlds-frame  to  be  my  Schollers  choise- 
booke :  So  many  strange  humours,  sundrie  sects,  varying 
judgements,  diverse  opinions,  different  lawes,  and  fantastical! 
customes  teach  us  to  judge  rightly  of  ours,  and  instruct  our 
judgement  to  acknowledge  his  imperfections  and  naturall 
weaknesse,  which  is  no  easie  an  apprentiship :  So  many  in- 

165 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  novations  of  estates,  so  many  fals  of  Princes,  and  changes  of 
XXV  publike  fortune,  may,  and  ought  to  teach  us,  not  to  make 
stitution  and  so  Srea^  accompt  of  ours  :  So  many  names,  so  many  victories, 
education  of an<^  so  niany  conquests  buried  in  darke  oblivion,  makes  the 
Children  hope  to  perpetuate  our  names,  but  ridiculous,  by  the  sur 
prising  of  ten  Argo-lettiers,  or  of  a  small  cottage,  which  is 
knowne  but  by  his  fall.  The  pride  and  fiercenesse  of  so 
many  strange  and  gorgeous  shewes :  the  pride-puft  majestie 
of  so  many  courts,  and  of  their  greatnesse,  ought  to  confirme 
and  assure  our  sight,  undauntedly  to  beare  the  affronts  and 
thunder-claps  of  ours,  without  seeling  our  eyes :  So  many 
thousands  of  men,  low-laide  in  their  graves  afore  us,  may 
encourage  us,  not  to  feare,  or  be  dismaied  to  go  meet  so 
good  companie  in  the  other  world ;  and  so  of  all  things  else. 
Our  life  (said  Pithagoras)  drawes  neare  unto  the  great  and 
populous  assemblies  of  the  Olympike  games,  wherein  some, 
to  get  the  glorie,  and  to  win  the  goale  of  the  games,  exercise 
their  bodies  with  all  industrie ;  others,  for  greedinesse  of 
gaine,  bring  thither  marchandise  to  sell:  others  there  are 
(and  those  be  not  the  worst)  that  seek  after  no  other  good, 
but  to  marke,  how,  wherefore,  and  to  what  end,  all  things 
are  done :  and  to  be  spectators  or  observers  of  other  mens 
lives  and  actions,  that  so  they  may  the  better  judge  and 
direct  their  owne.  Unto  examples  may  all  the  most  profit 
able  Discourses  of  Philosophic  be  sorted,  which  ought  to  be 
the  touch- stone  of  humane  actions,  and  a  rule  to  square 
them  by,  to  whom  may  be  said, 

PERS.  Sal  iii.  —quid  fas  optare,  quid  asper 

69>  Vtile  nummus  habet,  patrice  charisque  propinquis 

Quantum  elargiri  deceat,  quern  te  Dem  esse 
lussit,  et  humana  qua  parte  locatus  es  in  re. 
67.  Quid  sumus,  aut  quidnam  victuri  gignimur  : 

What  thou  maiest  wish,,  what  profit  may  come  cleare, 
From  new-stampt  coyne,  to  friends  and  countrie  deare, 
What  thou  ought'st  give  :  whom  God  would  have  thee 

bee, 

And  in  what  part  mongst  men  he  placed  thee. 
What  we  are,,  and  wherefore, 
To  live  heer  we  were  bore. 

What  it  is  to  know,  and  not  to  know  (which  ought  to  be 
166 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

the  scope   of  studie)  what  valour,  what   temperance,  and  CHAPTER 
what  justice  is:  what  difference  there  is  betweene  ambition        XXV 
and  avarice,  bondage  and  freedome,  subjection  and  libertie,  st^t*^  ™~d 
by  which  markes  a  man  may  distinguish  true  and  perfect  eciucati0n '  of 
contentment,  and  how  far- forth  one  ought  to  feare  or  appre-     Children 
hend  death,  griefe,  or  shame. 

Et  quo  quemque  modo  fugidtque  ferdtque  laborem.  VIRG.  SEn. 

How  ev'ry  labour  he  may  pile,  Vlp    9^- 

And  beare,  or  ev'ry  labour  flie. 

What  wards  or  springs  move  us,  and  the  causes  of  so 
many  motions  in  us :  For  me  seemeth,  that  the  first  dis 
courses,  wherewith  his  conceit  should  be  sprinkled,  ought  to 
be  those,  that  rule  his  manners,  and  direct  his  sense ;  which 
will  both  teach  him  to  know  himselfe,  and  how  to  live,  and 
how  to  die  well.  Among  the  liberall  Sciences,  let  us  begin 
with  that  which  makes  us  free :  Indeed,  they  may  all  in 
some  sort  stead  us,  as  an  instruction  to  our  life,  and  use  of  it, 
as  all  other  things  else  serve  the  same  to  some  purpose  or 
other.  But  let  us  make  especiall  choice  of  that,  which  may 
directly  and  pertinently  serve  the  same.  If  we  could  re- 
straine  and  adapt  the  appurtenances  of  our  life  to  their 
right  byase  and  naturall  limits,  we  should  find  the  best  part 
of  the  Sciences  that  now  are  in  use,  cleane  out  of  fashion 
with  us :  yea,  and  in  those  that  are  most  in  use,  there  are 
certaine  by-wayes  and  deep-flows  most  profitable,  which  we 
should  do  well  to  leave,  and  according  to  the  institution  of 
Socrates,  limit  the  course  of  our  studies  in  those  where  profit 
is  wanting. 

— sapere  aude,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Incipe:  vivendi  qui  recte  prorogat  horam,  ii.  40. 

Rusticus  expectat  dum  defluat  amnis,  at  ille 
Labitur,  et  labetur  in  omne  volubilis  cevum. 

Be  bold  to  be  wise  :  to  begin,  be  strong, 
He  that  to  live  well  doth  the  time  prolong, 
Clowne-like  expects,  till  downe  the  streame  be  run  ; 
That  runs,  and  will  run,  till  the  world  be  done. 

It  is  more  simplicitie  to  teach  our  children. 

Quid  moveant  Pisces,  animosdque  signa  Leonis,  PROP.  iv.  EL 

Lotus  et  Hesperia  quid  Capricornus  aqua.  i-  85. 

167 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  What  Pisces  move,  or  hot-breath 'd  Leos  beames, 

XXV  Or  Capricornus  bath'd  in  westerne  streames. 

stitution  and      The  knowledge  of  the  starres,  and   the  motion   of  the 
education    of  eighth  spheare,  before  their  owrie. 

Children 

Ti  IlAeiaOeo-o-i  Ka^oi          TI  o  acrTpacri  /3oa>Tea>. 

What  longs  it  to  the  seaveu  stars,,  and  me, 
Or  those  about  Bootes  be. 

Anaximenes  writing  to  Pythagoras,  saith,  '  with  what 
'  sense  can  I  ammuse  my  selfe  to  the  secrets  of  the  Starres, 
'  having  continually  death  or  bondage  before  mine  eyes  ? ' 
For  at  that  time  the  Kings  of  Persia  were  making  prepara 
tions  to  war  against  his  Countrie.  All  men  ought  to  say  so. 
Being  beaten  with  ambition,  with  avarice,  with  rashnesse, 
and  with  superstition,  and  having  such  other  enemies  unto 
life  within  him.  Wherefore  shall  I  study  and  take  care 
about  the  mobility  and  variation  of  the  world  ?  When  hee 
is  once  taught  what  is  fit  to  make  him  better  and  wiser,  he 
shall  be  entertained  with  Logicke,  naturall  Philosophy, 
Geometry,  and  Rhetoricke,  then  having  setled  his  judge 
ment,  looke  what  science  he  doth  most  addict  himselfe  unto, 
he  shall  in  short  time  attaine  to  the  perfection  of  it.  His 
lecture  shall  be  somtimes  by  way  of  talke  and  somtimes  by 
booke  :  his  tutor  may  now  and  then  supply  him  with  the  same 
Author,  as  an  end  and  motive  of  his  institution :  sometimes 
giving  him  the  pith  and  substance  of  it  ready  chewed.  And 
if  of  himselfe  he  be  not  so  throughly  acquainted  with  bookes, 
that  hee  may  readily  find  so  many  notable  discourses  as  are 
in  them  to  effect  his  purpose,  it  shall  not  be  amisse,  that 
some  learned  man  being  appointed  to  keepe  him  company, 
who  at  any  time  of  need,  may  furnish  him  with  such  muni 
tion,  as  hee  shall  stand  in  need  of;  that  hee  may  afterward 
distribute  and  dispense  them  to  his  best  use.  And  that  this 
kind  of  lesson  be  more  easie  and  naturall  than  that  of  Gaza, 
who  will  make  question  ?  Those  are  but  harsh,  thornie,  and 
unpleasant  precepts ;  vaine,  idle  and  immateriall  words,  on 
which  small  hold  may  be  taken ;  wherein  is  nothing  to 
quicken  the  minde.  In  this,  the  spirit  findeth  substance  to 
bide  and  feed  upon.  A  fruit  without  all  comparison  much 
better,  and  that  will  soone  be  ripe.  It  is  a  thing  worthy 

168 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

consideration,  to  see  what  state  things  are  brought  unto  in  CHAPTER 
this  our  age ;  and  how  Philosophic,  even  to  the  wisest,  and       XXV 

men  of  best  understanding,  is  but  an  idle,  vaine  and  fantasti-    .      . .   e  m" , 

J  i  4.u    i     J.L  •  •    •  j  stitution   and 

call  name,  of  small  use,  and  lesse  worth,  both  in  opinion  and  e(iucation    of 

effect.     I  thinke  these  Sophistries  are  the  cause  of  it,  which     Children 

have  forestalled  the  wayes  to  come  unto  it :  They  doe  very 

ill,  that  goe  about  to  make  it  seeme  as  it  were  inaccessible 

for  children  to  come  unto,  setting  it  foorth  with  a  wrimpled, 

gastlie,  and  frowning  visage ;  who  hath  masked  her  with  so 

counterfet,   pale,   and   hideous   a   countenance  ?      There   is 

nothing  more  beauteous,  nothing  more  delightfull,  nothing 

more  gamesome;  and  as   I  may  say,  nothing  more  fondly 

wanton :    for    she    presenteth    nothing    to    our   eyes,   and 

preacheth   nothing   to   our   eares,  but  sport  and  pastime. 

A  sad  and  lo wring  looke  plainly  declareth,  that  that  is  not 

her  haunt.     Demetrius  the  Gramarian,  finding  a  companie 

of  Philosophers   sitting   close  together   in  the  Temple  of 

Delphos,  said  unto  them,  '  Either  I  am  deceived,  or  by  your 

'  plausible  and  pleasant  lookes,  you  are  not  in  any  serious 

'  and  earnest  discourse  amongst  your  selves1;  to  whom  one 

of  them  named  Heracleon  the  Megarian  answered,  'That 

6  belongeth  to  them,  who  busie  themselves  in  seeking,  whether 

6  future  tense  of  the  verbe  /3d\\co  hath  a  double  X,  or  that 

6  labour  to  find  the  derivation  of  the  comparatives,  ^e/p&>i>, 

'  /3e\T/ft>z/,  and  of  the  superlatives  ^elpLarov,  /3e\Tt,aTov,  it  is 

4  they,  that  must  chafe  in  intertaining  themselves  with  their 

6  science :  as  for  discourses  of  Philosophic  they  are  wont  to 

*  glad,  rejoyce,  and  not  to  vex  and  molest  those  that  use 

4  them.1 

Deprendas  animi  tormenta  latentis  in  agro  IUVEN.  Sat.  ix. 

Corpore,  deprendas  et  gaudia,  sumit  utrumque  18. 

Inde  habitum  fades. 

You  may  perceive  the  torments  of  the  mind, 
Hid  in  sicke  bodie,  you  the  joyes  may  find, 
The  face  such  habit  takes  in  either  kind. 

That  mind  which  harboureth  Philosophic,  ought  by  reason 
of  her  sound  health,  make  that  bodie  also  sound  and  healthie  : 
it  ought  to  make  her  contentment  to  through-shine  in  all 
exteriour  parts :  it  ought  to  shapen  and  modell  all  outward 
demeanours  to  the  modell  of  it :  and  by  consequence  arme 

U  169 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  him  that  doth  possesse  it,  with  a  gracious  stoutnesse,  and 
^?^-  lively  audacitie,  with  an  active  and  pleasing  gesture,  and 
stitution  arid  w^  a  setled  and  cheerefull  countenance.  The  most  evident 
education  of  token,  and  apparant  signe  of  true  wisdome,  is  a  constant, 
Children  and  unconstrained  rejoycing,  whose  estate  is  like  unto  all 
things  above  the  Moone,  that  is,  ever  cleare,  alwaies  bright. 
It  is  Baroco  and  Baralipton,  that  makes  their  followers 
prove  so  base  and  idle,  and  not  Philosophic ;  they  know  her 
not,  but  by  heare-say  :  what  ?  Is  it  not  shee,  that  cleereth 
all  stormes  of  the  mind  ?  And  teacheth  miserie,  famine, 
and  sicknesse  to  laugh  ?  Not  by  reason  of  some  imaginarie 
Epicicles,  but  by  naturall  and  palpable  reasons.  Shee 
aymeth  at  nothing  but  vertue  :  it  is  vertue  shee  seekes  after  ; 
which  as  the  schoole  saith,  is  not  pitch t  on  the  top  of  an 
high,  steepie,  or  inaccessible  hill ;  for  they  that  have  come 
unto  her,  affirme,  that  cleane-contrarie,  shee  keeps  her  stand, 
and  holds  her  mansion,  in  a  faire,  flourishing,  and  pleasant 
plaine,  whence  as  from  an  high  watch  tower,  she  survaieth 
all  things,  to  be  subject  unto  her,  to  whom  any  man  may 
with  great  facilitie  come,  if  he  but  know  the  way  or  entrance 
to  her  palace  :  for,  the  pathes  that  lead  unto  her,  are  certaine 
fresh,  and  shadie  greene  allies,  sweet  and  flowrie  waies,  whose 
ascent  is  even,  easie,  and  nothing  wearisome,  like  unto  that 
of  heavens-vaults.  Forsomuch  as  they  have  not  frequented 
this  vertue,  who  gloriously,  as  in  a  throne  of  Majestic  sits 
soveraigne,  goodly,  triumphant,  lovely,  equally  delicious, 
and  couragious,  protesting  her  selfe  to  be  a  professed  and 
irreconciliable  enemie  to  all  sharpnesse,  austeritie,  feare,  and 
compulsion ;  having  nature  for  her  guide,  fortune  and 
voluptuousnesse  for  her  companions ;  they  according  to 
their  weaknesse  have  imaginarily  fained  her,  to  have  a 
foolish,  sad,  grim,  quarelous,  spitefull,  threatning,  and  dis- 
dainfull  visage,  with  an  horride  and  unpleasant  looke ;  and 
have  placed  her,  upon  a  craggie,  sharpe,  and  unfrequented 
rocke,  amidst  desert  cliffes,  and  uncouth  crags,  as  a  skar- 
crow,  or  bug-beare,  to  affright  the  common  people  with. 
Now  the  tutour,  which  ought  to  know,  that  he  should  rather 
seek  to  fill  the  mind,  and  store  the  will  of  his  disciple,  as 
much,  or  rather  more,  with  love  and  affection,  than  with 
awe,  and  reverence  unto  vertue,  may  shew  and  tell  him,  that 
170 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Poets  follow  common  humours,  making  him  plainly  to  per-  CHAPTER 
ceive,  and  as  it  were  palpably  to  feele,  that  the  Gods  have         XXV 
rather  placed  labour  and  sweat  at  the  entrances,  which  lead    9f  *lie  m" 
to  Venus  chambers,  than  at  the  doores,  that  direct  to  Pallas  education    of 
cabinets.  Children 

And  when  he  shall  perceive  his  scholler  to  have  a  sensible 
feeling  of  himselfe,  presenting  Bradamant,  or  Angelica 
before  him,  as  a  Mistresse  to  enjoy,  embelished  with  a 
naturall,  active,  generous,  and  unspotted  beautie,  not  uglie, 
or  Giant-like,  but  blithe  and  livelie,  in  respect  of  a  wanton, 
soft,  affected,  and  artificiall-flaring  beautie ;  the  one  attired 
like  unto  a  young  man,  coyfed  with  a  bright-shining  helmet, 
the  other  disguised  and  drest  about  the  head  like  unto  an 
impudent  harlot,  with  embroyderies,  frizelings,  and  carcanets 
of  pearles :  he  will  no  doubt  deeme  his  owne  love  to  be  a 
man  and  no  woman,  if  in  his  choice  he  differ  from  that 
effeminate  shepherd  of  Phrygia.  In  this  new  kind  of  lesson, 
he  shall  declare  unto  him,  that  the  prize,  the  glorie,  and 
height  of  true  vertue,  consisted  in  the  facilitie,  profit,  and 
pleasure  of  his  exercises :  so  far  from  difficultie,  and  in- 
cumbrances,  that  children  as  well  as  men,  the  simple  as  soone 
as  the  wise,  may  come  unto  her.  Discretion  and  temperance, 
not  force  or  way-wardnesse  are  the  instruments  to  bring  him 
unto  her.  Socrates  (vertues  chiefe  favorite)  that  he  might 
the  better  walke  in  the  pleasant,  naturall,  and  open  path,  of 
her  progresses,  doth  voluntarily  and  in  good  earnest,  quit  all 
compulsion.  Shee  is  the  nurse  and  foster-mother  of  all 
humane  pleasures,  who  in  making  them  just  and  upright, 
she  also  makes  them  sure  and  sincere.  By  moderating  them, 
she  keepeth  them  in  ure  and  breath.  In  limiting  and 
cutting  them  off,  whom  she  refuseth ;  she  whets  us  on 
toward  those  she  leaveth  unto  us ;  and  plenteously  leaves 
us  them,  which  Nature  pleaseth,  and  like  a  kind  mother 
giveth  us  over  unto  sacietie,  if  not  unto  wearisomnesse, 
unlesse  we  will  peradventure  say,  that  the  rule  and  bridle, 
which  stayeth  the  drunkard  before  drunkennesse,  the  glutton 
before  surfetting,  and  the  letcher  before  the  losing  of  his 
haire,  be  the  enemies  of  our  pleasures.  If  common  fortune 
faile  her,  it  cleerely  scapes  her  ;  or  she  cares  not  for  her,  or 
she  frames  another  unto  herselfe,  altogether  her  owne,  not 

171 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  so  fleeting,  nor  so  rowling.  She  knoweth  the  way  how  to 
XXV  be  rich,  mightie  and  wise,  and  how  to  lie  in  sweet-perfumed 
Of  the  m-  beds.  She  loveth  life ;  she  delights  in  beautie,  in  glorie, 
education  of  an<^  *n  nea^n-  But  ner  proper  and  particular  office  is,  first 
Children  to  know  how  to  use  such  goods  temperately,  and  how  to  lose 
them  constantly.  An  office  much  more  noble,  than  severe, 
without  which,  all  course  of  life  is  unnaturall,  turbulent,  and 
deformed,  to  which  one  may  lawfully  joyne  those  rocks,  those 
incumbrances,  and  those  hideous  monsters.  If  so  it  happen, 
that  his  Disciple  prove  of  so  different  a  condition,  that  he 
rather  love  to  give  eare  to  an  idle  fable,  than  to  the  report  of 
some  noble  voiage,  or  other  notable  and  wise  discourse,  when 
he  shall  heare  it ;  that  at  the  sound  of  a  Drum,  or  clang  of 
a  Trumpet,  which  are  wont  to  rowze  and  arme  the  youthly 
heat  of  his  companions,  turneth  to  another  that  calleth  him 
to  see  a  play,  tumbling,  jugling  tricks,  or  other  idle  lose- 
time  sports ;  and  who  for  pleasures  sake  doth  not  deeme  it 
more  delightsome  to  returne  all  sweatie  and  wearie  from  a 
victorious  combat,  from  wrestling,  or  riding  of  a  horse,  than 
from  a  Tennis-court,  or  dancing  schoole,  with  the  prize  or 
honour  of  such  exercises ;  The  best  remedy  I  know  for  such 
a  one,  is,  to  put  him  prentise  to  some  base  occupation,  in 
some  good  towne  or  other,  yea,  were  he  the  sonne  of  a  Duke ; 
according  to  Platoes  rule,  who  saith,  *  That  children  must 
'  be  placed,  not  according  to  their  fathers  conditions,  but 
'  the  faculties  of  their  mind.1  Since  it  is  Philosophic  that 
teacheth  us  to  live,  and  that  infancie  as  well  as  other  ages, 
may  plainly  read  her  lessons  in  the  same,  why  should  it  not 
be  imparted  unto  young  Schollers  ? 

PERS.  Sat.  iii.  Vdum  et  molle  lutum  est,  nunc  nunc  properandus,  et  acri 

23-  Fingendus  sine  fine  rota. 

He  Js  moist  and  soft  mould,  and  must  by  and  by 
Be  cast,  made  up,  while  wheele  whirl's  readily. 

We  are  taught  to  live,  when  our  life  is  well-nigh  spent. 
Many  schollers  have  been  infected  with  that  loathsome  and 
marrow-wasting  disease,  before  ever  they  came  to  read 
Aristotles  treatise  of  Temperance.  Cicero  was  wont  to  say, 
'That  could  he  out-live  the  lives  of  two  men,  he  should 
'  never  find  leasure  to  study  the  Lyrike  Poets.1  And  I  find 

172 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

these  Sophisters  both  worse  and  more   unprofitable.      Our  CHAPTER 

childe  is  engaged  in  greater  matters ;  And  but   the  first         XXV 

fifteene  or  sixteene  yeares  of  his  life,  are  due  unto  Pedantisme,    V 

the  rest  unto  action  :  let  us  therefore  imploy  so  short  time,  education  ^of 

as  we   have    to  live,  in    more   necessarie   instructions.      It      Children 

is  an  abuse;    remove   these  thornie    quiddities  of  Logike, 

whereby  our  life  can  no  whit  be  amended,  and  betake  our 

selves  to  the  simple  discourses  of  Philosophy ;  know  how  to 

chuse  and  fitly  to  make  use  of  them  :  they  are  much  more 

easie  to  be  conceived  than  one  of  Bocace  his  tales.    A  childe 

comming  from  nurse  is  more  capable  of  them,  than  he  is  to 

learne  to  read  or  write.    Philosophy  hath  discourses,  whereof 

infancie  as  well  as  decaying  old-age   may  make  good  use. 

I  am  of  Plutarkes  mind,  which  is,  that  Aristotle  did  not  so 

much  ammuse  his  great  Disciple  about  the  arts  how  to  frame 

Syllogismes,  or  the  principles  of  Geometric,  as  he  endevoured 

to   instruct    him    with   good    precepts,    concerning   valour, 

prowesse,  magnanimitie,  and  temperance,  and  an  undanted 

assurance  not  to  feare  any  thing ;  and  with  such  munition 

he  sent  him,  being  yet  verie  young,  to  subdue  the  Empire  of 

the  world,  only  with  30000  footmen,  4000  horsemen,  and 

42000  Crownes  in  monie.     As  for  other  arts  and  sciences ; 

he  saith  Alexander  honored  them,  and  commended  their 

excellencie  and  comlinesse ;  but  for  any  pleasure  he  tooke  in 

them,  his  affection  could  not  easily  be  drawne  to  exercise 

them. 

— petite  hinc  juvenesque  senesque  PERS.  Saf.  v. 

Finem  animo  certum,  miserisque  viatica  canis.  64. 

Young  men  and  old,,  draw  hence  (in  your  affaires) 
Your  minds  set  marke,  provision  for  gray  haires. 

It  is  that  which  Epicurus  said  in  the  beginning  of  his 
letter  to  Meniceus  :  '  Neither  let  the  youngest  shun,  nor  the 
'  oldest  wearie  himselfe  in  philosophying,  for  who  doth 
'  otherwise  seemeth  to  say,  that  either  the  season  to  live 
'  happily  is  not  yet  come,  or  is  already  past/  Yet  would 
I  not  have  this  young  gentleman  pent-up,  nor  carelesly 
cast-off  to  the  heedlesse  choler,  or  melancholy  humour  of 
the  hasty  Schoole-master.  I  would  not  have  his  budding 
spirit  corrupted  with  keeping  him  fast-tied,  and  as  it  were 
labouring  foureteene  or  fifteene  houres  a  day  poaring  on 

173 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  his  booke,  as  some  doe,  as  if  he  were  a  day-labouring  man  ; 
XXV        neither  doe  I  thinke  it  fit,  if  at  any  time,  by  reason  of  some 

...   , .  e  m~    solitarie  or  melancholy  complexion,  he  should  be  scene  with 
stitution   and  •    i-  T      ,•  •  -,  •     i       i       •,     ^       ^^ 

education    of  an  over-indiscreet  application  given  to  his  booke,  it  should 

Children  be  cherished  in  him ;  for,  that  doth  often  make  him  both 
unapt  for  civill  conversation,  and  distracts  him  from  better 
imployments :  How  many  have  I  scene  in  my  daies,  by  an 
over-greedy  desire  of  knowledge,  become  as  it  were  foolish  ? 
Carneades  was  so  deeply  plunged,  and  as  I  may  say  besotted 
in  it,  that  he  could  never  have  leasure  to  cut  his  haire,  or 
pare  his  nailes  :  nor  would  I  have  his  noble  manners  obscured 
by  the  incivilitie  and  barbarisme  of  others.  The  French 
wisdome  hath  long  since  proverbially  been  spoken  of,  as 
verie  apt  to  conceive  study  in  her  youth,  but  most  unapt 
to  keepe  it  long.  In  good  truth,  we  see  at  this  day,  that 
there  is  nothing  lovelier  to  behold,  than  the  young  children 
of  France ;  but  for  the  most  part,  they  deceive  the  hope 
which  was  fore-apprehended  of  them :  for  when  they  once 
become  men,  there  is  no  excellencie  at  all  in  them.  I 
have  heard  men  of  understanding  hold  this  opinion,  that  the 
Colleges  to  which  they  are  sent  (of  which  there  are  store) 
doe  thus  besot  them :  whereas  to  our  scholler,  a  cabinet,  a 
gardin,  the  table,  the  bed,  a  solitarinesse,  a  companie,  morn 
ing  and  evening,  and  all  houres  shall  be  alike  unto  him,  all 
places  shall  be  a  study  for  him :  for  Philosophy  (as  a  former 
of  judgements,  and  modeler  of  customes)  shall  be  his  prin- 
cipall  lesson,  having  the  privilege  to  entermeddle  her  selfe 
with  all  things,  and  in  all  places.  Isocrates  the  Orator, 
being  once  requested  at  a  great  banket  to  speake  of  his  art, 
when  all  thought  he  had  reason  to  answer,  said,  '  It  is  not 
'  now  time  to  doe  what  I  can,  and  what  should  now  be  done, 
'  I  cannot  doe  it ' ;  For,  to  present  orations,  or  to  enter  into 
disputation  of  Rhetorike,  before  a  companie  assembled 
together  to  be  merrie,  and  make  good  cheere,  would  be  but 
a  medly  of  harsh  and  jarring  musicke.  The  like  may  be 
said  of  all  other  Sciences.  But  touching  Philosophy,  namely 
in  that  point  where  it  treateth  of  man,  and  of  his  duties, 
and  offices,  it  hath  been  the  common  judgement  of  the 
wisest,  that  in  regard  of  the  pleasantnesse  of  her  conversa 
tion,  she  ought  not  to  be  rejected,  neither  at  banquets,  nor  at 
174 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

sports.     And  Plato  having  invited  her  to  his  solemne  feast,  CHAPTER 
we  see  how  kindly  she  entertaineth  the  companie  with  a         ^?^  • 
milde  behaviour,  fitly  suting  her  selfe  to  time  and  place,  stjtutj0^  ™m\ 
notwithstanding  it  be  one  of  his  learned'st  and  profitable  education    of 
discourses.  Children 


e  pauperibus  prodest,  locupletibus  feque,  HOR.  i.  Ep 

Et  neglecta  ceque  pueris  senibusque  nocebit.  cxxv. 

Poore  men  alike,  alike  rich  men  it  easeth, 
Alike  it  scorned,  old  and  young  displeaseth. 

So  doubtlesse  he  shall  lesse  be  idle  than  others  ;  for  even 
as  the  paces  we  bestow  walking  in  a  gallerie,  although  they 
be  twice  as  many  more,  wearie  us  not  so  much  as  those  we 
spend  in  going  a  set  journey  :  So  our  lesson  being  past  over, 
as  it  were,  by  chance,  or  way  of  encounter,  without  strict 
observance  of  time  or  place,  being  applied  to  all  our  actions, 
shall  be  digested,  and  never  felt.  All  sports  and  exercises 
shall  be  a  part  of  his  study  ;  running,  wrestling,  musicke, 
dancing,  hunting,  and  managing  of  armes,  and  horses.  I 
would  have  the  exterior  demeanor  or  decencie,  and  the  dis 
position  of  his  person  to  be  fashioned  together  with  his 
mind  ;  for,  it  is  not  a  mind,  it  is  not  a  body  that  we  erect, 
but  it  is  a  man,  and  we  must  not  make  two  parts  of  him. 
And  as  Plato  saith,  '  They  must  not  be  erected  one  without 
'  another,  but  equally  be  directed,  no  otherwise  than  a  couple 
1  of  horses  matched  to  draw  in  one  self-same  teeme.1  And 
to  heare  him,  doth  he  not  seem  to  imploy  more  time  and 
care  in  the  exercises  of  his  bodie  :  and  to  thinke  that  the  • 
rnind  is  together  with  the  same  exercised,  and  not  the  con- 
trarie  ?  As  for  other  matters,  this  institution  ought  to  be 
directed  by  a  sweet-severe  mildnesse  ;  Not  as  some  do,  who 
in  liew  of  gently-bidding  children  to  the  banquet  of  letters, 
present  them  with  nothing  but  horror  and  crueltie.  Let 
me  have  this  violence  and  compulsion  removed,  there  is 
nothing  that,  in  my  seeming,  doth  more  bastardise  and 
dizzie  a  wel-borne  and  gentle  nature  :  If  you  would  have 
him  stand  in  awe  of  shame  and  punishment,  doe  not  so 
much  enure  him  to  it  :  accustome  him  patiently  to  endure 
sweat  and  cold,  the  sharpnesse  of  the  wind,  the  heat  of  the 
sunne,  and  how  to  despise  all  hazards.  Remove  from  him 

175 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  all  nicenessc  and  quaintnesse  in  clothing,  in  lying,  in  eating, 
xxv .  and  in  drinking :  fashion  him  to  all  things ;  that  he  prove 
stitutioij  and  no^  a  ^re  anc^  wanton-puling  boy,  but  a  lustie  and  vigorous 
education  of  ^°J  :  When  I  was  a  child,  being  a  man,  and  now  am  old,  I 
Children  have  ever  judged  and  believed  the  same.  But  amongst 
other  things,  I  could  never  away  with  this  kind  of  discipline 
used  in  most  of  our  Colleges.  It  had  peradventure  been 
lesse  hurtfull,  if  they  had  somewhat  inclined  to  mildnesse,  or 
gentle  intreatie.  It  is  a  verie  prison  of  captivated  youth, 
and  proves  dissolute,  in  punishing  it  before  it  be  so.  Come 
upon  them  when  they  are  going  to  their  lesson,  and  you 
heare  nothing  but  whipping  and  brawling,  both  of  children 
tormented,  and  masters  besotted  with  anger  and  chafing. 
How  wide  are  they,  which  go  about  to  allure  a  childs  mind 
to  go  to  his  booke,  being  yet  but  tender  and  fearefull,  with 
a  stearne-frowning  countenance,  and  with  hands-full  of  rods  ? 
Oh  wicked  and  pernicious  manner  of  teaching !  which  Quin- 
tillian  hath  very  wel  noted,  that  this  imperious  kind  of 
authoritie,  namely,  this  way  of  punishing  of  children,  drawes 
many  dangerous  inconveniences  within.  How  much  more 
decent  were  it,  to  see  their  school-houses  and  formes  strewed 
with  greene  boughes  and  flowers,  than  with  bloudy  burchen- 
twigs  ?  If  it  lay  in  me,  I  would  doe  as  the  Philosopher 
Speusippus  did,  who  caused  the  pictures  of  Gladnesse  and 
Joy,  of  Flora,  and  of  the  Graces,  to  be  set  up  round  about 
his  school-house.  Where  their  profit  lieth,  there  should 
also  be  their  recreation.  Those  meats  ought  to  be  sugred 
over,  that  are  healthfull  for  childrens  stomackes,  and  those 
made  bitter  that  are  hurtfull  for  them.  It  is  strange  to  see 
how  carefull  Plato  sheweth  himselfe  in  framing  of  his  lawes 
about  the  recreation  and  pastime  of  the  youth  of  his  Citie, 
and  how  far  he  extends  himselfe  about  their  exercises,  sports, 
songs,  leaping,  and  dancing,  wherof  he  saith,  that  severe 
antiquitie  gave  the  conduct  and  patronage  unto  the  Gods 
themselves,  namely,  to  Apollo,  to  the  Muses,  and  to  Minerva. 
Marke  but  how  far-forth  he  endevoreth  to  give  a  thousand 
precepts  to  be  kept  in  his  places  of  exercises  both  of  bodie 
and  mind.  As  for  learned  Sciences,  he  stands  not  much 
upon  them,  and  seemeth  in  particular  to  commend  Poesie, 
but  for  Musickes  sake.  All  strangenesse  and  self-particu- 
176 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

laritie  in  our  manners  and  conditions,  is  to  be  shunned,  as  CHAPTER 
an  enemie  to  societie  and  civill  conversation.     Who  would        XXV 

not  be  astonished  at  Demophons  complexion,  chiefe  steward     .      .  e   m~ . 

P    A  i  !          iiiii  L    •      .  i      stitutiou   and 

of  Alexanders  houshold,   who   was    wont   to    sweat  in  the  e(jucation    of 

shadow,  and  quiver  for  cold  in  the  sunne  ?  I  have  scene  Children 
some  to  startle  at  the  smell  of  an  apple,  more  than  at 
the  shot  of  a  peece ;  some  to  be  frighted  with  a  mouse, 
some  readie  to  cast  their  gorge  at  the  sight  of  a  messe  of 
creame,  and  others  to  be  scared  with  seeing  a  fetherbed 
shaken :  as  Germanicus,  who  could  not  abide  to  see  a  cock, 
or  heare  his  crowing.  There  may  haply  be  some  hidden 
propertie  of  nature,  which  in  my  judgement  might  easilie  be 
removed,  if  it  were  taken  in  time.  Institution  hath  gotten 
this  upon  me  (I  must  confesse  with  much  adoe)  for,  except 
beere,  all  things  else  that  are  mans  food  agree  indifferently 
with  my  taste.  The  bodie  being  yet  souple,  ought  to  be 
accommodated  to  all  fashions  and  customes ;  ancl  (alwaies 
provided,  his  appetites  and  desires  be  kept  under)  let  a  yong 
man  boldly  be  made  fit  for  al  Nations  and  companies ;  yea, 
if  need  be,  for  al  disorders  and  surfetings ;  let  him  acquaint 
himselfe  with  al  fashions ;  That  he  may  be  able  to  do  al 
things,  and  love  to  do  none  but  those  that  are  commendable. 
Some  strict  Philosophers  commend  not,  but  rather  blame 
Calisthenes,  for  losing  the  good  favour  of  his  Master  Alex 
ander,  only  because  he  would  not  pledge  him  as  much  as  he 
had  drunke  to  him.  He  shall  laugh,  jest,  dally,  and  debauch 
himselfe  with  his  Prince.  And  in  his  debauching,  I  would 
have  him  out-go  al  his  fellowes  in  vigor  and  constancie,  and 
that  he  omit  not  to  doe  evill,  neither  for  want  of  strength 
or  knowledge,  but  for  lacke  of  will.  Multum  interest,  utrum  HOR.  Epist. 
peccare  quis  nolit,  out  nesciat :  '  There  is  a  great  difference,  xvii-  23- 
4  whether  one  have  no  will,  or  no  wit  to  doe  amisse.**  I 
thought  to  have  honoured  a  gentleman  (as  great  a  stranger, 
and  as  far  from  such  riotous  disorders  as  any  is  in  France) 
by  enquiring  of  him  in  verie  good  companie,  how  many 
times  in  all  his  life  he  had  bin  drunke  in  Germanic,  during 
the  time  of  his  abode  there,  about  the  necessarie  affaires  of 
our  King ;  who  tooke  it  even  as  I  meant  it,  and  answered 
three  times,  telling  the  time  and  manner  how.  I  know 
some,  who  for  want  of  that  qualitie,  have  been  much 
X  177 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

C  PI  AFTER  perplexed  when  they  have  had  occasion  to  converse  with  that 
xxv         nation.     I  have  often   noted  with   great  admiration,  that 
Of  the  m-    won(jerfull  nature  of  Alcibiades,  to  see  how  easilie  he  could 
education    ofsu^e  himselfe  to   so  divers  fashions,  and  different  humors, 
Children      without  prejudice  unto  his  health  ;  sometimes  exceeding  the 
sumptuousnesse  and  pompe  of  the  Persians,  and  now  and 
then  surpassing  the  austeritie  and  frugalitie  of  the  Lacede 
monians,  as  reformed  in  Sparta,  as  voluptuous  in  Ionia. 

HOR.  Epist.  Omnis  Aristippum  decuit  color,  et  status,  et  res. 

xv"-  25-  All  colours,  states,  and  things  are  fit 

For  courtly  Aristippus  wit. 

Such  a  one  would  I  frame  my  Disciple, 

— quern  duplici  panno  patientia  veldt, 
Mirabor,  mice  via  si  conversa  decebit. 

Whom  patience  clothes  with  sutes  of  double  kind, 
I  muse,  if  he  another  way  will  find. 

29.  Personamque  feret  non  inconcinnus  utramque. 

He  not  unfitly  may, 

Both  parts  and  persons  play. 

Loe  here  my  lessons,  wherein  he  that  acteth  them,  profit- 
eth  more,  than  he  that  but  knoweth  them,  whom  if  you  see, 
you  heare,  and  if  you  heare  him,  you  see  him.     God  forbid, 
saith  some  bodie  in  Plato,  that  to  Philosophize,  be  to  learne 
Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  many  things,  and  to  exercise  the  arts.     Hanc  amplissimam 
iv-  omnium    artium  bene  Vivendi  disciplinam,  vita  magis  quam 

litteris  persequuti  sunt.  '  This  discipline  of  living  well,  which 
'  is  the  amplest  of  all  other  arts,  they  followed  rather  in 
'  their  lives,  than  in  their  learning  or  writing.1  Leo  Prince 
of  the  Phliasians,  enquiring  of  Heraclides  Ponticus,  what 
art  he  professed,  he  answered, '  Sir,  I  professe  neither  art  nor 
'  science  ;  but  I  am  a  Philosopher."  Some  reproved  Diogenes, 
that  being  an  ignorant  man,  he  did  neverthelesse  meddle 
with  Philosophic,  to  whom  he  replied,  '  so  much  the  more 
<  reason  have  I,  and  to  greater  purpose  doe  I  meddle  with  if 
Hegesias  praid  him  upon  a  time  to  reade  some  booke  unto 
him  ;  '  You  are  a  merry  man,"  said  he  :  'As  you  chuse  natur- 
'  all  and  not  painted  right  and  not  counterfeit  figges  to  eat, 
178 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

4  why  doe  you  not  likewise  chuse,  not  the  painted  and  written,  CHAPTER 
4  but  the  true  and  naturall  exercises  ?'    He  shall  not  so  much        XXV 

repeat,  as  act  his  lesson.     In  his  actions  shall  he  make  repe-    .9/  4.*he  in  i 
...1.  ,,  ,,  TTr  -,  ii  i        stitution   and 

tition   of  the  same.      We  must  observe,  whether  there  bee  education    of 

wisdome  in  his  enterprises,  integritie  in  his  demeanor,  mo-     Children 
destie  in  his  jestures,  justice  in  his  actions,  judgement  and 
grace  in  his  speech,  courage  in  his  sicknesse,  moderation  in 
his  sports,  temperance  in  his  pleasures,  order  in  the  govern 
ment  of  his  house,  and  indifferencie  in  his  taste,  whether  it 
be  flesh,  fish,  wine,  or  water,  or  whatsoever  he  feedeth  upon. 
Qiti  disciplinam  suam  non  ostentationem  scientiw,  sed  legem  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
vitas  putet :  quique  obtemperet   ipse  sibi,  et  decretis   par  eat.  1K 
4  Who  thinks  his  learning  not  an  ostentation  of  knowledge, 
4  but  a  law  of  life,  and  himselfe  obayes  himselfe,  and  doth 
'  what  is  decreed/ 

The  true  mirror  of  our  discourses,  is  the  course  of  our 
lives.  Xeuxidamus  answered  one  that  demaunded  of  him, 
why  the  Lacedemonians  did  not  draw  into  a  booke,  the  ordi 
nances  of  prowesse,  that  so  their  yong  men  might  read  them ; 
4  it  is/  saith  he, 4  because  they  would  rather  accustome  them 
4  to  deeds  and  actions,  than  to  bookes  and  writings."  Com 
pare  at  the  end  of  fifteene  or  sixteene  yeares  one  of  these 
collegiall  Latinizers,  who  hath  imployed  all  that  while  onely 
in  learning  how  to  speake,  to  such  a  one  as  I  meane.  The 
world  is  nothing  but  babling  and  words,  and  I  never  saw  man, 
that  doth  not  rather  speake  more  than  he  ought,  than  lesse. 
Notwithstanding  halfe  our  age  is  consumed  that  way.  We 
are  kept  foure  or  five  yeares  learning  to  understand  bare 
words,  and  to  joine  them  into  clauses,  then  as  long  in  pro 
portioning  a  great  bodie  extended  into  foure  or  five  parts  ; 
and  five  more  at  least  ere  we  can  succinctly  know  how  to 
mingle,  joine,  and  interlace  them  handsomly  into  a  subtil 
fashion,  and  into  one  coherent  orbe.  Let  us  leave  it  to  those, 
whose  profession  is  to  doe  nothing  else.  Being  once  on  my 
journey  toward  Orleans,  it  was  my  chance  to  meet  upon 
that  plaine  that  lieth  on  this  side  Clery,  with  two  Masters 
of  Arts,  traveling  toward  Burdeaux,  about  fiftie  paces  one 
from  another  ;  far  off  behind  them,  I  descride  a  troupe  of 
horsemen,  their  Master  riding  formost,  who  was  the  Earle 
of  Rochefocault ;  one  of  my  servants  enquiring  of  the 

179 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  first  of  those  Masters  of  arts,  what  Gentleman  he  was  that 
XXV         followed  him  ;    supposing  my  servant  had  meant  his  fellow- 

.     *  e  m"    scholler,  for  he  had  not  yet  seen  the  Earles  traine,  answered 
stitution  and     ,  '        ,  TT     .  J    ,.  _,.      .  ~ 

education    of  pleasantly,  '  He  is  no  gentleman,  Sir,  but  a  Gramanan,  and 

Children  '  I  am  a  Logitian.'  Now,  we  that  contrariwise  seek  not  to 
frame  a  Gramarian,  nor  a  Logitian,  but  a  compleat  gentle 
man,  let  us  give  them  leave  to  rnispend  their  time  ;  we  have 
else-where,  and  somewhat  else  of  more  import  to  doe.  So 
that  our  disciple  be  well  and  sufficiently  stored  with  matter; 
words  will  follow  apace,  and  if  they  will  not  follow  gently, 
he  shall  hale  them  on  perforce.  I  heare  some  excuse  them 
selves,  that  they  cannot  expresse  their  meaning,  and  make 
a  semblance  that  their  heads  are  so  full-stuft  with  many 
goodly  things,  but  for  want  of  eloquence  they  can  neither 
utter  nor  make  shew  of  them.  It  is  a  meere  fopperie.  And 
will  you  know  what,  in  my  seeming,  the  cause  is  ?  They  are 
shadows  and  Chimeraes,  proceeding  of  some  formelesse  con 
ceptions,  which  they  cannot  distinguish  or  resolve  within, 
and  by  consequence  are  not  able  to  produce  them,  in  asmuch 
as  they  understand  not  themselves  :  And  if  you  but  marke 
their  earnestnesse,  and  how  they  stammer  and  labour  at  the 
point  of  their  deliverie,  you  would  deeme,  that  what  they  go 
withall,  is  but  a  conceiving,  and  therefore  nothing  neere 
downelying ;  and  that  they  doe  but  lickc  that  imperfect  and 
shapelesse  lump  of  matter.  As  for  me,  I  am  of  opinion,  and 
Socrates  would  have  it  so,  that  he  who  hath  a  cleare  and 
lively  imagination  in  his  mind,  may  easilie  produce  and  utter 
the  same,  although  it  be  in  Bergamask,  or  Welsh,  and  if  he 
be  dumbe,  by  signes  and  tokens. 

HOR.  Art.  Vcrbdque  preevisam  rem  non  invita  sequentur. 

When  matter  we  fore-know, 
Words  voluntarie  flow. 

SEN.  Controv.       As  one  said,  as  poetically  in  his  prose,  Cum  res  animum 
vii.  Prose.         occupavere,  verba    ambiunt.      '  When  matter    hath  possest 
6  their  minds,  they  hunt  after  words  : '    and  another  :    Ipscc 
res  verba  raplunt.     '  Things  themselves  will  catch  and  carry 
4  words  :  '    He   knowes  neither  Ablative,  Conjunctive,  Sub 
stantive,  nor  Gramar,  no  more  doth  his  Lackey,  nor  any 
Oyster- wife  about  the  streets,  and  yet  if  you  have  a  mind  to 
180 


THE    FIRST    BOORE 

it,  he  will  intertaine  you  your  fill,  and  peradventure  stumble  CHAPTER 
as  little  and  as  seldome  against  the  rules  of  his  tongue,  as  xxv  . 
the  best  Master  of  arts  in  France.  He  hath  no  skill  in  J^^  ^nd 
Rhetoricke,  nor  can  he  with  a  preface  fore-stall  and  captivate  e(jucation  of 
the  Gentle  Readers  good  will :  nor  careth  he  greatly  to  Children 
know  it.  In  good  sooth,  all  this  garish  painting  is  easilie 
defaced,  by  the  lustre  of  an  in-bred,  and  simple  truth  ;  for 
these  dainties  and  quaint  devices,  serve  but  to  ammuse  the 
vulgar  sort ;  unapt  and  incapable  to  taste  the  most  solid  and 
firme  meat :  As  Afer  verie  plainly  declareth  in  Cornelius 
Tacitus.  The  Ambassadours  of  Samos  being  come  to  Cleo- 
menes  King  of  Sparta,  prepared  with  a  long  prolix  Oration, 
to  stir  him  up  to  war  against  the  tyrant  Policrates,  after  he 
had  listned  a  good  while  unto  them,  his  answer  was : 
'  Touching  your  Exordium  or  beginning  I  have  forgotten  it, 
6  the  middle  I  remember  not ;  and  for  your  conclusion  I  will 
6  do  nothing  in  it.1  A  fit,  and  (to  my  thinking)  a  verie  good 
answer ;  and  the  Orators  were  put  to  such  a  shift,  as  they 
knew  not  what  to  replie.  And  what  said  another  ?  the 
Athenians  from  out  two  of  their  cunning  Architects,  were  to 
chuse  one  to  erect  a  notable  great  frame  :  the  one  of  them 
more  affected  and  selfe- presuming,  presented  himselfe  before 
them,  with  a  smooth  fore-premeditated  discourse,  about  the 
subject  of  that  piece  of  worke,  and  thereby  drew  the  judge 
ments  of  the  common  people  unto  his  liking  ;  but  the  other 
in  few  words,  spake  thus  :  '  Lords  of  Athens,  what  this  man 
4  hath  said,  I  will  performed  In  the  greatest  earnestnesse  of 
Ciceroes  eloquence  many  were  drawn  into  a  kind  of  admira 
tion  ;  But  Cato  jesting  at  it,  said,  '  Have  we  not  a  pleasant 
6  Consull  ? '  A  quicke  cunning  Argument,  and  a  wittie  say 
ing,  whether  it  go  before,  or  come  after,  it  is  never  out  of 
season.  If  it  have  no  coherence  with  that  which  goeth 
before,  nor  with  what  commeth  after ;  it  is  good  and 
commendable  in  it  selfe.  I  am  none  of  those  that 
thinke  a  good  Ryme,  to  make  a  good  Poeme;  let  him 
hardly  (if  so  he  please)  make  a  short  syllable  long,  it  is 
his  wit  and  matter :  if  the  invention  be  rare  and  good,  and 
no  great  judgement  have  cunningly  played  their  part. 
I  will  say  to  such  a  one;  he  is  a  good  Poet,  but  an  ill 
Versifier. 

181 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER   HOR.  i.  Sat.     Emunctce  naris,  durus  componere  versus. 

OfX?V '        1V'         UC1       A  man  whose  sense  could  finely  pierce,, 
V     .       m" ,  But  harsh  and  hard  to  make  a  verse. 

stitution    and 

education    of      Let  a  man    (saith    Horace)    make    his    worke    loose   all 
Children      seames,  measures,  and  joynts. 

58-  Tempora  certa  modbsque,  et  quod  prius  ordine  verbum  eat, 

Postering  facias,  preeponens  ultima  primis: 
62.  Invenias  etiam  disiecti  membra  Poetce. 

Set  times  and  moods,  make  you  the  first  word  last, 
The  last  word  first,  as  if  they  were  new  cast : 
Yet  find  th'  unjoynted  Poets  joints  stand  fast. 

He  shall  for  all  that,  nothing  gain-say  himselfe,  every 
piece  will  make  a  good  shew.  To  this  purpose  answered 
Menander  those  that  chid  him,  the  day  being  at  hand,  in 
which  he  had  promised  a  Comedy,  and  had  not  begun  the 
same, '  Tut-tut,1  said  he, '  it  is  alreadie  finished,  there  wanteth 
'  nothing  but  to  adde  the  verse  unto  it : '  for,  having  ranged 
and  cast  the  plot  in  his  mind,  he  made  small  accompt  of 
feet,  of  measures,  or  cadences  of  verses,  which  indeed  are  but 
of  small  import  in  regard  of  the  rest.  Since  great  Ronzarde 
and  learned  Bellay,  have  raised  our  French  Poesie  unto  that 
height  of  honour,  where  it  now  is :  I  see  not  one  of  these 
petty-ballad-makers,  or  prentise-dogrell  rymers,  that  doth 
not  bumbast  his  labours  with  high-swelling  and  heaven-dis- 
imbowelling  words,  and  that  doth  not  marshall  his  cadences 
SEN.  Epist.  xl.  verie  neere  as  they  doe.  Plus  sonat  quam  valet.  '  The 
6  sound  is  more  than  the  weight  or  worth.'  And  for  the 
vulgar  sort,  there  were  never  so  many  Poets,  and  so  few 
good  :  but  as  it  hath  been  easie  for  them  to  represent  their 
rymes,  so  come  they  far  short  in  imitating  the  rich  descrip 
tions  of  the  one,  and  rare  inventions  of  the  other.  But 
what  shall  he  doe,  if  he  be  urged  with  sophisticall  subtilties 
about  a  Sillogisme  ?  A  gammon  of  Bacon  makes  a  man 
drink,  drinking  quencheth  a  mans  thirst.  Ergo,  a  gammon 
of  bacon  quencheth  a  mans  thirst.  Let  him  mock  at  it,  it 
is  more  wittie  to  be  mockt  at,  than  to  be  answered.  Let 
him  borrow  this  pleasant  counter-craft  of  Aristippus ;  '  Why 
6  shall  I  unbind  that,  which  being  bound  doth  so  much 
'  trouble  me?1  Some  one  proposed  certaine  Logicall  quid 
dities  against  Cleanthes,  to  whom  Chrisippus  said  ;  use  such 
182 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

jugling  tricks  to  play  with  children,  and  divert  not  the  CHAPTER 
serious  thoughts  of  an  aged  man  to  such  idle  matters.     If       xxv  m 

such  foolish  wiles,  Contorta  et  aculeata  sophismata,  '  Intricate    9.    *he  m" A 

,       .         ,         |  .  .          ,  j       i*      »j_  •     i  strtution.   anci 

c  and  stinged  sopnismes,  must  perswade  a  lie,  it  is  dangerous;  education    of 

but  if  they  proove  void  of  any  effect,  and  move  him  but  to     Children 

laughter,  I  see  not  why  he  shall  beware  of  them.     Some  i  Cic.  Acad. 

there  are  so  foolish  that  will  go  a  quarter  of  a  mile  out  of  @u-  1V- 

the  way  to  hunt  after  a  quaint  new  word,  if  they  once  get 

in  chace  ;  Aut  qui  non  verba  rebus  aptant,  sed  res  extrmsecus 

arcessunt,  quibus   verba   conveniant.     '  Or   such   as   fit   not 

'  words  to  matter,  but  fetch  matter  from  abroad,  whereto 

4  words  be  fitted.1     And  another,  Qui  alicujus  verbi  decore  SEN.  Epist.  lix. 

placentis,  vocentur  ad  id  quod  non  proposuerunt  scribere. 

4  Who  are  allured  by  the  grace  of  some  pleasing  word,  to 

'  write   that   they   intended    not    to   write.1      I   doe   more 

willingly  winde  up  a  wittie  notable  sentence,  that  so  I  may 

sew  it  upon  me,  than  unwinde  my  thread  to  go  fetch  it. 

Contrariwise,  it  is  for  words  to  serve  and  wait  upon  the 

matter,  and  not  for  matter  to  attend  upon  words,  and  if  the 

French  tongue  cannot  reach  unto  it,  let  the  Gaskonie,  or 

any  other.     I  would  have  the  matters  to  surmount,  and  so 

fill  the  imagination  of  him  that  harkneth,  that  he  have  no 

remembrance  at  all  of  the  words.     It  is  a  naturall,  simple, 

and  unaffected  speech  that  I  love,  so  written  as  it  is  spoken, 

and  such   upon  the  paper,  as  it  is  in  the  mouth,  a  pithie, 

sinnowie,  full,  strong,  compendious   and    materiall   speech, 

not  so  delicate  and  affected  as  vehement  and  piercing. 

Hcec  demum  sapiet  dictio,  quceferiet.  Epitaph.   Luc. 

In  fine,,  that  word  is  wisely  fit,  6. 

Which  strikes  the  fence,  the  marke  doth  hit. 

Rather  difficult  than  tedious,  void  of  affection,  free,  loose 
and  bold,  that  every  member  of  it  seeme  to  make  a  bodie ; 
not  Pedanticall,  nor  Frier-like,  nor  Lawyer-like,  but  rather 
downe  right,  Souldier-like.  As  Suetonius  calleth  that  of 
lulius  Caesar,  which  I  see  no  reason  wherefore  he  calleth  it. 
I  have  sometimes  pleased  my  selfe  in  imitating  that  licen- 
ciousnesse  or  wanton  humour  of  our  youths,  in  wearing  of 
their  garments  ;  as  carelesly  to  let  their  cloaks  hang  downe 
over  one  shoulder;  to  weare  their  cloakes  scarfe  or  baw- 

183 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  drikewise,  and  their  stockings  loose  hanging  about  their  legs. 
xxv         It  represents  a  kind  of  disdainfull  fiercenesse  of  these  forraine 

Of  the  in-    embellishings,  and  neglect  carelesnesse  of  art :  But  I  com- 
stitution  and  i    •.  T_   •         •       i         i    •      ,  i  IP  * 

education    of  mend  it  more  being  imployed  in  the  course  and  forme  of 

Children      speech.     All  manner  of  affectation,  namely  in  the  livelinesse 
and  libertie  of  France,  is  unseemelv  in  a  Courtier.     And  in 
a  Monarchic  every  Gentleman  ought  to  addresse  himselfe 
unto  a  Courtiers  carriage.     Therefore  do  we  well  somewhat 
to  incline  to  a  native  and  carelesse  behaviour.     I  like  not  a 
contexture,  where  the  seames  and  pieces  may  be  scene :  As 
in  a  well  compact  bodie,  what  need  a  man  distinguish  and 
SEN.  Epist.  xl.  number  all  the  bones  and  veines  severally  ?     Quce  veritati 
m'  operam  dat  oratio,  incomposita  sit  et  simplex.     Quis  accurate 

loquitur,  nisi  qui  vult  putide  loqui  ?  '  The  speach  that 
c  intendeth  truth  must  be  plaine  and  unpollisht :  Who 
6  speaketh  elaborately,  but  he  that  meanes  to  speake  un- 
'  savouredly  ? '  That  eloquence  offereth  injurie  unto  things, 
which  altogether  drawes  us  to  observe  it.  As  in  apparell,  it 
is  a  signe  of  pusillanimitie  for  one  to  marke  himselfe,  in 
some  particular  and  unusuall  fashion  :  so  likewise  in  common 
speech,  for  one  to  hunt  after  new  phrases,  and  unaccustomed- 
quaint  words,  proceedeth  of  a  scholasticall  and  childish 
ambition.  Let  me  use  none  other  than  are  spoken  in  the 
hals  of  Paris.  Aristophanes  the  Gramarian  was  somewhat 
out  of  the  way,  when  he  reproved  Epicurus,  for  the  simplicitie 
of  his  words,  and  the  end  of  his  art  oratorie,  which  was 
onely  perspicuitie  in  speech.  The  imitation  of  speach,  by 
reason  of  the  facilitie  of  it,  followeth  presently  a  whole 
nation.  The  imitation  of  judging  and  inventing,  comes 
more  slow.  The  greater  number  of  Readers,  because  they 
have  found  one  selfe-same  kind  of  gowne,  suppose  most  falsly 
to  holde  one  like  bodie.  Outward  garments  and  cloakes 
may  be  borrowed,  but  never  the  sinews  and  strength  of  the 
bodie.  Most  of  those  that  converse  with  me,  speake  like 
unto  these  Essayes ;  but  I  know  not  whether  they  thinke 
alike.  The  Athenians  (as  Plato  averreth)  have  for  their 
part  great  care  to  be  fluent  and  eloquent  in  their  speech ; 
The  Lacedemonians  endevour  to  be  short  and  compendious ; 
And  those  of  Greet  labour  more  to  bee  plentifull  in  conceits, 
than  in  language.  And  these  are  the  best.  Zeno  was  wont 
184 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

to  say,  'That  he  had  two  sorts  of  disciples;  the  one  he  CHAPTER 
'  called  (j)i\o\6yov<;,  curious  to  learne  things,1  and  those  were  OfX^V . 
his  darlings,  the  other  he  termed  XOYO^XOU?,  who  respected  s^.u^0®  ^j 
nothing  more  than  the  language.  Yet  can  no  man  say,  but  education  of 
that  to  speake  well,  is  most  gracious  and  commendable,  but  Children 
not  so  excellent  as  some  make  it :  and  I  am  grieved  to  see 
how  we  imploy  most  part  of  our  time  about  that  onely.  I 
would  first  know  mine  owne  tongue  perfectly,  then  my 
neighbours  with  whom  I  have  most  commerce.  I  must  needs 
acknowledge,  that  the  Greeke  and  Latine  tongues,  are  great 
ornaments  in  a  Gentleman,  but  they  arc  purchased  at  over- 
high  a  rate.  Use  it  who  list,  I  will  tell  you  how  they  may 
be  gotten  better  cheape,  and  much  sooner  than  is  ordinarily 
used,  which  was  tried  in  my  selfe.  My  late  father,  having 
by  all  the  meanes  and  Industrie,  that  is  possible  for  man, 
sought  amongst  the  wisest,  and  men  of  best  understanding, 
to  find  a  most  exquisite  and  readie  way  of  teaching,  being 
advised  of  the  inconveniences  then  in  use  ;  was  given  to 
understand,  that  the  lingring  while,  arid  best  part  of  our 
youth,  that  we  imploy  in  learning  the  tongues,  which  cost 
them  nothing,  is  the  onely  cause  we  can  never  attaine  to  that 
absolute  perfection  of  skill  and  knowledge,  of  the  Greekes, 
and  Romanes.  I  doe  not  beleeve  that  to  be  the  onely  cause. 
But  so  it  is,  the  expedient  my  father  found  out,  was  this ; 
that  being  yet  at  nurse,  and  before  the  first  loosing  of  my 
tongue,  I  was  delivered  to  a  Germane  (who  died  since,  a  most 
excellent  Physitian  in  France)  he  being  then  altogether 
ignorant  of  the  French  tongue,  but  exquisitely  readie  and 
skilfull  in  the  Latine.  This  man,  whom  my  Father  had  sent 
for  of  purpose,  and  to  whom  he  gave  verie  great  entertain 
ment,  had  me  continually  in  his  armes,  and  was  mine  onely 
overseer.  There  were  also  joyned  unto  him  two  of  his 
countrimen,  but  not  so  learned ;  whose  charge  was  to  attend, 
and  now  and  then,  to  play  with  me  ;  and  all  these  together 
did  never  entertaine  me  with  other  than  the  Latine  tongue. 
As  for  others  of  his  houshold,  it  was  an  inviolable  rule,  that 
neither  himselfe,  nor  my  mother,  nor  man,  nor  maid-servant, 
were  suffered  to  speake  one  word  in  my  companie,  except 
such  Latine  words,  as  every  one  had  learned  to  chat  and 
prattle  with  me.  It  were  strange  to  tell  how  every  one  in 
Y  185 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  house  profited   therein.     My  Father  and   my  Mother 
XXV        learned  so  much  Latine,  that  for  a  need  they  could  under- 

Of  the  m-    stancl  jt,  when  they  heard  it  spoken,  even  so  did  all  the 
stitution   and  ,         ,     ,  \  J  T  r  j 

education    of  houshold  servants,  namely  such  as  were  neerest  and  most 

Children  about  me.  To  be  short,  we  were  all  so  Latinized,  that 
the  townes  round  about  us  had  their  share  of  it ;  insomuch 
as  even  at  this  day,  many  Latine  names  both  of  workmen 
and  of  their  tooles,  are  yet  in  use  among  them.  And  as  for 
my  selfe,  I  was  about  six  yeares  old,  and  could  understand 
no  more  French  or  Perigordine,  than  Arabike,  and  that 
without  art,  without  bookes,  rules,  or  grammer,  without 
whipping  or  whining.  I  had  gotten  as  pure  a  Latine  tongue 
as  my  Master  could  speake  ;  the  rather  because  I  could 
neither  mingle  or  confound  the  same  with  other  tongues. 
If  for  an  Essay  they  would  give  me  a  Theme,  whereas  the 
fashion  in  Colleges  is,  to  give  it  in  French,  I  had  it  in 
bad  Latine,  to  reduce  the  same  into  good.  And  Nicholas 
Grucchi,  who  hath  written,  De  comitiis  Romanorum,  William 
Guerenti,  who  hath  commented  Aristotele:  Georg  Buchanan, 
that  famous  Scottish  Poet,  and  Marke-Antonie  Muret,  whom 
(while  he  lived)  both  France  and  Italic  to  this  day,  acknow 
ledge  to  have  been  the  best  Orator :  all  which  have  beene  my 
familiar  tutors,  have  often  told  me,  that  in  mine  infancie  I 
had  the  Latine  tongue  so  readie  and  so  perfect,  that  them 
selves  feared  to  take  me  in  hand.  And  Buchanan,  who 
afterward  I  saw  attending  on  the  Marshall  of  Brissacke,  told 
me,  he  was  about  to  write  a  treatise  of  the  institution  of 
children,  and  that  he  tooke  the  model  and  pat  tern  e  from 
mine :  for,  at  that  time  he  had  the  charge  and  bringing  up 
of  the  young  Earle  of  Brissack,  whom  since  we  have  scene 
prove  so  worthy  and  so  valiant  a  Captaine.  As  for  the 
Greeke,  wherein  I  have  but  small  understanding,  my  father 
purposed  to  make  me  learne  it  by  art ;  But  by  new  and  un 
customed  meanes,  that  is,  by  way  of  recreation  and  exercise. 
We  did  tosse  our  declinations,  and  conjugations  to  and  fro, 
as  they  doe,  who  by  way  of  a  certaine  game  at  tables  learne 
both  Arithmetike  and  Geometric.  For,  amongst  other 
things  he  had  especially  beene  perswaded  to  make  me  taste 
and  apprehend  the  fruits  of  dutie  and  science  by  an  unforced 
kinde  of  will,  and  of  mine  ownc  choice ;  and  without  any 
186 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

compulsion  or  rigor  to  bring  me  up  in  all  mildnesse  and  CHAPTER 
libertie :  yea  with  such  kinde  of  superstition,  that,  whereas        XXV 

some  are  of  opinion,  that  suddenly  to  awaken  young;  children,          *      m~, 

j         .,          r,         ?,  £,  i    <»  •   V7.    .i8  istitution   and 

and  as  it  were  by  violence  to  startle  and  fright  them  out  of  education    of 

their  dead  sleepe  in  a  morning  (wherein  they  are  more  Children 
heavie  and  deeper  plunged  than  we)  doth  greatly  trouble 
and  distemper  their  braines,  he  would  every  morning  cause 
me  to  be  awakened  by  the  sound  of  some  instrument ;  and  I 
was  never  without  a  servant ;  Who  to  that  purpose  attended 
upon  me.  This  example  may  serve  to  judge  of  the  rest;  as 
also  to  commend  the  judgement  and  tender  affection  of  so 
carefull  and  loving  a  father:  who  is  not  to  be  blamed, 
though  hee  reaped  not  the  fruits  answerable  to  his  exquisite 
toyle,  and  painefull  manuring.  Two  things  hindered  the 
same  ;  first  the  barrennesse  and  unfit  soyle :  for  howbeit  I 
were  of  a  sound  and  strong  constitution,  and  of  a  tractable 
and  yeelding  condition,  yet  was  I  so  heavie,  so  sluggish,  and 
so  dull,  that  I  could  not  be  rouzed  (yea  were  it  to  goe  to 
play)  from  out  mine  idle  drowzinesse.  What  I  saw,  I  saw  it 
perfectly ;  and  under  this  heavy,  and  as  it  were  Lethe-com 
plexion  did  I  breed  bardie  imaginations,  and  opinions  farre 
above  my  yeares.  My  spirit  was  very  slow,  and  would  goe 
no  further  than  it  was  led  by  others ;  my  apprehension 
blockish,  my  invention  poore  ;  and  besides,  I  had  a  marvelous 
defect  in  my  weake  memorie :  it  is  therefore  no  wonder,  if 
my  father  could  never  bring  me  to  any  perfection.  Secondly, 
as  those  that  in  some  dangerous  sicknesse,  moved  with  a  kind 
of  hope-full  and  greedie  desire  of  perfect  health  againe,  give 
eare  to  every  Leach  or  Emperike,  and  follow  all  counsels,  the 
good  man  being  exceedingly  fearefull  to  commit  any  over 
sight,  in  a  matter  he  tooke  so  to  heart,  suffered  himselfe  at 
last  to  be  led  away  by  the  common  opinion,  which  like  unto 
the  Cranes,  followeth  ever  those  that  go  before,  and  yeelded 
to  custome :  Having  those  no  longer  about  him,  that  had 
given  him  his  first  directions,  and  which  they  had  brought 
out  of  Italic.  Being  but  six  yeares  old  I  was  sent  to  the 
College  of  Guienne,  then  most  flourishing  and  reputed  the 
best  in  France,  where  it  is  impossible  to  adde  any  thing  to 
the  great^care  he  had,  both  to  chuse  the  best  and  most  suffi 
cient  Masters,  that  could  be  found,  to  reade  unto  me,  as  also 

187 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  for   all   other   circumstances   partaining   to   my  education; 

XXV        wherein  contrary  to  usuall  customes  of  Colleges,  he  observed 

Of  the  in-    many  particular  rules.     But  so  it  is,  it  was  ever  a  College. 

education^of  -^v  Latin  tongue  was  forthwith  corrupted,  whereof  by  reason 
Children  of  discontinuance,  I  afterward  lost  all  manner  of  use  :  which 
new  kind  of  institution,  stood  me  in  no  other  stead,  but  that 
at  my  first  admittance,  it  made  me  to  over-skip  some  of  the 
lower  formes,  and  to  be  placed  in  the  highest.  For  at 
thirteene  yeares  of  age,  that  I  left  the  College,  I  had  read 
over  the  whole  course  of  Philosophic  (as  they  call  it)  but 
with  so  small  profit,  that  I  can  now  make  no  account  of  it. 
The  first  taste  or  feeling  I  had  of  bookes,  was  of  the  pleasure 
I  tooke  in  reading  the  fables  of  Ovids  Met  amor phosies ;  for, 
being  but  seven  or  eight  yeares  old,  I  would  steale  and 
sequester  my  selfe  from  all  other  delights,  only  to  reade 
them :  Forsomuch  as  the  tongue  wherein  they  were  written 
was  to  me  naturall ;  and  it  was  the  easiest  booke  I  knew, 
and  by  reason  of  the  matter  therein  contained  most  agree 
ing  with  my  young  age.  For  of  King  Arthur,  of  Lancelot 
du  Lake,  of  Amadis,  of  Huon  of  Burdeaux,  and  such  idle 
time  consuming,  and  wit-besotting  trash  of  bookes  wherein 
youth  doth  commonly  ammuse  it  selfe,  I  was  not  so  much  as 
acquainted  with  their  names,  and  to  this  day  know  not  their 
bodies,  nor  what  they  containe :  So  exact  was  my  discipline. 
Whereby  I  became  more  carelesse  to  studie  my  other  pre 
script  lessons.  And  well  did  it  fall  out  for  my  purpose,  that 
I  had  to  deale  with  a  very  discreet  Master,  who  out  of  his 
judgement  could  with  such  dexteritie  winke  at,  and  second 
my  untowardlinesse,  and  such  other  faults  that  were  in  me. 
For  by  that  meanes,  I  read  over  Virgils  JEneados,  Terence, 
Plautus,  and  other  Italian  Comedies,  allured  thereunto  by 
the  pleasantnesse  of  their  severall  subjects  :  Had  be  beene  so 
foolishly-severe,  or  so  severely  froward  as  to  crosse  this 
course  of  mine,  I  thinke  verily  I  had  never  brought  any 
thing  from  the  College,  but  the  hate  and  contempt  of 
Bookes,  as  doth  the  greatest  part  of  our  Nobilitie.  Such 
was  his  discretion,  and  so  warily  did  he  behave  himselfe, 
that  he  saw  and  would  not  see  :  hee  would  foster  and  increase 
my  longing :  suffering  me  but  by  stealth,  and  by  snatches  to 
glut  my  selfe  with  those  Bookes ;  holding  ever  a  gentle  hand 
188 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

over  me,  concerning  other  regular  studies.     For,  the  chiefest  CHAPTER 
thing  my  father  required  at  their  hands  (unto  whose  charge    nf^?^. 
he   had   committed  me)  was   a    kinde  of  well  conditioned  ^tutton  and 
mildenesse,  and  facilitie  of  complexion.     And,  to  say  truth,  education    of 
mine  had  no  other  fault,  but  a  certaine  dull  languishing,  and     Children 
heavie  slothfulnesse.     The  danger  was  not,  I  should  doe  ill, 
but  that  I  should  doe  nothing. 

No  man  did  ever  suspect,  I  would  prove  a  bad,  but  an 
unprofitable  man :  foreseeing  in  me  rather  a  kind  of  idle- 
nesse,  than  a  voluntary  craftinesse.  I  am  not  so  selfe- 
conceited  but  I  perceive  what  hath  followed.  The  com 
plaints  that  are  daily  buzzed  in  mine  eares  are  these ;  that  I 
am  idle,  cold,  and  negligent  in  offices  of  friendship,  and 
dutie  to  my  parents,  and  kinsfolkes ;  and  touching  publike 
offices,  that  I  am  over  singular  and  disdainfull.  And  those 
that  are  most  injurious  cannot  aske,  wherefore  I  have  taken, 
and  why  I  have  not  paied  ?  but  may  rather  demand,  why 
I  doe  not  quit,  and  wherefore  I  doe  not  give  ?  I  would  take 
it  as  a  favour,  they  should  wish  such  effects  of  supereroga 
tion  in  me.  But  they  are  unjust  and  over  partiall,  that  will 
goe  about  to  exact  that  from  me,  which  I  owe  not,  with 
more  rigor  than  they  will  exact  from  themselves  that  which 
they  owe ;  wherein  if  they  condemne  me,  they  utterly  cancell 
both  the  gratifying  of  the  action,  and  the  gratitude,  which 
thereby  would  be  due  to  me.  Whereas  the  active  well  doing 
should  be  of  more  consequence,  proceeding  from  my  hand, 
in  regard  I  have  no  passive  at  all.  Wherefore  I  may  so 
much  the  more  freely  dispose  of  my  fortune,  by  how  much 
more  it  is  mine,  and  of  my  selfe  that  am  most  mine  owne. 
Notwithstanding,  if  I  were  a  great  blazoner  of  mine  owne 
actions,  I  might  peradventure  barre  such  reproches,  and 
justly  upbraid  some,  that  they  are  not  so  much  offended, 
because  I  doe  not  enough,  as  for  that  I  may,  and  it  lies  in 
my  power  to  doe  much  more  than  I  doe.  Yet  my  minde 
ceased  not  at  the  same  time  to  have  peculiar  unto  it  selfe 
well  setled  motions,  true  and  open  judgements  concerning 
the  objects  which  it  knew;  which  alone,  and  without  any 
helpe  or  communication  it  would  digest.  And  amongst 
other  things  I  verily  beleeve,  it  would  have  proved  altogether 
incapable  and  unfit  to  yeeld  unto  force,  or  stoope  unto 

189 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  violence.     Shall  I  account  or  relate  this  qualitie  of  my  in- 
XXV        fancie,  which  was,  a  kinde  of  boldnesse  in  my  lookes,  and 

Of  the  m-    gentle  softnesse  in  my  voice,  and  affabilitie  in  my  gestures, 
stitution   and  &    j       j  -,  •     •          J e        •  i/?    .      .1 

education    of  anc*  a  dextentic  in  conforming  my  selre  to  the  parts  I  under- 

Children      tooke  ?  for  before  the  age  of  the 

VIRG.  Buc.  Alter  ab  undecimo  turn  me  vix  ceperat  annus: 

Eel.  viii.  39.  ITT/ 

Yeares  had  1  (to  make  even) 

Scarse  two  above  eleven. 

I  have  under-gone  and  represented  the  chiefest  parts  in  the 
Latin  Tragedies  of  Buchanan,  Guerenti,  and  of  Muret ; 
which  in  great  state  were  acted  and  plaid  in  our  College  of 
Guienne  :  wherein  Andreas  Goveanus  our  Rector  principall ; 
who  as  in  all  other  parts  belonging  to  his  charge,  was  with 
out  comparison  the  chiefest  Rector  of  France,  and  my  selfe 
(without  ostentation  be  it  spoken)  was  reputed,  if  not  a 
chiefe  master,  yet  a  principall  Actor  in  them.  It  is  an 
exercise  I  rather  commend  than  disalow  in  young  Gentlemen : 
and  have  seene  some  of  our  Princes  (in  imitation  of  some  of 
former  ages)  both  commendably  and  honestly,  in  their  proper 
persons  act  and  play  some  parts  in  Tragedies.  It  hath  here 
tofore  been  esteemed  a  lawful!  exercise,  and  a  tolerable  pro- 
Liv.  dec.  iii.  4.  fession  in  men  of  honor,  namely  in  Greece.  Aristoni  tragico 
actori  rem  aperlt :  liuic  et  genus  etfortuna  honesta  erant :  nee 
ars,  quia  niliil  tale  apud  Grcccos  pudori  est,  ea  deformabat. 
'  He  imparts  the  matter  to  Ariston  a  Player  of  tragedies, 
6  whose  progenie  and  fortune  were  both  honest ;  nor  did  his 
'  profession  disgrace  them,  because  no  such  matter  is  a  dis- 
'  paragement  amongst  the  Grascians." 

And  I  have  ever  accused  them  of  impertinencie,  that  con- 
demne  and  disalow  such  kindes  of  recreations,  and  blamed 
those  of  injustice,  that  refuse  good  and  honest  Comedians, 
or  (as  we  call  them)  Players,  to  enter  our  good  townes,  and 
grudge  the  common  people  such  publike  sports.  Politike 
and  wel  ordered  commonwealths  endevor  rather  carefully  to 
unite  and  assemble  their  Citizens  together;  as  in  serious 
offices  of  devotion,  so  in  honest  exercises  of  recreation. 
Common  societie  and  loving  friendship  is  thereby  cherished 
and  increased.  And  besides,  they  cannot  have  more  formall 
and  regular  pastimes  allowed  them,  than  such  as  are  acted 

190 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

and  represented  in  open  view  of  all,  and  in  the  presence  of  CHAPTER 
the  magistrates  themselves :  And  if  I  might  beare  sway,  I    OfX?V. 
would  thinke  it  reasonable,  thdt  Princes  should  sometimes,  at  B^^®  ^ 
their  proper  charges,  gratifie  the  common  people  with  them,  education    Of 
as  an  argument  of  a  fatherly  affection,  and  loving  goodnesse     Children 
towards  them  :  and  that  in  populous  and  frequented  cities, 
there  should  be  Theatres  and    places    appointed   for   such 
spectacles  ;  as  a  diverting  of  worse  inconveniences,  and  secret 
actions.     But  to  come  to  my  intended  purpose,  there  is  no 
better  way  than  to  allure  the  affection,  and  to  entice  the 
appetite :  otherwise  a  man  shall  breed  but  asses  laden  with 
Bookes.    With  jerkes  of  rods  they  have  their  satchels  full 
of  learning  given  them  to  keepe.     Which  to  doe  well, 
one  must  not  only  harbor  in  himselfe,  but  wed 
and  mary  the  same  with  his  minde. 


THE     TWENTY-SIXTH     CHAPTER 

It  is  follie  to  referre  Truth  or  Falshood  to 
our  sufficiencie. 

T  is  not  peradventure  without  reason,  that 
we  ascribe  the  facilitie  of  beleeving  and 
easines  of  perswasion,  unto  simplicitie  and 
ignorance  :  For  me  seemeth  to  have  learnt 
heretofore,  that  beliefe  was,  as  it  were  an 
impression  conceived  in  our  minde,  and 
according  as  the  same  was  found  either 
more  soft,  or  of  lesse  resistance,  it  was 
easier  to  imprint  any  thing  therein.  Vt  necesse  est  lancem  in  GIG.  A  cad.  QK. 
libra  ponderibus  impositls  deprimi :  sic  animum  perspicuis  *v- 
cedere.  'As  it  is  necessarie  a  scale  must  goe  downe  the 
4  ballance  when  weights  are  put  into  it,  so  must  a  minde  yeeld 
'  to  things  that  are  manifest.1  Forasmuch  therefore,  as  the 
minde  being  most  emptie  and  without  counterpoize,  so  much 
the  more  easily  doth  it  yeeld  under  the  burthen  of  the  first 
perswasion.  And  that's  the  reason  why  children,  those  of 
the  common  sort,  women,  and  sickefolks,  are  so  subject  to  be 
mis-led,  and  so  easie  to  swallow  gudgeons.  Yet  on  the 

191 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  other  side  it  is  a  sottish  presumption  to  disdaine  and  con- 
XXVI        demne  that  for  false,  which  unto  us  seemeth  to  beare  no 
It  is  lollie  to  s\iew  of  likelihood  or  truth  :  which  is  an  ordinarie  fault  in 
or     Falshood  those  who  perswade  themselves  to  be  of  more  sufficiency  than 
to  our  suffi-    the  vulgar  sort.     So  was  I  sometimes  wont  to  doe,  and  if 
ciencie       I  heard  any  body  speake,  either  of  ghosts  walking,  of  fore 
telling  future  things,  of  enchantments,  of  witchcrafts,  or  any 
other  thing  reported,  which  I  could  not  well  conceive,  or  that 
was  beyond  my  reach. 

HOR.  ii.  Ep.  ii.  Somnia,  terrores  magicos,  miracula,  sagas, 

208.  Nocturnos  lemures,  portentaque  Thessali. 

Ureames,  magike  terrors,  witches,  uncouth-wonders, 
Night-walking1  sprites,  Thessalian  conjur'd-thunders. 

I  could  not  but  feele  a  kinde  of  compassion  to  see  the 
poore  and  seely  people  abused  with  such  follies.  And  now 
I  perceive,  that  I  was  as  much  to  be  moaned  myselfe  :  Not 
that  experience  hath  since  made  me  to  dicerne  any  thing 
beyond  my  former  opinions :  yet  was  not  my  curiositie  the 
cause  of  it,  but  reason  hath  taught  me,  that  so  resolutely  to 
condemne  a  thing  for  false,  and  impossible,  is  to  assume  unto 
himselfe  the  advantage,  to  have  the  bounds  and  limits  of 
Gods  will,  and  of  the  power  of  our  common  mother  Nature 
tied  to  his  sleeve :  And  that  there  is  no  greater  folly  in  the 
world,  than  to  reduce  them  to  the  measure  of  our  capacitie, 
and  bounds  of  our  sufficiencie.  If  we  terme  those  things 
monsters  or  miracles  to  which  our  reason  cannot  attaine,  how 
many  such  doe  daily  present  themselves  unto  our  sight  ?  Let 
us  consider  through  what  clouds,  and  how  blinde-fold  we  are 
led  to  the  knowledge  of  most  things,  that  passe  our  hands  : 
verily  we  shall  finde,  it  is  rather  custome,  than  science  that 
removeth  the  strangenesse  of  them  from  us : 

LUCR.  ii.  —jam  nemofessus  saturusque  videndi, 

Suspicere  in  coeli  dignatur  lucida  templa. 

Now  no  man  tir'd  with  glut  of  contemplation, 
Deignes  to  have  heav'ns  bright  Church  in  admiration. 

And  that  those  things,  were  they  newly  presented  unto 
us,  wee  should  doubtlesse  deeme  them,  as  much,  or  more 
unlikely,  and  incredible,  than  any  other. 

192 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

— sinunc  primum  mortalibus  adsint  CHAPTER 

Eao  improviso,  ceu  sint  objecta,  repente,  XXVI 

Nil  magis  his  rebus  poterat  mirabile  did,  It  is  follie  to 

Aut  minus  ante  quod  auderentfore  credere  gentes.  referre  Truth 

If  now  first  on  a  sudden  they  were  here  or     Falshood 

Mongst  mortall  men,  object  to  eie  or  eare,  to  our  suffi- 

Nothing,  than  these  things,  would  more  wondrous  bee,  ciencie 

Or  that,  men  durst  lesse  thinke,  ever  to  see.  LUCR.  ii.  1042. 

He  who  had  never  scene  a  river  before,  the  first  he  saw,  he 
thought  it  to  be  the  Ocean :  and  things  that  are  the  greatest 
in  our  knowledge,  we  judge  them  to  be  the  extremest  that 
nature  worketh  in  that  kinde.  vi.  671. 

Scilicet  etfluvius  qui  non  est  maximus,  ei  est 
Qui  non  ante  aliquem  majorem  vidit,  et  ingens 
Arbor  homoque  videtur,  et  omnia  de  genere  omni 
Maxima  qua  vidit  quisque,  hcec  ingentia  fingit. 

A  streame  none  of  the  greatest,  may  so  seeme 
To  him,  that  never  saw  a  greater  streame. 
Trees,  men,  seeme  huge,  and  all  things  of  all  sorts, 
The  greatest  one  hath  scene,  he  huge  reports. 

Coiisuetudine  oculorum  assuescunt  animi,  neque  admirantur,  Cic.  Nat,  DC. 
neque  requirunt  rationes  earum  rerum,  quas  semper  vident.  "• 
'  Mindes  are  acquainted  by  custome  of  their  eies,  nor  do  they 
'  admire,  or  enquire  the  reason  of  those  things  which  they 
4  continually  behold.'  The  novelty  of  things  doth  more 
incite  us  to  search  out  the  causes,  than  their  greatnesse  :  we 
must  judge  of  this  infinit  power  of  nature,  with  more 
reverence,  and  with  more  acknowledgement  of  our  owne 
ignorance  and  weaknesse.  How  many  things  of  small  likeli 
hood  are  there,  witnessed  by  men,  worthie  of  credit,  whereof 
if  we  cannot  be  perswaded,  we  should  at  least  leave  them  in 
suspence  ?  For,  to  deeme  them  impossible,  is  by  rash 
presumption  to  presume  and  know  how  farre  possibilitie 
reacheth.  If  a  man  did  well  understand,  what  difference 
there  is  betweene  impossibilitie,  and  that  which  is  unwonted 
and  betweene  that  which  is  against  the  course  of  nature,  and 
the  common  opinion  of  men,  in  not  beleeving  rashly,  and  in 
not  disbeleeving  easily;  the  rule  of  'Nothing  too-much,1 
commanded  by  Chilon,  should  be  observed.  When  we  finde 
in  Froysard,  that  the  Earl  of  Foix,  (being  in  Bearne)  had 
knowledge  of  the  defeature  at  Inberoth,  of  King  John  of 

Z  193 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Castile,  the  morrow  next  it  hapned,  and  the  meanes  he 
XXVI  alleageth  for  it,  a  man  may  well  laugh  at  it :  And  of  that 
referre  Truth  wn^c^  our  Annales  report,  that  Pope  Honorius,  the  very 
or  Falshood same  day  that  King  Philip  Augustus  died  at  Mantes, 
to  our  suffi-  caused  his  publike  funerals  to  be  solemnized,  and  com- 
ciencie  manded  them  to  be  celebrated  throughout  all  Italic.  For, 
the  authoritie  of  the  witnesses  hath  peradventure  no  suffi 
cient  warrant  to  restraine  us.  But  what  if  Plutarke,  besides 
divers  examples  which  he  alleageth  of  antiquitie,  saith  to 
have  certainly  knowne,  that  in  'Domitians  time,  the  newes 
'  of  the  battle  lost  by  Antonius  in  Germany  many  daies 
'journeies  thence,  was  published  at  Rome,  and  divulged 
'  through  the  world,  the  very  same  day  it  succeeded:1  And 
if  Caesar  holds,  that  it  hath  many  times  happened,  that 
report  hath  foregone  the  accident :  Shall  we  not  say,  that 
those  simple  people  have  suffered  themselves  to  be  cousened 
and  seduced  by  the  vulgar  sort,  because  they  were  not  as 
cleare-sighted  as  we  ?  Is  there  any  thing  more  daintie,  more 
unspotted,  and  more  lively  than  Plinies  judgement,  when 
soever  it  pleaseth  him  to  make  shew  of  it  ?  Is  there  any 
farther  from  vanitie  ?  I  omit  the  excellencie  of  his  learning 
and  knowledge,  whereof  I  make  but  small  reckoning :  in 
which  of  those  two  parts  doe  we  exceed  him  ?  Yet  there  is 
no  scholler  so  meanely  learned,  but  will  convince  him  of 
lying,  and  read  a  lecture  of  contradiction  against  him  upon 
the  progresse  of  natures  works.  When  wee  read  in  Bouchet 
the  myracles  wrought  by  the  reliques  of  Saint  Hillarie,  his 
credit  is  not  sufficient  to  barre  us  the  libertie  of  contradict 
ing  him  :  yet  at  random  to  condemne  all  such  like  histories, 
seemeth  to  me  a  notable  impudencie.  That  famous  man 
Saint  Augustine  witnesseth  to  have  seene  a  blinde  childe  to 
recover  his  sight,  over  the  reliques  of  Saint  Gervase  and 
Protaise  at  Milane  :  and  a  woman  at  Carthage,  to  have  beene 
cured  of  a  canker,  by  the  signe  of  the  holy  Crosse,  which 
a  woman  newly  baptized  made  unto  her :  and  Hesperius 
a  familiar  friend  of  his,  to  have  expelled  certaine  spirits, 
that  molested  his  house,  with  a  little  of  the  earth  of  our 
Saviours  sepulcher ;  which  earth  being  afterwards  transported 
into  a  Church,  a  Paralitike  man  was  immediately  therewith 
cured  :  and  a  woman  going  in  procession,  having  as  she  past 
194 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

by  with  a  nose-gaie  toucht  the  case  wherein  Saint  Stevens  CHAPTER 
bones  were,  and  with  the  same  afterward  rubbed  her  eies,  she  .xxv* 
recovered  her  sight,  which  long  before  she  had  utterly  lost :  fls  i16  *? 
and  divers  other  examples,  where  he  affirmeth  to  have  beene  or  Falshood 
an  assistant  himselfe.  What  shal  we  accuse  him  of,  and  two  to  our  suffi- 
other  holy  Bishops,  Aurelius  and  Maximinus,  whom  he  ciencie 
calleth  for  his  witnesses  ?  Shal  it  be  of  ignorance,  of 
simplicity,  of  malice,  of  facility,  or  of  imposture  ?  Is  any 
man  living  so  impudent,  that  thinks  he  may  be  compared  to 
them,  whether  it  be  in  vertue  or  piety,  in  knowledge  or 
judgement,  in  wisdome  or  sufficiency?  Qui  ut  rationem  Cic.  Div.  i. 
nullam  qfferrent,  ipsa  authoritate  me  frangerent :  '  Who 
'  though  they  alleaged  no  reason,  yet  might  subdue  me  with 
'  their  very  authoritie.'  It  is  a  dangerous  fond  hardinesse, 
and  of  consequence,  besides  the  absurd  temerity  it  drawes 
with  it,  to  despise  what  we  conceive  not.  For,  after  that 
according  to  your  best  understanding,  you  have  established 
the  limits  of  truth,  and  bounds  of  falshood,  and  that  it  is 
found,  you  must  necessarily  beleeve  things,  wherein  is  more 
strangenesse,  than  in  those  you  deny;  you  have  alreadie 
bound  your  selfe  to  abandon  them.  Now  that  which  me 
thinkes  brings  as  much  disorder  in  our  consciences,  namely 
in  these  troubles  of  religion  wherein  we  are,  is  the  dispensa 
tion  Catholikes  make  of  their  beliefe.  They  suppose  to  shew 
themselves  very  moderate  and  skilfull,  when  they  yeeld  their 
adversaries  any  of  those  articles  now  in  question.  But 
besides  that,  they  perceive  not  what  an  advantage  it  is  for 
him  that  chargeth  you,  if  you  but  once  begin  to  yeeld  and 
give  them  ground ;  and  how  much  that  encorageth  him  to 
pursue  his  point :  those  articles  which  they  chuse  for  the 
lightest,  are  oftentimes  most  important.  Either  a  man 
must  wholy  submit  himselfe  to  the  authoritie  of  our 
Ecclesiasticall  policie,  or  altogether  dispence  himselfe  from 
it :  It  is  not  for  us  to  determine  what  part  of  obedience  we 
owe  unto  it.  And  moreover,  I  may  say  it,  because  I  have 
made  triall  of  it,  having  sometimes  used  this  libertie  of  my 
choice,  and  particular  election,  not  regarding  certaine  points 
of  the  observance  of  our  Church,  which  seeme  to  beare  a  face, 
either  more  vaine,  or  more  strange ;  comming  to  communicate 
them  with  wise  men,  I  have  found  that  those  things  have  a 

195 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  most  solid  and  steadie  foundation,  and  that  it  is  but  foolish- 
XXVI        nesse  and  ignorance,  makes  us  receive  them  with  lesse  respect 
It  is  follie  to  an(j  reverence  than  the  rest.     Why  remember  we  not,  what, 
or  ^Falshood  an(^  now  manv  contradictions  we  finde  and  feele  even  in  our 
to  our  suffi-  owne  judgement  ?     How  many  things  served  us  but  yester- 
ciencie       day  as  articles  of  faith,  which  to  day  we  deeme  but  fables  ? 
Glory   and   curiositie    are   the   scourges   of   our   soules. 
The  latter  induceth  us  to  have  an  oare  in  every  ship, 
and  the  former  forbids   us  to  leave  any  thing 
unresolved  or  undecided. 


HOR.  Art. 
Poet.  4. 


THE    TWENTY-SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Friendship. 


ONSIDERING  the  proceeding  of  a  Painters 
worke  I  have:  a  desire  hath  possessed 
mee  to  imitate  him :  He  maketh  choice 
of  the  most  convenient  place  and  middle 
of  everie  wall,  there  to  place  a  picture, 
laboured  with  all  his  skill  and  sufficiencie ; 
and  all  void  places  about  it  he  filleth  up 
with  antike  Boscage  or  Crotesko  works ; 
which  are  fantasticall  pictures,  having  no  grace,  but  in 
the  variety  and  strangenesse  of  them.  And  what  are  these 
my  compositions  in  truth,  other  than  antike  workes,  and 
monstrous  bodies,  patched  and  hudled  up  together  of  divers 
members,  without  any  certaine  or  well  ordered  figure,  having 
neither  order,  dependencie,  or  proportion,  but  casuall  and 
framed  by  chance  ? 

Desinit  in  piscem  mutter  formosa  super  ne. 

A  woman  faire  for  parts  superior, 
Ends  in  a  fish  for  parts  inferior. 

Touching  this  second  point  I  goe  as  farre  as  my  Painter, 
but  for  the  other  and  better  part  I  am  farre  behinde :  for 
my  sufficiency  reacheth  not  so  farre,  as  that  I  dare  under 
take,  a  rich,  a  polished,  and  according  to  true  skill,  and  art- 
like  table.  I  have  advised  my  selfe  to  borrow  one  of  Steven 

196 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

de  la  Boitie,  who  with  this  kinde  of  worke  shall  honour  all  the  CHAPTER 
world.  It  is  a  discourse  he  entitled,  '  Voluntary  Servitude,1  XXVII 
but  those  who  have  not  knowne  him,  have  since  very  properly  ^  f  friendship 
rebaptized  the  same,  '  The  against  one.1  In  his  first  youth 
he  writ,  by  way  of  Essaie,  in  honour  of  libertie  against 
Tyrants.  It  hath  long  since  beene  dispersed  amongst  men 
of  understanding,  not  without  great  and  well  deserved  com 
mendations  :  for  it  is  full  of  wit,  and  containeth  as  much 
learning  as  may  be :  yet  doth  it  differ  much  from  the  best 
he  can  do.  And  if  in  the  age  I  knew  him  in,  he  would  have 
undergone  my  dessigne,  to  set  his  fantasies  downe  in  writing, 
we  should  doubtlesse  see  many  rare  things,  and  which  would 
very  neerely  approch  the  honour  of  antiquity :  for  especially 
touching  that  part  of  natures  gifts,  I  know  none  may  be 
compared  to  him.  But  it  was  not  long  of  him,  that  ever 
this  Treatise  came  to  mans  view,  and  I  beleeve  he  never  saw 
it  since  it  first  escaped  his  hands :  with  certaine  other  notes 
concerning  the  edict  of  Januarie,  famous  by  reason  of  our 
intestine  warre,  which  haply  may  in  other  places  finde  their 
deserved  praise.  It  is  all  I  could  ever  recover  of  his  reliques 
(whom  when  death  seized,  he  by  his  last  will  and  testament, 
left  with  so  kinde  remembrance,  heire  and  executor  of  his 
librarie  and  writings)  besides  the  little  booke,  I  since  caused 
to  be  published :  To  which  his  pamphlet  I  am  particularly 
most  bounden,  forsomuch  as  it  was  the  instrumentall  meane 
of  our  first  acquaintance.  For  it  was  shewed  me  long  time 
before  I  saw  him ;  and  gave  me  the  first  knowledge  of  his 
name,  addressing,  and  thus  nourishing  that  unspotted  friend 
ship,  which  we  (so  long  as  it  pleased  God)  have  so  sincerely, 
so  entire  and  inviolably  maintained  betweene  us,  that  truly 
a  man  shall  not  commonly  heare  of  the  like ;  and  amongst  our 
moderne  men  no  signe  of  any  such  is  scene.  So  many  parts 
are  required  to  the  erecting  of  such  a  one,  that  it  may  be 
counted  a  wonder,  if  fortune  once  in  three  ages  contract  the 
like.  There  is  nothing  to  which  Nature  hath  more  addressed 
us  than  to  societie.  And  Aristotle  saith,  '  that  perfect  Law- 
'  givers  have  had  more  regardfull  care  of  friendship  than  of 
'justice.1  And  the  utmost  drift  of  it's  perfection  is  this. 
For  generally,  all  those  amities  which  are  forged  and  nourished 
by  voluptuousnesse  or  profit,  publike  or  private  need,  are 

197 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  thereby  so  much  the  lesse  faire  and  generous,  and  so  much 
XXVII  the  lesse  true  amities,  in  that  they  intermeddle  other  causes, 
f  Friendship  scope?  and  fruit  with  friendship,  than  it  selfe  alone  :  Nor  doe 
those  foure  ancient  kindes  of  friendships,  Naturall,  sociall, 
hospitable,  and  venerian,  either  particularly  or  conjointly 
beseeme  the  same.  That  from  children  to  parents  may 
rather  be  termed  respect :  Friendship  is  nourished  by  com 
munication,  which  by  reason  of  the  over-great  disparitie 
cannot  bee  found  in  them,  and  would  happly  offend  the 
duties  of  nature :  for  neither  all  the  secret  thoughts  of 
parents  can  be  communicated  unto  children,  lest  it  might 
engender  an  unbeseeming  familiaritie  betweene  them,  nor  the 
admonitions  and  corrections  (which  are  the  chiefest  offices  of 
friendship)  could  be  exercised  from  children  to  parents. 
There  have  nations  beene  found,  where,  by  custome,  children 
killed  their  parents,  and  others,  where  parents  slew  their 
children,  thereby  to  avoid  the  hindrance  of  enter-bearing 
one  another  in  after-times :  for  naturally  one  dependeth  from 
the  ruine  of  another.  There  have  Philosophers  beene  found 
disdaining  this  naturall  conjunction,  witnesse  Aristippus, 
who  being  urged  with  the  affection  he  ought  his  children,  as 
proceeding  from  his  loynes,  began  to  spit,  saying,  *  That  also 
4  that  excrement  proceeded  from  him,  and  that  also  we 
6  engendred  wormes  and  lice.1  And  that  other  man,  whom 
Plutarke  would  have  perswaded  to  agree  with  his  brother, 
answered,  '  I  care  not  a  straw  the  more  for  him,  though  he 
'  came  out  of  the  same  wombe  I  did.1  Verily  the  name  of 
Brother  is  a  glorious  name,  and  full  of  loving  kindnesse,  and 
therefore  did  he  and  I  terme  one  another  sworne  brother  : 
but  this  commixture,  dividence,  and  sharing  of  goods,  this 
joyning  wealth  to  wealth,  and  that  the  riches  of  one  shall 
be  the  povertie  of  another,  doth  exceedingly  distemper  and 
distract  all  brotherly  alliance,  and  lovely  conj  unction :  If 
brothers  should  conduct  the  progresse  of  their  advancement 
and  thrift  in  one  same  path  and  course,  they  must  necessarily 
oftentimes  hinder  and  crosse  one  another.  Moreover,  the 
correspondencie  and  relation  that  begetteth  these  true  and 
mutually  perfect  amities,  why  shall  it  be  found  in  these? 
The  father  and  the  sonne  may  very  well  be  of  a  farre  differ 
ing  complexion,  and  so  many  brothers :  He  is  my  sonne,  he 
198 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

is  my  kinsman ;  but  he  may  be  a  foole,  a  bad,  or  a  peevish-   CHAPTER 
minded  man.     And  then  according  as  they  are  friendships,       XXVII 
which  the  law  and  dutie  of  nature  doth  command  us,  so  ° :  FriendshlP 
much  the  lesse  of  our  owne  voluntarie  choice  and  libertie  is 
there  required  unto  it :  And  our  genuine  libertie  hath  no 
production  more  properly  her  owne,  than  that  of  affection 
and  amitie.     Sure  I  am,  that  concerning  the  same  I  have 
assaied  all  that  might  be,  having  had  the  best  and  most 
indulgent  father  that  ever  was,  even  to  his  extremest  age, 
and  who  from  father  to  sonne  was  descended  of  a  famous 
house,   and   touching   this    rare-scene   vertue   of  brotherly 
concord  very  exemplare : 

— et  ipw  HOR.  ii.  Od, 

Notus  infratres  animi  paterni.  ii.  5. 

To  his  brothers  knowne  so  kinde, 
As  to  beare  a  fathers  minde. 

To  compare  the  affection  toward  women  unto  it,  although 
it  proceed  from  our  owne  free  choise,  a  man  cannot,  nor  may 
it  be  placed  in  this  ranke  :  Her  fire,  I  confess  it 

( — neque  enim  est  dea  nescia  nostri 
QiifS  dukem  curis  miscet  amaritiem.) 

(Nor  is  that  Goddesse  ignorant  of  me, 
Whose  bitter-sweets  with  my  cares  mixed  be.) 

to  be  more  active,  more  fervent,  and  more  sharpe.  But  it  is 
a  rash  and  wavering  fire,  waving  and  divers  :  the  fire  of  an 
ague  subject  to  fits  and  stints,  and  that  hath  but  slender 
hold-fast  of  us.  In  true  friendship,  it  is  a  generall  and 
universall  heat,  and  equally  tempered,  a  constant  and  setled 
heat,  all  pleasure  and  smoothnes,  that  hath  no  pricking  or 
stinging  in  it,  which  the  more  it  is  in  lustfull  love,  the  more 
is  it  but  a  ranging  and  mad  desire  in  following  that  which 
flies  us, 

Come  segue  la  lepre  il  cacciatore  ARIOST.  can. 

Alfreddo,  al  caldo,  alia  montagna,  al  lito,  x.  st.  7. 

Ne  piu  I'estima  poi  che  presa  vede, 

E  sol  dietro  a  chifugge  affretta  il  piede. 

Ev'n  as  the  huntsman  doth  the  hare  pursue, 

In  cold,  in  heat,  on  mountaines,  on  the  shore, 

But  cares  no  more,  when  he  her  ta'en  espies, 

Speeding  his  pace,  only  at  that  which  flies. 

199 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER      As  soone  as  it  creepeth  into  the  termes  of  friendship,  that 

OfFv£fJM»'  *S  ^°  sa^'  *n  ^e  agreement  °f  w^s>  it  languisheth  and 
1  lp  vanisheth  away :  enjoying  doth  lose  it,  as  having  a  corporall 
end,  and  subject  to  sacietie.  On  the  other  side,  friendship 
is  enjoyed  according  as  it  is  desired,  it  is  neither  bred, 
nor  nourished,  nor  increaseth  but  in  jovissance,  as  being 
spirituall,  and  the  minde  being  refined  by  use  and  custome. 
Under  this  chiefe  amitie,  these  fading  affections  have  some 
times  found  place  in  me,  lest  I  should  speake  of  him,  who  in 
his  verses  speakes  but  too  much  of  it.  So  are  these  two 
passions  entred  into  me  in  knowledge  one  of  another,  but 
in  comparison  never :  the  first  flying  a  high,  and  keeping  a 
proud  pitch,  disdainfully  beholding  the  other  to  passe  her 
points  farre  under  it.  Concerning  marriage,  besides  that  it 
is  a  covenant  which  hath  nothing  free  but  the  entrance,  the 
continuance  being  forced  and  constrained,  depending  else 
where  than  from  our  will,  and  a  match  ordinarily  concluded 
to  other  ends :  A  thousand  strange  knots  are  therein  com 
monly  to  be  unknit,  able  to  break  the  web,  and  trouble  the 
whole  course  of  a  lively  affection ;  whereas  in  friendship, 
there  is  no  commerce  or  busines  depending  on  the  same, 
but  it  selfe.  Seeing  (to  speake  truly)  that  the  ordinary 
sufficiency  of  women,  cannot  answer  this  conference  and 
communication,  the  nurse  of  this  sacred  bond :  nor  seeme 
their  mindes  strong  enough  to  endure  the  pulling  of  a  knot 
so  hard,  so  fast,  and  durable.  And  truly,  if  without  that, 
such  a  genuine  and  voluntarie  acquaintance  might  be  con 
tracted,  where  not  only  mindes  had  this  entire  jovissance, 
but  also  bodies,  a  share  of  the  alliance,  and  where  a  man 
might  wholy  be  engaged :  It  is  certaine,  that  friendship 
would  thereby  be  more  compleat  and  full:  But  this  sex 
could  never  yet  by  any  example  attaine  unto  it,  and  is  by 
ancient  schooles  rejected  thence.  And  this  other  Greeke 
licence  is  justly  abhorred  by  our  customes,  which  notwith 
standing,  because  according  to  use  it  had  so  necessarie  a 
disparitie  of  ages,  and  difference  of  offices  betweene  lovers, 
did  no  more  sufficiently  answer  the  perfect  union  and  agree- 
Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  ment,  which  here  we  require :  Quis  est  enim  iste  amor  ami- 
lv-  citice  f  cur  neque  deformem  adolescentem  quisquam  amat,  neque 

formosum  senem  ?  '  For,  what  love  is  this  of  friendship  ?  why 
200 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

'  doth  no  man  love  either  a  deformed  young  man,  or  a  CHAPTER 
'  beautifull  old  man  ? '  For  even  the  picture  the  Academie  XXVII 
makes  of  it,  will  not  (as  I  suppose)  disavowe  mee,  to  say  Of  Friendship 
thus  in  her  behalfe :  That  the  first  furie,  enspired  by  the  son 
of  Venus  in  the  lovers  hart,  upon  the  object  of  tender 
youths-flower,  to  which  they  allow  all  insolent  and  passionate 
violences,  an  immoderate  heat  may  produce,  was  simply 
grounded  upon  an  externall  beauty ;  a  false  image  of  cor- 
porall  generation :  for  in  the  spirit  it  had  no  power,  the 
sight  whereof  was  yet  concealed,  which  was  but  in  his 
infancie,  and  before  the  age  of  budding.  For,  if  this  furie 
did  seize  upon  a  base  minded  courage,  the  meanes  of  it's 
pursuit,  where  riches,  gifts,  favour  to  the  advancement  of 
dignities,  and  such  like  vile  merchandice,  which  they  reprove. 
If  it  fell  into  a  most  generous  minde,  the  interpositions  were 
likewise  generous  :  Philosophicall  instructions,  documents  to 
reverence  religion,  to  obey  the  lawes,  to  die  for  the  good  of 
his  countrie  :  examples  of  valor,  wisdome  and  justice.  The 
lover  endevoring  and  studying  to  make  himselfe  acceptable 
by  the  good  grace  and  beauty  of  his  minde  (that  of  his  body 
being  long  since  decayed)  hoping  by  this  mentall  societie  to 
establish  a  more  firme  and  permanent  bargaine.  When  this 
pursuit  attained  the  effect  in  due  season,  (for  by  not  requir 
ing  in  a  lover,  he  should  bring  leasure  and  discretion  in  his 
enterprise,  they  require  it  exactly  in  the  beloved  ;  forasmuch 
as  he  was  to  judge  of  an  internall  beauty,  of  a  difficile  know 
ledge,  and  abstruse  discovery)  than  by  the  interposition  of  a 
spiritual  beauty  was  the  desire  of  a  spiritual  conception 
engendred  in  the  beloved.  The  latter  was  here  chiefest ; 
the  corporall,  accidentall  and  second,  altogether  contrarie  to 
the  lover.  And  therefore  doe  they  preferre  the  beloved, 
and  verifie  that  the  gods  likewise  preferre  the  same  :  and 
greatly  blame  the  Poet  ^Eschylus,  who  in  the  love  betweene 
Achilles  and  Patroclus  ascribeth  the  lovers  part  unto 
Achilles,  who  was  in  the  first  and  beardlesse  youth  of  his 
adolescency,  and  the  fairest  of  the  Graecians.  After  this 
generall  communitie,  the  mistris  and  worthiest  part  of  it, 
predominant  and  exercising  her  offices  (they  say  the  most 
availefull  commodity  did  thereby  redound  both  to  the 
private  and  publike).  That  it  was  the  force  of  countries 
2  A  201 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  received  the  use  of  it,  and  the  principall  defence  of  equitie 
XXVII  and  Hbertie :  witnesse  the  comfortable  loves  of  Hermodius 

Of  Friendship  an(j  Aristogiton.  Therefore  name  they  it  sacred  and  divine, 
and  it  concerns  not  them  whether  the  violence  of  tyrants,  or 
the  demisnesse  of  the  people  be  against  them  :  To  conclude, 
all  can  be  alleaged  in  favour  of  the  Academy,  is  to  say,  that 
it  was  a  love  ending  in  friendship,  a  thing  which  hath  no 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  bad  reference  unto  the  Stoical  definition  of  love :  Amorem 

1V>  conatum  esse  amiciticefaciendce  ex  pulchritudims  specie.  6  That 

6  love  is  an  endevour  of  making  friendship,  by  the  shew  of 
'  beautie.1  I  returne  to  my  description  in  a  more  equitable 

Cic.  Amic.  and  equall  manner.  Omnww  amititice  corroboratisjam  con- 
tfirmatisque  ingeniis  et  cctatibus  judicandce  sunt.  '  Clearely 
c  friendships  are  to  be  judged  by  wits,  and  ages  already 
6  strengthened  and  confirmed.1  As  for  the  rest,  those  we 
ordinarily  call  friendes  and  amities,  are  but  acquaintances 
and  familiarities,  tied  together  by  some  occasion  or  commo 
dities,  by  meanes  whereof  our  mindes  are  entertained.  In  the 
amitie  I  speake  of,  they  entermixe  and  confound  themselves 
one  in  the  other,  with  so  universall  a  commixture,  that  they 
weare  out,  and  can  no  more  finde  the  seame  that  hath  con- 
joyned  them  together.  If  a  man  urge  me  to  tell  wherefore 
I  loved  him,  I  feele  it  cannot  be]  expressed,  but  by  answer 
ing  ;  Because  it  was  he,  because  it  was  my  selfe.  There  is 
beyond  all  my  discourse,  and  besides  what  I  can  particularly 
report  of  it,  I  know  not  what  inexplicable  and  fatall  power, 
a  meane  and  Mediatrix  of  this  indissoluble  union.  Wee 
sought  one  another,  before  we  had  scene  one  another,  and 
by  the  reports  we  heard  one  of  another ;  which  wrought  a 
greater  violence  in  us,  than  the  reason  of  reports  may  well 
beare :  I  thinke  by  some  secret  ordinance  of  the  heavens,  we 
embraced  one  another  by  our  names.  And  at  our  first 
meeting,  which  was  by  chance  at  a  great  feast,  and  solemne 
meeting  of  a  whole  towneship,  we  found  our  selves  so  sur 
prized,  so  knowne,  so  acquainted,  and  so  combinedly  bound 
together,  that  from  thence  forward,  nothing  was  so  neere 
unto  us,  as  one  unto  another.  He  writ  an  excellent  Latyne 
Satyre ;  since  published ;  by  which  he  excuseth  and  ex- 
poundeth  the  precipitation  of  our  acquaintance,  so  suddenly 
come  to  her  perfection ;  Sithence  it  must  continue  so  short  a 
202 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

time,  and  begun  so  late  (for  we  were  both  growne  men,  and  CHAPTER 
he  some  yeares  older  than  my  selfe)  there  was  no  time  to  be  XXVII 
lost.  And  it  was  not  to  bee  modelled  or  directed  by  the  ° L  FriendshlP 
paterne  of  regular  and  remisse  friendship,  wherein  so  many 
precautions  of  a  long  and  preallable  conversation  are  re 
quired.  This  hath  no  other  Idea  than  of  it  selfe,  and  can 
have  no  reference  but  to  it  selfe.  It  is  not  one  especiall  con 
sideration,  nor  two,  nor  three,  nor  foure,  nor  a  thousand :  It 
is  I  wot  not  what  kinde  of  quintessence,  of  all  this  commix 
ture,  which  having  seized  all  my  will,  induced  the  same  to 
plunge  and  lose  it  selfe  in  his,  which  likewise  having  seized 
all  his  will,  brought  it  to  lose  and  plunge  it  selfe  in  mine, 
with  a  mutuall  greedinesse,  and  with  a  semblable  concurrance. 
I  may  truly  say,  lose,  reserving  nothing  unto  us,  that  might 
properly  be  called  our  owne,  nor  that  was  either  his,  or 
mine.  When  Lelius  in  the  presence  of  the  Romane  Consuls, 
who  after  the  condemnation  of  Tiberius  Gracchus,  pursued 
all  those  that  had  beene  of  his  acquaintance,  came  to 
enquire  of  Caius  Blosius  (who  was  one  of  his  chiefest  friends) 
what  he  would  have  done  for  him,  and  that  he  answered, 
c  All  things.'  'What  ?  All  things  ?'  replied  he  :  'And  what 
'  if  he  had  willed  thee  to  burne  our  Temples  ? '  Blosius 
answered,  '  He  would  never  have  commanded  such  a  thing." 
'  But  what  if  he  had  done  it  ?'  replied  Lelius :  The  other 
answered,  '  I  would  have  obeyed  him : '  If  hee  were  so 
perfect  a  friend  to  Gracchus,  as  Histories  report,  he  needed 
not  offend  the  Consuls  with  this  last  and  bold  confession, 
and  should  not  have  departed  from  the  assurance  hee  had  of 
Gracchus  his  minde.  But  yet  those,  who  accuse  this  answer 
as  seditious,  understand  not  well  this  mysterie :  and  doe  not 
presuppose  in  what  termes  he  stood,  and  that  he  held 
Gracchus  his  will  in  his  sleeve,  both  by  power  and  know 
ledge.  They  were  rather  friends  than  Citizens,  rather 
friends  than  enemies  of  their  countrey,  or  friends  of  ambition 
and  trouble.  Having  absolutely  committed  themselves  one 
to  another,  they  perfectly  held  the  reines  of  one  anothers 
inclination :  and  let  this  yoke  be  guided  by  vertue  and 
conduct  of  reason  (because  without  them  it  is  altogether 
impossible  to  combine  and  proportion  the  same).  The  answer 
of  Blosius  was  such  as  it  should  be.  If  their  affections  mis- 

203 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  carried,  according  to  my  meaning,  they  were  neither  friends 
XXVII  one  to  other,  nor  friends  to  themselves.  As  for  the  rest, 
ie  p  this  answer  sounds  no  more  than  mine  would  doe,  to  him 
that  would  in  such  sort  enquire  of  me ;  if  your  will  should 
command  you  to  kill  your  daughter,  would  you  doe  it  ?  and 
that  I  should  consent  unto  it :  for,  that  beareth  no  witnesse 
of  consent  to  doe  it :  because  I  am  not  in  doubt  of  my  will, 
and  as  little  of  such  a  friends  will.  It  is  not  in  the  power 
of  the  worlds  discourse  to  remove  me  from  the  certaintie  I 
have  of  his  intentions  and  judgements  of  mine:  no  one  of 
it's  actions  might  be  presented  unto  me,  under  what  shape 
soever,  but  I  would  presently  finde  the  spring  and  motion  of 
it.  Our  mindes  have  jumped  so  unitedly  together,  they 
have  with  so  fervent  an  aifection  considered  of  each  other, 
and  with  like  affection  so  discovered  and  sounded,  even  to 
the  very  bottome  of  each  others  heart  and  entrails,  that  I 
did  not  only  know  his,  as  well  as  mine  owne,  but  I  would 
(verily)  rather  have  trusted  him  concerning  any  matter  of 
mine,  than  my  selfe.  Let  no  man  compare  any  of  the  other 
common  friendships  to  this.  I  have  as  much  knowledge  of 
them  as  another,  yea  of  the  perfectest  of  their  kinde  :  yet 
wil  I  not  perswade  any  man  to  confound  their  rules,  for  so  a 
man  might  be  deceived.  In  these  other  strict  friendships  a 
man  must  march  with  the  bridle  of  wisdome  and  precaution 
in  his  hand  :  the  bond  is  not  so  strictly  tied,  but  a  man  may 
in  some  sort  distrust  the  same.  'Love  him"1  (said  Chilon) 
'  as  if  you  should  one  day  hate  him  againe.  Hate  him  as  if 
'  you  should  love  him  againe.'  This  precept,  so  abhominable 
in  this  soveraigne  and  mistris  Amitie,  is  necessarie  and 
wholesome  in  the  use  of  vulgar  and  customarie  friendships : 
toward  which  a  man  must  employ  the  saying  Aristotle  was 
wont  so  often  to  repeat,  '  Oh  you  my  friends,  there  is  no 
'  perfect  friend.' 

In  this  noble  commerce,  offices  and  benefits  (nurses  of 
other  amities)  deserve  not  so  much  as  to  bee  accounted  of: 
this  confusion  so  full  of  our  wills  is  cause  of  it :  for  even  as 
the  friendship  I  beare  unto  my  selfe,  admits  no  accrease,  by 
any  succour  I  give  my  selfe  in  any  time  of  need,  whatsoever 
the  Stoickes  alleage ;  and  as  I  acknowledge  no  thanks  unto 
my  selfe  for  any  service  I  doe  unto  my  selfe,  so  the  union  of 
"204 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

such  friends,  being  truly  perfect,  makes  them  lose  the  feeling  CHAPTER 
of  such  duties,  and  hate,  and  expell  from  one  another  these  XXVII 
words  of  division,  and  difference;  benefit,  good  deed,  dutie,  Of  Friendship 
obligation,  acknowledgement,  prayer,  thanks,  and  such  their 
like.  All  things  being  by  effect  common  betweene  them ; 
wils,  thoughts,  judgements,  goods,  wives,  children,  honour, 
and  life ;  and  their  mutual!  agreement,  being  no  other  than 
one  soule  in  two  bodies,  according  to  the  fit  definition  of 
Aristotle,  they  can  neither  lend  or  give  ought  to  each  other. 
See  here  the  reason  why  Lawmakers,  to  honour  marriage 
with  some  imaginary  resemblance  of  this  divine  bond,  in- 
hibite  donations  betweene  husband  and  wife ;  meaning 
thereby  to  inferre,  that  all  things  should  peculiarly  bee 
proper  to  each  of  them,  and  that  they  have  nothing  to 
divide  and  share  together.  If  in  the  friendship  whereof  I 
speake,  one  might  give  unto  another,  the  receiver  of  the 
benefit  should  binde  his  fellow.  For,  each  seeking  more 
than  any  other  thing,  to  doe  each  other  good,  he  who  yeelds 
both  matter  and  occasion,  is  the  man  sheweth  himselfe 
liberall,  giving  his  friend  that  contentment,  to  effect  towards 
him  what  he  desireth  most.  When  the  Philosopher  Diogenes 
wanted  money,  he  was  wont  to  say ;  '  That  he  re-demanded 
'  the  same  of  his  friends,  and  not  that  he  demanded  it ' :  And 
to  shew  how  that  is  practised  by  effect,  I  will  relate  an 
ancient  singular  example.  Eudamidas  the  Corinthian  had 
two  friends.  Charixenus  a  Sycionian,  and  Aretheus  a  Corin 
thian  ;  being  upon  his  death-bed,  and  very  poore,  and  his 
two  friends  very  rich,  thus  made  his  last  will  and  testament. 
'  To  Aretheus,  I  bequeath  the  keeping  of  my  mother,  and  to 
4  maintaine  her  when  she  shall  be  old :  To  Charixenus  the 
6  marrying  of  my  daughter,  and  to  give  her  as  great  a  dowry 
'  as  he  may :  and  in  case  one  of  them  shall  chance  to  die 
'  before,  I  appoint  the  surviver  to  substitute  his  charge,  and 
'  supply  his  place."  Those  that  first  saw  this  testament, 
laughed  and  mocked  at  the  same;  but  his  heires  being 
advertised  thereof,  were  very  well  pleased,  and  received  it 
with  singular  contentment.  And  Charixenus  one  of  them, 
dying  five  daies  after  Eudamidas,  the  substitution  being 
declared  in  favour  of  Aretheus,  he  carefully  and  very  kindly 
kept  and  maintained  his  mother,  and  of  five  talents  that  he 

205 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  was  worth,  he  gave  two  and  a  halfe  in  mariage  to  one  only 
XXVII  daughter  he  had,  and  the  other  two  and  a  halfe  to  the 

Of  Friendship  daughter  of  Eudamidas,  whom  he  married  both  in  one  day. 
This  example  is  very  ample,  if  one  thing  were  not,  which  is 
the  multitude  of  friends :  For,  this  perfect  amity  I  speake  of, 
is  indivisible ;  each  man  doth  so  wholy  give  himselfe  unto 
his  friend,  that  he  hath  nothing  left  him  to  divide  else 
where  :  moreover  he  is  grieved  that  he  is  double,  triple,  or 
quadruple,  and  hath  not  many  soules,  or  sundry  wils,  that 
he  might  conferre  them  all  upon  this  subject.  Common 
friendships  may  bee  divided ;  a  man  may  love  beauty  in  one, 
facility  of  behaviour  in  another,  liberality  in  one,  and 
wisdome  in  another,  paternity  in  this,  fraternity  in  that 
man,  and  so  forth :  but  this  amitie  which  possesseth  the 
soule,  and  swaies  it  in  all  soveraigntie,  it  is  impossible  it 
should  be  double.  If  two  at  one  instant  should  require 
helpe,  to  which  would  you  run?  Should  they  crave  con 
trary  offices  of  you,  what  order  would  you  follow  ?  Should 
one  commit  a  matter  to  your  silence,  which  if  the  other 
knew  would  greatly  profit  him,  what  course  would  you  take  ? 
Or  how  would  you  discharge  your  selfe  ?  A  singular  and 
principall  friendship  dissolveth  all  other  duties,  and  freeth 
all  other  obligations.  The  secret  I  have  sworne  not  to 
reveale  to  another,  I  may  without  perjurie  impart  it  unto 
him,  who  is  no  other  but  my  selfe.  It  is  a  great  and  strange 
wonder  for  a  man  to  double  himselfe ;  and  those  that  talke 
of  tripling,  know  not,  nor  cannot  reach  unto  the  height  of  it. 
'  Nothing  is  extreme,  that  hath  his  like."1  And  he  who  shal 
presuppose,  that  of  two  I  love  the  one  as  wel  as  the  other, 
and  that  they  enter-love  one  another,  and  love  me  as  much 
as  I  love  them  :  he  multiplieth  in  brother-hood,  a  thing 
most  singular,  and  alonely  one,  and  than  which  one  alone 
is  also  the  rarest  to  be  found  in  the  world.  The  remainder 
of  this  history  agreeth  very  wel  with  what  I  said ;  for, 
Eudamidas  giveth  as  a  grace  and  favor  to  his  friends  to 
employ  them  in  his  need :  he  leaveth  them  as  his  heires  of 
his  liberality,  which  consisteth  in  putting  the  meanes  into 
their  hands,  to  doe  him  good.  And  doubtlesse,  the  force  of 
friendship  is  much  more  richly  shewen  in  his  deed,  than  in 
Aretheus.  To  conclude,  they  are  imaginable  effects,  to  him 
206 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

that  hath  not  tasted  them;  and  which  makes  me  wonder-  CHAPTER 
fully  to  honor  the  answer  of  that  young  Souldier  to  Cyrus,  XXVII 
who  enquiring  of  him,  what  he  would  take  for  a  horse,  with  Of  Friendship 
which  he  had  lately  gained  the  prize  of  a  race,  and  whether 
he  would  change  him  for  a  Kingdome  ?  '  No  surely  my  Liege ' 
(said  he)  '  yet  would  I  willingly  forgoe  him  to  gaine  a  true 
6  friend,  could  I  but  finde  a  man  worthy  of  so  precious  an 
c  alliance.1  He  said  not  ill,  in  saying,  '  could  I  but  finde." 
For,  a  man  shall  easily  finde  men  fit  for  a  superficiall 
acquaintance ;  but  in  this,  wherein  men  negotiate  from  the 
very  centre  of  their  harts,  and  make  no  spare  of  any  thing, 
it  is  most  requisite,  all  the  wards  and  springs  be  sincerely 
wrought,  and  perfectly  true.  In  confederacies,  which  hold 
but  by  one  end,  men  have  nothing  to  provide  for,  but  for 
the  imperfections,  which  particularly  doe  interest  and  con- 
cerne  that  end  and  respect.  It  is  no  great  matter  what 
religion  my  Physician  and  Lawyer  is  of:  this  consideration 
hath  nothing  common  with  the  offices  of  that  friendship 
they  owe  mee.  So  doe  I  in  the  familiar  acquaintances,  that 
those  who  serve  me  contract  with  me.  I  am  nothing  in 
quisitive  whether  a  Lackey  be  chaste  or  no,  but  whether  he 
be  diligent :  I  feare  not  a  gaming  Muletier,  so  much  as  if  he 
be  weake ;  nor  a  hot  swearing  Cooke,  as  one  that  is  ignorant 
and  unskilfull ;  I  never  meddle  with  saying  what  a  man 
should  doe  in  the  world ;  there  are  over  many  others  that 
doe  it ;  but  what  my  selfe  doe  in  the  world. 

Mihi  sic  usus  est:  Tibi,  ut  opus  est  facto ,  face.  TER.  Heau. 

So  is  it  requisite  for  me  ;  *£'  l"  scen<  '• 

Doe  thou  as  needfull  is  for  thee. 

Concerning  familiar  table-talke,  I  rather  acquaint  my  selfe 
with,  and  follow  a  merry  conceited  humour,  than  a  wise 
man :  And  in  bed  I  rather  prefer  beauty,  than  goodnesse ; 
and  in  society  or  conversation  of  familiar  discourse,  I  respect 
rather  sufficiency,  though  without  Preud^hommie^  and  so  of 
all  things  else.  Even  as  he  that  was  found  riding  upon  an 
hobby-horse,  playing  with  his  children,  besought  him,  who 
thus  surprized  him,  not  to  speake  of  it,  untill  he  were  a 
father  himselfe,  supposing  the  tender  fondnesse,  and  fatherly 
passion,  which  then  would  possesse  his  minde,  should  make 

207 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  him  an  impartiall  judge  of  such  an  action.     So  would  I  wish 

XXVII       to  speake  to  such  as  had  tried  what  I  speake  of:  but  know- 

:  Friendship  jng  ^ow  far  gucj1  an  amjtie  is  from  the  common  use,  and  how 

seld  scene  and  rarely  found,  I  looke  not  to  finde  a  competent 

judge.     For,   even    the  discourses,  which   sterne    antiquitie 

hath  left  us  concerning  this  subject,  seeme  to  me  but  faint 

and  forcelesse  in  respect  of  the  feeling  I  have  of  it :  And  in 

that  point  the  effects  exceed  the  very  precepts  of  Philosophic. 


HOR.  i.  Sat.  v. 

44. 


VIRG. 
49. 


TER.  Heau. 
act.  i.  seen.  i. 
97- 


Nil  ego  contulerim  jucundo  sanus  amico. 

For  me,  be  I  well  in  my  wit, 
Nought,  as  a  merry  friend,  so  fit. 

Ancient  Menander  accounted  him  happy,  that  had  but 
met  the  shadow  of  a  true  friend :  verily  he  had  reason  to 
say  so,  especially  if  he  had  tasted  of  any :  for  truly,  if  I  com 
pare  all  the  rest  of  my  forepassed  life,  which  although  I  have 
by  the  meere  mercy  of  God,  past  at  rest  and  ease,  and 
except  the  losse  of  so  deare  a  friend,  free  from  all  grievous 
affliction,  with  an  ever-quietnesse  of  minde,  as  one  that  have 
taken  my  naturall  and  originall  commodities  in  good  pay 
ment,  without  searching  any  others :  if,  as  I  say,  I  compare 
it  all  unto  the  foure  yeares,  I  so  happily  enjoied  the  sweet 
company,  and  deare-deare  society  of  that  worthy  man,  it  is 
nought  but  a  vapour,  nought  but  a  darke  and  yrkesome 
light.  Since  the  time  I  lost  him, 

quern  semper  acerbum, 
Semper  honoratum  (sic  Dii  voluistis)  habebo. 

Which  I  shall  ever  hold  a  bitter  day, 
Yet  ever  honor 'd  (so  my  God  t'  obey). 

I  doe  but  languish,  I  doe  but  sorrow :  and  even  those 
pleasures,  all  things  present  me  with,  in  stead  of  yeelding  me 
comfort,  doe  but  redouble  the  griefe  of  his  losse.  We  were 
copartners  in  all  things.  All  things  were  with  us  at  halfe  ; 
me  thinkes  I  have  stolne  his  part  from  him. 

— Nee  fas  esse  utta  me  voluptate  Uicfrui 
Decrevi,  tantisper  dum  ille  abest  meus  particeps. 


208 


I  have  set  downe,  no  joy  enjoy  I  may, 
As  long-  as  he  my  partner  is  away. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

I  was  so  accustomed  to  be  ever  two,  and  so  enured  to  be  CHAPTER 


XXVII 

Of  Friendship 

HOR.  ii.  Od. 
xvii.  5. 


never  single,  that  me  thinks  I  am  but  halfe  my  selfe. 

Illam  niece  si  partem  animce  tulit, 

Maturior  vis,  quid  moror  altera, 

Nee  charus  ceque  nee  superstes, 

Integer?    life  dies  utramque 
Daxit  ruinam. 

Since  that  part  of  my  soule  riper  fate  reft  me. 
Why  stay  I  heere  the  other  part  he  left  me  ? 
Nor' so  deere,  nor  entire,  while  heere  I  rest  : 
That  day  hath  in  one  ruine  both  opprest. 

There  is  no  action  can  betide  me,  or  imagination  possesse 
me,  but  I  heare  him  saying,  as  indeed  he  would  have  done 
to  me :  for  even  as  he  did  excell  me  by  an  infinite  distance 
in  all  other  sufficiencies  and  vertues,  so  did  he  in  all  offices 
and  duties  of  friendship. 

Quis  desiderio  sit  pudor  aut  modus,  IB.  i.  Od. 

Tarn  chari  capitix  ?  xxiv.  i. 

What  modesty  or  measure  may  I  beare, 
In  want  and  wish  of  him  that  was  so  deare  ? 

0  miserof rater  adempte  mihi!  CATUL.  Eleg. 

Omnia  tecum  una  perierunt  g audio,  nostra,  iv.  20,  92,  23, 

QufB  tuus  in  vita  dulcis  alebat  amor.  95. 

Ta  mea,  tu  moriens  fregisti  commodaf rater,  21. 

Tecum  una  tota  est  nostra  sepulta  anima,  94- 

Cujus  ego  interitu  tota  de  mentefugavi 

Hcec  studia,  atque  omnes  delicias  animi.  25. 

Alloquar?  audiero  nunquam  tua  verba  loquentem? 

Nunquam  ego  te  vita  f rater  amabilior, 
Aspiciam  posthac?  at  certe  semper  amabo.  Ib.  i.  9. 

O  brother  reft  from  miserable  me, 

All  our  delight's  are  perished  with  thee, 

Which  thy  sweet  love  did  nourish  in  my  breath. 

Thou  all  my  good  hast  spoiled  in  thy  death  : 

With  thee  my  soule  is  all  and  whole  enshrinde, 

At  whose  death  I  have  cast  out  of  minde 

All  my  mindes  sweet-meets,  studies  of  this  kinde ; 

Never  shall  I,  heare  thee  speake,  speake  with  thee  ? 

Thee  brother,  than  life  dearer,  never  see  ? 

Yet  shalt  thou  ever  be  belov'd  of  mee. 

but  let  us  a  little  heare  this  yong  man  speake,  being  but 
sixteene  yeares  of  age. 

2B  209 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER       Because  I  have  found  this  worke  to  have  since  beene  pub- 
XXVII       lished  (and  to  an  ill  end)  by  such  as  seeke  to  trouble  and 

Of  Friendship  subvert  the  state  of  our  common-wealth,  nor  caring  whether 
they  shall  reforme  it  or  no ;  which  they  have  fondly  inserted 
among  other  writings  of  their  invention,  I  have  revoked  my 
intent,  which  was  to  place  it  here.  And  lest  the  Authors 
memory  should  any  way  be  interessed  with  those  that  could 
not  thoroughly  know  his  opinions  and  actions,  they  shall 
understand,  that  this  subject  was  by  him  treated  of  in  his 
infancie,  only  by  way  of  exercise,  as  a  subject,  common, 
bare-worne,  and  wyer-drawne  in  a  thousand  bookes.  I  will 
never  doubt  but  he  beleeved  what  he  writ,  and  writ  as  he 
thought :  for  hee  was  so  conscientious,  that  no  lie  did  ever 
passe  his  lips,  yea  were  it  but  in  matters  of  sport  or  play : 
and  I  know,  that  had  it  beene  in  his  choyce,  he  would  rather 
have  beene  borne  at  Venice,  than  at  Sarlac ;  and  good  reason 
why :  But  he  had  another  maxime  deepely  imprinted  in  his 
minde,  which  was,  carefully  to  obey,  and  religiously  to 
submit  himselfe  to  the  lawes,  under  which  he  was  borne. 
There  was  never  a  better  Citizen,  nor  more  affected  to  the 
welfare  and  quietnesse  of  his  countrie,  nor  a  sharper  enemie 
of  the  changes,  innovations,  newfangles,  and  hurly-burlies  of 
his  time :  He  would  more  willingly  have  imployed  the 
utmost  of  his  endevours  to  extinguish  and  suppresse,  than 
to  favour  or  further  them :  His  minde  was  modelled  to 
the  patterne  of  other  best  ages.  But  yet  in  exchange 
of  his  serious  treatise,  I  will  here  set  you  downe 
another,  more  pithie,  materiall,  and  of  more 
consequence,  by  him  likewise  produced  in 
that  tender  age. 


210 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 


THE    TWENTY-EIGHTH    CHAPTER 

Nine  and  twentie  Sonnets  of  Steven  de  la 

Boetie,  to  the  Lady  of  Grammont, 

Countesse  of  Guissen. 

ADAME,  I  present  you  with  nothing  that 
is  mine,  either  hecause  it  is  already  yours, 
or  because  I  finde  nothing  therein  worthy 
of  you.  But  wheresoever  these  verses 
shall  be  seene,  for  the  honour  which  there 
by  shall  redound  to  them,  by  having  this 
glorious  Corisanda  of  Andoins  for  their 
guide,  I  thought  it  good  to  adorne  them 
with  your  worthy  name.  I  have  deemed  this  present  fit  for 
your  Ladiship,  forsomuch  as  there  are  few  Ladies  in  France, 
that  either  can  better  judge  of  Poesie,  or  fitter  apply  the  use 
of  it,  than  your  worthy  selfe  :  and  since  in  these  her  drooping 
daies,  none  can  give  it  more  life,  or  vigorous  spirit,  than  you, 
by  those  rich  and  high-tuned  accords,  wherewith  amongst  a 
million  of  other  rare  beauties,  nature  hath  richly  graced  you. 
Madame,  these  verses  deserve  to  be  cherished  by  you  :  and 
I  am  perswaded  you  will  be  of  mine  opinion,  which  is,  that 
none  have  come  out  of  Gaskonie,  that  either  had  more  wit, 
or  better  invention,  and  that  witnesse  to  have  proceeded 
from  a  richer  veine.  And  let  no  jealousie  possesse  you, 
inasmuch  as  you  have  but  the  remainder  of  that,  which 
whilome  I  caused  to  be  printed  under  the  name  of  my  Lord 
of  Foix,  your  worthy,  noble  and  deare  kinsman  :  For  truly, 
these  have  a  kinde  of  livelinesse,  and  more  piercing  Emphasis 
than  any  other,  and  which  I  cannot  well  expresse :  as  hee 
that  made  them  in  his  Aprils  youth,  and  when  he  was 
enflamed  with  a  noble  glorious  flame,  as  I  will  one  day  tell 
your  honour  in  your  eare.  The  other  were  afterward  made 
by  him  in  favour  of  his  wife,  at  what  time  he  wooed  and 
solicited  her  for  marriage,  and  began  to  feele  I  wot  not  what 
martiall-chilnesse,  and  husbands-coldnesse.  And  I  am  one 

211 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  of  those,  whose  opinion  is,  that  divine  Poesie  doth  no  where 
XXVIII      fadge  so  well,  and  so  effectually  applaudeth,  as  in  a  youth- 
twenSe^on  ^Ll^'  wanton>  an^  unbridled  subject.     The  above  mentioned 
aet^ofSteven    nme  an<^  twentie  Sonnets  of  Boetie,  and  that  in  the  former 
de  la  Boetie          impressions  of  this  booke  were  here  set  downe,  have 
since  beene  printed  with  his  other  works. 


THE   TWENTY-NINTH   CHAPTER 

Of  Moderation. 

S  if  our  sense  of  feeling  were  infected,  wee 
corrupt  by  our  touching,  things  that  in 
themselves  are  faire  and  good.  We  may 
so  seize  on  vertue,  that  if  we  embrace  it 
with  an  over-greedy  and  violent  desire, 
it  may  become  vitious.  Those  who  say, 
'  There  is  never  excesse  in  vertue,  because 
'  it  is  no  longer  vertue  if  any  excesse  be  in 
'  it,1  doe  but  jest  at  words. 

HOR.  i.  Epist.  Insani  sapiens  nomenferat,  cequus  iniqui, 

vi.  15.  Vltra  quam  satis  est,  virtutem  si  petal  ipsam. 

A  wise  man  mad,  just  unjust,  may  I  name, 
More  than  is  meet,  ev'n  vertue  if  he  claime. 

Philosophy  is  a  subtile  consideration.  A  man  may  love 
vertue  too  much,  and  excessively  demeane  himselfe  in  a  good 
action.  Gods  holy  word  doth  apply  it  selfe  to  this  byase : 
'  Be  not  wiser  than  you  should,  and  be  soberly  wise."  I  have 
seene  some  great  men,  blemish  the  reputation  of  their  religion, 
by  shewing  themselves  religious  beyond  the  example  of  men 
of  their  qualitie.  I  love  temperate  and  indifferent  natures. 
Immoderation  towards  good,  if  it  offend  me  not,  it  amazeth, 
and  troubleth  me  how  I  should  call  it.  Neither  Pausanias 
his  mother,  who  gave  the  first  instruction,  and  for  her  sonnes 
death  brought  the  first  stone  :  Nor  Posthumius  the  Dictator, 
that  brought  his  owne  sonne  to  his  end,  whom  the  heat  and 
forwardnesse  of  youth,  had  haply  before  his  ranke,  made  to 
charge  his  enemies,  seeme  so  just  as  strange  unto  me.  And 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

I  neither  love  to  perswade  or  follow  so  savage  and  so  deare  CHAPTER 
a  vertue.  The  Archer  that  overshoots  his  marke,  doth  no  XXIX 
otherwise  than  he  that  shooteth  short.  Mine  eies  trouble  Of  Modera- 
me  as  much  in  climbing  up  toward  a  great  light,  as  to  goe 
downe  in  the  darke.  Callicles  in  Plato  saith,  The  extremitie 
of  Philosophy  to  bee  hurtfull :  and  perswades  no  man  to 
wade  further  into  it,  than  the  bounds  of  profit :  And  that 
taken  with  moderation,  it  is  pleasant  and  commodius,  but 
in  the  end  it  makes  a  man  wilde  and  vicious,  disdainfull  of 
religion  and  of  common  lawes :  an  enemie  of  civill  conversa 
tion  :  a  foe  to  humane  sensualitie,  and  worldly  pleasures : 
incapable  of  all  politike  administration  ;  and  ujifit  to  assist 
others  or  to  helpe  himselfe :  apt  to  be  without  revenge 
buffeted,  and  baffled.  He  saith  true  :  for  in  her  excesse,  she 
enthralleth  our  naturall  libertie,  and  by  an  importunate  wile, 
diverts  us  from  the  faire  and  plaine  path,  which  nature 
traceth  out  for  us.  The  love  we  beare  to  women,  is  very 
lawful ;  yet  doth  Divinitie  bridle  and  restraine  the  same.  I 
remember  to  have  read  in  Saint  Thomas,  in  a  place  where 
he  condemneth  marriages  of  kinsfolkes  in  forbidden  degrees, 
this  one  reason  amongst  others  :  that  the  love  a  man  beareth 
to  such  a  woman  may  be  immoderate ;  for,  if  the  wedlocke, 
or  husband-like  affection  be  sound  and  perfect,  as  it  ought 
to  be,  and  also  surcharged  with  that  a  man  oweth  to  alliance 
and  kindred,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  that  surcrease  may  easily 
transport  a  husband  beyond  the  bounds  of  reason.  Those 
Sciences  that  direct  the  manners  of  men,  as  Divinitie  and 
Philosophy,  medleth  with  all  things.  There  is  no  action  so 
private  and  secret  may  be  concealed  from  their  knowledge 
and  jurisdiction.  Well  doe  they  learne  that  search  and 
censure  their  libertie.  It  is  women  communicate  their  parts 
as  much  as  a  man  list  to  wantonize  with  them  :  but  to 
phisicke  them  bashfulnesse  forbids  them.  I  will  then  in 
their  behalfe  teach  husbands  this,  if  there  be  any  too  much 
flesht  upon  them :  which  is,  that  the  verie  pleasures  they 
have  by  the  familiaritie  of  their  wives,  except  moderately 
used ;  they  are  reproved :  and  not  only  in  that,  but  in  any 
other  unlawfull  subjects,  a  man  may  trespasse  in  licentious- 
nesse,  and  offend  in  excesse.  Those  shamelesse  endearings, 
which  the  first  heat  suggests  unto  us  in  that  sportfull  delight, 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  are  not  only  undecently,  but  hurtfully  employed  towards  our 
XXIX  wives.  Let  them  at  least  learne  impudencie  from  another 

Of  M.odera-  hand.  They  are  ever  broad-waking  when  wee  need  them. 
I  have  used  no  meanes  but  naturall  and  simple  instruction. 
Marriage  is  a  religious  and  devout  bond:  and  that  is  the 
reason  the  pleasure  a  man  hath  of  it,  should  be  a  moderate, 
staied  and  serious  pleasure,  and  mixed  with  severitie,  it 
ought  to  bee  a  voluptuousnesse  somewhat  circumspect  and 
conscientious.  And  because  it  is  the  chiefest  of  generation, 
there  are  that  make  a  question,  whether  it  be  lawfull  to 
require  them  of  copulation,  as  well  when  we  have  no  hope  of 
children,  as  when  they  are  over-aged,  or  big  with  childe.  It 
is  an  homicide,  according  to  Plato.  Certaine  nations  (and 
amongst  others,  the  Mahometane)  abhorre  Conjunction  with 
women  great  with  childe.  Many  also  with  those  that  have 
their  monethly  disease.  Zenobia  received  her  husband  but  for 
one  charge ;  which  done,  all  the  time  of  her  conception,  she 
let  him  goe  at  random,  and  that  past,  she  gave  him  leave 
to  begin  againe :  a  notable  and  generous  example  of  marriage. 
Plato  borroweth  the  narration  (of  some  needy  and  hunger- 
starven  Poet)  of  this  sport.  That  Jupiter  one  day  gave  his 
wife  so  hot  a  charge,  impatient  to  stay  till  she  came  to  bed, 
hee  laid  her  along  upon  the  floore,  and  by  the  vehemence  of 
his  pleasure  forgot  the  urgent  and  weighty  resolutions  lately 
concluded  upon  with  the  other  gods  of  his  caelestiall  court ; 
boasting  he  found  it  as  sweet  at  that  time,  as  he  had  done, 
when  first  he  spoiled  her  of  her  virginitie,  by  stealth  and 
unknowne  to  their  parents.  The  Kings  of  Persia,  called  for 
their  wives,  when  they  went  to  any  solemne  feast,  but  when 
much  drinking  and  wine  began  to  heat  them  in  good  earnest, 
they  sent  them  to  their  chambers,  seeing  they  could  no 
longer  refrain,  but  must  needs  yeeld  to  sensualitie,  lest  they 
should  be  partakers  of  their  immoderate  lust ;  and  in  their 
stead  sent  for  other  women,  whom  this  duty  of  respect  might 
not  concerne.  All  pleasures  and  gratifications  are  not  well 
placed  in  all  sorts  of  people.  Epaminondas  had  caused  a 
dissolute  young  man  to  be  imprisoned :  Pelopidas  intreated 
him,  that  for  his  sake  he  would  set  him  at  libertie,  but  he 
refused  him,  and  yeelded  to  free  him  at  the  request  of  an 
harlot  of  his,  which  likewise  sued  for  his  enlargement ;  say- 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

ing,  it  was  a  gratification  due  unto  a  Courtizan,  and  not  to  CHAPTER 
a  Captaine.  Sophocles  being  partner  with  Pericles  in  the  XXIX 
Pretorship,  seeing  by  chance  a  faire  boy  to  passe  by :  '  Oh 
'  what  a  beauteous  boy  goeth  yonder ! '  said  he  to  Pericles : 
'  That  speech  were  more  fitting  another  than  a  Pretor,1 
answered  Pericles, '  who  ought  not  only  to  have  chaste  hands, 
'  but  also  unpolluted  eies.1  ^Elius  Verus  the  Emperour,  his 
wife  complaining  that  he  followed  the  love  of  other  women, 
answered  'he  did  it  for  conscience  sake,  for  so  much  as 
4  marriage  was  a  name  of  honour,  and  dignity,  and  not  of 
'  foolish  and  lascivious  lust.1  And  our  Ecclesiasticall  Historic, 
hath  with  honour  preserved  the  memorie  of  that  wife,  which 
sued  to  be  devorced  from  her  husband,  because  she  would 
not  second  and  consent  to  his  over-insolent  and  lewde  em- 
bracements.  To  conclude,  there  is  no  voluptuousnesse  so 
just,  wherein  excesse  and  intemperance  is  not  reprochfull 
unto  us.  But  to  speake  in  good  sooth,  is  not  a  man  a  miser 
able  creature  ?  He  is  scarce  come  to  his  owne  strength  by 
his  naturall  condition,  to  taste  one  only  compleate,  entire 
and  pure  pleasure,  but  he  laboreth  by  discourse  to  cut  it 
off':  he  is  not  wretched  enough,  except  by  art  and  study  he 
augment  his  miserie. 

Fortunes  miseras  auximus  arte  vias.  PROPERT.  iii. 

El.  vii.  32. 
Fortunes  unhappie  ill, 

We  amplifie  by  skill. 

Humane  wisdome  doth  foolishly  seeke  to  be  ingenious  in 
exercising  her  selfe  to  abate  the  number,  and  diminish  the 
pleasure  of  sensualities,  that  pertaine  to  us :  as  it  doth 
favorably  and  industriously  in  employing  her  devises,  to 
paint  and  set  a  luster  on  evils,  before  our  eies,  and  therewith 
to  recreate  our  sense.  Had  I  beene  chiefe  of  a  faction, 
I  would  have  followed  a  more  naturall  course,  which  to  say 
true,  is  both  commodious  and  sacred,  and  should  per- 
adventure  have  made  my  selfe  strong  enough  to  limite  the 
same.  Although  our  spirituall  and  corporall  Physitians :  as 
by  covenant  agreed  upon  betweene  them,  finde  no  way  of 
recoverie,  nor  remedies  for  diseases  of  body  and  minde,  but 
by  torment,  griefe  and  paine,  watching,  fasting,  haire-shirts, 
farre  and  solitarie  exile,  perpetuall  prison,  roddes  and  other 

215 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  afflictions,  have  therefore  beene  invented:  But  so,  that  they 
n/vPX        be  truly  afflictions,  and  that  there  be  some  stinging  sharp- 

tion  nesse  in  them  :  And  that  the  successe  be  not  as  Gallios  was, 
who  having  beene  confined  to  the  ile  of  Lesbos,  newes  came 
to  Rome,  that  there  he  lived  a  merry  life ;  and  what  the 
Senate  had  laid  upon  him  for  a  punishment,  redounded  to 
his  commodity :  whereupon  they  agreed  to  revoke  him  home 
to  his  owne  house  and  wife,  strictly  enjoyning  him  to  keepe 
the  same,  thereby  to  accommodate  their  punishment  to  his 
sense  and  feeling.  For  he  to  whom  fasting  should  procure 
health  and  a  merrie  heart,  or  he  to  whom  poison  should  be 
more  healthy  than  meat,  it  would  be  no  longer  a  wholesome 
receipt,  no  more  than  drugs  in  other  medicines,  are  of  no 
effect  to  him  that  takes  them  with  appetite  and  pleasure. 
Bitternesse  and  difficultie  are  circumstances  fitting  their 
operation.  That  nature  -which  should  take  Reubarbe  as 
familiar,  should  no  doubt  corrupt  the  use  of  it ;  it  must  be 
a  thing  that  hurts  the  stomacke,  if  it  shal  cure  it :  and  here 
the  common  rule  failes,  that  infirmities  are  cured  by  their 
contraries  :  for  one  ill  cureth  another.  This  impression  hath 
some  reference  to  this  other  so  ancient,  where  some  thinke 
they  gratifie  both  heaven  and  earth  by  killing  and  massacring 
themselves,  which  was  universally  embraced  in  all  religions. 
Even  in  our  fathers  age  ;  Amurath  at  the  taking  of  Isthmus, 
sacrificed  six  hundred  young  Graecians  to  his  fathers  soule : 
to  the  end  their  bloud  might  serve  as  a  propitiation  to 
expiate  the  sinnes  of  the  deceased.  And  in  the  new  countries 
discovered  in  our  days  yet  uncorrupted,  and  virgins,  in  regard 
of  ours,  it  is  a  custome  well  nigh  received  everie  where.  All 
their  idolles  are  sprinkled  with  humane  bloud,  not  without 
divers  examples  of  horrible  crueltie.  Some  are  burnt  alive, 
and  halfe  roasted  drawne  from  the  fire,  that  so  they  may 
pull  out  their  hearts  and  entrails  ;  othersome,  yea  women  are 
fleade  quicke,  and  with  their  yet-bleeding  skins,  they  invest 
and  cover  others.  And  no  lesse  of  examples  of  constant 
resolution.  For  these  wretched  sacrifiable  people,  old  men, 
women  and  children,  some  daies  before,  goe  themselves 
begging  their  almes,  for  the  offering  of  their  sacrifice,  and  all 
of  full  glee,  singing,  and  dancing  with  the  rest,  they  present 
themselves  to  the  slaughter.  The  Ambassadours  of  the 
216 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Kings  of  Mexico,  in  declaring  and  magnifying  the  greatnesse  CHAPTER 
of  their  Master  to  Fernando  Cortez,  after  they  had  told  him,        XXIX 
that  he  had  thirtie  vassals,  whereof  each  one  was  able  to  levie   Of  Modera- 
a  hundred  thousand  combatants,  and  that  he  had  his  resi 
dence  in  the  fairest  and  strongest  Citie  under  heaven,  added 
moreover,  that  he  had  fiftie  thousand  to  sacrifice  for  every 
yeare  :  verily  some  affirme  that  they  maintain e  continuall 
warres  with  certaine  mightie  neighbouring  Nations,  not  so 
much  for  the  exercise  and  training  of  their  youth,  as  that 
they  may  have  store  of  prisoners  taken  in  warre  to  supply 
their  sacrifices.     In  another  province,  to  welcome  the  said 
Cortez,  they  sacrificed  fiftie  men  at  one  clap.    I  will  tell  this 
one  storie  more :  Some  of  those  people  having  beene  beaten 
by  him,  sent  to  know  him,  and  to  intreat  him  of  friendship. 
The  messengers  presented  him  with  three  kinds  of  presents, 
in  this  manner :  4  Lord,  if  thou  be  a  fierce  God,  that  lovest 
6  to  feed  on  flesh  and  bloud,  here  are  five  slaves,  eat  them, 
'  and  we  will  bring  thee  more :  if  thou  be  a  gently  mild 
4  God,  here  is  incense  and  feathers  ;  but  if  thou  be  a 
'  man,  take  these  birds  and  fruits,  that  here  we 
'  present  and  offer  unto  thee.' 


THE    THIRTIETH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  Caniballes. 

what  time  King  Pirrhus  came  into  Italic, 
after  he  had  survaid  the  marshalling  of  the 
Armie,  which  the  Romans  sent  against 
him  :  '  I  wot  not,1  said  he,  '  what  bar- 
'  barous  men  these  are '  (for  so  were  the 
Graecians  wont  to  call  all  strange  nations) 
'  but  the  disposition  of  this  Armie,  which 
4  I  see,  is  nothing  barbarous.1  So  said 
the  Graecians  of  that  which  Flaminius  sent  into  their 
countrie :  And  Philip  viewing  from  a  Tower  the  order  and 
distribution  of  the  Romane  camp,  in  his  kingdome  under 
Publius  Sulpitius  Galba.  Loe  how  a  man  ought  to  take 
heed,  lest  he  over-weeningly  follow  vulgar  opinions,  which 
2C 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  should  be  measured  by  the  rule  of  reason,  and  not  by  the 
xxx     .   common  report.     I  have  had  long  time  dwelling  with  me  a 

I*1?!  man,  who  for  the  space  of  ten  or  twelve  yeares  had  dwelt  in 

balles  ,,  111-1-  I.IT  i  • 

that  other  world,  which  in  our  age  was  lately  discovered  in 

those  parts  where  Villegaignon  first  landed,  and  surnamed 
Antartike  France.  This  discoverie  of  so  infinit  and  vast 
a  countrie,  seemeth  worthy  great  consideration.  I  wot  not 
whether  I  can  warrant  my  selfe,  that  some  other  be  not 
discovered  hereafter,  sithence  so  many  worthy  men,  and 
better  learned  than  we  are,  have  so  many  ages  beene 
deceived  in  this.  I  feare  me  our  eies  be  greater  than  our 
bellies,  and  that  we  have  more  curiositie  than  capacitie. 
We  embrace  all,  but  we  fasten  nothing  but  wind.  Plato 
PLAT.  Tima.  maketh  Solon  to  report,  that  he  had  learn't  of  the  Priests  of 
the  citie  of  Says  in  ^Egypt,  that  whilom,  and  before  the 
generall  Deluge,  there  was  a  great  Hand  called  Atlantis, 
situated  at  the  mouth  of  the  strait  of  Gibraltar,  which  con 
tained  more  firme  land  than  Affrike  and  Asia  together. 
And  that  the  Kings  of  that  countrie,  who  did  not  only 
possesse  that  Hand,  but  had  so  farre  entred  into  the  maine 
land,  that  of  the  bredth  of  Affrike,  they  held  as  farre  as 
JEgypt ;  and  of  Europes  length,  as  farre  as  Tuscanie :  and 
that  they  undertooke  to  invade  Asia,  and  to  subdue  all  the 
nations  that  compasse  the  Mediterranean  Sea,  to  the  gulfe 
of  Mare-Maggiore,  and  to  that  end  they  traversed  all  Spaine, 
France,  and  Italic,  so  farre  as  Greece,  where  the  Athenians 
made  head  against  them ;  but  that  a  while  after,  both  the 
Athenians  themselves,  and  that  great  Hand,  were  swallowed 
up  by  the  Deluge.  It  is  verie  likely  this  extreme  ruine  of 
waters  wrought  strange  alterations  in  the  habitations  of  the 
earth:  as  some  hold  that  the  Sea  hath  divided  Sicilie  from 
Italic, 

VIRG.  Aen.  iii.  HfBC  loca  vi  quondam,  et  vasta  convulsa  ruina 

414,  416.  Dissiluisseferunt,  cum  protinus  utraque  tellus 

Vnaforet. 

Men  say,  sometimes  this  land  by  that  forsaken, 
And  that  by  this,  were  split,  and  ruine-shaken, 
Whereas  till  then  both  lands  as  one  were  taken. 

Cypres  from  Soria,  the  Hand  of  Negroponte  from  the  maine 
land  of  Beotia,  and  in  other  places  joyned  lands  that  were 
218 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

sundred  by  the  Sea,  filling  with  mud  and  sand  the  chanels  CHAPTER 
betweene  them.  XXX 

Of  the  Cani- 

— sterilisque  diu  palus  apt  ague  remis  balles 

Vicinas  urbes  alit,  et  grave  sentit  aratrum.  HoR.^r/.  Poet. 

The  fenne  long  barren,  to  be  row'd  in,  now  65- 

Both  feeds  the  neighbour  townes,  and  feeles  the  plow. 

But  there  is  no  great  apparence,  the  said  Hand  should  be 
the  new  world  we  have  lately  discovered ;  for,  it  well-nigh 
touched  Spaine,  and  it  were  an  incredible  effect  of  inunda 
tion,  to  have  removed  the  same  more  than  twelve  hundred 
leagues,  as  we  see  it  is.  Besides,  our  moderne  Navigations 
have  now  almost  discovered,  that  it  is  not  an  Hand,  but 
rather  firme  land,  and  a  continent,  with  the  East  Indias  on 
one  side,  and  the  countries  lying  under  the  two  Poles  on  the 
other ;  from  which  if  it  be  divided,  it  is  with  so  narrow  a 
strait,  and  intervall,  that  it  no  way  deserveth  to  be  named 
an  Hand  :  For,  it  seemeth  there  are  certaine  motions  in  these 
vast  bodies,  some  naturall,  and  other  some  febricitant,  as 
well  as  in  ours.  When  I  consider  the  impression  my  river  of 
Dordoigne  worketh  in  my  time,  toward  the  right  shoare  of 
her  descent  and  how  much  it  hath  gained  in  twentie  yeares, 
and  how  many  foundations  of  divers  houses  it  hath  over 
whelmed  and  violently  caried  away ;  I  confesse  it  to  be  an 
extraordinarie  agitation  :  for,  should  it  alwaies  keepe  one 
course,  or  had  it  ever  kept  the  same,  the  figure  of  the  world 
had  ere  this  beene  overthrowne :  But  they  are  subject  to 
changes  and  alterations.  Sometimes  they  overflow  and 
spread  themselves  on  one  side,  sometimes  on  another ;  and 
other  times  they  containe  themselves  in  their  naturall  beds 
or  chanels.  I  speak  not  of  sudden  inundations,  whereof  we 
now  treat  the  causes.  In  Medoc  alongst  the  Sea-coast,  my 
brother  the  Lord  of  Arsacke,  may  see  a  towne  of  his  buried 
under  the  sands,  which  the  Sea  casteth  up  before  it :  The 
tops  of  some  buildings  are  yet  to  be  discerned.  His  Rents 
and  Demaines  have  beene  changed  into  barren  pastures. 
The  inhabitants  thereabouts  affirme,  that  some  yeares  since, 
the  Sea  encrocheth  so  much  upon  them,  that  they  have  lost 
foure  leagues  of  firme  land  :  These  sands  are  her  fore-runners. 
And  we  see  great  hillocks  of  gravell  moving,  which  march 

219 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  halfe  a  league  before  it,  and  usurpe  on  the  firme  land.     The 
XXX       other  testimonie  of  antiquitie,  to  which  some  will  referre 

°f  balles"1*"  this  discoverie>  is  in  Aristotle  (if  at  least  that  little  booke  of 
unheard  of  wonders  be  his)  where  he  reporteth  that  certaine 
Carthaginians  having  failed  athwart  the  Atlantike  Sea, 
without  the  strait  of  Gibraltar,  after  long  time,  they  at  last 
discovered  a  great  fertill  Hand,  all  replenished  with  goodly 
woods,  and  watred  with  great  and  deepe  rivers,  farre  distant 
from  al  land,  and  that  both  they  and  others,  allured  by  the 
goodnes  and  fertility  of  the  soile,  went  thither  with  their 
wives,  children,  and  houshold,  and  there  began  to  inhabit 
and  settle  themselves.  The  Lords  of  Carthage  seeing  their 
countrie  by  little  and  little  to  be  dispeopled,  made  a  law  and 
expresse  inhibition,  that  upon  paine  of  death  no  more  men 
should  goe  thither,  and  banished  all  that  were  gone  thither 
to  dwell,  fearing  (as  they  said)  that  in  successe  of  time,  they 
would  so  multiply  as  they  might  one  day  supplant  them, 
and  overthrow  their  owne  estate.  This  narration  of  Aristotle 
hath  no  reference  unto  our  new  found  countries.  This 
servant  I  had,  was  a  simple  and  rough-hewen  fellow  :  a  con 
dition  fit  to  yeeld  a  true  testimonie.  For,  subtile  people 
may  indeed  marke  more  curiously,  and  observe  things  more 
exactly,  but  they  amplifie  and  glose  them  :  and  the  better  to 
perswade,  and  make  their  interpretations  of  more  validitie, 
they  cannot  chuse  but  somewhat  alter  the  storie.  They 
never  represent  things  truly,  but  fashion  and  maske  them 
according  to  the  visage  they  saw  them  in ;  and  to  purchase 
credit  to  their  judgement,  and  draw  you  on  to  beleeve  them, 
they  commonly  adorne,  enlarge,  yea,  and  Hyperbolize  the 
matter.  Wherein  is  required  either  a  most  sincere  Reporter, 
or  a  man  so  simple,  that  he  may  have  no  invention  to  build 
upon,  and  to  give  a  true  likelihood  unto  false  devices,  and 
be  not  wedded  to  his  owne  will.  Such  a  one  was  my  man  ; 
who  besides  his  owne  report,  hath  many  times  shewed  me 
divers  Mariners,  and  Merchants,  whom  hee  had  knowne  in 
that  voyage.  So  am  I  pleased  with  his  information,  that 
I  never  enquire  what  Cosmographers  say  of  it.  We  had 
need  of  Topographers  to  make  us  particular  narrations  of 
the  places  they  have  beene  in.  For  some  of  them,  if  they 
have  the  advantage  of  us,  that  they  have  seene  Palestine, 
220 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

will  challenge  a  privilege,  to  tell  us  newes  of  all  the  world  CHAPTER 

besides.     I  would  have  everie  man  write  what  he  knowes,        XXX 

and  no  more:  not  only  in  that,  but  in  all  other  subjects.  <'ftheCam- 

For  one  may  have  particular  knowledge  of  the  nature  of  one 

river,  and  experience  of  the  qualitie  of  one  fountaine,  that  in 

other  things  knowes  no  more  than  another  man  :  who  never- 

thelesse  to  publish  this  little  scantling,  will  undertake  to 

write  of  all  the  Physickes.     From  which  vice  proceed  divers 

great  inconveniences.      Now  (to   returne   to   my   purpose) 

I  finde  (as  farre  as  I  have  beene  informed)  there  is  nothing 

in  that  nation,  that  is  either  barbarous  or  savage,  unlesse 

men  call  that  barbarisme  which  is  not  common  to  them. 

As  indeed,  we  have  no  other  ayme  of  truth  and  reason,  than 

the  example  and  Idea  of  the  opinions  and  customes  of  the 

countrie  we  live  in.     There  is  ever  perfect  religion,  perfect 

policie,  perfect  and  compleat  use  of  all  things.     They  are 

even  savage,  as  we  call  those  fruits  wilde,  which  nature  of 

her  selfe,  and  of  her  ordinarie   progresse   hath   produced : 

whereas  indeed,  they  are  those  which  our  selves  have  altered 

by  our  artificiall  devices,  and  diverted  from  their  common 

order,  we  should  rather  terme  savage.     In  those  are  the  true 

and  most  profitable  vertues,  and  naturall  properties  most 

lively  and  vigorous,  which  in  these  we  have  bastardized, 

applying  them  to  the  pleasure  of  our  corrupted  taste.     And 

if  notwithstanding,  in  divers  fruits  of  those  countries  that 

were  never  tilled,  we  shall  finde,  that  in  respect  of  ours  they 

are  most  excellent,  and  as  delicate  unto  our  taste ;  there  is 

no  reason,  art  should  gaine  the  point  of  honour  of  our  great 

and  puissant  mother  Nature.     We  have  so  much  by  our 

inventions  surcharged  the  beauties  and  riches  of  her  workes, 

that  we  have  altogether  overchoaked  her:  yet  where  ever 

her  puritie   shineth,   she    makes   our   vaine    and   frivolous 

enterprises  wonderfully  ashamed. 

Et  veniunt  hederce  sponte  sua  melius,  PROPERT.  i. 

Surgit  et  in  soils  formosior  arbutus  antris,  &•  "•  IO> 

Et  volucres  nulla  dulcius  arte  canunt. 

Ivies  spring  better  of  their  owne  accord., 
Unhanted  plots  much  fairer  trees  afford. 
Birds  by  no  art  much  sweeter  notes  record. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  All  our  endevour  or  wit,  cannot  so  much  as  reach  to 
XXX  represent  the  nest  of  the  least  birdlet,  it's  contexture, 
keautie,  Pr°fit  and  use,  no  nor  the  web  of  a  seely  spider. 
'  All  things '  (saith  Plato)  '  are  produced,  either  by  nature,  by 
'  fortune,  or  by  art.  The  greatest  and  fairest  by  one  or 
'  other  of  the  two  first,  the  least  and  imperfect  by  the  last/ 
Those  nations  seeme  therefore  so  barbarous  unto  me,  because 
they  have  received  very  little  fashion  from  humane  wit,  and 
are  yet  neere  their  originall  naturalitie.  The  lawes  of  nature 
doe  yet  command  them,  which  are  but  little  bastardized  by 
ours,  and  that  with  such  puritie,  as  I  am  sometimes  grieved 
the  knowledge  of  it  came  no  sooner  to  light,  at  what  time 
there  were  men,  that  better  than  we  could  have  judged  of  it. 
I  am  sorie,  Lycurgus  and  Plato  had  it  not :  for  me  seemeth 
that  what  in  those  nations  we  see  by  experience,  doth  not 
only  exceed  all  the  pictures  wherewith  licentious  Poesie  hath 
proudly  imbellished  the  golden  age,  and  all  her  quaint 
inventions  to  faine  a  happy  condition  of  man,  but  also  the 
conception  and  desire  of  Philosophy.  They  could  not 
imagine  a  genuitie  so  pure  and  simple,  as  we  see  it  by 
experience  ;  nor  ever  beleeve  our  societie  might  be  main 
tained  with  so  little  art  and  humane  combination.  It  is  a 
nation,  would  I  answer  Plato,  that  hath  no  kinde  of  traffike, 
no  knowledge  of  Letters,  no  intelligence  of  numbers,  no 
name  of  magistrate,  nor  of  politike  superioritie ;  no  use  of 
service,  of  riches  or  of  povertie  ;  no  contracts,  no  successions, 
no  partitions,  no  occupation  but  idle ;  no  respect  of  kindred, 
but  common,  no  apparell  but  naturall,  no  manuring  of  lands, 
no  use  of  wine,  corne,  or  mettle.  The  very  words  that 
import  lying,  falshood,  treason,  dissimulations,  covetousnes, 
envie,  detraction,  and  pardon,  were  never  heard  of  amongst 
them.  How  dissonant  would  hee  finde  his  imaginarie 
common- wealth  from  this  perfection  ? 

Hos  natura  modos  primiim  dedit. 

Nature  at  first  uprise, 
These  manners  did  devise. 

Furthermore,  they  live  in  a  country  of  so  exceeding 
pleasant  and  temperate  situation,  that  as  my  testimonies 
have  told  me,  it  is  verie  rare  to  see  a  sicke  body  amongst 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

them  ;  and  they  have  further  assured  me  they  never  saw  any  CHAPTER 
man  there,  either  shaking  with  the  palsie,  toothlesse,  with 
eies  dropping,  or  crooked  and  stooping  through  age.  They  ° 
are  seated  alongst  the  sea-coast,  encompassed  toward  the 
land  with  huge  and  steepie  mountaines,  having  betweene 
both,  a  hundred  leagues  or  thereabout  of  open  and  cham- 
paine  ground.  They  have  great  abundance  of  fish  and  flesh, 
that  have  no  resemblance  at  all  with  ours,  and  eat  them 
without  any  sawces,  or  skill  of  Cookerie,  but  plaine  boiled 
or  broiled.  The  first  man  that  brought  a  horse  thither, 
although  he  had  in  many  other  voyages  conversed  with 
them,  bred  so  great  a  horror  in  the  land,  that  before  they 
could  take  notice  of  him,  they  slew  him  with  arrowes.  Their 
buildings  are  very  long,  and  able  to  containe  two  or  three 
hundred  soules,  covered  with  barkes  of  great  trees,  fastned 
in  the  ground  at  one  end,  enterlaced  and  joyned  close 
together  by  the  tops,  after  the  manner  of  some  of  our 
Granges ;  the  covering  whereof  hangs  downe  to  the  ground, 
and  steadeth  them  as  a  flancke.  They  have  a  kinde  of  wood 
so  hard,  that  ryving  and  cleaving  the  same,  they  make 
blades,  swords,  and  grid-irons  to  broile  their  meat  with. 
Their  beds  are  of  a  kinde  of  cotten  cloth,  fastned  to  the 
house-roofe,  as  our  ship-cabbanes  :  everie  one  hath  his  severall 
cowch  ;  for  the  women  lie  from  their  husbands.  They  rise 
with  the  Sunne,  and  feed  for  all  day,  as  soone  as  they  are 
up  :  and  make  no  more  meales  after  that.  They  drinke  not 
at  meat,  as  Suidas  reporteth  of  some  other  people  of  the 
East,  which  dranke  after  meales,  but  drinke  many  times  a 
day,  and  are  much  given  to  pledge  carowses.  Their  drinke 
is  made  of  a  certaine  root,  and  of  the  colour  of  our  Claret 
wines,  which  lasteth  but  two  or  three  daies ;  they  drinke  it 
warme :  It  hath  somewhat  a  sharpe  taste,  wholsome  for  the 
stomack,  nothing  heady,  but  laxative  for  such  as  are  not 
used  unto  it,  yet  verie  pleasing  to  such  as  are  accustomed 
unto  it.  In  stead  of  bread,  they  use  a  certaine  white  com 
position,  like  unto  Corianders  confected.  I  have  eaten  some, 
the  taste  wherof  is  somewhat  sweet  and  wallowish.  They 
spend  the  whole  day  in  dancing.  Their  young  men  goe  a 
hunting  after  wilde  beasts  with  bowes  and  arrowes.  Their 
women  busie  themselves  therewhil'st  with  warming  of  their 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  drinke,  which  is  their  chiefest  office.  Some  of  their  old 
xxx  .  men,  in  the  morning  before  they  goe  to  eating,  preach  in 
bafles  am~  common  ^°  a^  the  houshold,  walking  from  one  end  of  the 
house  to  the  other,  repeating  one  selfe-same  sentence  many 
times,  till  he  have  ended  his  turne  (for  their  buildings  are  a 
hundred  paces  in  length)  he  commends  but  two  things  unto 
his  auditorie,  First,  valour  against  their  enemies,  then 
lovingnesse  unto  their  wives.  They  never  misse  (for  their 
restraint)  to  put  men  in  minde  of  this  dutie,  that  it  is  their 
wives  which  keepe  their  drinke  luke-warme  and  well-seasoned. 
The  forme  of  their  beds,  cords,  swords,  blades,  and  woodden 
bracelets,  wherewith  they  cover  their  hand  wrists,  when  they 
fight,  and  great  Canes  open  at  one  end,  by  the  sound  of 
which  they  keepe  time  and  cadence  in  their  dancing,  are  in 
many  places  to  be  scene,  and  namely  in  mine  owne  house. 
They  are  shaven  all  over,  much  more  close  and  cleaner  than 
wee  are,  with  no  other  Razors  than  of  wood  or  stone.  They 
beleeve  their  soules  to  be  eternall,  and  those  that  have 
deserved  well  of  their  Gods,  to  be  placed  in  that  part  of 
heaven  where  the  Sunne  riseth,  and  the  cursed  toward  the 
West  in  opposition.  They  have  certaine  Prophets  and 
Priests,  which  commonly  abide  in  the  mountaines,  and  very 
seldome  shew  themselves  unto  the  people  ;  but  when  they 
come  downe,  there  is  a  great  feast  prepared,  and  a  solemne 
assembly  of  manie  towneships  together  (each  Grange  as  I 
have  described  maketh  a  village,  and  they  are  about  a 
French  league  one  from  another).  The  Prophet  speakes  to 
the  people  in  publike,  exhorting  them  to  embrace  vertue, 
and  follow  their  dutie.  All  their  morall  discipline  con- 
taineth  but  these  two  articles ;  first  and  undismaied  resolu 
tion  to  warre,  then  an  inviolable  affection  to  their  wives. 
Hee  doth  also  Prognosticate  of  things  to  come,  and  what 
successe  they  shall  hope  for  in  their  enterprises :  hee  either 
perswadeth  or  disswadeth  them  from  warre ;  but  if  he  chance 
to  misse  of  his  divination,  and  that  it  succeed  otherwise  than 
hee  foretold  them,  if  hee  be  taken,  he  is  hewen  in  a  thousand 
peeces,  and  condemned  for  a  false  Prophet.  And  therefore 
he  that  hath  once  misreckoned  himselfe  is  never  scene  againe. 
Divination  is  the  gift  of  God ;  the  abusing  whereof  should 
be  a  punishable  imposture.  When  the  Divines  amongst  the 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Scythians  had  foretold  an  untruth,  they  were  couched  along  CHAPTER 
upon  hurdles  full  of  heath  or  brushwood,  drawne  by  oxen, 
and  so  manicled  hand  and  foot,  burned  to  death.  Those  Of 
which  manage  matters  subject  to  the  conduct  of  mans 
sufficiencie,  are  excusable,  although  they  shew  the  utmost  of 
their  skill.  But  those  that  gull  and  conicatch  us  with  the 
assurance  of  an  extraordinarie  facultie,  and  which  is  beyond 
our  knowledge,  ought  to  be  double  punished  ;  first  because 
they  performe  not  the  effect  of  their  promise,  then  for  the 
rashnesse  of  their  imposture  and  unadvisednesse  of  their 
fraud.  They  warre  against  the  nations,  that  lie  beyond 
their  mountaines,  to  which  they  go  naked,  having  no  other 
weapons  than  bowes,  or  woodden  swords,  sharpe  at  one  end, 
as  our  broaches  are.  It  is  an  admirable  thing  to  see  the 
constant  resolution  of  their  combats,  which  never  end  but 
by  effusion  of  bloud  and  murther :  for  they  know  not  what 
feare  or  rowts  are.  Every  Victor  brings  home  the  head  of 
the  enemie  he  hath  slaine  as  a  Trophey  of  his  victorie,  and 
fastneth  the  same  at  the  entrance  of  his  dwelling  place. 
After  they  have  long  time  used  and  entreated  their  prisoners 
well,  and  with  all  commodities  they  can  devise,  he  that  is 
the  Master  of  them  ;  sommoning  a  great  assembly  of  his 
acquaintance ;  tieth  a  corde  to  one  of  the  prisoners  armes, 
by  the  end  whereof  he  holds  him  fast,  with  some  distance 
from  him,  for  feare  he  might  offend  him,  and  giveth  the 
other  arme,  bound  in  like  manner,  to  the  dearest  friend  he 
hath,  and  both  in  the  presence  of  all  the  assembly  kill  him 
with  swords :  which  done,  they  roast,  and  then  eat  him  in 
common,  and  send  some  slices  of  him  to  such  of  their  friends 
as  are  absent.  It  is  not  as  some  imagine,  to  nourish  them 
selves  with  it,  (as  anciently  the  Scithians  wont  to  doe,)  but 
to  represent  an  extreme,  and  inexpiable  revenge.  Which 
we  prove  thus  ;  some  of  them  perceiving  the  Portugales,  who 
had  confederated  themselves  with  their  adversaries,  to  use 
another  kinde  of  death,  when  they  tooke  them  prisoners; 
which  was,  to  burie  them  up  to  the  middle,  and  against  the 
upper  part  of  the  body  to  shoot  arrowes,  and  then  being 
almost  dead,  to  hang  them  up ;  they  supposed,  that  these 
people  of  the  other  world  (as  they  who  had  sowed  the 
knowledge  of  many  vices  amongst  their  neighbours,  and  were 
2D  225 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  much  more  cunning  in  all  kindes  of  evils  and  mischiefe  than 
XXX  they)  under-tooke  not  this  manner  of  revenge  without  cause, 
ball  M*1"  a  ^m^  consecluen^y  it  was  more  smartfull,  and  cruell  than 
theirs,  and  thereupon  began  to  leave  their  old  fashion  to 
follow  this.  I  am  not  sorie  we  note  the  barbarous  horror  of 
such  an  action,  but  grieved,  that  prying  so  narrowly  into 
their  faults  we  are  so  blinded  in  ours.  I  thinke  there  is 
more  barbarisme  in  eating  men  alive,  than  to  feed  upon 
them  being  dead;  to  mangle  by  tortures,  and  torments  a 
body  full  of  lively  sense,  to  roast  him  in  peeces,  to  make 
dogges  and  swine  to  gnaw  and  teare  him  in  mammockes  (as 
wee  have  not  only  read,  but  scene  very  lately,  yea  and  in 
our  owne  memorie,  not  amongst  ancient  enemies,  but  our 
neighbours  and  fellow-citizens  ;  and  which  is  worse,  under 
pretence  of  pietie  and  religion)  than  to  roast  and  eat  him 
after  he  is  dead.  Chrysippus  and  Zeno,  arch-pillers  of  the 
Stoicke  sect,  have  supposed  that  it  was  no  hurt  at  all,  in 
time  of  need,  and  to  what  end  soever,  to  make  use  of  our 
carrion  bodies,  and  to  feed  upon  them,  as  did  our  forefathers, 
who  being  besieged  by  Ca?sar  in  the  Citie  of  Alexia,  resolved 
to  sustaine  the  famine  of  the  siege,  with  the  bodies  of  old  men. 
women,  and  other  persons  unserviceable  and  unfit  to  fight. 

luv.  Sat.  xv.  Vascones  (fama  est)  alimenti*  talibus  usi 

93-  Produxere  animas. 

Gascoynes  (as  fame  reports) 
Liv'd  with  meats  of  such  sorts. 

And  Physitians  feare  not,  in  all  kindes  of  compositions 
availefull  to  our  health,  to  make  use  of  it,  be  it  for  outward 
or  inward  applications  :  But  there  was  never  any  opinion 
found  so  unnatural  1  and  immodest,  that  would  excuse  treason, 
treacherie,  disloyaltie,  tyrannic,  crueltie,  and  such  like,  which 
are  our  ordinarie  faults.  We  may  then  well  call  them  bar 
barous,  in  regard  of  reasons  rules,  but  not  in  respect  of  us 
that  exceed  them  in  all  kinde  of  barbarisme.  Their  warres 
are  noble  and  generous,  and  have  as  much  excuse  and  beautie, 
as  this  humane  infirmitie  may  admit :  they  ayme  at  nought 
so  much,  and  have  no  other  foundation  amongst  them,  but 
the  meere  jelousie  of  vertue.  They  contend  not  for  the 
//  gaining  of  new  lands;  for  to  this  day  they  yet  enjoy  that 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

naturall  ubertie  and  fruitfulnesse,  which  without  labouring  CHAPTER 
toyle,  doth  in  such  plenteous  abundance  furnish  them  with  XXX 
all  necessary  things,  that  they  need  not  enlarge  their  limits.  Of  *h ®  Cani~ 
They  are  yet  in  that  happy  estate,  as  they  desire  no  more, 
than  what  their  naturall  necessities  direct  them  :  whatsoever 
is  beyond  it,  is  to  them  superfluous.  Those  that  are  much 
about  one  age,  doe  generally  enter-call  one  another  brethren, 
and  such  as  are  younger,  they  call  children,  and  the  aged  are 
esteemed  as  fathers  to  all  the  rest.  These  leave  this  full 
possession  of  goods  in  common,  and  without  division  to  their 
heires,  without  other  claime  or  title,  but  that  which  nature 
doth  plainely  impart  unto  all  creatures,  even  as  shee  brings 
them  into  the  world.  If  their  neighbours  chance  to  come 
over  the  mountaines  to  assaile  or  invade  them,  and  that  they 
get  the  victorie  over  them,  the  Victors  conquest  is  glorie, 
and  the  advantage  to  be  and  remaine  superior  in  valour  and 
vertue :  else  have  they  nothing  to  doe  with  the  goods  and 
spoyles  of  the  vanquished,  and  so  returne  into  their  countrie, 
where  they  neither  want  any  necessarie  thing,  nor  lacke  this 
great  portion,  to  know  how  to  enjoy  their  condition  happily, 
and  are  contented  with  what  nature  affoordeth  them.  So 
doe  these  when  their  turne  commeth.  They  require  no 
other  ransome  of  their  prisoners,  but  an  acknowledgement 
and  confession  that  they  are  vanquished.  And  in  a  whole 
age,  a  man  shall  not  finde  one,  that  doth  not  rather  embrace 
death,  than  either  by  word  or  countenance  remissely  to  yeeld 
one  jot  of  an  invincible  courage.  There  is  none  scene  that 
would  not  rather  be  slaine  and  devoured,  than  sue  for  life, 
or  shew  any  feare  :  They  use  their  prisoners  with  all  libertie, 
that  they  may  so  much  the  more  hold  their  lives  deare  and 
precious,  and  commonly  entertaine  them  with  threats  of 
future  death,  with  the  torments  they  shall  endure,  with  the 
preparations  intended  for  that  purpose,  with  mangling  and 
slicing  of  their  members,  and  with  the  feast  that  shall  be 
kept  at  their  charge.  All  which  is  done,  to  wrest  some 
remisse,  and  exact  some  faint-yeelding  speech  of  submission 
from  them,  or  to  possesse  them  with  a  desire  to  escape  or 
run  away;  that  so  they  may  have  the  advantage  to  have 
danted  and  made  them  afraid,  and  to  have  forced  their  constan- 
cie.  For  certainly  true  victorie  consisteth  in  that  only  point. 

227 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  CLAUD,  vi.  —Victoria  nulla  est 

XXX         Cons.  Hon.          Guam  quce  confesses  animo  quoque  subjuqat  hostes. 

Of  the  Cani-  Paneg.  245. 

balles  No  conquest  such,,  as  to  suppresse 

Foes  hearts,  the  conquest  to  confesse. 

The  Hungarians,  a  most  warre-like  nation,  were  whilome 
wont  to  pursue  their  prey  no  longer  than  they  had  forced 
their  enemie  to  yeeld  unto  their  mercie.  For,  having 
wrested  this  confession  from  him,  they  set  him  at  libertie 
without  offence  or  ransome,  except  it  were  to  make  him 
sweare,  never  after  to  beare  armes  against  them.  Wee  get 
many  advantages  of  our  enemies,  that  are  but  borrowed  and 
not  ours :  It  is  the  qualitie  of  porterly-rascall,  and  not  of 
vertue,  to  have  stronger  armes,  and  sturdier  legs ;  Disposi 
tion  is  a  dead  and  corporall  qualitie.  It  is  a  tricke  of 
fortune  to  make  our  enemie  stoope,  and  to  bleare  his  eies 
with  the  Sunnes-light :  It  is  a  pranke  of  skill  and  knowledge 
to  be  cunning  in  the  art  of  fencing,  and  which  may  happen 
unto  a  base  and  worthlesse  man.  The  reputation  and  worth 
of  a  man  consisteth  in  his  heart  and  will :  therein  consists 
true  honour :  Constancie  is  valour,  not  of  armes  and  legs, 
but  of  minde  and  courage  ?  it  consisteth  not  in  the  spirit 
and  courage  of  our  horse,  nor  of  our  armes,  but  in  ours. 
He  that  obstinately  faileth  in  his  courage,  Si  succiderit,  de 
genu  pugnat,  '  If  hee  slip  or  fall,  he  fights  upon  his  knee.1 
He  that  in  danger  of  imminent  death,  is  no  whit  dan  ted  in 
his  assurednesse ;  he  that  in  yeeld  ing  up  his  ghost  beholding 
his  enemie  with  a  scornefull  and  fierce  looke,  he  is  vanquished, 
not  by  us,  but  by  fortune :  he  is  slaine,  but  not  conquered. 
The  most  valiant,  are  often  the  most  unfortunate.  So  are 
there  triumphant  losses  in  envie  of  victories.  Not  those 
foure  sister  victories,  the  fairest  that  ever  the  Sunne  beheld 
with  his  all-seeing  eie,  of  Salamis,  of  Plateae,  of  Micale,  and 
of  Sicilia,  durst  ever  dare  to  oppose  all  their  glorie  together, 
to  the  glorie  of  the  King  Leonidas  his  discomfiture  and  of 
his  men,  at  the  passage  of  Thermopylae :  what  man  did  ever 
run  with  so  glorious  an  envie,  or  more  ambitious  desire  to 
the  goale  of  a  combat,  than  Captaine  Ischolas  to  an  evident 
losse  and  overthrow  ?  who  so  ingeniously  or  more  politikely 
did  ever  assure  himselfe  of  his  welfare,  than  he  of  his  ruine  ? 

228 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

He  was  appointed  to  defend  a  certaine  passage  of  Peloponesus  CHAPTER 
against  the  Arcadians,  which  finding  himselfe  altogether  un-  XXX 
able  to  performe,  seeing  the  nature  of  the  place,  and  in-  Of  ^fles  ^ 
equalitie  of  the  forces,  and  resolving,  that  whatsoever  should 
present  it  selfe  unto  his  enemie,  must  necessarily  be  utterly 
defeated :  On  the  other  side,  deeming  it  unworthy  both  his 
vertue  and  magnanimitie,  and  the  Lacedemonian  name,  to 
faile  or  faint  in  his  charge,  bet  ween  e  these  two  extremities 
he  resolved  upon  a  meane  and  indifferent  course,  which  was 
this.  The  youngest  and  best  disposed  of  his  troupe,  he  re 
served  for  the  service  and  defence  of  their  countrie,  to  which 
hee  sent  them  backe ;  and  with  those  whose  losse  was  least, 
and  who  might  best  be  spared,  hee  determined  to  maintaine 
that  passage,  and  by  their  death  to  force  the  enemie,  to  pur 
chase  the  entrance  of  it  as  deare  as  possibly  he  could ;  as  in 
deed  it  followed.  For  being  suddenly  environed  round  by 
the  Arcadians :  After  a  great  slaughter  made  of  them,  both 
himselfe  and  all  his  were  put  to  the  sword.  Is  any  Trophey 
assigned  for  conquerours,  that  is  not  more  duly  due  unto 
these  conquered  ?  A  true  conquest  respecteth  rather  an  un- 
danted  resolution,  and  honourable  end,  than  a  faire  escape, 
and  the  honour  of  vertue  doth  more  consist  in  combating 
than  in  beating.  But  to  returne  to  our  historic,  these 
prisoners,  howsoever  they  are  dealt  withall,  are  so  farre 
from  yeelding,  that  contrariwise  during  two  or  three  moneths 
that  they  are  kept,  they  ever  carry  a  cheerefull  countenance, 
and  urge  their  keepers  to  hasten  their  triall,  they  outragiously 
defie,  and  injure  them.  They  upbraid  them  with  their 
cowardlinesse,  and  with  the  number  of  battels,  they  have 
lost  againe  theirs.  I  have  a  song  made  by  a  prisoner,  where 
in  is  this  clause,  Let  them  boldly  come  altogether,  and 
flocke  in  multitudes,  to  feed  on  him ;  for  with  him  they 
shall  feed  upon  their  fathers,  and  grandfathers,  that  hereto 
fore  have  served  his  body  for  food  and  nourishment :  These 
muscles,  (saith  he)  this  flesh,  and  these  veines,  are  your  owne  ; 
fond  men  as  you  are,  know  you  not  that  the  substance  of 
your  forefathers  limbes  is  yet  tied  unto  ours  ?  Taste  them 
well,  for  in  them  shall  you  finde  the  relish  of  your  owne 
flesh  :  An  invention,  that  hath  no  shew  of  barbarisme.  Those 
that  paint  them  dying,  and  that  represent  this  action,  when 

229 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  they  are  put  to  execution,  delineate  the  prisoners  spitting  in 
XXX  their  executioners  faces,  and  making  mowes  at  them.  Verily, 
??i  m  so  long  as  breath  is  in  their  body,  they  never  cease  to  brave 
and  defie  them,  both  in  speech  and  countenance.  Surely,  in 
respect  of  us  these  are  very  savage  men  :  for  either  they  must 
be  so  in  good  sooth,  or  we  must  be  so  indeed :  There  is  a 
wondrous  distance  betweene  their  forme  and  ours.  Their 
men  have  many  wives,  and  by  how  much  more  they  are 
reputed  valiant,  so  much  the  greater  is  their  number.  The 
manner  and  beautie  in  their  marriages  is  wondrous  strange 
and  remarkable:  For,  the  same  jealousie  our  wives  have  to 
keepe  us  from  the  love  and  affection  of  other  women,  the 
same  have  theirs  to  procure  it.  Being  more  carefull  for  their 
husbands  honour  and  content,  than  of  any  thing  else :  They 
endevour  and  apply  all  their  industrie,  to  have  as  many 
rivals  as  possibly,  they  can,  forasmuch  as  it  is  a  testimonie  of 
their  husbands  vertue.  Our  women  would  count  it  a 
wonder,  but  it  is  not  so  :  It  is  vertue  properly  Matrimoniall ; 
but  of  the  highest  kinde.  And  in  the  Bible,  Lea,  Rachell, 
Sara,  and  Jacobs  wives,  brought  their  fairest  maiden  servants 
unto  their  husbands  beds.  And  Li  via  seconded  the  lustfull 
appetites  of  Augustus  to  her  great  prejudice.  And  Stratonica 
the  wife  of  King  Dejotarus  did  not  only  bring  a  most 
beauteous  chamber-maide,  that  served  her,  to  her  husbands 
bed,  but  very  carefully  brought  up  the  children  he  begot  on 
her,  and  by  all  possible  meanes  aided  and  furthered  them  to 
succeed  in  their  fathers  roialtie.  And  least  a  man  should 
thinke,  that  all  this  is  done  by  a  simple,  and  servile,  or  awe- 
full  dutie  unto  their  custome,  and  by  the  impression  of  their 
ancient  customes  authoritie,  without  discourse  or  judgement, 
and  because  they  are  so  blockish,  and  dull  spirited,  that  they 
can  take  no  other  resolution,  it  is  not  amisse,  wee  alleage 
some  evidence  of  their  sufficiencie.  Besides  what  I  have  said 
of  one  of  their  warlike  songs,  I  have  another  amorous 
canzonet,  which  beginneth  in  this  sence :  '  Adder  stay,  stay 
'  good  adder,  that  my  sister  may  by  the  patterne  of  thy 
c  partie-coloured  coat  drawe  the  fashion  and  worke  of  a  rich 
c  lace,  for  me  to  give  unto  my  love ;  so  may  thy  beautie,  thy 
'  nimblenesse  or  disposition  be  ever  preferred  before  all  other 
'  serpents."  The  first  couplet  is  the  burthen  of  the  song.  I 
230 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

am  so  conversant  with  Poesie,  that  I  may  judge,  this  inven-  CHAPTER 
tion  hath  no  barbarisme  at  all  in  it,  but  is  altogether  Ana-  XXX 
creontike.  Their  language  is  a  kinde  of  pleasant  speech,  and  v  n  B 
hath  a  pleasing  sound,  and  some  affinitie  with  the  Greeke 
terminations.  Three  of  that  nation,  ignorant  how  deare 
the  knowledge  of  our  corruptions  will  one  day  cost  their 
repose,  securitie,  and  happinesse,  and  how  their  ruine  shall 
proceed  from  this  commerce,  which  I  imagine  is  already  well 
advanced,  (miserable  as  they  are  to  have  suffered  themselves 
to  be  so  cosoned  by  a  desire  of  new-fangled  novelties,  and  to 
have  quit  the  calmenesse  of  their  climate,  to  come  and  see 
ours)  were  at  Roane  in  the  time  of  our  late  King  Charles  the 
ninth,  who  talked  with  them  a  great  while.  They  were 
shewed  our  fashions,  our  pompe,  and  the  forme  of  a  faire 
Citie ;  afterward  some  demanded  their  advise,  and  would 
needs  know  of  them  what  things  of  note  and  admirable  they 
had  observed  amongst  us :  they  answered  three  things,  the 
last  of  which  I  have  forgotten,  and  am  very  sorie  for  it,  the 
other  two  I  yet  remember.  They  said,  '  First,  they  found  it 
'  very  strange,  that  so  many  tall  men  with  long  beards, 
'  strong  and  well  armed,  as  it  were  about  the  Kings  person 
4  (it  is  very  likely  they  meant  the  Switzers  of  his  guard) 
'  would  submit  themselves  to  obey  a  beardlesse  childe,  and 
'  that  we  did  not  rather  chuse  one  amongst  them  to  com- 
'  mand  the  rest.1  Secondly  (they  have  a  manner  of  phrase 
whereby  they  call  men  but  a  moytie  one  of  another.)  '  They 
6  had  perceived,  there  were  men  amongst  us  full  gorged  with 
6  all  sortes  of  commodities,  and  others  which  hunger-starved, 
'  and  bare  with  need  and  povertie,  begged  at  their  gates : 
6  and  found  it  strange,  these  moyties  so  needy  could  endure 
6  such  an  injustice,  and  that  they  tooke  not  the  others  by 
4  the  throte,  or  set  fire  on  their  houses."*  I  talked  a  good 
while  with  one  of  them,  but  I  had  so  bad  an  interpreter,  and 
who  did  so  ill  apprehend  my  meaning,  and  who  through  his 
foolishnesse  was  so  troubled  to  conceive  my  imaginations, 
that  I  could  draw  no  great  matter  from  him.  Touching 
that  point,  wherein  I  demanded  of  him,  what  good  he  re 
ceived  by  the  superioritie  he  had  amongst  his  countriemen 
(for  he  was  a  Captaine  and  our  Marriners  called  him  King) 
he  told  me,  it  was  to  march  formost  in  any  charge  of  warre  : 

231 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  further,  I  asked  him,  how  many  men  did  follow  him,  hee 
XXX        shewed  me  a  distance  of  place,  to  signin'e  they  were  as  many 
h  11     m~  as  might  be  contained  in  so  much  ground,  which  I  guessed 
to  be  about  4  or  5  thousand  men :  moreover  I  demanded, 
if  when  warres  were  ended,  all  his  authoritie  expired;  he 
answered,  that  hee  had  only  this  left  him,  which  was,  that 
when  he  went  on  progresse,  and  visited  the  villages  depend 
ing  of  him,  the  inhabitants  prepared  paths  and  high-waies 
athwart  the  hedges  of  their  woods,  for  him  to  passe 
through  at  ease.     All  that  is  not  verie  ill ;  but 
what  of  that  ?     They  weare  no  kinde  of 
breeches  nor  hosen. 


THE  THIRTY-FIRST  CHAPTER 

That  a  man  ought  soberly  to  meddle  with  judging 
of  divine  lawes. 


KINGS  unknowne  are  the  true  scope  of 
imposture,  and  subject  of  Legerdemaine : 
forasmuch  as  strangenesse  it  selfe  doth 
first  give  credit  unto  matters,  and  not 
being  subject  to  our  ordinarie  discourses, 
they  deprive  us  of  meanes  to  withstand 
them.  To  this  purpose,  said  Plato,  '  it  is 
6  an  easie  matter  to  please,  speaking  of 
6  the  nature  of  the  Gods,  than  of  mens:1  For  the  Auditors 
ignorance  lends  a  faire  and  large  cariere,  and  free  libertie,  to 
the  handling  of  secret  hidden  matters.  Whence  it  folio weth, 
that  nothing  is  so  firmly  beleeved,  as  that  which  a  man 
knoweth  least;  nor  are  there  people  more  assured  in  their 
reports,  than  such  as  tell  us  fables,  as  Alchumists,  Prognosti- 
cators,  Fortune-tellers,  Palmesters,  Physitians,  id  genus  omne, 
'  and  such  like."*  To  which,  if  I  durst,  I  would  joyne  a  rable 
of  men,  that  are  ordinarie  interpreters  and  controulers  of 
Gods  secret  desseignes,  presuming  to  finde  out  the  causes  of 
every  accident,  and  to  prie  into  the  secrets  of  Gods  divine 
will,  the  incomprehensible  motives  of  his  works.  And  how- 
beit,  the  continuall  varietie  and  discordance  of  events  drive 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

them  from  one  corner  to  another,  and  from  East  to  West,  CHAPTER 
they  will  not  leave  to  follow  their  bowle,  and  with  one  small  XXXI 
pensill  drawe  both  white  and  blacke.  There  is  this  com-  Tha*  a  ™an 
mendable  observance  in  a  certaine  Indian  nation,  who  if  \y\0  mgcldfe 
they  chance  to  be  discomfited  in  any  skirmish  or  battel,  they  with  judging 
publikely  beg  pardon  of  the  Sunne,  who  is  their  God,  as  for  of  divine 
an  unjust  action,  referring  their  good  or  ill  fortune  to  divine  lawes 
reason,  submitting  their  judgement  and  discourses  unto  it. 
It  suffiseth  a  Christian  to  beleeve,  that  all  things  come  from 
God,  to  receive  them  from  his  divine  and  inscrutable 
wisdome  with  thanksgiving,  and  in  what  manner  soever  they 
are  sent  him,  to  take  them  in  good  part.  But  I  utterly 
disalow  a  common  custome  amongst  us,  which  is  to  ground 
and  establish  our  religion  upon  the  prosperitie  of  our 
enterprises.  Our  beleefe  hath  other  sufficient  foundations, 
and  need  not  be  authorized  by  events.  For  the  people 
accustomed  to  these  plausible  arguments,  and  agreeing  with 
his  taste,  when  events  sort  contrarie  and  disadvantageous  to 
their  expectation,  they  are  in  hazard  to  waver  in  their  faith  : 
As  in  the  civil  warres,  wherin  we  are  now  for  religions  sake, 
those  which  got  the  advantage,  at  the  conflict  of  Rochelabeille, 
making  great  joy  and  bone-fires  for  that  accident,  and  using 
that  fortune,  as  an  assured  approbation  of  their  faction : 
when  afterward  they  come  to  excuse  their  disaster  of  Mont- 
contour  and  larnac,  which  are  scourges  and  fatherly  chastise 
ments  :  if  they  have  not  a  people  wholy  at  their  mercy,  they 
will  easily  make  him  perceive,  what  it  is  to  take  two  kinds 
of  corne  out  of  one  sacke  :  and  from  one  and  the  same 
mouth  to  blow  both  hot  and  cold.  It  were  better  to 
entertaine  it  with  the  true  foundations  of  veritie.  It  was 
a  notable  Sea-battel,  which  was  lately  gained  against  the 
Turkes,  under  the  conduct  of  Don  John  of  Austria.  But  it 
hath  pleased  God  to  make  us  at  other  times  both  see  and 
feele  other  such,  to  our  no  small  losse  and  detriment.  To 
conclude,  it  is  no  easie  matter  to  reduce  divine  things  unto 
our  ballance,  so  they  suffer  no  impeachment :  And  he  that 
would  yeeld  a  reason,  why  Arrius  and  Leo  his  Pope,  chiefe 
Principals,  and  maine  supporters  of  this  heresie,  died  both  at 
severall  times,  of  so  semblable  and  so  strange  deaths  (for 
being  forced  through  a  violent  belly-ach  to  goe  from  their 
2  E  233 


CHAPTER 
XXXI 

That   a    man 
ought    sober 
ly  to  meddle 
with   judging 
of  divine 
lawes 


Wisd.  ix.  13. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

disputations  to  their  close-stoole,  both  suddenly  yeelded  up 
their  ghosts  on  them)  and  exaggerate  that  divine  vengeance 
by  the  circumstance  of  the  place,  might  also  adde  the  death 
of  Heliogabalus  unto  it,  who  likewise  was  slaine  upon 
a  privie.  But  what  ?  Ireneus  is  found  to  be  engaged  in  like 
fortune  :  Gods  intent  being  to  teach  us,  that  the  good  have 
some  thing  else  to  hope  for,  and  the  wicked  somewhat  else 
to  feare,  than  the  good  or  bad  fortune  of  this  world :  He 
manageth  and  applieth  them  according  to  his  secret  disposi 
tion  :  and  depriveth  us  of  the  meanes,  thereby  foolishly  to 
make  our  profit.  And  those,  that  according  to  humane 
reason  will  thereby  prevaile,  doe  but  mocke  themselves.  They 
never  give  one  touch  of  it,  that  they  receive  not  two  for  it. 
S.  Augustine  giveth  a  notable  triall  of  it  upon  his  adversaries. 
It  is  a  conflict,  no  more  decided  by  the  armes  of  memorie, 
than  by  the  weapons  of  reason.  A  man  should  be  satisfied 
with  the  light,  which  it  pleaseth  the  Sunne  to  communicate 
unto  us  by  vertue  of  his  beanies ;  and  he  that  shall  lift  up 
his  eies  to  take  a  greater  within  his  body,  let  him  not  thinke 
it  strange,  if  for  a  reward  of  his  over- weening  and  arrogancie 
he  loseth  his  sight.  Quis  hominum  potest  scire  consUium 
Del?  aut  quis  poterit  cogitare,  quid  velit  dominus? 
6  Who  amongst  men  can  know  Gods  counsell,  or 
'  who  can  thinke  what  God  will  doe  ? ' 


THE    THIRTY-SECOND   CHAPTER 

To  avoid  voluptuousnesse  in  regard  of  life. 

HAVE  noted  the  greatest  part  of  ancient  opin 
ions  to  agree  in  this:  That  when  our  life 
affords  more  evill  than  good,  it  is  then  time 
to  die :  and  to  preserve  our  life  to  our  torment 
and  incommoditie,  is  to  spurre  and  shocke 
the  very  rules  of  nature :  as  say  the  old  rules. 

Gnom.  Grcec.  6.  V  &lv  oXiintos  rj  Gaveiv  €vdaip,6va>s. 


234 


Or  live  without  distresse, 
Or  die  with  happinesse. 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

Ka\bv  TO  6vrj(TK€iv  ols  vftptv  TO  £rjv  (frcpfi.      Gnom.  Grcec.  6.    CHAPTER 
Tis  good  for  them  to  die,  XXXII 

Whom  life  brings  infamie.  To  avoid  v°- 

luptuousnesse 
Kpelao-oi/  TO  prj  £rjv  eVriV,  fj  £rjv  dOXias.  in    regard 

Tis  better  not  to  live,  of  life 

Than  wretchedly  not  thrive.  SOPH.  STOB. 

Serm.  118. 

But  to  drive  off  the  contempt  of  death  to  such  a  degree, 
as  to  imploy  it  to  distract,  and  remove  himselfe  from 
honours,  riches,  greatnesse,  and  other  goods  and  favours, 
which  wee  call  the  goods  of  fortune :  as  if  reason  had  not 
enough  to  doe,  to  perswade  us  to  forgoe  and  leave  them, 
without  adding  this  new  surcharge  unto  it,  I  had  neither 
scene  the  same  commanded  nor  practised  untill  such  time  as 
one  place  of  Seneca  came  to  my  hands,  wherein  counselling 
Lucilius  (a  man  mightie  and  in  great  authoritie  about  the 
Emperour)  to  change  this  voluptuous  and  pompous  life,  and 
to  withdraw  himselfe  from  this  ambition  of  the  world,  to  some 
solitarie,  quiet  and  philosophicall  life :  about  which  Lucilius 
alleaged  some  difficulties:  'My  advice  is1  (saith  he) '  that  either 
6  thou  leave  and  quit  that  life,  or  thy  life  altogether :  But  I 
'  perswade  thee  to  follow  the  gentler  way,  and  rather  to  untie 
6  than  breake  what  thou  hast  so  ill  knit :  alwaies  provided 
'  thou  breake  it,  if  thou  canst  not  otherwise  untie  the  same.1 
There  is  no  man  so  base  minded,  that  loveth  not  rather  to 
fall  once,  than  ever  to  remaine  in  feare  of  falling.  I  should 
have  deemed  this  counsell  agreeing  with  the  Stoickes  rudenes  : 
But  it  is  more  strange  it  should  be  borrowed  of  Epicurus,  who 
to  that  purpose  writeth  this  consonant  unto  Idomeneus.  4  Yet 
6  thinke  I  to  have  noted  some  such  like  thing  amongst  our 
'  owne  people,  but  with  Christian  moderation.  Saint  Hilarie 
'  Bishop  of  Poitiers,  a  famous  enemie  of  the  Arrian  heresie, 
'  being  in  Syria,  was  advertised  that  Abra  his  only  daughter 
'  whom  hee  had  left  at  home  with  her  mother,  was  by  the 
'  greatest  Lords  of  the  countrie  solicited  and  sued  unto  for 
4  marriage,  as  a  damosell  very  well  brought  up,  faire,  rich, 
'  and  in  the  prime  of  her  age :  he  writ  unto  her  (as  we  see) 
'  that  she  should  remove  her  affections,  from  all  the  pleasures 
6  and  advantages  might  be  presented  her :  for,  in  his  voyage 
'  he  had  found  a  greater  and  worthier  match  or  husband  of 

235 


CHAPTER 
XXXII 

To  avoid  vo- 
luptuousnesse 
regard 


in 


of  life 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

'  far  higher  power  and  magnificence,  who  should  present  and 
6  endow  her  with  roabes  and  jewels  of  un valuable  price. 
'  His  purpose  was  to  make  her  lose  the  appetite  and  use  of 
4  worldly  pleasures,  and  wholly  to  wed  her  unto  God.  To 
6  which,  deeming  his  daughters  death  the  shortest  and  most 
'  assured  way,  he  never  ceased  by  vowes,  prayers,  and  orisons, 
'  humbly  to  beseech  God  to  take  her  out  of  this  world,  and 
'  to  call  her  to  his  mercie,  as  it  came  to  passe ;  for  shee 
'  deceased  soone  after  his  returne :  whereof  he  shewed  manifest 
4  tokens  of  singular  gladnesse.'  This  man  seemeth  to  endeere 
himselfe  above  others,  in  that  at  first  sight  he  addresseth 
himselfe  to  this  meane,  which  they  never  embrace  but  sub 
sidiarily,  and  sithence  it  is  towards  his  only  daughter.  But 
I  will  omit  the  successe  of  this  storie,  although  it  be  not  to 
my  purpose.  Saint  Hilaries  wife,  having  understood  by  him, 
how  her  daughters  death  succeeded  with  his  intent  and  will, 
and  how  much  more  happy  it  was  for  her  to  be  dislodged  from 
out  this  world,  than  still  to  abide  therein,  conceived  so  lively 
an  apprehension  of  the  eternall  and  heavenly  blessednesse, 
that  with  importunate  instancie  she  solicited  her  husband, 
to  doe  as  much  for  her.  And  God,  at  their  earnest  entreatie, 
and  joynt-common  prayers,  having  soone  after  taken  her 
unto  himselfe  :  it  was  a  death  embraced  with  singular 
and  mutuall  contentment  to  both. 


THE   THIRTY-THIRD    CHAPTER 

That  fortune  is  oftentimes  met  withall  in  pursuit 
of  reason. 

HE  inconstancie  of  Fortunes  diverse  waver 
ing,  is  the  cause  shee  should  present  us 
with  all  sorts  of  visages.     Is   there  any 
action  of  justice  more  manifest  that  this  ? 
Caesar  Borgia  Duke  of  Valentinois,  having 
resolved  to  poison  Adrian    Cardinall   of 
Cornetto,  with  whom  Pope  Alexander  the 
sixth,  his  father  and  he  were  to  sup  that 
night  in  Vaticane,  sent  certaine  bottles  of  empoysoned  wine 
236 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

before,  and  gave  his  Butler  great  charge  to  have  a  speciall  CHAPTER 
care  of  it.     The  Pope  comming  thither  before  his  sonne,  and       XXXIII 

calling  for  some  drinke;  the  butler  supposing  the  Wine  had  That  fortune 

(,  „  T    T  !  .rr»       ,i  i  pis   oftentimes 

beene  so  caret  ully  commended  unto  him  tor  the  goodnesse  or  met  withall  in 

it,  immediately  presented  some  unto  the  Pope,  who  whilest  pursuit  of 
he  was  drinking,  his  sonne  came  in  and  never  imagining  his  reason 
bottles  had  beene  toucht,  tooke  the  cup  and  pledged  his 
father,  so  that  the  Pope  died  presently ;  and  the  sonne,  after 
he  had  long  time  beene  tormented  with  sicknesse,  recovered 
to  another  worse  fortune.  It  sometimes  seemeth,  that  when 
we  least  think  on  her,  shee  is  pleased  to  sport  with  us.  The 
Lord  of  Estree,  then  guidon  to  the  Lord  of  Vandosme,  and 
the  Lord  of  Liques,  Lievtenant  to  the  Duke  of  Ascot,  both 
servants  to  the  Lord  of  Foungueselles  sister,  albeit  of  con- 
trarie  factions  (as  it  hapneth  among  neighbouring  bordurers) 
the  Lord  of  Liques  got  her  to  wife  :  But  even  upon  his  wed 
ding  day,  and  which  is  worse,  before  his  going  to  bed,  the  bride- 
groome  desiring  to  breake  a  staffe  in  favour  of  his  new  Bride 
and  Mistris,  went  out  to  skirmish  neere  to  Saint  Omer,  where 
the  Lord  of  Estree  being  the  stronger  tooke  him  prisoner, 
and  to  endeare  his  advantage,  the  Lady  her  selfe  was  faine, 

Conjugis  ante  coacta  novi  dimittere  collum,  CATUL.  Eleg. 

Qudm  veniens  una  atque  altera  rursus  hyems  iv.  81. 

Noctibus  in  longis  avidum  saturasset  amorem, 

Her  new  feeres  necke  for'st  was  she  to  forgoe, 
Ere  winters  one  and  two  returning  sloe, 
In  long  nights  had  ful-fiTd 
Her  love  so  eager  wil'd, 

in  courtesie,  to  sue  unto  him  for  the  deliverie  of  his  prisoner, 
which  he  granted ;  the  French  Nobilitie  never  refusing  Ladies 
any  kindnesse.  Seemeth  she  not  to  be  a  right  artist  ?  Con- 
stantine  the  sonne  of  Helen  founded  the  Empire  of  Constan 
tinople,  and  so,  many  ages  after,  Constantine  the  sonne  of 
Helen  ended  the  same.  She  is  sometimes  pleased  to  envie 
our  miracles  :  we  hold  an  opinion,  that  King  Clovis  besieging 
Angoulesme,  the  wals  by  a  divine  favour  fell  of  themselves. 
And  Bouchet  borroweth  of  some  author,  that  King  Robert 
beleagring  a  Citie,  and  having  secretly  stolne  away  from  the 
siege  to  Orleans,  there  to  solemnize  the  feasts  of  Saint 
Aignan,  as  he  was  in  his  earnest  devotion,  upon  a  certaine 

237 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  passage  of  the  Masse,  the  walles   of  the   towne  besieged, 
XXXIII      without   any   batterie,   fell   flat   to    the   ground.     She   did 
T:  .:   :      ttnc  altogether  contrarie  in  our  warres  of  Millane:  For,  Captaine 
;,?  ^    VI       ?  Ren«e^  beleagiiiig  the  CUx  of  Eronna  foe  us,  und  having 
pursuit  of    caused  a  forcible  mine  to  be  wrought  under  a  great  curtine 
reason       of  the  walles,  by  force  whereof,  it  being  violently  flowne  up 
from  out  the  ground,  did  notwithstanding,  whole  and  un 
broken,  fall  so  right  into  his  foundation  againe,  that  the 
besieged  found  no  inconvenience  at  all  by  it.     She  sometimes 
playeth  the  Physitian.     '  lason  Phereus  being  utterly  forsaken 

*  of  all  Physitians,  by  reason  of  an  impostume  he  had  in  his 

*  breast,  and  desirous  to  be  rid  of  it,  though  it  were  by  death, 

*  as  one  of  the  forlorne  hope,  rusht  into  a  battel  amongst  the 

*  thickest  throng  of  his  enemies,  where  he  was  so  rightly 
4  wounded  acrosse  the  body,  that  his  impostume  brake,  and 
4  he  was  cured.     Did  shee  not  exceed  the  Painter  Protogenes 
4  in  the  skill  of  his  trade  ?  who  having  perfected  the  image 

*  of  a  wearie  and  panting  dog,  and  in  all  parts  over-tired,  to 

*  his  content,  but  being  unable,  as  he  desired,  lively  to  repre- 

*  sent  the  drivel  or  slaver  of  his  mouth,  vexed  against  his 
4  owne  worke,  took  his  spunge,  and  moist  as  it  was  with 
4  divers  colours,  threw  it  at  the  picture,  with  purpose  to  blot 
4  and  deface  all   hee  had  done :    fortune  did  so  fitly  and 

*  lightly  came  the  same  toward  the  dogs  chaps,  that  there 

*  it  perfectly  finished,  what  his  art  could  never  attaine  unto.* 
Doth  she  not  sometimes  addresse  and  correct  our  counsels  ? 
Isabell  Queene  of  England,  being  to  repasse  from  Zeland  into 
her  Kingdome  with  an  armie,  in  favour  of  her  sonne  against 
her  husband,  had  utterly  beene  cast  away,  had  she  come  unto 
the  Port  intended,  being  there  expected  by  her  enemies : 
But  fortune  against  her  will,  brought  her  to  another  place. 
where  shee  safely  landed.     And  that  ancient  fellow,   who 
hurling  a  stone  at  a  dog,  misst  him,  and  therewithal!  hit  and 
slew  his  stepdame,  had  she  not  reason  to  pronounce  this 
Terse, 

mu 


Chance  of  it  selfe,  than  wee, 
Doth  better  say  and  see? 

Fortune  hath  better  advice  than  wee.     Icetes  had  prac- 
tised  and  suborned  two   souldiers  to  kill   Timoleon,  then 
288 


0 


reason 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

residing  at  Adrane  in  Sicily.  They  appointed  a  time  to  doe,  CHAPTER 
as  he  should  be  assisting  at  some  sacrifice;  and  scattering  XXXIII 
themselves  amongst  the  multitude,  as  they  were  winking  one 
upon  another,  to  shew  how  they  had  a  verie  fit  opportunitie 
to  doe  the  deed  :  Loe  here  a  third  man,  that  with  a  huge  pursuit  of 
blow  of  a  sword,  striketh  one  of  them  over  the  head,  and 
fels  him  dead  to  the  ground  and  so  runs  away.  His  fellow 
supposing  himself  e  discovered  and  undone,  runs  to  the  altar, 
suing  for  sanctuarie,  with  promise  to  confesse  the  truth  ; 
Even  as  he  was  declaring  the  conspiracie,  behold  the  third 
man,  who  had  likewise  beene  taken,  whom  as  a  murtherer 
the  people  tugged  and  haled  through  the  throng  toward 
Timoleon  and  the  chiefest  of  the  assembly,  where  he  humbly 
calleth  for  mercy,  alleaging  that  he  had  justly  murthered 
the  murtherer  of  his  father,  whom  his  good  chance  was  to 
finde  there,  averring  by  good  witnesses,  before  them  all,  that 
in  the  Citie  of  the  Leontines,  his  father  had  beene  prodi- 
toriously  slaine  by  him,  on  whom  he  had  now  revenged  him- 
selfe.  In  meede  whereof,  because  he  had  beene  so  fortunate 
(in  seeking  to  right  his  fathers  untimely  death)  to  save  the 
common  father  of  the  Sicilians  from  so  imminent  a  danger, 
he  had  ten  Attike  mines  awarded  him.  This  fortune  in  her 
directions  exceedeth  all  the  rules  of  humane  wisdome.  But 
to  conclude,  is  not  an  expresse  application  of  her  favour, 
goodnesse,  and  singular  pietie  manifestly  discovered  in  this 
action  r  Ignatius  the  Father  and  tiie  Sonne,  both  banished 
by  proscription  by  the  Triumvirs  of  Rome,  resolved  on  this 
generous  act,  to  yeeld  their  lives  one  into  anothers  hands, 
and  thereby  frustrate  the  Tyrants  cruelty.  They  furiously 
with  their  keene  rapiers  drawne,  ran  one  against  another": 
Fortune  so  directed  their  points,  that  each  received  his 
mortall  stroke  ;  adding  to  the  honour  of  seld-seene  an  amity, 
that  they  had  j  ust  so  much  strength  left  them,  to  draw  their 
armed  and  bloudy  hands  from  out  their  goared  wounds,  in 
that  plight,  so  fast  to  embrace,  and  so  hard  to  claspe  one 
another,  that  the  hangmen  were  forced,  at  one  stroke,  and 
together,  to  cut  off  both  their  heads  ;  leaving  their  bodies 
for  ever  tied  in  so  honourable  a  knot,  and  their 
wounds  so  joyned,  that  they  lovingly  drew  and 
suckt  each  others  bloud,  breath,  and  life. 

ttfl 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE   THIRTY-FOURTH   CHAPTER 

Of  a  defect  in  our  policies. 

Y  whilome-father,  a  man  who  had  no  helpe 
but  from  experience,  and  his  owne  nature, 
yet  of  an  unspotted  judgement,  hath 
heretofore  told  me,  that  he  much  desired 
to  bring  in  this  custome,  which  is,  that 
in  all  cities  there  should  be  a  certaine 
appointed  place,  to  which,  whosoever 
should  have  need  of  any  thing,  might 
come  and  cause  his  businesse  to  be  registred  by  some  officer 
appointed  for  that  purpose:  As  for  example,  if  one  have 
pearles  to  sell,  he  should  say,  I  seeke  to  sell  some  pearls : 
and  another,  I  seeke  to  buy  some  pearls :  Such  a  man  would 
faine  have  companie  to  travell  to  Paris  ;  Such  a  one  enquireth 
for  a  servant  of  this  or  that  qualitie ;  Such  a  one  seeketh  for 
a  Master ;  another  a  workman ;  Some  this ;  some  that ; 
every  man  as  he  needed.  And  it  seemeth  that  this  meanes 
of  enter-warning  one  another  would  bring  no  small  com- 
moditie  unto  common  commerce  and  societie ;  For  there  are 
ever  conditions  that  enter-seeke  one  another,  and  because 
they  understand  not  one  another,  they  leave  men  in  great 
necessitie.  I  understand,  to  the  infamous  reproach  of  our 
age,  that  even  in  our  sight,  two  most  excellent  men  in 
knowledge,  have  miserably  perished  for  want  of  food  and 
other  necessaries :  Lilius  Gregorius  Giraldus  in  Italy,  and 
Sebastianus  Castalio  in  Germanic:  And  I  verily  beleeve 
there  are  many  thousands,  who  had  they  knowne  or  under 
stood  their  wants,  would  either  have  sent  for  them,  and  with 
large  stipends  entertained  them,  or  would  have  convaid 
them  succour,  where  ever  they  had  beene.  The  world  is  not 
so  generally  corrupted,  but  I  know  some,  that  would  earnestly 
wish,  and  with  harty  affections  desire,  the  goods  which  their 
forefathers  have  left  them,  might,  so  long  as  it  shall  please 
fortune  they  may  enjoy  them,  be  emploied  for  the  reliefe  of 
rare,  and  supply  of  excellent  mens  necessitie,  and  such  as  for 
any  kind  of  worth  and  vertue  are  remarkable ;  many  of 
240 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

which  are  daily  scene  to  be  pursued  by  ill  fortune  even  to  CHAPTER 
the  utmost  extremitie,  and  that  would  take  such  order  for      XXXIV 
them,  as  had  they  not  their  ease  and  content,  it  might  only  Of  a  de^c.t  m 
be  imputed  to  their  want  of  reason  or  lacke  of  discretion. 
In  this  Oeconomicke  or  houshold  order  my  father  had  this 
order,  which  I  can  commend,  but  no  way  follow :  which  was, 
that  besides  the  day-booke  of  houshold  affaires,  wherein  are 
registred  at  least   expences,  paiments,   gifts,  bargains  and 
sales,  that  require  not  a  Notaries  hand  to  them,  which  booke 
a  receiver  had  the  keeping  of:  he  appointed  another  journall- 
booke  to  one  of  his  servants,  who  was  his  clerke,  wherein  he 
should  insert  and  orderly  set  downe  all  accidents  worthy  the 
noting,  and  day  by  day  register  the  memories  of  the  historic 
of  his  house:   A  thing  very  pleasant  to  read,  when  time 
began  to  weare  out  the  remembrance  of  them,  and  fit  for  us 
to  passe  the  time  withall,  and  to  resolve  some  doubts :  when 
such  a  worke  was  begun,  when  ended,  what  way  or  course 
was  taken,  what  accidents  hapned,  how  long  it  continued ; 
all  our  voyages,  where,  and  how  long  we  were  from  home ; 
our  marriages,  who  died,  and  when  ;  the  receiving  of  good  or 
bad  tidings,  who  came,  who  went,  changing  or  removing  of 
houshold   officers,    taking   of   new,    or    discharging   of  old 
servants,  and  such  like  matters.    An  ancient  custome,  and 
which  I  would  have  all  men  use  and  bring  into  fashion 
again e  in  their  severall  homes  :  and  I  repent  my  selfe, 
I  have  so  foolishly  neglected  the  same. 


THE    THIRTY-FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  use  of  Apparell. 

;HATSOEVER  I  ayme  at,  I  must  needs  force 
some  of  customes  contradictions,  so  carefully 
hath  she  barred  all  our  entrances.  I  was 
devising  in  this  chil-cold  season,  whether  the 
fashion  of  these  late  discovered  Nations  to 
go  naked,  be  a  custome  forced  by  the  hot  temperature 
of  the  ayre,  as  we  say  of  the  Indians  and  Moores,  or 
whether  it  be  an  originall  manner  of  mankind.  Men  of 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  understanding,  forasmuch  as  whatsoever  is  contained  under 
XXXV  heaven  (as  saith  the  holy  writ)  is  subject  to  the  same  lawes, 
^^  of  are  wont  in  such  like  considerations,  where  naturall  lawes  are 
to  be  distinguished  from  those  invented  by  man,  to  have 
recourse  to  the  generall  policie  of  the  world,  where  nothing 
that  is  counterfet  can  be  admitted.  Now  all  things  being 
exactly  furnished  else-whence  with  all  necessaries  to  main- 
taine  this  being,  it  is  not  to  be  imagined  that  we  alone 
should  be  produced  in  a  defective  and  indigent  estate,  yea, 
and  in  such  a  one,  as  cannot  be  maintained  without  forrain 
helpe.  My  opinion  is,  that  even  as  all  plants,  trees,  living 
creatures,  and  whatsoever  hath  life,  is  naturally  scene 
furnished  with  sufficient  furniture  to  defend  it  selfe  from  the 
injurie  of  all  wethers  : 

LUCR.  iv.  932.  Propteredque  fere  res  omnes,  aut  corio  sunt, 

Aut  seta,  aut  conchis,  aut  callo,  aut  cortice  tecta. 

Therefore  all  things  almost  we  cover'd  marke, 
With  hide,  or  haire,  or  shels,  or  brawne,  or  barke. 

Even  so  were  we  :  But  as  those  who  by  an  artificiall  light 
extinguish  the  brightnesse  of  the  day,  we  have  quenched  our 
proper  meanes,  by  such  as  wee  have  borrowed.  And  wee 
may  easily  discerne,  that  only  custome  makes  that  seeme 
impossible  unto  us,  which  is  not  so :  For  of  those  nations 
that  have  no  knowledge  of  cloaths,  some  are  found  situated 
under  the  same  heaven,  and  climate,  or  paralell,  that  we  are 
in,  and  more  cold  and  sharper  than  ours.  Moreover,  the 
tenderest  parts  of  us  are  ever  bare  and  naked,  as  our  eyes, 
face,  mouth,  nose,  and  eares ;  and  our  countrie-swaines  (as 
our  forefathers  wont)  most  of  them  at  this  day  goe  bare- 
breasted  downe  to  the  navill.  Had  we  beene  borne  needing 
petti-coats  and  breeches,  there  is  no  doubt,  but  nature  would 
have  armed  that  which  she  hath  left  to  the  batterie  of 
seasons,  and  furie  of  wethers,  with  some  thicker  skin  or  hide, 
as  shee  hath  done  our  fingers  ends,  and  the  scales  of  our  feet. 
Why  seemes  this  hard  to  be  believed  ?  Betweene  my  fashion 
of  apparell,  and  that  of  one  of  my  countrie-clownes,  I  find 
much  more  difference  betweene  him  and  me,  than  betweene 
his  fashion,  and  that  of  a  man  who  is  cloathed  but  with  his 
bare  skin.  How  many  men  (especially  in  Turkic,)  go  ever 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

naked  for  devotions  sake?  A  certaine  man  demanded  of  CHAPTER 
one  of  our  loytring  rogues,  whom  in  the  deep  of  frosty  XXXV 
Winter,  he  saw  wandring  up  and  downe  with  nothing  but  »  .  us^ 
his  shirt  about  him,  and  yet  as  blithe  and  lusty  as  an  other 
that  keepes  himselfe  muffled  and  wrapt  in  warme  furres  up 
to  the  eares  ;  how  he  could  have  patience  to  go  so.  '  And 
'  have  not  you,  good  Sir,"*  (answered  he)  '  your  face  all  bare  ? 
4  Imagine  I  am  all  face.1  The  Italians  report  (as  far  as 
I  remember)  of  the  Duke  of  Florence  his  foole,  who  when 
his  Lord  asked  him,  how  being  so  ill  clad,  he  could  endure 
the  cold,  which  he  hardly  was  able  to  doe  himselfe;  To 
whom  the  foole  replied ;  '  Master,  use  but  my  receipt,  and 
'  put  all  the  cloaths  you  have  upon  you,  as  I  doe  all  mine ; 
'  you  shall  feele  no  more  cold  than  I  doe.1  King  Massinissa, 
even  in  his  eldest  daies,  were  it  never  so  cold,  so  frosty,  so 
stormie,  or  sharpe  wether,  could  never  be  induced,  to  put 
something  on  his  head,  but  went  alwaies  bare-headed.  The 
like  is  reported  of  the  Emperor  Severus.  In  the  battels  that 
past  betweene  the  ^Egyptians,  and  the  Persians,  Herodotus 
saith,  that  both  himselfe  and  divers  others  tooke  speciall 
notice,  that  of  such  as  lay  slaine  on  the  ground,  the 
^Egyptians  sculs  were  without  comparison  much  harder  than 
the  Persians  :  by  reason  that  these  go  ever  with  their  heads 
covered  with  coifs  and  turbants,  and  those  from  their  infancie 
ever  shaven  and  bare-headed.  And  King  Agesilaus,  even  in 
his  decrepit  age,  was  ever  wont  to  weare  his  cloaths  both 
Winter  and  Summer  alike.  Suetonius  affirmeth,  that  Caesar 
did  ever  march  formost  before  his  troupes,  and  most  com 
monly  bare-headed,  and  on  foot,  whether  the  sunne  shone,  or 
it  rained.  The  like  is  reported  of  Hanniball, 

— turn  vertice  nudo,  SYL.  ITAL.  250. 

Eoccipere  insanos  imbres,  coslique  ruinam. 

Bare-headed  then  he  did  endure, 
Heav'ns  ruine  and  mad-raging  showre. 

A  Venetian  that  hath  long  dwelt  amongst  them,  and  who 
is  but  lately  returned  thence,  writeth,  that  in  the  Kingdome  of 
Pegu,  both  men  and  women,  having  all  other  parts  clad,  goe 
ever  bare-footed,  yea,  and  on  horse-backe  also.  And  Plato  for 
the  better  health  and  preservation  of  the  body  doth  earnestly 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  perswade,  that  no  man  should  ever  give  the  feet  and  the  head 
XXXV  other  cover,  than  Nature  hath  allotted  them.  He  whom 
A  reU  ^e  P°l°nians  cnuse  f°r  their  King  next  to  ours,  who  may 
worthily  be  esteemed  one  of  the  greatest  Princes  of  our  age, 
doth  never  weare  gloves,  nor  what  wether  soever  it  be, 
winter  or  summer,  other  bonnet  abroad  than  in  the  warme 
house.  As  I  cannot  endure  to  goe  unbuttoned  or  untrussed, 
so  the  husband-men  neighbouring  about  me,  would  be,  and 
feele  themselves  as  fettered  or  hand-bound,  with  going  so. 
Varro  is  of  opinion,  that  when  we  were  appointed  to  stand 
bare  headed  before  the  gods,  or  in  presence  of  the  Magis 
trates,  it  was  rather  done  for  our  health,  and  to  enure  and 
arme  us  against  injuries  of  the  wether,  than  in  respect  of 
reverence.  And  since  we  are  speaking  of  cold,  and  are 
French-men,  accustomed  so  strangely  to  array  our  selves  in 
party-coloured  sutes  (not  I,  because  I  seldome  weare  any 
other  then  blacke  or  white,  in  imitation  of  my  father)  let  us 
adde  this  one  thing  more,  which  Captaine  Martyn  du  Bellay 
relateth  in  the  voyage  of  Luxemburg,  where  hee  saith  to 
have  seene  so  hard  frosts,  that  their  munition-wines  were 
faine  to  be  cut  and  broken  with  hatchets  and  wedges,  and 
shared  unto  the  Souldiers  by  weight,  which  they  caried  away 
in  baskets ;  and  Ovid, 

OVID.  Trist.  Nuddque  consistunt  formam  servantia  testce 

iii.  El.  x.  23.  Vina,  nee  hausta  men,  sed  data  frusta  bibunt. 

Bare  wines,  still  keeping  forme  of  caske,  stand  fast, 
Not  gulps,  but  gobbets  of  their  wine  they  taste. 

The  frosts  are  so  hard  and  sharpe  in  the  emboguing  of  the 
Meotis  fennes,  that  in  the  very  place  where  Mithridates 
Lievtenant  had  delivered  a  battel  to  his  enemies,  on  hard 
ground,  and  drie-footed,  and  there  defeated  them  ;  the  next 
summer,  he  there  obtained  another  sea-battel  against  them. 
The  Romanes  suffered  a  great  disadvantage  in  the  fight  they 
had  with  the  Carthaginians  neere  unto  Placentia,  for  so 
much  as  they  went  to  their  charge  with  their  bloud  congealed, 
and  limbes  benummed,  through  extreme  cold :  whereas 
Hanniball  had  caused  many  fires  to  be  made  through-out 
his  campe,  to  warme  his  souldiers  by,  and  a  quantitie  of  oile 
to  be  distributed  amongst  them,  that  therewith  annointing 


°f 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

themselves,  they  might  make  their  sinewes  more  supple  and  CHAPTER 
nimble,  and  harden  their  pores  against  the  bitter  blasts  of  XXXV 
cold  wind,  which  then  blew,  and  nipping  piercing  of  the  ayre. 
The  Graecians  retreat  from  Babilon  into  their  countrie,  is 
renowned,  by  reason  of  the  many  difficulties  and  encombrances 
they  encountred  withall,  and  were  to  surmount:  whereof 
this  was  one,  that  in  the  mountaines  of  Armenia,  being 
surprised  and  encircled  with  so  horrible  and  great  quantitie 
of  snow,  that  they  lost  both  the  knowledge  of  the  countrie, 
and  the  wayes  :  wherewith  they  were  so  straitly  beset,  that 
they  continued  a  day  and  a  night  without  eating  or  drinking  ; 
and  most  of  their  horses  and  cattell  died  :  of  their  men  a 
great  number  also  deceased  ;  many  with  the  glittering  and 
whitenesse  of  the  snow,  were  strucken  blinde  :  divers  through 
the  extremitie  were  lamed,  and  their  limbes  shrunken  up, 
many  starke  stiffe,  and  frozen  with  colde,  although  their  senses 
were  yet  whole.  Alexander  saw  a  nation,  where  in  winter 
they  burie  their  fruit-bearing  trees  under  the  ground,  to  de 
fend  them  from  the  frost  :  a  thing  also  used  amongst  some  of 
our  neighbours.  Touching  the  subject  of  apparell  :  the  King 
of  Mexico  was  wont  to  change  and  shift  his  clothes  foure  times  a 
day,  and  never  wore  them  againe,  employing  his  leavings  and 
cast-sutes  for  his  continuall  liberalities  and  rewards  ;  as 
also  neither  pot  nor  dish,  nor  any  implement  of  his 
kitchin  or  table  were  twice  brought  before  him. 


THE  THIRTY-SIXTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Cato  the  younger. 

AM  not  possessed  with  this  common  errour, 
to  judge  of  others  according  to  what  I  am 
my  selfe.  I  am  easie  to  beleeve  things 
differing  from  my  selfe.  Though  I  be 
engaged  to  one  forme,  I  doe  not  tie 
the  world  unto  it,  as  every  man  doth  ? 
And  I  beleeve  and  conceive  a  thousand 
manners  of  life,  contrarie  to  the  common 
sort :  I  more  easily  admit  and  receive  difference,  than 

245 


Of  Cato  the 
younger 


Cic.  Orat.  ad 
Br. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  resemblance  in  us.  I  discharge  as  much  as  a  man  will, 
XXXVI  another  being  of  my  conditions  and  principles,  and  simply 
consider  of  it  in  my  selfe  without  relation,  framing  it  upon 
it's  owne  modell.  Though  my  selfe  be  not  continent,  yet  doe 
I  sincerely  commend  and  allow  the  continencie  of  the 
Capuchins  and  Theatines,  and  highly  praise  their  course  of 
life.  I  doe  by  imagination  insinuate  my  selfe  into  their  place : 
and  by  how  much  more  they  bee  other  than  my  selfe,  so  much 
the  more  doe  I  love  and  honour  them.  I  would  gladly  have 
every  man  judged  apart,  and  not  be  drawne  my  selfe  in  con 
sequence  by  others  examples.  My  weaknesse  doth  no  way 
alter  the  opinions  I  should  have  of  the  force  and  vigor  of 
those  that  deserve  it.  Stint,  qui  nihil  suadent,  quam  quod  se 
imitari  posse  confidant.  '  There  be  such  as  advise  to  nothing, 
'  but  what  they  trust  themselves  can  imitate.'  Crawling  on 
the  face  of  the  earth,  I  cease  not  to  marke,  even  into  the 
clouds,  the  inimitable  height  of  some  heroicke  minds.  It 
is  much  for  me  to  have  a  formall  and  prescript  judgement,  if 
the  effects  bee  not  so,  and  at  least  to  maintaine  the  chiefe 
part  exempted  from  corruption.  It  is  something  to  have  a 
good  minde,  when  my  forces  faile  me.  The  age  we  live  in  (at 
least  our  climate)  is  so  dull  and  leaden,  that  not  only  the 
execution,  but  the  very  imagination  of  vertue  is  farre  to 
seeke,  and  seemes  to  be  no  other  thing  than  a  College 
supposition,  and  a  gibrish  word. 

HOR.  vi.  Epi.  — virtutem  verba  putant,  ut 

i.  31.  Lucum  ligna  : 

Vertue  seemes  words  to  these, 

As  trees  are  wood,  or  woods  are  trees. 

Quam  vereri  deberent,  etiam  si  percipere  non  possent. 
'  Which  yet  they  should  reverence,  though  they  could  not 
'  reach  unto.'  It  is  an  eare-ring  or  pendent  to  hang  in  a 
cabinet,  or  at  the  tongues  end,  as  well  as  at  an  eare  for  an 
ornament.  There  are  no  more  vertuous  actions  knowne  ; 
those  that  beare  a  shew  of  vertue,  have  no  essence  of  it :  for 
profit,  glorie,  custome,  feare,  and  other  like  strange  causes 
direct  us  to  produce  them.  Justice,  valour,  integritie,  which 
we  then  exercise,  may  by  others  consideration,  and  by  the 
countenance  they  publikely  beare,  be  termed  so  :  but  with 

246 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

the  true  workman,  it  is  no  vertue  at  all.  There  is  another  CHAPTER 
end  proposed  ;  another  efficient  cause.  Vertue  alloweth  of  XXXVI 
nothing,  but  what  is  done  by  her,  and  for  her  alone.  In  (  Cato  t}ie 
that  great  battell  at  Potidaea  which  the  Grsecians  under  Jm 
Pausanias  gained  of  Mardonius  and  the  Persians,  the  victors 
following  their  custome,  comming  to  share  the  glorie  and 
prise  of  the  victorie  betweene  them,  ascribed  the  pre- 
excellencie  of  valor  in  that  conflict  to  the  Spartane  nation. 
The  Spartanes  impartial!  Judges  of  vertue,  when  they  came 
to  decide,  to  what  particular  man  of  their  countrie,  the 
honour  to  have  done  best  in  that  day,  should  of  right  belong, 
they  found  that  Aristodemus  had  most  couragiously  engaged 
and  hazarded  himselfe  :  Yet  gave  him  not  the  prise  of 
honour  of  it,  because  his  vertue  had  beene  therunto  incited, 
by  an  earnest  desire  to  purge  himselfe  from  the  reproch  and 
infamie,  which  hee  had  incurred  in  the  action  at  Thermopyles, 
and  from  all  daring  ambition  to  die  couragiously,  thereby  to 
warrant  his  former  imputation.  Our  j  udgements  are  yet  sicke, 
and  follow  the  depravations  of  our  customes.  I  see  the 
greatest  part  of  our  spirits  to  affect  wit,  and  to  shew  them 
selves  ingenious,  by  obscuring  and  detracting  from  the  glorie 
of  famous  and  generall  ancient  actions,  giving  them  some 
base  and  malicious  interpretation,  fondly  and  enviously 
charging  them  with  vaine  causes,  and  frivolous  occasions.  A 
subtill  invention  no  doubt.  Let  any  man  present  me,  with 
the  most  excellent  and  blamelesse  action,  and  I  will  oppose  it 
with  fiftie  vicious  and  bad  intentions,  all  which  shall  carrie  a 
face  of  likeli-hood.  God  knowes  (to  him  that  will  extend 
them)  what  diversitie  of  images  our  internal  will  doth  suffer: 
They  doe  not  so  maliciously  as  grosely  and  rudely  endevour 
to  be  ingenious  with  all  their  railing  and  detraction.  The 
same  paine  a  man  taketh  to  detract  from  these  noble  and 
famous  names,  and  the  verie  same  libertie,  would  I  as  will 
ingly  take  to  lend  them  my  shoulders  to  extoll  and  magnifie 
them.  I  would  endevour  to  charge  these  rare  and  choise 
figures,  selected  by  the  consent  of  wise  men,  for  the  worlds 
example,  as  much,  and  as  high,  as  my  invention  would  give 
me  leave  with  honour,  in  a  plausible  interpretation,  and 
favourable  circumstance.  And  a  man  must  thinke,  that  the 
diligent  labours  of  our  invention,  are  farre  beyond  their 

247 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  merit.  It  is  the  part  of  honest  minded  men  to  pourtray 
XXXVI  vertue,  as  faire  as  possible  faire  may  be.  A  thing  which 
Cato  the  ^^d  no  wnit  be  mis-seeming  or  undecent,  if  passion  should 
transport  us  to  the  favour  and  pursuit  of  so  sacred  formes, 
what  these  doe  contrarie,  they  either  doe  it  through  malice 
or  knaverie,  with  purpose  to  reduce  and  sute  their  beleefe  to 
their  capacitie,  whereof  I  lately  spake  :  or  rather  as  I  thinke, 
because  their  sight  is  not  of  sufficient  power  or  clearnes,  nor 
addressed  to  conceive  or  apprehend  the  farre-shining  bright- 
nes  of  vertue  in  naturall  and  genuine  puritie :  As  Plutarke 
saith,  that  in  his  time,  some  imputed  the  cause  of  Cato  the 
youngers  death  to  the  feare  he  had  conceived  of  Cesar : 
whereat  he  hath  some  reason  to  be  moved  :  by  which  a  man 
may  judge,  how  much  more  he  would  have  beene  offended 
with  those  that  have  ascribed  the  same  unto  ambition.  Oh 
foolish  people !  Hee  would  no  doubt  have  performed  a  faire 
action,  so  generous  and  so  just,  rather  with  ignominie,  than 
for  glorie.  This  man  was  truly  a  patterne,  whom  nature 
chose  to  shew  how  farre  humane  vertue  may  reach,  and  mans 
constancie  attaine  unto.  But  my  purpose  is  not  here  to 
treat  this  rich  argument :  I  will  only  confront  together  the 
sayings  of  five  Latin  Poets  upon  Catoes  commendations,  and 
for  the  interest  of  Cato,  and  by  incidencie  for  theirs  also. 
Now  ought  a  gentleman  well-bred,  in  respect  of  others,  finde 
the  two  former  somewhat  languishing.  The  third  more 
vigorous,  but  suppressed  by  the  extravagancie  of  force.  He 
will  j  udge  there  were  yet  place  for  one  or  two  degrees  of  inven 
tion,  to  reach  unto  the  fourth,  in  consideration  of  which  he 
will  through  admiration  joyne  hands  for  the  last  (yet  first  in 
some  degree  and  space,  but  which  space  he  will  sweare  can 
by  no  humane  spirit  be  filled  up)  he  will  be  much  amazed, 
he  will  be  much  amated.  Loe  here  are  wonders,  we  have 
more  Poets  than  judges  and  interpreters  of  poesie.  It  is  an 
easier  matter  to  frame  it,  than  to  know  it :  Being  base  and 
humble,  it  may  be  judged  by  the  precepts  and  art  of  it :  But 
the  good  and  loftie,  the  supreme  and  divine,  is  beyond  rules, 
and  above  reason.  Whosoever  discerneth  her  beautie,  with 
a  constant,  quicke-seeing,  and  setled  looke,  he  can  no  more 
see  and  comprehend  the  same  than  the  splendor  of  a  light 
ning  flash.  It  hath  no  communitie  with  our  judgement; 
248 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

but  ransacketh  and  ravisheth  the  same.  The  furie  which  CHAPTER 
prickes  and  moves  him  that  can  penetrate  her,  doth  also  XXXVI 
stricke  and  wound  a  third  man,  if  he  heare  it  either  handled  (  ^ato  the 
or  recited,  as  the  Adamant  stone  drawes,  not  only  a  needle,  y01 
but  infuseth  some  of  her  facultie  in  the  same  to  draw  others : 
And  it  is  more  apparently  scene  in  theaters,  that  the  sacred 
inspiration  of  the  Muses,  having  first  stirred  up  the  Poet 
with  a  kinde  of  agitation  unto  choler,  unto  griefe,  unto  hatred, 
yea  and  beyond  himselfe,  whither  and  howsoever  they  please, 
doth  also  by  the  Poet  strike  and  enter  into  the  Actor,  and 
consequently  by  the  Actor,  a  whole  auditorie  or  multitude. 
It  is  the  ligament  of  our  senses  depending  one  of  another. 
Even  from  my  infancie,  Poesie  hath  had  the  vertue  to  trans 
pierce  and  transport  me.  But  that  lively  and  feeling-moving 
that  is  naturally  in  me,  hath  diversly  beene  handled,  by  the 
diversitie  of  formes,  not  so  much  higher  or  lower  (for  they 
were  ever  the  highest  in  every  kind)  as  different  in  colour. 
First  a  blithe  and  ingenious  fluiditie,  then  a  quaint-wittie, 
and  loftie  conceit.  To  conclude,  a  ripe  and  constant  force. 
Ovid,  Lucan,  and  Virgil,  will  better  declare  it.  But  here 
our  Gallants  are  in  their  full  cariere. 

Sit  Goto  dum  vivit  sane  vel  Ccesare  major.  MART.  Epig. 

xxxii.  5. 
Let  Cato  lumor,  while  he 

doth  live,  greater  than  Caesar  be. 
Saith  one. 

— et  invictum  devictd  morte  Catonem :  MANIL.  Astr. 

Cato  unconquered,  death  being  vanquished.  iv-  87- 

Saith  another :  And  the  third  speaking  of  the  civill  warres 
betweene  Caesar  and  Pompey. 

Victrix  causa  Diis  placuit,  sed  victa  Catoni.  LUCAN.  Bel. 

The  cause  that  overcame  with  Gods  was  greater  ;  ^lv-  >•  I27- 

But  the  cause  overcome  pleasd  Cato  better. 

And  the  fourth  upon  Caesars  commendations : 

Et  cuncta  terrarum  subacta,  HOR.  ii.  Od.  i. 

Prater  atrocem  animum  Catonis.  23. 

Of  all  the  earth  all  parts  inthralled, 
Catoes  minde  only  unappalled. 
2G  249 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER      And  the  harts-master,  after  he  hath  enstalled  the  names 
XXXVI      of  the  greatest  Romanes  in  his  picture,  endeth  thus  : 


Of  Cato  the 
younger 

VIRG.  &n. 
viii.  670. 


— his  dantem  jura  Catonem. 

Chiefe  justice  Cato  doe  decree 

Lawes  that  for  righteous  soules  should  be. 


PLUT.  Vtt. 
Pyrrh.  f. 


THE    THIRTY-SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

How  we  weepe  and  laugh  at  one 
self e- same  thing. 


HEN  we  reade  in  Histories,  that  Antigonus 
was  highly  displeased  with  his  sonne,  at 
what  time  he  presented  unto  him  the  head 
of  King  Pirrhus  his  enemie,  slaine  but  a 
little  before  in  fight  against  him ;  which 
he  no  sooner  saw,  but  hee  burst  foorth 
a  weeping.  And  that  Renate  Duke  of 
Loraine,  wept  for  the  death  of  Charles 
Duke  of  Burgundie,  whom  hee  had  eftsoones  discomfited,  and 
was  as  an  assistant  mourner  at  his  funeralls :  And  that  in 
the  battel  of  Auroy  (which  the  Earle  of  Montfort  had  gained 
against  the  faction  of  Charles  de  Blois,  for  the  Dutchy  of 
Britanie)  the  victorious  conqueror  met  with  the  body  of  his 
enemie  deceased,  mourned  very  grievously  for  him ;  a  man 
must  not  suddenly  exclaime. 

E  cosie  auvien,  die  I'animo  ciascuna 
Sua  passion,  sotto  contrario  manto 
Ricuopre,  con  la  vista  hor  chiara,  hor  bruna. 

So  happens  it,  the  minde  covers  each  passion 

Under  a  cloake  of  colours  opposite^ 

To  sight  now  cleare,  now  darke,  in  divers  fashion. 

When  Caesar  was  presented  with  Pompeis  head,  Histories 
report  that  he  turn'd  his  looks  aside,  as  from  a  ghastly  and 
unpleasing  spectacle.  There  hath  beene  so  long  a  corre- 
spondencie  and  societie  in  the  managing  of  publike  affaires, 

250 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

mutually  betweene  them,  such  a  communitie  of  fortunes,  so  CHAPTER 
many  reciprocall  offices  and  bonds  of  alliance,  that  a  man      XXXVII 

H°w 


cannot  thinke  his  countenance  to  have  beene  forced,  false,     °w  ^e  w^ePJ 

T      M  .,  .       .,  ,,  '  and    laugh   at 

and  wily,  as  this  other  supposeth.  one  seife-same 

—  tutumque  putavit  thmg 

lam  bonus  esse  socer,  lacrymas  non  sponte  cadentes  LUCAN.  ix. 

Effudit  gemitusque  expressit  pectore  Iceto.  IO4°' 

Now  to  be  kinde  indeed  he  did  not  doubt 
Father  in  law,  teares,  which  came  hardly  out 
He  shed,  and  grones  exprest 
From  inward  pleased  brest. 

For  certainly,  howbeit  the  greatest  number  of  our  actions 
bee  but  masked  and  painted  over  with  dissimulation,  and 
that  it  may  sometimes  be  true, 

H&redis  fetus  sub  persona  risus  est.  AUL.  CELL. 

Nod.  Att.~x.vii. 
I  he  weeping  of  an  heire,  is  laughing  under  a  c   ™ 

visard  or  disguise. 

Yet  must  a  man  consider  by  judging  of  his  accidents,  how 
our  mindes  are  often  agitated  by  divers  passions  ;  For  (as 
they  say)  there  is  a  certaine  assembly  of  divers  humors  in 
our  bodies,  whereof  she  is  soveraigne  mistris,  who  most  ordi 
narily,  according  to  our  complexions  doth  command  us  :  so 
in  our  minde,  although  it  containe  severall  motions  that 
agitate  the  same,  yet  must  one  chiefly  be  predominant.  But 
it  is  not  with  so  full  an  advantage,  but  for  the  volubilitie 
and  supplenesse  of  our  minde,  the  weakest  may  by  occasion 
reobtaine  the  place  againe,  and  when  their  turne  commeth, 
make  a  new  charge,  whence  we  see,  not  only  children,  who 
simply  and  naturally  follow  nature,  often  to  weepe  and  laugh 
at  one  selfe-same  thing  ;  but  none  of  us  all  can  vaunt  him- 
selfe,  what  wished  for,  or  pleasant  voyage  soever  he  under 
take,  but  that  taking  leave  of  his  family  and  friends,  he  shall 
feele  a  chilling  and  panting  of  the  heart,  and  if  he  shed  not 
teares,  at  least  he  puts  his  foot  in  the  stirrop  with  a  sad  and 
heavie  cheere.  And  what  gentle  flame  soever  doth  warme 
the  heart  of  young  virgins,  yet  are  they  hardly  drawne  to 
leave  and  forgoe  their  mothers,  to  betake  them  to  their 
husbands  :  whatsoever  this  good  fellow  say  : 

251 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Est  ne  n°vis  nuptis  odio  Venus,  dnne  parentum 

XXXVII  Frustrantur  falsis  gaudia  lacrynmlis, 

How  we  weepe  Vbertim  thalami  quas  intra  limina  fundunt  ? 
and    laugh    at  Non,  ita  me  divi,  vera  gemunt,  juverint. 

one  selfe-same  Doe  young  Birds  hate  indeed  fresh  Venus  toyes, 
thing  Or  with  false  teares  delude  their  parents  joyes, 

CATUL.  Eleg.  Which  in  their  chambers  they  powre  out  amaine  ? 
»•  IS-  So  helpe  me  God,  they  doe  not  true  complaine. 

So  is  it  not  strange  to  mourne  for  him  dead,  whom  a  man 
by  no  meanes  would  have  alive  againe.  When  I  chide  my 
boy,  I  doe  it  with  the  best  heart  I  have :  They  are  true  and 
not  fained  imprecations  :  but  that  fit  past  over,  let  him  have 
need  of  me,  I  will  gladly  doe  him  all  the  good  I  can,  and 
by  and  by  I  turne  over  another  leafe.  If  I  chance  to  call 
one  knave  or  asse,  my  purpose  is  not  for  ever  to  enfeoffe  him 
with  those  nick-names ;  nor  doe  I  thinke  to  say,  tong  thou 
liest,  if  immediately  after  I  call  him  an  honest  man.  No 
qualitie  doth  embrace  us  purely  and  universally.  If  it  were 
not  the  countenance  of  a  foole  to  speake  alone,  or  to  him 
selfe,  there  would  scarce  be  day,  or  houre,  wherein  some  body 
should  not  heare  me  mutter  and  grumble  to  my  selfe,  and 
against  my  selfe.  A  (  )  in  the  fooles  teeth,  yet  doe  not  I 
thinke  it  to  be  my  definition.  He  that  seeth  me  sometimes 
to  cast  a  frowning  looke  upon  my  wife,  or  sometimes  a  loving 
countenance,  and  thinkes,  that  either  of  them  is  but  fained, 
he  is  a  foole.  Nero  taking  leave  of  his  mother,  whom  hee 
sent  to  be  drowned,  felt  notwithstanding  the  emotion  of  that 
motherly  farewell,  and  at  one  instant  was  strucken  with 
horror  and  pitie.  It  is  said,  that  the  Sunnes-light  is  not  of 
one  continued  piece,  but  that  it  so  uncessantly,  and  without 
intermission  doth  cast  so  thicke  new  raies,  one  in  the  necke 
of  another  upon  us,  that  wee  cannot  perceive  the  space 
betweene  them. 

LUCR.  v.  281.  Largus  enim  liquidifons  luminis  cethereus  sol, 

Inrigat  assidue  cesium  candors  recenti, 
Suppeditdtque  novo  confestim  lumine  lumen. 

Heav'ns  Sunne  the  plenteous  spring  of  liquid  light 
Still  heav'n  bedewes  with  splendor  fresh  and  bright, 
Still  light  supplies  with  light  of  fresher  sight. 

So  doth  our  minde  cast  her  points  diversly  and  imper- 
252 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

ceptibly.     Artabanus  surprised  Xerxes  his  nephew,  and  chid  CHAPTER 

him  for  the  sudden  changing  of  his  countenance.    He  was  to      XXXVII 

consider  the  unmeasurable  greatnesse  of  his   forces  at  the     °w  we 

passage  of  Hellespont,  for  the  enterprise  of  Greece.    First  he  j 

was  suddenly  assailed  by  an  excessive  joy,  to  see  so  many        thing 

thousands   of  men  at  his  service,  and  witnessed  the  same 

by  the  alacritie  and  cheerefulnes  of  his  countenance :  And 

immediately  at  the  verie  moment,  his  thoughts  suggesting, 

how  so  many  lives  were  to  be  consumed,  and  should  come  to 

nothing  (at  the  furthest,  within  one  age)  he  gan  to  frowne 

his  browes,  and  grew  so  pensive,  that  he  wept.     We  have 

with  a  resolute  and  inexorable  minde  pursued  the  revenge  of 

an  inj  urie,  and  felt  a  singular  content  for  the  victorie ;  yet 

upon  better  advice  doe  we  weepe :  it  is  not  that  we  weepe 

for  :  the  thing  is  as  it  was,  there  is  nothing  changed  :     But 

that   our   minde   beholds  the  thing  with  another  eie,  and 

under  an  other  shape  it  presents  it  selfe  unto  us.    For  every 

thing  hath  divers  faces,  sundry  byascs,  and  severall  lustres. 

Aliance,    kinred,    old    acquaintances,  and   long   friendship 

seize  on  our  imagination,  and  at  that  instant,  passionate  the 

same  according  to  their  qualitie,  but  the  turne  or  change  of 

it,  is  so  violent,  that  it  escapes  us. 

Nil  adeo  fieri  celeri  rations  videtur,  LUCR.  iii.  183. 

Quam  si  mens  fieri  proponit  et  inchoat  ipsa. 
Ocius  ergo  animus  quam  res  se  perciet  ulla, 
Ante  oculos  quarum  in  promptu  natura  videtur. 

Nothing  in  so  quicke  sort  seemes  to  be  done, 
As  minde  set  on  a  thing,  and  once  begun, 
The  minde  that  swifter  stirres  before  our  eies, 
Than  any  thing,  whose  forme  we  soone  comprize. 

And  therefore,  intending  to  continue  one  body  of  all  this 

pursuit,  we  deceive  our  selves.     When   Timoleon    weepeth 

the  murther  he  hath  perpetrated  with  so  mature  and  generous 

a  determination,  he  weepeth  not  for  the  libertie  restored 

to  his  countrie,  nor  the  tyrant,  but  he  weepeth  for 

his  brother.     One  part  of  his  dutie  is  acted, 

let  us  permit  him  to  play  the  other. 


253 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE  THIRTY-EIGHTH   CHAPTER 

Of  Solitarinesse. 


IUVEN.  Sat. 
xiii.  26. 


ET  us  leave  apart  this  outworne  comparison, 
betweene  a  solitarie  and  an  active  life  : 
And  touching  that  goodly  saying  under 
which  ambition  and  avarice  shroud  them 
selves  ;  that  we  are  not  borne  for  our  par 
ticular,  but  for  the  publike  good :  Let 
us  boldly  refer  our  selves  to  those  that 
are  engaged ;  and  let  them  beat  their  con 
science,  if  on  the  contrarie,  the  states,  the  charges,  and  this 
trash  of  the  world,  are  not  rather  sought  and  sued  for  to 
draw  a  private  commoditie  from  the  publike.  The  bad  and 
indirect  meanes  wherethrough  in  our  age  men  can  vase  and 
toyle  to  attaine  the  same,  doe  manifestly  declare  the  end 
thereof  to  be  of  no  great  consequence.  Let  us  answer 
ambition,  that  herselfe  gives  us  the  taste  of  solitarinesse. 
For  what  doth  she  shun  so  much  as  company?  What 
seeketh  shee  more  than  elbow-roome  ?  There  is  no  place,  but 
there  are  meanes  and  waies  to  doe  well  or  ill.  Neverthelesse 
if  the  saying  of  Bias  be  true ;  '  That  the  worst  part  is  the 
'  greatest ' :  Or  that  which  Ecclesiastes  saith,  '  That  of  a 
4  thousand  there  is  not  one  good/ 

Rari  quippe  boni,  numero  via  sunt  totidem,  quot 
Thebarum  porta,  vel  divitis  ostia  Nili: 

Good  men  are  rare,  so  many  scarce  (I  feare) 
As  gates  of  Thebes,  mouths  of  rich  Nilus  were. 

Contagion  is  very  dangerous  in  a  throng.  A  man  must 
imitate  the  vicious,  or  hate  them :  both  are  dangerous :  for 
to  resemble  them  is  perilous,  because  they  are  many,  and  to 
hate  many  is  hazzardous,  because  they  are  dissemblable, 
and  Merchants  that  travell  by  sea,  have  reason  to  take  heed, 
that  those  which  goe  in  the  same  ship,  be  not  dissolute, 
blasphemers,  and  wicked,  judging  such  company  unfortunate. 
Therefore  Bias  said  pleasantly  to  those,  that  together  with 
him  passt  the  danger  of  a  great  storme,  and  called  to  the  Gods 
254 


Of  Solitari- 
nesse 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

for  helpe:  'Peace  my  masters,  lest  they  should  heare,  that  CHAPTER 
'  you  are  here  with  me.'  And  of  a  more  militarie  example, 
Albuberque,  Viceroy  in  India  for  Emanuel  King  of  Portugall, 
in  an  extreme  danger  of  a  sea-tempest,  tooke  a  young  boy 
upon  his  shouldiers,  for  this  only  end,  that  in  the  common 
perill  his  innocencie  might  be  his  warrant,  and  recommend 
ing  to  Gods  favour,  to  set  him  on  shore  :  yet  may  a  wise 
man  live  every  where  contented,  yea  and  alone,  in  the  throng 
of  a  Pallace :  but  if  he  may  chuse,  he  will  (saith  he)  'Avoid 
'  the  sight  of  it.'  If  need  require,  he  will  endure  the  first:  but 
if  he  may  have  his  choice,  he  will  chuse  the  latter.  He 
thinks  he  hath  not  sufficiently  rid  himselfe  from  vices,  if  he 
must  also  contest  with  other  mens  faults.  Charondas 
punished  those  for  wicked,  that  were  convicted  to  have 
frequented  lewd  companies.  There  is  nothing  so  dis-sociable 
and  sociable  as  man,  the  one  for  his  vice,  the  other  for  his 
nature.  And  I  think  Antisthenes  did  not  satisfie  him  that 
upbraided  him  with  his  conversation  with  the  wicked,  saying, 
'  That  Physicians  live  amongst  the  sicke.'  Who  if  they 
stead  sick-mens  healths,  they  empaire  their  owne,  by  the 
infection,  continuall  visiting,  touching  and  frequenting  of 
diseases.  Now  (as  I  suppose)  the  end  is  both  one,  thereby 
to  live  more  at  leasure,  and  better  at  ease.  But  man  doth 
not  alwaies  seeke  the  best  way  to  come  unto  it,  who  often 
supposeth  to  have  quit  affaires,  when  he  hath  but  changed 
them.  There  is  not  much  lesse  vexation  in  the  government 
of  a  private  family,  than  in  the  managing  of  an  entire  state  : 
wheresoever  the  minde  is  busied,  there  it  is  all.  And  though 
domesticall  occupations  be  lesse  important,  they  are  as  impor 
tunate.  Moreover,  though  we  have  freed  our  selves  from 
the  court,  and  from  the  market,  we  are  not  free  from  the 
principall  torments  of  our  life. 

— ratio  et  prudentia  euros,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Non  locus  effusi  late  maris  arbiter  aufert.  xi.  25. 

Reason  and  wisdome  may  set  cares  aside, 
Not  place  the  Arbiter  of  seas  so  wide. 

Shift   we,  or   change   we   places   never  so  often,  ambition, 
avarice,  irresolution,  feare  and  concupiscences  never  leave  us. 

255 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER      HOR.  iii.       Et post  equitem  sedet  atra  cura. 
XAXVll  •  I?'     care  looking  grim  and  blacke,  doth  sit 

Behinde  his  backe  that  rides  from  it. 

They  often  follow  us,  even  into  immured  cloisters,  and  into 
schooles  of  Philosophy ;  nor  doe  hollow  rocks,  nor  wearing 
of  haire-shirts,  nor  continuall  fastings  rid  us  from  them. 

VIRG.  sEn.  iv.  Hfsret  lateri  lethalis  arundo. 

73-  The  shaft  that  death  implide 

Sticks  by  the  flying  side. 

It  was  told  Socrates,  that  one  was  no  whit  amended  by 
his  travell :  '  I  beleeve  it  well '  (said  he)  '  for  he  carried  him- 
'  selfe  with  him.1 

HOR.  ii.  Od.  Quid  terras  alio  calentes 

xvi-  x&  Sole  mutamus?  patrid  quis  exul 

Se  quoquefugit  ? 

Why  change  we  soyles  warm'd  with  another  Sunne  ? 
Who  from  home  banisht  hath  himselfe  out-runne  ? 

If  a  man  doe  not  first  discharge  both  himselfe  and  his 
minde  from  the  burthen  that  presseth  her,  removing  from 
place  to  place  will  stirre  and  presse  her  the  more;  as  in 
a  ship,  wares  well  stowed,  and  closely  piled,  take  up  least 
roome,  you  doe  a  sicke-man  more  hart  than  good,  to  make 
him  change  place,  you  settle  an  evill  in  removing  the  same ; 
as  stakes  or  poles,  the  more  they  are  stirred  and  shaken,  the 
faster  they  sticke,  and  sinke  deeper  into  the  ground.  There 
fore  is  it  not  enough,  for  a  man  to  have  sequestred  himselfe 
from  the  concourse  of  people :  it  is  not  sufficient  to  shift 
place,  a  man  must  also  sever  himselfe  from  the  popular  con 
ditions,  that  are  in  us.  A  man  must  sequester  and  recover 
himselfe  from  himselfe. 

PERS.  Sat.  v.  — rupijam  vincula,  dicas, 

158.  Nam  luctata  canis  nodum  arripit,  attamen  ilia 

Cumfugit,  a  collo  trahitur  pars  longa  catenas,  j 

You  will  say  haply  I  my  bonds  have  quit, 
Why  so  the  striving  dog  the  knot  hath  bit ; 
Yet  when  he  flies,  much  chaine  doth  follow  it. 

We  carry  our  fetters  with  us  :  is  it  not  an  absolute  libertie  ; 
256 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

we  still  cast  backe  our  lookes  towards  that  we  have  left  CHAPTER 

behinde  :  our  minde  doth  still  run  on  it ;  our  fansie  is  full  of    XXXVIII 
.,  Of  Solitan- 

nesse 

— nisi  purgatum  est  pectus,  qua  prcelia  nobis  LUCR.  v.  44. 

Atque  pericula  tune  ingratis  insinuandum  ? 

Quanta  conscindunt  hominem  cupidinis  acres 

Sollicitum  curce,  quantique  perinde  timores  ? 

Quidve  superbia,  spurcitia,  ac  petulantia,  quantas 

Efficiunt  clades,  quid  luxus  desidiesque? 

Unlesse  our  breast  be  purg'd,  what  warres  must  wee 
What  perils  then,  though  much  displeased,  see  ? 
How  great  feares,  how  great  cares  of  sharpe  desire 
Doe  carefull  man  distract,  torment,  enfire? 
Uncleannesse,  wantonnesse,  sloth,  riot,  pride, 
How  great  calamities  have  these  implide  ? 

Our  evill  is  rooted  in  our  minde :  and  it  cannot  scape  from 
it  selfe. 

In  culpa  est  animus,  qui  se  non  effugit  unquam.  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

The  minde  in  greatest  fault  must  lie, 
Which  from  it  selfe  can  never  flie. 

Therefore  must  it  be  reduced  and  brought  into  it  selfe :  It 
is  the  true  solitarinesse,  and  which  may  be  enjoyed  even  in 
the  frequencie  of  peopled  Cities,  and  Kings  courts  :  but  it  is 
more  commodiously  enjoyed  apart.  Now  sithence  wee  under 
take  to  live  solitarie,  and  without  companie,  let  us  cause  our 
contentment  to  depend  of  our  selves :  Let  us  shake  off  all 
bonds  that  tie  us  unto  others :  Gaine  we  that  victorie  over 
us,  that  in  good  earnest  we  may  live  solitarie,  and  therein 
live  at  our  ease.  Stilphon  having  escaped  the  combustion  of 
his  Citie,  wherein  he  had  lost,  both  wife,  and  children,  and 
all  his  goods ;  Demetrius  Poliorcetes  seeing  him  in  so  great  a 
ruine  of  his  Countrie,  with  an  unaffrighted  countenance,  de 
manded  of  him,  whether  he  had  received  any  losse ;  He 
answered,  '  No  :  and  that  (thanks  given  to  God)  he  had  lost 
6  nothing  of  his  owne.1  It  is  that,  which  Antisthenes  the 
Philosopher  said  very  pleasantly,  '  That  man  ought  to  pro- 
4  vide  himselfe  with  munitions,  that  might  float  upon  the 
4  water,  and  by  swimming  escape  the  danger  of  shipwracke 
'  with  him.1  Verily,  'a  man  of  understanding  hath  lost 
4  nothing,  if  he  yet  have  himselfe.1  When  the  Citie  of  Nola 

2H  257 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  was  over-run  by  the   Barbarians,  Paulinus  Bishop  thereof, 
XXXVIII     having  lost  all  he  had  there,  and  being  their  prisoner,  prayed 

thus  Unt°  G°d  :  ' Oh  L°rd  deliver  me  fr°m  feelinS  of  l.his 
6  losse :  for  thou  knowest  as  yet  they  have  toucht  nothing 

'  that  is  mine.'  The  riches  that  made  him  rich,  and  the 
goods  which  made  him  good,  were  yet  absolutely  whole. 
Behold  what  it  is  to  chuse  treasures  well,  that  may  be  freed 
from  injurie;  and  to  hide  them  in  a  place,  where  no  man 
may  enter,  and  which  cannot  be  betraied  but  by  our  selves. 
A  man  that  is  able,  may  have  wives,  children,  goods,  and 
chiefly  health,  but  not  so  tie  himselfe  unto  them,  that  his 
felicitie  depend  on  them.  We  should  reserve  a  store-house 
for  our  selves,  what  need  soever  chance ;  altogether  ours,  and 
wholy  free,  wherein  we  may  hoard  up  and  establish  our  true 
libertie,  and  principall  retreit  and  solitarinesse,  wherein  we 
must  go  alone  to  our  selves,  take  our  ordinarie  entertainment, 
and  so  privately,  that  no  acquaintance  or  communication  of 
any  strange  thing  may  therein  find  place  :  there  to  discourse, 
to  meditate  and  laugh,  as,  without  wife,  without  children, 
and  goods,  without  traine,  or  servants ;  that  if  by  any  occa 
sion  they  be  lost,  it  seeme  not  strange  to  us  to  passe  it  over ; 
we  have  a  mind  moving  and  turning  in  it  selfe ;  it  may  keep 
it  selfe  companie ;  it  hath  wherewith  to  offend  and  defend, 
wherewith  to  receive,  and  wherewith  to  give.  Let  us  not 
feare  that  we  shall  faint  and  droop  through  tedious  and  mind- 
tyring  idlenesse  in  this  solitarinesse. 

In  solis  sistibi  turba  locis. 

Be  thou,  when  with  thee  is  not 
As  good  unto  thy  selfe  as  many. 

Vertue  is  contented  with  it  selfe,  without  discipline,  without 
words,  and  without  effects.  In  our  accustomed  actions,  of  a 
thousand  there  is  not  one  found  that  regards  us  :  he  whom 
thou  seest  so  furiously,  and  as  it  were  besides  himselfe,  to 
clamber  or  crawle  up  the  citie  wals,  or  breach,  as  a  point- 
blank  to  a  whole  voly  of  shot,  and  another  all  wounded  and 
skarred,  crazed  and  faint,  and  wel-nie  hunger-starven,  resolved 
rather  to  die,  than  to  open  his  enemie  the  gate,  and  give  him 
entrance;  doest  thou  think  he  is  there  for  himselfe?  No 
verily,  It  is  peradventure  for  such  a  one,  whom  neither  he, 
258 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

nor  so  many  of  his  fellowes  ever  saw,  and  who  haply  takes  no  CHAPTER 
care  at  all  for  them  ;  but  is  there-whilst  wallowing  up  to  the  XXXVIII 
eares  in  sensualitie,  slouth,  and  all  manner  of  carnal  delights. 
This  man  whom  about  mid-night,  when  others  take  their 
rest,  thou  seest  come  out  of  his  study  meagre-looking,  with 
eyes-trilling,  flegmatike,  squalide,  and  spauling,  doest  thou 
thinke,  that  plodding  on  his  books  he  doth  seek  how  he  shall 
become  an  honester  man ;  or  more  wise,  or  more  content  ? 
There  is  no  such  matter.  He  wil  either  die  in  his  pursuit, 
or  teach  posteritie  the  measure  of  Plautus  verses,  and  the 
true  Orthography  of  a  Latine  word.  Who  doth  not  will 
ingly  chop  and  counter-change  his  health,  his  ease,  yea,  and 
his  life  for  glorie,  and  for  reputation  ?  The  most  unpro 
fitable,  vaine,  and  counterfet  coine,  that  is  in  use  with  us. 
Our  death  is  not  sufficient  to  make  us  afraid,  let  us  also 
charge  our  selves  with  that  of  our  wives,  of  our  children,  and 
of  our  friends,  and  people.  Our  owne  affaires  doe  not  suffi 
ciently  trouble  and  vexe  us ;  Let  us  also  drudge,  toile,  vex, 
and  torment  our  selves  with  our  neighbours  and  friends 
matters. 

Vah  quemqudnme  hominem  in  animum  instituere,  aut  TER.  Adel.  act 

Parare,  quod  sit  charius,  quam  ipse  est  sibi?  i.  sc.  i.  13. 

Fie,  that  a  man  should  cast,  that  ought,  than  he 
Himselfe  of  himselfe  more  belov'd  should  be. 

Solitarinesse  mee  seemeth  hath  more  apparance  and  reason 
in  those  which  have  given  their  most  active  and  flourishing 
age  unto  the  world,  in  imitation  of  Thales.  We  have  lived 
long  enough  for  others,  live  we  the  remainder  of  our  life 
unto  our  selves :  let  us  bring  home  our  cogitations  and  in 
ventions  unto  our  selves,  and  unto  our  ease.  It  is  no  easie 
matter  to  make  a  safe  retreit :  it  doth  over-much  trouble  us 
with  joyning  other  enterprises  unto  it.  Since  God  gives  us 
leasure  to  dispose  of  our  dislodging,  let  us  prepare  our 
selves  unto  it,  packe  wee  up  our  baggage.  Let  us  betimes 
bid  our  companie  farewell.  Shake  we  off  these  violent  hold 
fasts,  which  else-where  engage  us,  and  estrange  us  from  our 
selves.  These  so  strong  bonds  must  be  untied,  and  a  man 
may  eft-soones  love  this  or  that,  but  wed  nothing  but  him 
selfe  ;  That  is  to  say,  let  the  rest  be  our  owne :  yet  not  so 
combined  and  glued  together,  that  it  may  not  be  sundred, 

259 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  without  fieaing  us,  and  therewithal!,  pull  away  some  peece 

XXXVIII     of  our  owne.     The  greatest  thing  of  the  world,  is  for  a  man 

Solitari- 


societie,  since  we  can  bring  nothing  to  it.  And  he  that 
cannot  lend,  let  him  take  heed  of  borrowing.  Our  forces 
faile  us :  retire  we  them,  and  shut  them  up  into  our  selves. 
He  that  can  suppresse  and  confound  in  himselfe  the  offices 
of  so  many  amities,  and  of  the  company,  let  him  doe  it.  In 
this  fall,  which  makes  us  inutile,  irkesome,  and  importunate 
to  others,  let  him  take  heed  he  be  not  importunate,  irkesome, 
and  unprofitable  to  himselfe.  Let  him  flatter,  court,  and 
cherish  himselfe,  and  above  all  let  him  governe  himselfe, 
respecting  his  reason  and  fearing  his  conscience,  so  that  he 
may  not  without  shame  stumble  or  trip  in  their  presence. 
Rarum  est  enim,  ut  satis  se  quisque  vereatur.  4  For  it  is  a 
4  rare  matter,  that  every  man  sufficiently  should  stand  in 
4  awe  and  reverence  of  himselfe.1  Socrates  saith,  '  That 
4  young  men  ought  to  be  instructed,  and  men  exercised  in 
c  well  doing;  and  old  men  withdraw  themselves  from  all 
4  civill  and  military  negotiations,  living  at  their  owne  dis- 
4  cretion,  without  obligation  to  any  certaine  office.'  There 
are  some  complexions,  more  proper  for  these  precepts  of 
retreit  than  others.  Those  which  have  a  tender  and  demisse 
apprehension,  a  squemish  affection,  a  delicate  will,  and 
which  cannot  easily  subject  or  imploy  it  selfe  (of  which  both 
by  naturall  condition  and  propense  discourse  I  am  one)  wil 
better  apply  themselves  unto  this  counsell  than  active  minds, 
and  busie  spirits ;  which  imbrace  all,  every  where  engage,  and 
in  all  things  passionate  themselves ;  that  offer,  that  present, 
and  yeeld  themselves  to  all  occasions.  A  man  must  make 
use  of  all  these  accidentall  commodities,  and  which  are  with 
out  us,  so  long  as  they  be  pleasing  to  us ;  but  not  make 
them  our  principall  foundation :  It  is  not  so,  nor  reason, 
nor  nature  permit  it.  Why  should  we  against  their  lawes 
subject  our  contentment  to  the  power  of  others  ?  Moreover, 
to  anticipate  the  accidents  of  fortune ;  for  a  man  to  deprive 
himselfe  of  the  commodities  he  hath  in  possession,  as  many 
have  done  for  devotion,  and  some  Philosophers  by  discourse ; 
to  serve  themselves,  to  lie  upon  the  hard  ground,  to  pull  out 
their  own  eyes,  to  cast  their  riches  into  the  Sea,  to  seeke  for 
260 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

paine  and  smart  (some  by  tormenting  this  life,  for  the  happi-  CHAPTER 
nesse  of  another ;  othersome  placing  themselves  on  the  lowest    ^^^Y*11. 
step,  thereby  to  warrant  themselves  from  a  new  fall)  is  the  o  i  ai. 

action  of  an  excessive  vertue.  Let  sterner  and  more  vigor 
ous  complexions  make  their  lurking  glorious  and  more 
exemplar. 

— tuta  et  parvuta  laudo,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

CUm  res  defitiunt,  satis  inter  vilia  fortis :  xv.  42. 

Verum  ubi  quid  melius  contingit  et  unctius,  idem 
Hos  sapere,  et  solos  aio  bene  vivere,  quorum 
Conspicitur  nitidis  fandata  pecunia  villis. 

When  riches  faile,  I  praise  the  safe  estate, 

Though  small ;  base  things  doe  not  high  thoughts  abate. 

But  when  tis  better,  finer  with  me,  I 

They  only  live  well,  and  are  wise,  doe  crie, 

Whose  coine  in  faire  farmes  doth  well-grounded  lie. 

There  is  worke  enough  for  me  to  doe  without  going  so 
far.  It  sufficeth  me  under  fortunes  favour,  to  prepare  my 
selfe  for  her  disfavour ;  and  being  at  ease,  as  far  as  imagina 
tion  may  attaine  unto,  to  represent  the  evill  to  come  unto 
my  selfe :  Even  as  we  enure  our  selves  to  Tilts  and  Tour- 
neyes,  and  counterfeit  warre  in  time  of  peace.  I  esteeme  not 
Arcesilaus  the  Philosopher  lesse  reformed,  because  I  know 
him  to  have  used  houshold  implements  of  gold  and  silver, 
according  as  the  condition  of  his  fortune  gave  him  leave.  I 
rather  value  him  the  more,  than  if  he  had  not  done  it,  for- 
somuch  as  he  both  moderately  and  liberally  made  use  of 
them.  I  know  unto  what  limits  naturall  necessitie  goeth ; 
and  I  consider  the  poore  almesman  begging  at  my  doore,  to 
be  often  more  plumb-cheekt,  in  better  health  and  liking 
than  I  am :  Then  doe  I  enter  into  his  estate,  and  assay  to 
frame  and  sute  my  mind  unto  his  byase.  And  so  over 
running  other  examples,  albeit  I  imagine  death,  povertie, 
contempt,  and  sicknesse  to  be  at  my  heeles,  I  easily  resolve 
my  selfe,  not  to  apprehend  any  feare  of  that,  which  one  of 
lesse  worth  than  my  selfe  doth  tolerate  and  undergoe  with 
such  patience  :  And  I  cannot  beleeve,  that  the  basenesse  or 
shallownesse  of  understanding,  can  doe  more  than  vigor  and 
far-seeing,  or  that  the  effects  and  reason  of  discretion,  can 
not  reach  to  the  effects  of  custome  and  use.  And  knowing 

261 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Of  Solitari- 
nesse 


HOR.  Epist.  i. 
19. 


CHAPTER  what  slender  hold-fast  these  accessorie  commodities  have,  I 
XXXVIII  omit  not  in  full  jovyssance  of  them,  humbly  to  beseech  God 
of  j^g  mercie  (as  a  soveraigne  request)  to  make  me  contented 
with  my  selfe,  and  with  the  goods  proceeding  from  me.  I 
see  some  gallantly-disposed  young  men,  who  notwithstanding 
their  faire-seeming  shew,  have  many  boxes  full  of  pils  in 
their  coffers  at  home,  to  take  when  the  rhume  shall  assaile 
them ;  which  so  much  the  lesse  they  feare,  when  they  thinke 
the  remedy  to  be  at  hand.  So  must  a  man  doe :  as  also  if 
he  feele  himselfe  subject  to  some  greater  infirmitie,  to  store 
himselfe  with  medicaments  that  may  asswage,  supple,  and 
stupifie  the  part  grieved.  The  occupation  a  man  should 
chuse  for  such  a  life,  must  neither  be  painfull  nor  tedious, 
otherwise,  in  vaine  should  we  accompt  to  have  sought  our 
abiding  there,  which  depends  from  the  particular  taste  of 
every  man.  Mine  doth  no  way  accommodate  it  selfe  to 
husbandrie.  Those  that  love  it,  must  with  moderation 
apply  themselves  unto  it. 

Conentur  sibi  res,  non  se  submittere  rebus. 

Endevour  they  things  to  them  to  submit, 
Not  them  to  things  (if  they  have  Horace  wit). 

Husbandrie  is  otherwise  a  servile  office,  as  Salust  termeth 
it :  It  hath  more  excusable  parts,  as  the  care  of  gardening, 
which  Xenophon  ascribeth  to  Cyrus :  A  meane  or  medio- 
critie  may  be  found,  betweene  this  base  and  vile  carking  care, 
extended  and  full  of  toiling  labor,  which  we  see  in  men 
that  wholly  plunge  themselves  therein,  and  that  profound 
and  extreme  retchlesnesse  to  let  all  things  goe  at  six  and 
seven,  which  is  seen  in  others. 

— Democriti  pecus  edit  agellos 
Cultaque,  dum  peregre  est  animus  sine  corpore  velox. 

Cattle  destroyd  Democritus  his  sets, 
While  his  mind  bodilesse  vagaries  fets. 

But  let  us  heare  the  counsell,  which  Plinie  the  younger 
giveth  to  his  friend  Cornelius  Rufus,  touching  this  point  of 
Solitarinesse  :  4 1  perswade  thee  in  this  full-gorged  and  fat 
'  retreit,  wherein  thou  art,  to  remit  this  base  and  abject 
'  care  of  husbandrie  unto  thy  servants,  and  give  thy  selfe  to 

262 


Ib.  xii.  12. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

6  the  study  of  letters,  whence  thou  maist  gather  something,  CHAPTER 
'  that  may  altogether  be  thine  owne ' ;  He  meaneth  reputa-     XXXVIII 
tion :  like  unto  Ciceroes  humor,  who  saith,  '  That  he  will  Of  Solitari- 
6  imploy  his  solitarinesse  and  residence  from  publike  affaires, 
4  to  purchase  unto  himselfe  by  his  writings  an  immortall  life.' 

—usque  adeone  PERS<  Saf  j 

Scire  tuum  nihil  est,  nisi  te  scire  hoc  sciat  alter  ?  27. 

Is  it  then  nothing  worth  that  thou  doost  know, 
Unlesse  what  thou  doost  know,  thou  others  show  ? 

It  seemeth  to  be  reason,  when  a  man  speaketh  to  with 
draw  himselfe  from  the  world,  that  one  should  looke  beyond 
him.  These  doe  it  but  by  halfes.  Indeed,  they  set  their 
match  against  the  time  they  shall  be  no  more  :  but  pretend 
to  reap  the  fruit  of  their  dessignes,  when  they  shall  be  absent 
from  the  world,  by  a  ridiculous  contradiction.  The  imagina 
tion  of  those,  who  through  devotion  seeke  solitarinesse, 
filling  their  minds  with  the  certaintie  of  heavenly  promises, 
in  the  other  life,  is  much  more  soundly  consorted.  They 
propose  God  as  an  object  infinit  in  goodnesse,  and  incom 
prehensible  in  power,  unto  themselves.  The  soule  hath 
therein,  in  all  free  libertie,  wherewith  to  glut  her  selfe. 
Afflictions  and  sorrowes  redound  to  their  profit,  being 
imployed  for  the  purchase  and  attaining  of  health,  and 
eternall  gladnesse.  Death,  according  to  ones  wish,  is  a 
passage  to  so  perfect  an  estate.  The  sharpnesse  of  their 
rides,  is  presently  made  smooth  and  easie  by  custome ;  and 
carnall  concupiscences,  rejected,  abated,  and  lulled  asleep  by 
refusing  them ;  for  nothing  entertaineth  them  but  use  and 
exercise.  This  only  end  of  another  life,  blessedly  immortall, 
doth  rightly  merit  we  should  abandon  the  pleasures  and 
commodities  of  this  our  life.  And  he  that  can  enlighten  his 
soule  with  the  flame  of  a  lively  faith  and  hope,  really  and 
constantly,  in  his  solitarinesse,  doth  build  unto  himselfe  a 
voluptuous  and  delicious  life,  far  surmounting  all  other  lives. 
Therefore  doth  neither  the  end  nor  middle  of  this  counsell 
please  me.  We  are  ever  falling  into  a  relaps,  from  an  ague 
to  a  burning  fever.  This  plodding  occupation  of  bookes,  is 
as  painfull  as  any  other,  and  as  great  an  enemie  unto  health, 
which  ought  principally  to  be  considered.  And  a  man 

263 


nesse 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  should  not  suffer  himselfe  to  be  inveagled  by  the  pleasure  he 
XXXVIII  takes  in  them:  It  is  the  same  pleasure,  that  loseth  the 
thriving  husband-man,  the  greedy-covetous,  the  sinning- 
voluptuous,  and  the  puft-up  ambitious.  The  wisest  men 
teach  us  sufficiently  to  beware  and  shield  us  from  the 
treasons  of  our  appetites,  and  to  discerne  true  and  perfect 
pleasures,  from  delights  blended  and  entermingled  with 
more  paine.  For,  most  pleasures  (say  they)  tickle,  fawne 
upon,  and  embrace  us,  with  purpose  to  strangle  us,  as  did 
the  theeves  whom  the  ^Egyptians  termed  Philistas :  And  if 
the  head-ach  would  seize  upon  us  before  drunkennesse,  we 
would  then  beware  of  too  much  drinking:  but  sensualitie 
the  better  to  entrap  us,  marcheth  before,  and  hideth  her 
tracke  from  us.  Bookes  are  delightfull ;  but  if  by  con- 
tinuall  frequenting  them,  we  in  the  end  lose  both  health  and 
cheerefulnesse  (our  best  parts)  let  us  leave  them.  I  am  one 
of  those  who  thinke  their  fruit  can  no  way  countervaile  this 
losse.  As  men  that  have  long  time  felt  themselves  enfeebled 
through  some  indisposition,  doe  in  the  end  yeeld  to  the 
mercie  of  Physicke,  and  by  art  have  certaine  rules  of  life 
prescribed  them,  which  they  will  not  transgresse :  So  he 
that  with-drawes  himselfe,  as  distasted  and  over-tired  with 
the  common  life,  ought  likewise  to  frame  and  prescribe  this 
unto  the  rules  of  reason  ;  direct  and  range  the  same  by  pre 
meditation,  and  discourse.  He  must  bid  all  manner  of 
travell  farewell,  what  shew  soever  it  beare ;  and  in  generall 
shun  all  passions  that  any  way  empeach  the  tranquillitie  of 
mind  and  body,  and  follow  the  course  best  agreeing  with 
his  humour. 


PROPERT.  ii. 
El.  xxv.  38. 


Vnusquisque  sua  noverit  ire  via. 

His  owne  way  every  man 
Tread-out  directly  can. 

A  man  must  give  to  thriving  husbandrie,  to  laborious 
study,  to  toilesome  hunting,  and  to  every  other  exercise,  the 
utmost  bounds  of  pleasure ;  and  beware  he  engage  himselfe 
no  further,  if  once  paine  begin  to  intermeddle  it  selfe  with 
her ;  we  should  reserve  businesse  and  negotiations,  only  for 
so  much  as  is  behoovefull  to  keepe  us  in  breath,  and  to 
warrant  us  from  the  inconveniences  which  the  other  extre- 

264 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

mi  tie  of  a  base,  faint-hart  ed  idlenesse  drawes  after  it.    There  CHAPTER 

are  certaine  barren  and  thornie  sciences,  which  for  the  most    XXXVIII 

part  are  forged  for  the  multitude:  they  should  be  left  for 

those,  who  are  for  the  service  of  the  world.     As  for  my  selfe, 

I  love  no  books,  but  such  as  are  pleasant,  and  easie,  and 

which  tickle  me,  or  such  as  comfort  and  counsell  me,  to 

direct  my  life  and  death. 

— taciturn  sylvas  inter  reptare  salubres  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Curantem  quidquid  dignum  sapiente  bonoque  est.  iv-  4- 

Silently  creeping  midst  the  wholesome  wood 
With  care  what 's  for  a  wise  man  and  a  good. 

The  wiser  sort  of  men,  having  a  strong  and  vigorous  mind, 
may  frame  unto  themselves  an  altogether  spirituall  life.  But 
mine  being  common,  I  must  help  to  uphold  my  selfe  by 
corporall  commodities :  And  age  having  eftsoones  dispoiled 
me  of  those  that  were  most  sutable  to  my  fantasie,  I  instruct 
and  sharpen  my  appetite  to  those  remaining  most  sortable 
this  other  season.  We  must  tooth  and  naile  retaine  the  use 
of  this  lives  pleasures,  which  our  yeares  snatch  from  us,  one 
after  another : 

Carpamus  dulcia,  nostrum  est,  PERS.  Sat.  v. 

Quodvivis:  cinis  et  manes  etfabulafies.  155- 

Plucke  we  sweet  pleasures  :  we  thy  life  give  thee. 
Thou  shalt  a  tale,  a  ghost,  and  ashes  be. 

Now  concerning  the  end  of  glorie,  which  Plinie,  and  Cicero 
propose  unto  us,  it  is  far  from  my  discourse  :  The  most 
opposite  humour  to  solitarie  retiring,  is  ambition.  '  Glorie 
'  and  rest,  are  things  that  cannot  squat  in  one  same  forme ' : 
as  far  as  I  see,  these  have  nought  but  their  armes  and  legs 
out  of  the  throng,  their  mind  and  intent  is  further  and  more 
engaged  in  them  than  ever  it  was. 

Tun  vetule  auriculis  alienis  colligis  escas  ?  Ib.  i.  22. 

Gatherst  thou  dotard  at  these  yeares, 
Fresh  baits,  fine  food,  for  others  eares  ? 

They  have  gone  backe  that  they  might  leap  the  better, 
and  with  a  stronger  motion  make  a  nimbler  offer  amidst  the 
multitude.  Will  you  see  how  they  shoot-short  by  a  cornes 
breadth  ?  let  us  but  counterpoise  the  advice  of  two  Philoso- 

21  265 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  phers,  and  of  two  most  different  sects:  The  one  writing  to 
XXXVIII  Idomeneus,  the  other  to  Lucilius  their  friends,  to  divert  them 

°f  n°sstari"  from  ^ne  managing  of  affaires  and  greatnesse,  unto  a  solitarie 
kind  of  life.  'You  have1  (say  they) '  lived  hitherto  swimming 
6  and  floating  adrift,  come  and  die  in  the  haven ;  you  have 
'  given  the  past  of  your  life  unto  light,  give  the  remainder 
'  unto  darknesse.  It  is  impossible  to  give  over  occupations, 
'  if  you  doe  not  also  give  over  the  fruits  of  them  :  Therefore 
'  cleare  your  selfe  from  all  care  and  glorie.  There  is  great 
6  danger,  lest  the  glittering  of  your  fore-passed  actions  should 
'  over-much  dazle  you,  yea,  and  follow  you  even  to  your  den. 
'  Together  with  other  concupiscences,  shake  off  that  which 
'  commeth  from  the  approbation  of  others.  And  touching 
'  your  knowledge  and  sufficiencie,  take  you  no  care  of  them, 
'  they  will  lose  no  whit  of  their  effect ;  if  your  selfe  be  any 
'  thing  the  better  for  them.  Remember  but  him,  who  being 
'  demanded,  to  what  purpose  he  toyled  so  much  about  an 
'  Art,  which  could  by  no  meanes  come  to  the  knowledge  of 
'  many.  "  Few  are  enow  for  me ;  one  will  suffice,  yea,  lesse 
'  "  than  one  will  content  me,  answered  he." '  He  said  true  : 
you  and  another  are  a  sufficient  theatre  one  for  another ;  or 
you  to  your  selfe  alone.  Let  the  people  be  one  unto  you,  and 
one  be  all  the  people  to  you :  It  is  a  base  ambition  to  goe 
about  to  draw  glorie  from  ones  idlenesse,  and  from  ones 
lurking  hole.  A  man  must  doe  as  some  wilde  beasts,  which 
at  the  entrance  of  their  caves,  will  have  no  manner  of  footing 
scene.  You  must  no  longer  seeke,  what  the  world  saith  of 
you,  but  how  you  must  speake  unto  your  selfe :  withdraw 
your  selfe  into  your  selfe  ;  but  first  prepare  your  selfe  to 
receive  your  selfe :  it  were  folly  to  trust  to  your  selfe,  if  you 
cannot  governe  your  selfe.  A  man  may  as  well  faile  in 
solitarinesse,  as  in  companie,  there  are  waies  for  it,  untill 
such  time  as  you  have  framed  your  selfe  such,  that  you  dare 
not  halt  before  your  selfe,  and  that  you  shall  be  ashamed  of, 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  and  beare  a  kind  of  respect  unto  your  selfe,  Obversentur 

»•  species  honestce  ammo :  '  Let  honest  Ideaes  still  represent 

'  themselves  before  your  mind ' :  Ever  present  Cato,  Phocion, 

SEN.  Epist.  xi.  and  Aristides  unto  your  imagination,  in  whose  presence  even 
fooles  would  hide  their  faults,  and  establish  them  as  con- 
troulers  of  all  your  intentions.  If  they  be  disordered  and 
266 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

untuned,  their  reverence  will  order  and  tune  them  againe :  CHAPTER 
they  will  containe  you  in  a  way,  to  be  contented  with  your     XXXVIII 
selfe ;  to  borrow  nothing  but  from  your  selfe,  to  settle  and   { 
stay  your  mind  in  assured  and  limited  cogitations,  wherein 
it  may  best  please  it  selfe,  and  having  gotten  knowledge  of 
true  felicities,  which  according  to  the  measure  a  man  under 
stands  them,  he  shall  accordingly  injoy,  and  with  them  rest 
satisfied,  without  wishing  a  further  continuance,  either 
of  life  or  name.     Loe  heere  the  counsell  of  truly- 
pure,  and  purely- true  philosophic,  not  of  a  vaine- 
glorious,  boasting,  and  prating  philosophic, 
as  is  that  of  the  two  first. 


THE    THIRTY-NINTH    CHAPTER 

A  consideration  upon  Cicero. 

NE  word  more  in  comparison  of  these  two. 
There  are  gathered  out  of  Ciceroes  writ 
ings  and  from  Plinies,  (in  mine  opinion 
little  agreeing  with  his  unckle)  infinite 
testimonies  of  a  nature  beyond  measure 
ambitious.  Amongst  others,  that  they 
openly  solicit  the  Historians  of  their  times, 
not  to  forget  them  in  their  writings  :  and 
fortune,  as  it  were  in  spight,  hath  made  the  vanitie  of  their 
request  to  continue  even  to  our  daies,  and  long  since  the 
histories  were  lost.  But  this  exceedeth  all  hearts-basenesse 
in  persons  of  that  stampe,  to  have  gone  about  to  draw  some 
principall  glorie  from  prating  and  speaking,  even  to  imploy 
their  private  Epistles  written  to  their  friends ;  in  such  sort, 
as  some  missing  the  opportunitie  to  be  sent,  they  notwith 
standing  cause  them  to  be  published,  with  this  worthy 
excuse,  that  they  would  not  lose  their  travell  and  lucubra 
tions.  Is  it  not  a  seemly  thing  in  two  Romane  Consuls, 
chiefe  magistrates  of  the  common-wealth,  Empresse  of  the 
world,  to  spend  their  time  in  wittily  devising,  and  closely 
hudling  up  of  a  quaint  missive  or  wittie  epistle,  therby  to 
attaine  the  reputation,  that  they  perfectly  understand  their 

267 


A  considera 
tion  upon 
Cicero. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  mother  tongue?  What  could  a  seely  School-master,  who 
XXXIX  gets  his  living  by  such  trash,  doe  worse  ?  If  the  acts  of 
Xenophon,  or  of  Caesar  had  not  by  much  exceeded  their 
eloquence,  I  cannot  beleeve,  they  would  ever  have  written 
them.  They  have  endevored  to  recommend  unto  posterity, 
not  their  sayings,  but  their  doings.  And  if  the  perfection 
of  well-speaking  might  bring  any  glorie  sutable  unto  a  great 
personage,  Scipio  and  Lelius  would  never  have  resigned  the 
honour  of  their  Comedies,  and  the  elegancies,  and  smooth- 
sportfull  conceits  of  the  Latine  tongue,  unto  an  Affrican 
servant :  For,  to  prove  this  labour  to  be  theirs,  the  exquisit 
eloquence,  and  excellent  invention  thereof  doth  sufficiently 
declare  it :  and  Terence  him  self e  doth  avouch  it :  And  I 
could  hardly  be  removed  from  this  opinion.  It  is  a  kind  of 
mockerie  and  injurie,  to  raise  a  man  to  worth,  by  qualities 
mis-seeming  his  place,  and  unfitting  his  calling,  although  for 
some  other  respects  praise-worthy  ;  and  also  by  qualities  that 
ought  not  to  be  his  principall  object.  As  he  that  would 
commend  a  King  to  be  a  cunning  Painter,  or  a  skilfull 
Architect,  or  an  excellent  Harquibuzier,  or  a  never  missing 
runner  at  the  Ring.  These  commendations  acquire  a  man 
no  honour,  if  they  be  not  presented  altogether  with  those 
that  are  proper  and  convenient  unto  him,  that  is  to  say, 
justice,  and  the  skill  to  governe,  and  knowledge  to  direct  his 
people  both  in  peace  and  warre.  In  this  sort  doth  Agri 
culture  honour  Cyrus,  and  Eloquence  Charlemaine,  together 
with  his  knowledge  in  good  letters.  I  have  in  my  time  seen 
some,  who  by  writing  did  earnestly  get  both  their  titles  and 
living,  to  disavow  their  aprentissage,  mar  their  pen,  and 
affect  the  ignorance  of  so  vulgar  a  qualitie ;  and  which  our 
people  holds,  to  be  seldome  found  amongst  wise  men, 
endevouring  to  be  commended  for  better  qualities.  Demos 
thenes  his  companions  in  their  ambassage  to  Philip,  praised 
their  Prince  to  be  faire,  eloquent,  and  a  good  quaffer. 
Demosthenes  said,  they  were  commendations  rather  fitting 
a  woman,  an  advocate,  and  a  spunge,  than  a  King. 


HOR.  Car. 
Secul.  51. 


268 


Imperet  bellante  prior,  jacentem 
Lenis  in  hostem. 

Better  he  rule,  who  mercifull  will  rue 
His  foe  subdued,  than  he  that  can  subdue. 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

It  is  not   his   profession   to   know,  either  how  to  hunt  CHAPTER 

cunningly,  or  to  dance  nimbly.  XXXIX 

A  considera- 

Orabunt  causas  alii,  ccelique  meatus  tion  upon 

Describent  radio,  etfulgentia  sidera  dicent ;  Cicero 

Hie  regere  imperio  populos  sciat. 

Others  shall  causes  plead,  describe  the  skies 
Motion  by  instrument,  say  how  stars  rise  : 
But  let  him  know  to  rule  (just,  valiant,  wise). 

Plutarke  saith  moreover,  '  That  to  appeare  so  absolutely 
'  excellent  in  these  lesse-necessarie  parts,  is  to  produce  a 
6  witnesse  against  himselfe,  to  have  ill  spent  his  houres,  and 
'  fondly  bestowed  his  study,  which  might  better  have  beene 
'  imployed  to  more  behoovefull  and  profitable  use.1  So  that 
Philip  King  of  Macedon,  having  heard  great  Alexander  his 
sonne  sing  at  a  feast  and  vie  with  the  best  Musitians  :  '  Art 
'  thou  not  ashamed '  (said  he  unto  him)  6  to  sing  so  well  ? "* 
And  to  the  same  Philip,  said  a  Musitian,  gainst  whom  he 
contended  about  his  Art,  c  God  forbid,  my  Soveraigne,  that 
'  ever  so  much  hurt  should  befall  you,  that  you  should 
'  understand  these  things  better  than  my  selfe."*  A  King 
ought  to  be  able  to  answer,  as  Ipicrates  did  the  Orator  who 
in  his  invective  urged  him  in  this  manner :  '  And  what  art 
4  thou  thou  shouldst  so  brave  it  ?  Art  thou  a  man  at  Armes  ? 
6  Art  thou  an  Archer  ?  Art  thou  a  Pike-man  ? '  'I  am  none 
'  of  all  those,  but  I  am  he  who  command  all  those."*  And 
Antisthenes  made  it  as  an  argument  of  little  valour  in 
Ismenias,  when  some  commended  him  to  be  an  excellent 
Flutist.  Well  I  wot,  that  when  I  heare  some  give  themselves 
to  imitate  the  phrase  of  my  Essayes,  I  would  rather  have 
them  hold  their  peace :  They  doe  not  so  much  raise  the 
words,  as  depresse  the  sense ;  so  much  the  more  sharply,  by 
how  much  more  obliquely.  Yet  am  I  deceived  if  some  others 
take  not  more  hold  on  the  matter;  and  how  well  or  ill 
soever,  if  any  writer  hath  scattered  the  same,  either  more 
materiall,  or  at  least  thicker  on  his  paper:  That  I  may 
collect  the  more,  I  doe  but  huddle  up  the  arguments  or 
chiefe  heads.  Let  me  but  adde  what  followes  them,  I  shall 
daily  increase  this  volume.  And  how  many  stories  have 
I  glanced  at  therein,  that  speake  not  a  word,  which  who 
soever  shal  unfold,  may  from  them  draw  infinite  Essayes? 

269 


tion  upon 
Cicero 


SEN.  Epist. 
cxv.  p. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Nor   they,  nor  my  allegations   doe   ever   serve  simply   for 
XXXIX      examples,  authoritie,  or  ornament.     I  doe  not  only  respect 
'•  them  for  the  use  I  draw  from  them.     They  often  (beyond 
my  purpose)  produce  the  seed  of  a  richer  subject,  and  bolder 
matter,  and  often  collaterally,  a  more  harmonious  tune,  both 
for  me,  that  will  expresse  no  more  in  this  place,  and  for 
them  that  shall  hit  upon  my  tune. 

But  returning  to  vertue,  I  find  no  great  choice,  betweene 
him  that  can  speake  nothing  but  evill,  and  one  that  can 
talke  nothing  but  to  talke  well.  Non  est  ornamentum  virile 
concinnitas.  '  Finenesse  is  no  great  grace  for  a  man.'  Wise 
men  say,  that  in  respect  of  knowledge,  there  is  nothing  but 
Philosophy,  and  in  regard  of  effects  but  Vertue;  which  is 
generally  fit  for  all  degrees,  and  for  al  orders.  Something 
there  is  alike  in  these  two  other  Philosophers ;  for  they 
also  promise  eternitie  to  the  Epistles,  they  write  to  their 
friends.  But  after  another  fashion,  and  to  a  good  purpose, 
accommodating  themselves  to  others  vanitie ;  For  they  send 
them  word,  that  if  care  to  make  themselves  knowen  unto 
future  ages,  and  respect  of  renowne,  doth  yet  retaine  them  in 
the  managing  of  affaires,  and  makes  them  feare  solitarinesse, 
and  a  retired  life,  to  which  they  would  call  them,  that  they 
take  no  more  paines  for  it :  forasmuch  as  they  have  sufficient 
credit  with  posteritie,  by  answering  them ;  and  were  it  but 
by  the  Epistles  they  write  unto  them,  they  will  make  their 
name  as  famous,  and  as  farre  knowen,  as  all  their  publike 
actions  might  doe.  Besides  this  difference,  they  are  not 
frivolous,  idle,  and  triviall  Epistles,  and  only  compact  and 
held  together  with  exquisite  choise  words,  hudled-up  and 
ranged  to  a  just  smoothe  cadence,  but  stufft  and  full  of 
notable  sayings,  and  wise  sentences  ;  by  which  a  man  doth 
not  only  become  more  eloquent,  but  more  wise,  and  that 
teach  us,  not  to  say  well,  but  to  doe  well.  Fie  on  that 
eloquence,  which  leaves  us  with  a  desire  of  it,  and  not  of 
things :  unlesse  a  man  will  say,  that  Ciceroes  being  so 
exceedingly  perfect,  doth  frame  it  selfe  a  body  of  perfection. 
I  will  further  alleage  a  storie,  which  to  this  purpose  we  reade 
of  him,  to  make  us  palpably  feele  his  naturall  condition.  He 
was  to  make  an  Oration  in  publike,  and  being  urged  betimes 
to  prepare  himselfe  for  it,  Eros  one  of  his  servants  came  to 
270 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

tel  him,  the  Auditorie  was  deferred  till  the  morrow  next;  CHAPTER 
he  was  so  glad  of  it,  that  for  so  good  newes  he  gave  him  his  XXXIX 
libertie.  Touching  this  subject  of  Epistles,  thus  much  I  will  tJJ£JJp5T" 
say ;  It  is  a  worke  wherein  my  friends  are  of  opinion  I  can  Cicero 
doe  something :  And  should  more  willingly  have  undertaken 
to  publish  my  gifts,  had  I  had  who  to  speake  unto.  It  had 
beene  requisite  (as  I  have  had  other  times)  to  have  had  a 
certaine  commerce  to  draw  me  on,  to  encourage  me,  and  to 
uphold  me.  For,  to  goe  about  to  catch  the  winde  in  a  net, 
as  others  doe,  I  cannot;  and  it  is  but  a  dreame.  I  am 
a  sworne  enemie  to  all  falsifications.  I  should  have  beene 
more  attentive,  and  more  assured,  having  a  friendly  and 
strong  direction,  than  to  behold  the  divers  images  of  a  whole 
multitude  :  and  I  am  deceived,  if  it  had  not  better  succeeded 
with  me.  I  have  naturally  a  comical  and  familiar  stile : 
But  after  a  maner  peculiar  unto  my  self,  inept  to  all  publike 
Negotiations,  answering  my  speech,  which  is  altogether  close, 
broken,  and  particular :  I  have  no  skill  in  ceremonious 
letters,  which  have  no  other  substance,  but  a  faire  contexture 
of  complemental  phrases  and  curteous  words.  I  have  no 
taste  nor  faculty  of  these  tedious  offers  of  service  and  affec 
tion.  I  believe  not  so  much  as  is  said,  and  am  nothing 
pleased  to  say  more  than  I  believe.  It  is  farre  from  that 
which  is  used  now  adaies:  For,  there  was  never  so  abject  and 
servile  a  prostitution  of  presentations ;  life,  soule,  devotion, 
adoration,  servant,  slave ;  all  these  words  are  so  generally 
used,  that  when  they  would  expresse  a  more  emphaticall 
intent  and  respective  will,  they  have  no  meanes  left  them  to 
expresse  it.  I  deadly  hate  to  heare  a  flatterer  :  which  is  the 
cause  I  naturally  affect  a  pithy,  sinnowie,  drie,  round,  and 
harsh  kind  of  speach ;  which,  of  such  as  have  no  further 
acquaintance  with  me,  is  judged  to  encline  to  disdaine.  I 
honor  them  most,  whom  I  seeme  to  regard  least :  And  where 
my  mind  marcheth  most  cheerefully,  I  often  forget  the  steps 
of  gravitie:  And  I  offer  my  selfe  but  faintly  and  rudely 
to  those  whose  I  am  indeed,  and  present  my  selfe  least,  to 
such  as  I  have  most  given  my  selfe.  Me  thinkes  they  should 
read  it  in  my  heart,  and  that  the  expression  of  my  words, 
wrongeth  my  conception.  To  welcome,  to  take  leave,  to 
bid  farewell,  to  give  thanks,  to  salute,  to  present  my  service, 

271 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  such  verball  complements  of  the  ceremoniall  lawes  of 
XXXIX       our  civilitie,  I  know  no  man  so  sottishly-barren  of  speech, 

tion  upon*"  as  m?  Selfe'  And  I  Was  never  imPloyed  to  indite  Letters 
Cicero  °f  favour  or  commendatorie,  but  he  for  whom  they  were, 
j  udged  them  drie,  barren,  and  faint.  The  Italians  are  great 
Printers  of  Epistles,  whereof  I  thinke  I  have  a  hundred 
severall  Volumes.  I  deeme  those  of  Hanniball  Caro  to 
be  the  best.  If  all  the  paper  I  have  heretofore  scribled 
for  Ladies  were  extant,  at  what  time  my  hand  was  truly 
transported  by  my  passion,  a  man  should  haply  find  some 
page  worthy  to  be  communicated  unto  idle  and  fond- 
doting  youth,  embabuinized  with  this  furie.  I  ever  write  my 
letters  in  post-hast,  and  so  rashly-head  long,  that  howbeit 
I  write  intolerably  ill,  I  had  rather  write  with  mine  owne 
hand,  than  imploy  another  :  for  I  find  none  that  can  follow 
me,  and  I  never  copy  them  over  againe.  I  have  accustomed 
those  great  persons  that  know  me,  to  endure  blots,  blurs, 
dashes,  and  botches,  in  my  letters,  and  a  sheete  without 
folding  or  margine.  Those  that  cost  me,  either  most  labour 
or  studie,  are  they  that  are  least  worth.  When  I  once  begin 
to  traile  them,  it  is  a  signe  my  mind  is  not  upon  them. 
I  commonly  begin  without  project :  the  first  word  begets  the 
second.  Our  moderne  letters  are  more  fraught  with  borders, 
and  prefaces,  than  with  matter,  as  I  had  rather  write  two, 
than  fold  and  make  up  one,  which  charge  I  commonly  resigne 
to  others:  So  likewise  when  the  matter  is  ended,  I  would 
willingly  give  another  the  charge,  to  adde  these  long  orations, 
offers,  praiers,  and  imprecations,  which  we  place  at  the  end 
of  them,  and  wish  hartily,  some  new  fashion  would  discharge 
us  of  them.  As  also  to  superscribe  them  with  a  legend  of 
qualities,  titles,  and  callings,  wherein,  lest  I  might  have 
tripped,  I  have  often  times  omitted  writing,  especially  to 
men  of  Justice,  Lawyers,  and  Financiers.  So  many  innova 
tions  of  offices,  so  difficult  a  dispensation  and  ordinance  of 
divers  names  and  titles  of  honour,  which  being  so  dearely 
bought,  can  neither  be  exchanged  or  forgotten  without 
offence.  I  likewise  find  it  gracelesse  and  idly-fond,  to 
charge  the  front  and  inscription  of  the  many  bookes 
and  pamphlets,  which  we  daily  cause  to  be 
imprinted  with  them. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 


THE   FORTIETH    CHAPTER 

That  the  taste  of  goods  or  evils  doth  greatly  depend 
on  the  opinion  we  have  of  them. 

EN '  (saith  an  ancient  Greeke  sentence)  *  are 
'  tormented  by  the  opinions  they  have  of 
'  things,  and  not  by  things  themselves."  It 
were  a  great  conquest  for  the  ease  of  our 
miserable  humane  condition,  if  any  man 
could  establish  every  where  this  true  pro 
position.  For  if  evils  have  no  entrance 
into  us,  but  by  our  judgement,  it  seemeth 
that  it  lieth  in  our  power,  either  to  contemne  or  turne  them 
to  our  good.  If  things  yeeld  themselves  unto  our  mercie, 
why  should  we  not  have  the  fruition  of  them,  or  apply  them 
to  our  advantage  ?  If  that  which  we  call  evill  and  torment, 
be  neither  torment,  nor  evill,  but  that  our  fancie  only  gives  it 
that  qualitie,  it  is  in  us  to  change  it :  and  having  the  choice 
of  it,  if  none  compell  us,  we  are  very  fooles,  to  bandy  for 
that  partie,  which  is  irkesome  unto  us  :  and  to  give  infir 
mities,  indigence,  and  contempt,  a  sharpe  and  ill  taste,  if  we 
may  give  them  a  good  :  And  if  fortune  simply  affoord  us 
the  matter,  it  lieth  in  us  to  give  it  the  forme.  Now  that 
that  which  we  terme  evill,  is  not  so  of  it  selfe,  or  at  least, 
such  as  it  is,  that  it  depends  of  us  to  give  it  another  taste, 
and  another  countenance  (for  all  comes  to  one)  let  us  see 
whether  it  can  be  maintained.  If  the  originall  being  of 
those  things  we  feare,  had  the  credit  of  ifs  owne  authoritie 
to  lodge  it  selfe  in  us,  alike  and  semblable  would  it  lodge  in 
all :  For  men  be  all  of  one  kind,  and  except  the  most  or 
least,  they  are  furnished  with  like  meanes  to  judge,  and  in 
struments  to  conceive.  But  the  diversitie  of  opinions,  which 
we  have  of  those  things,  doth  evidently  shew,  that  but  by 
composition  they  never  enter  into  us.  Some  one  peradventure 
doth  lodge  them  in  himselfe,  as  they  are  in  essence,  but  a 
thousand  others  give  them  a  new  being,  and  a  contrarie. 
We  accompt  of  death,  of  povertie,  and  of  sorrow,  as  of  our 
chiefest  parts.  Now  death,  which  some  of  all  horrible  things 
2K  273 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  call  the  most  horrible,  who  knowes  not,  how  others  call  it, 
XL         the  only  haven  of  this  lives-torments  ?  the  soveraigne  good 
That  the     Qf  nature  ?  the  only  staie  of  our  libertie  ?  and  the  ready  and 
or  evils  doth  common  receit  of  our  evils  ?     And  as  some  doe  fearefully- 
greatly      de-  trembling,    and    senslesly-affrighted,    expect   her    comming, 
pend  on  the  others  endure  it  more  easily  than  life  :  And  one  complaineth 
opinion  we    of  her  facilitie  : 
have   of 

them  Mors  utinam  pavidos  vita  subducere  nolles, 

LUCAN.  iv.  Bed  virtus  te  sola  daret ! 

5  O  death  !  I  would  thou  would'st  let  cowards  live, 

That  resolv'd  valour  might  thee  only  give  ! 

But  let  us  leave  these  glorious  minds:  Theodorus  answered 
Lysimachus,  who  threatned  to  kill  him  :  '  Thou  shalt  doe  a 
'  great  exploit  to  come  to  the  strength  of  a  Cantharides."1 
The  greatest  number  of  Philosophers  are  found  to  have  either 
by  designe  prevented,  or  hastned  and  furthered  their  deaths. 
How  many  popular  persons  are  seen  brought  unto  death,  and 
not  to  a  simple  death,  but  entermixt  with  shame,  and  some 
times  with  grievous  torments,  to  embrace  it  with  such  an 
undaunted  assurance  ;  some  through  stubborne  wilfulnesse, 
other  some  through  a  naturall  simplicitie,  in  whom  is  nothing 
scene  changed  from  their  ordinarie  condition  ;  setling  their 
domesticall  affaires,  recommending  themselves  unto  their 
friends,  preaching,  singing,  and  entertaining  the  people:  yea, 
and  sometimes  uttering  words  of  jesting  and  laughter,  and 
drinking  to  their  acquaintance,  as  well  as  Socrates  ?  One 
who  was  led  to  the  gallowes,  desired  it  might  not  be  thorow 
such  a  street,  for  feare  a  Merchant  should  set  a  Serjant  on 
his  backe,  for  an  old  debt.  Another  wished  the  hang-man 
not  to  touch  his  throat,  lest  hee  should  make  him  swowne 
with  laughing,  because  he  was  so  ticklish.  Another  answered 
his  confessor,  who  promised  him  he  should  sup  that  night 
with  our  Saviour  in  heaven, '  Goe  thither  your  selfe  to  supper, 
4  for  I  use  to  fast  a  nights.1  Another  upon  the  Gibbet  calling 
for  drinke,  and  the  hang-man  drinking  first,  said,  hee  would 
not  drinke  after  him,  for  feare  hee  should  take  the  pox  of 
him.  Everie  man  hath  heard  the  tale  of  the  Piccard,  who 
being  upon  the  ladder  ready  to  be  throwen  downe,  there  was 
a  wench  presented  unto  him,  with  this  offer  (as  in  some  cases 

274 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

our  law  doth  sometimes  tolerate)  that  if  hee  would  marrie  CHAPTER 
her,  his  life  should  be  saved,  who  after  he  had  a  while  beheld          XL 

her,  and  perceiving  that  she  halted,  said  hastily,  'Away,  away,  .   Thatr  the  , 
,   T  r  j      i?  j.i      i      •  i       i  •       J '  taste  of  goods 

'  good  hang-man,  make  an  end  01  thy  busmes,  she  limps.  or  eviis  doth 

The  like  is  reported  of  a  man   in  Denmarke,   who   being  greatly      de- 
adjudged  to  have  his  head  cut  oft',  and  being  upon  the  scaffold,  pend  on   the 
had  the  like  condition  offered  him,  but  refused  it,  because    °Pmion  we 
the  wench  offered  him  was  jaw-falne,  long  cheekt,  and  sharpe-  * 

nosed.  A  young  lad  at  Tholous,  being  accused  of  heresie,  in 
all  points  touching  his  beleefe,  referred  himselfe  wholly  to 
his  Masters  faith,  (a  young  scholar  that  was  in  prison  with 
him)  and  rather  chose  to  die,  than  hee  would  be  pers waded 
his  Master  could  erre.  We  reade  of  those  of  the  Towne  of 
Arras,  at  what  time  King  Lewis  the  eleventh  tooke  it,  that 
amongst  the  common  people  many  were  found,  who  rather 
than  they  would  say,  'God  save  the  King,'  suffered  themselves 
to  be  hanged.  And  of  those  base-minded  jesters  or  buffbns, 
some  have  beene  scene,  that  even  at  the  point  of  death, 
would  never  leave  their  jesting  and  scoffing.  He  whom  the 
heads-man  threw  off  from  the  Gallowes,  cried  out,  'Row  the 
*  Gaily,1  which  was  his  ordinarie  by-word.  Another,  who  being 
at  his  last  gaspe,  his  friends  had  laid  him  upon  a  pallet 
alongst  the  fire-side,  there  to  breathe  his  last,  the  Physitian 
demanding  where  his  griefe  pained  him  ?  answered,  'Betweene 
'  the  bench  and  the  fire':  And  the  Priest  to  give  him  the  last 
unction,  seeking  for  his  feet,  which  by  reason  of  his  sicke- 
nesse  were  shrunken  up,  he  told  him,  '  My  good  friend  you 
'  shal  finde  them  at  my  legges  ends,  if  you  looke  well.'  To 
another  that  exhorted  him  to  recommend  himselfe  to  God, 
he  asked,  '  Who  is  going  to  him?"  And  the  fellow  answering, 
'  Your  selfe  shortly:'  'If  it  be  his  good  pleasure,!  would  to  God 
'  it  might  be  to  morrow  night,'  replied  he:  'Recommend  but 
'  your  selfe  to  him,'  said  the  other, 'and  you  shall  quickly  be 
'  there':  'It  is  best  then,' answered  he, 'that  my  selfe  carry  mine 
'  owne  commendations  to  him.'  In  the  kingdome  of  Narsinga, 
even  at  this  day  their  Priests  wives  are  buried  alive  with  the 
bodies  of  their  dead  husbands.  All  other  wives  are  burnt 
at  their  husbands  funerals,  not  only  constantly,  but  cheer 
fully.  When  their  King  dieth,  his  wives,  his  concubines, 
his  minions,  together  with  al  his  officers  and  servants,  which 

275 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  make  a  whole  people,  present  themselves  so  merrily  unto  the 

XL          fire5  wherein  his  body  is  burned,  that  they  manifestly  seeme 

That  the     |.o    esteeme   it   as    a   great    honour,    to   accompanie    their 

taste  of  groods  ,  T  .1-1  -rv     •  i,  t* 

or  evils  doth  deceased  master  to   his  ashes.      During  our  last  warres  of 

greatly  de-  Millaine,  and  so  many  takings,  losses,  miseries,  and  calamities 
pend  on  the  of  that  Citie,  the  people  impatient  of  so  many  changes  of 
opinion  we  fortune,  tooke  such  a  resolution  unto  death,  that  I  have 
them*  heard  my  father  say,  he  kept  accompt  of  five  and  twentie 
chiefe  housholders,  that  in  one  weeke  made  them-selves 
away :  An  accident  which  hath  some  affinitie  with  that  of 
the  Xanthians,  who  being  besieged  by  Brutus,  did  pell-mell- 
headlong,  men,  women,  and  children  precipitate  them-selves 
into  so  furious  a  desire  of  death,  that  nothing  can  be  per 
formed  to  avoid  death,  which  these  did  not  accomplish  to 
avoid  life  :  So  that  Brutus  had  much  adoe,  to  save  a  verie 
small  number  of  them.  Every  opinion  is  of  sufficient  power 
to  take  hold  of  a  man  in  respect  of  life.  The  first  Article 
of  that  couragious  oath,  which  the  Countrie  of  Greece  did 
sweare,  and  keepe,  in  the  Median  warre,  was,  that  every 
particular  man  should  rather  change  his  life  unto  death, 
than  the  Persian  lawes  for  theirs.  What  a  world  of  people 
are  daily  scene  in  the  Turkish  warres,  and  the  Graecians, 
more  willing  to  embrace  a  sharpe,  a  bitter,  and  violent  death, 
than  to  be  uncircumcized  and  baptized  ?  An  example 
whereof  no  religion  is  incapable.  The  Kings  of  Castile 
having  banished  the  Jewes  out  of  their  Countrie,  King  John 
of  Portugall  for  eight  crownes  a  man,  sold  them  a  retreit  in 
his  dominion,  for  a  certaine  time,  upon  condition  (the  time 
expired)  they  should  avoid,  and  he  find  them  ships  to 
transport  them  into  Affrike.  The  day  of  their  departure 
come,  which  past,  it  was  expressed,  that  such  as  had  not  obeyed, 
should  for  ever  remaine  bond-slaves;  ships  were  provided 
them,  but  very  scarce  and  sparingly :  And  those  which  were 
imbarked,  were  so  rudely,  churlishly,  and  villainously  used, 
by  the  passengers  and  marriners ;  who  besides  infinite  other 
indignites,  loitred  so  long  on  the  seas,  now  forward,  now 
backward,  that  in  the  end,  they  had  consumed  all  their 
victuals,  and  were  forced,  if  they  would  keepe  themselves 
alive,  to  purchase  some  of  them,  at  so  excessive  a  rate,  and 
so  long,  that  they  were  never  set  a  shore,  till  they  had 
276 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

brought  them  so  bare,  that  they  had  nothing  left  them  but  CHAPTER 
their  shirts.     The  newes  of  this  barbarous  inhumanitie  being         XL 
reported  to  those  that  were  yet  on  land,  most  of  them  re-  tag^*tf  5^ 
solved  to  yeeld   and   continue   bond-slaves :    whereof  some  or  evils  doth 
made  a  semblance  to  change  their  religion.     Emanuel  that  greatly      de- 
immediately  succeeded  lohn,  being   come   to    the    Crowne,  pend  on   the 
first  set  them  at  libertie,  then  changing  his  minde,  commanded    °pimon  Je 
them  to  depart  out  of  his  dominions,  and  for  their  passages         them 
assigned  them  three  ports.     He  hoped,  as  Bishop  Osorius 
reporteth,  (a  Latine  Historian  of  our  ages,  not  to  be  despised) 
that  the  favor  of  the  libertie,  to  which  he  had  restored  them, 
having  failed  to  convert  them  unto  Christianize,  the  difficultie 
to  commit  themselves  unto  marriners  and  pyrates  robberies, 
to  leave  a  Countrie  where  they  were  setled  with  great  riches, 
for  to  goe  seeke  unknowen  and  strange  regions,  would  bring 
them  into  Portugall  againe.     But  seeing  all  his  hopes  frus 
trate,  and  that  they  purposed  to  passe  away,  hee  cut  off'  two 
of  the  three  ports  he  had  promised  them,  that  so  the  tedious 
distance  and  incommoditie  of  the  passage  might  retaine  some, 
or  rather  that  he  might  have  the  meane  to  assemble  them  all 
together  in  one  place,  for  a  fitter  opportunitie  of  the  execution 
he  intended,  which  was  this.     Hee  appointed  that  all  their 
children  under  fourteene  yeares  of  age,  should  be  taken  from 
out  the  hands  of  their  parents,  and  removed  from  their  sight 
and  conversation,  to  some  place  where  they  might  be  brought 
up,  and  instructed  in  our  religion.     He  saith  that  this  effect 
caused  an  horrible  spectacle  :  The  naturall  affection  betweene 
the  fathers  and  the  children ;  moreover  the  zeale  unto  their 
ancient  faith,  striving  against  this  violent  ordinance.     Divers 
fathers  and  mothers  were  ordinarily  scene  to  kill  themselves, 
and  with  a  more  cruell  example  through  compassion  and 
love,  to  throw  their  young  children  into  pitts  and   wells, 
thereby  to  shun  the  Law.     The  terme  which  he  had  prefixed 
them  being  expired,  for  want  of  other  meanes,  they  yeelded 
unto  thraldome.     Some  became  Christians,  from  whose  faith 
and  race,  even  at  this  day  (for  it  is  an  hundred  yeares  since) 
few  Portugalls   assure  themselves;    although   custome,  and 
length  of  time  be  much  more  forcible  counsellors  unto  such 
mutations,  than  any  other  compulsion.      In  the  Towne  of 
Castelnaw  Darry,  more  than  fifty  Albigeois,  all  heretikes,  at 

277 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  one  time,  with  a  determined  courage,  suffred  themselves  to 
XL          be  burned  alive,  all  in  one  same  fire,  before  they  would  re- 
taste  of  *  oods  can^  anc^  Disavow  their  opinions.     Quoties  non  modb  ductores 
or  evils  doth  nostri,  sed  universi  etiam  exercitus,  ad  non  dubiam  mortem 
greatly      de-  concurrerunt  ?     '  How  often  have,  not  only  our  Leader '  (saith 
pend  on   the  Tully)  4  but  also  our  whole  armies  run  roundly  together  to 
opinion  we    <  an  undoubted  death  ? '     I  have  seene  one  of  my  familiar 
them        friends  runne  furiously  on  death,  with  such,  and  so  deepely 
Cic   Tusc  Ou  *n  k*s  neai>t  ro°ted  affection,  by  divers  visages  of  discourse, 
i.  *  which  I  could  never  suppresse  in  him,  and  to  the  first  that 

offered  it  selfe  masked  with  a  lustre  of  honour,  without 
apprehending  any  sharpe  or  violent  end,  therein  to  precipi 
tate  himselfe.  We  have  many  examples  in  our  daies,  yea  in 
very  children,  of  such  as  for  feare  of  some  slight  incom- 
moditie  have  yeelded  unto  death.  And  to  this  purpose  saith 
an  ancient  Writer,  what  shall  we  not  feare,  if  we  feare  that, 
which  cowardise  it  selfe  hath  chosen  for  her  retrait  ?  Heere 
to  huddle  up  a  long  bead-rowle  of  those  of  all  sexes,  condi 
tions,  sects,  in  most  happy  ages,  which  either  have  expected 
death  most  constantly,  or  sought  for  it  voluntarily,  and  not 
only  sought  to  avoid  the  evils  of  this  life,  but  some,  only  to 
shun  the  sacietie  of  living  any  longer :  and  some,  for  the 
hope  of  a  better  condition  elsewhere,  I  should  never  have 
done.  The  number  is  so  infinite,  that  verily  it  would  be  an 
easier  matter  for  me  to  reckon  up  those  that  have  feared  the 
same.  Only  this  more.  Pirro  the  Philosopher,  finding  him 
selfe  upon  a  very  tempestuous  day  in  a  boat,  shewed  them 
whom  he  perceived  to  be  most  affrighted  through  feare,  and 
encouraged  them  by  the  example  of  an  hog,  that  was 
amongst  them,  and  seemed  to  take  no  care  at  all  for  the 
storme :  Shall  wee  then  dare  to  say,  that  the  advantage  of 
reason,  whereat  we  seeme  so  much  to  rejoyce,  and  for  whose 
respect  we  account  our  selves  Lords  and  Emperours  of  all 
other  creatures,  hath  beene  infused  into  us  for  our  torment  ? 
6  What  availeth  the  knowledge  of  things,  if  through  them 
'  we  become  more  demisse  ? '  If  thereby  wee  lose  the  rest 
and  tranquillitie  wherein  we  should  be  without  them  ?  and 
if  it  makes  us  of  worse  condition  than  was  Pirrhos  hog? 
Shall  we  employ  the  intelligence,  heaven  hath  bestowed  upon 
us  for  our  greatest  good,  to  our  ruine  ?  repugning  natures 
278 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

desseigne  and  the  universall  order  and  vicissitude  of  things,  CHAPTER 
which  implieth  that  every  man  should  use  his  instruments         XL 
and  meanes  for  his  owne  commoditie ?     Wei  (will  some  tell     That 
me)  let  your  rule  fit  you  against  death ;  but  what  will  you  0*S  e 
say  of  indigence  and  necessitie  ?  what  will  you  also  say  of  greatly      de- 
minde-grieving  sorrow,  which  Aristippus,  Hieronymus,  and  pend   on  the 
most  of  the  wisest  have  judged  the  last  evill  ?  and  those    °pinion  we 
which  denied  the  same  in  words,  confessed  the  same  in  effect  ?         them 
Possidonius  being  extremely  tormented  with  a  sharpe  and 
painfull  sicknesse,  Pompey  came  to  see  him,  and  excused 
himselfe  he  had  chosen  so  unfit  an  houre  to  heare  him  dis 
course  of  Philosophy  :  '  God  forbid '  (answered  Possidonius) 
'that    ever  paine  should  so  farre  usurpe  upon  me,  as  to 
'  hinder  me  from  discoursing  of  so  worthy  a  subject.1     And 
thereupon  began  to  speake  of  the  contempt  of  paine.     But 
there  whilst  she  plaied  her  part,  and  uncessantly  pinched 
and  urged  him ;   gainst  whom  hee  exclaimed  :  '  Paine,  doe 
4  what  thou  list,  I  shall  never  be  drawne  to  say,  that  thou 
'  art  an  evill/     That  saying,  which  they  would  make  of  such 
consequence,  what  doth  it  inferre  against  the  contempt  of 
paine?  it  contends  but  for  the  word.     And  if  the  pangs 
thereof  move  him  not  there-whilst,  why  breakes  he  off  his 
discourse  for  it  ?     Why  thinks  he  to  worke  a  great  exploit, 
not  to  call  it  an  evill  ?    All  doth  not  consist  in  imagination. 
Heere  we  judge  of  the  rest.     It  is  assured  learning  that  here 
doth  play  her  part,  our  owne  senses  are  Judges  of  it. 

Qui  nisi  sunt  veri ;  ratio  quoque  falsa  sit  omnis.  LUCR.  iv.  487. 

Which  senses  if  they  be  not  true, 
All  reason  's  false,  it  must  ensue. 

Shall  we  make  our  skin  beleeve,  the  stripes  of  a  whip  doe 
tickle  it  ?  and  perswade  our  taste,  that  Aloes  be  wine  of 
Graves?  Pirrhos  hog  is  here  in  our  predicament.  He  is 
nothing  danted  at  death,  but  if  you  beat  him,  he  will  grunt, 
«rie  and  torment  himselfe.  Shall  wee  force  the  generall  law 
of  nature,  which  in  all  living  creatures  under  heaven  is  scene 
to  tremble  at  paine  ?  The  very  trees  seeme  to  groane  at 
offences.  Death  is  but  felt  by  discourse,  because  it  is  the 
motion  of  an  instant. 

279 


CHAPTER 
XL 

That  the 
taste  of  goods 
or  evils  doth 
greatly      de 
pend   on  the 
opinion  we 
have  of 
them 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

Autfuit,  aut  veniet,  nihil  est  prcesentis  in  ilia. 

Death  hath  come,  or  it  will  not  misse  ; 
But  in  it  nothing  present  is. 


OVID.  Epist. 
Ariad.  82. 


Morsque  minus  poetics,  quam  mora  mortis  habet. 

Deaths  pain 's  lesse,  roundly  acted, 
Than  when  death  is  protracted. 


SEN.  Quar. 
Von.  cap.  iv. 


A  thousand  beasts,  a  thousand  men,  are  sooner  dead  than 
threatned.  Besides,  what  wee  principally  call  feare  in  death, 
it  is  paine  her  customarie  fore-runner.  Neverthelesse  if  we 
must  give  credit  to  an  ancient  father,  Malam  mortem  non 
facit,  nisi  quod  sequitur  mortem.  '  Nothing,  but  what  follows 
'  death,  makes  death  to  be  evill.1  And  I  might  more  truly 
say,  that  neither  that  which  goeth  before,  nor  that  which 
commeth  after,  is  no  appurtenance  of  death,  we  falsely  ex 
cuse  our  selves.  And  I  find  by  experience,  that  it  is  rather 
the  impatience  of  the  imagination  of  death,  that  makes  us 
impatient  of  the  paine,  and  that  we  feele  it  two-fold  griev 
ous,  forasmuch  as  it  threats  us  to  die.  But  reason  accusing 
our  weaknesse,  to  feare  so  sudden  a  thing,  so  unavoidable, 
so  insensible ;  we  take  this  other  more  excusable  pretence. 
All  evils  that  have  no  other  danger,  but  of  the  evill,  we 
count  them  dangerlesse.  The  tooth-ach,  the  paine  of  the 
gowt,  how  grievous  soever,  because  they  kill  not,  who 
reckoneth  them  in  the  number  of  maladies  ?  Well,  suppose 
that  in  death  wee  especially  regard  the  paine :  As  also 
povertie  hath  nothing  to  be  feared  for,  but  what  she  casteth 
upon  us  through  famine,  thirst,  cold,  heat,  and  other 
miseries,  it  makes  us  feele  and  endure.  So  have  we  nothing 
to  doe  but  with  paine.  I  will  willingly  grant  them,  that  it 
is  the  worst  accident  of  our  being.  For,  I  am  the  man  that 
hate  and  shun  it  as  much  as  possible  may  be;  because 
hitherto  (thanks  be  unto  God)  I  have  no  commerce  or  deal 
ing  with  her :  But  it  is  in  our  power,  if  not  to  dissanull,  at 
least  to  diminish  the  same,  through  patience :  And  though 
the  body  should  be  moved  thereat,  yet  to  keepe  the  minde 
and  reason  in  good  temper.  And  if  it  were  not  so,  who 
then  hath  brought  vertue,  valour,  force,  magnanimitie,  and 
resolution  into  credit  ?  Where  shall  they  play  their  part,  if 
there  be  no  more  paine  defied?  Avida  est periculi  virtus, 

280 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

'Vertue  is  desirous  of  danger.'     If  a  man  must  not  lie  on  CHAPTER 
the  hard  ground,  armed  at  all  assaies,  to  endure  the  heat  of         XL 

the  scorching  Sunne,  to  feed  hungerly  upon  a  horse,  or  an  .   That  the 

,&.        ,/.  '  IT         1 1        l   •  r  taste  of  g-oods 

asse,  to  see  himselfe  mangled  and  cut  in  peeces,  to  have  a  or  evils  doth 

bullet  pluckt  out  of  his  bones,  to  suffer  incisions,  his  flesh  to  greatly      de- 
be    stitcht   up,  cauterized,  and  searched,  all  incident  to  a  pend  on  the 
martiall  man ;  how  shall  we  purchase  the  advantage  and    °Pmion  we 
preheminence,  which  we    so   greedily  seek    after,  over  the         them 
vulgar  sort  ?     It  is  far  from  avoiding  the  evill  and  paines  of 
it,  as  wise  men  say,  that  of  actions  equally  good,  one  should 
most  be  wished  to  be  done,  wherein  is  most  paine  and  griefe. 
Non  enim  hilaritate  nee  lasdvia  risu  aut  joco  comite  levitatis,  Cic.  De  Fin. 
sed  scepe  etiam  tristes  Jirmitate  et  constantia  sunt  beati.     '  For  "• 
'  men  are  not  happy  by  mirthfulnesse,  or  wantonnesse,  or 
'  laughing,  or  jesting,  which  is  the  companion  of  lightnesse ; 
4  but  often,  even   those  that  are  sorrowfull,  through  their 
'  strong  heart  and  constancies     And  therefore  was  it  impos 
sible  to  perswade  our  fathers,  that  conquests  atchieved  by 
maine-force,  in  the  hazard  of  warre,  were  not  more  available 
and  advantageous,  than  those  obtained  in  all  securitie  by 
practices  and  stratagems. 

Latins  est,  quoties  magno  sibi  constat  honestum.  LUCAN,  ix.  404. 

Honesty  makes  chiefest  cheare, 
When  it  doth  cost  it  selfe  most  deare. 

Moreover,  this  ought  to  comfort  us,  that  naturally,  if 
paine  be  violent,  it  is  also  short;  if  long,  it  is  easie:  Sicic.DeFin.il. 
grav'is,  brevis ;  si  longus,  levis.    'If  it  be  grievous,  it  is  short ;  Epic- 
'  if  it  be  long,  it  is  light.'    Thou  shalt  not  feele  it  over  long ; 
if  thou  feele  it  over  much,  it  will  either  end  it  selfe,  or  end 
thee :  All  comes  to  one :  If  thou  beare  not  it,  it  will  beare 
thee  away.     Memineris  maximos  morte  Jiniri,  parvos  multa  Ib.  \. 
habere    intervatta    requietis ;   mediocrium  nos   esse   dominos : 
ut  si  tolerabiles  sint,  feramus:  sin   minus,  e  vita,  quum   ea 
non  placeat,  tanqudm  e  theatro  exeamus.      'Remember  the 
'  greatest  are  ended  with  death,  the  lesser  have  many  pauses 
'  of  rest ;  we  are  masters  of  the  meane  ones :  so  as  if  they  be 
'  tolerable,  we  may  beare  them ;  if  not,  we  may  make   an 
'  Exit  from  our  life  which  doth  not  please,  as  from  a  stage.' 
That  which  makes  us  endure  paine  with  such  impatience,  is, 

2L  281 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  that  we  are  not  accustomed  to  take  our  chiefe  contentment 
XL  in  the  soule,  and  that  we  doe  not  sufficiently  rely  on  her ; 
That  the  w\lo  js  the  only,  and  soveraigne  mistris  of  our  condition. 
or^evUs  doth  The  bodJ  hath  (except  the  least  or  most)  but  one  course, 
greatly  de-  and  one  byase.  The  soule  is  variable  in  all  manner  of  formes, 
pend  on  the  and  rangeth  to  her  selfe,  and  to  her  estate,  whatsoever  it  be, 
opinion  we  tne  senses  of  the  body,  and  all  other  accidents.  Therefore 
them  must  she  be  studied,  enquired,  and  sought-after:  and  her 
powerfull  springs  and  wards  should  be  rowzed  up.  There  is 
neither  reason,  nor  prescription,  nor  force  can  availe  against 
her  inclination  and  choise.  Of  so  infinit  byases,  that  she 
hath  in  her  disposition,  let  us  allow  her  one  sutable  and  fit 
to  our  rest  and  preservation :  Then  shall  we  not  only  be 
sheltered  from  all  offence,  but  if  it  please  her,  also  gratified 
and  flattered  of  all  grievances  and  evils.  She  indifferently 
makes  profit  of  all ;  even  errours  and  dreames,  doe  profit 
ably  bestead  her,  as  a  loyall  matter,  to  bring  us  unto  safetie 
and  contentment.  It  may  easily  be  seen,  that  the  point  of 
our  spirit,  is  that  which  sharpneth  both  paine  and  pleasure 
in  us.  Beasts  wanting  the  same,  leave  their  free  and 
naturall  senses  unto  their  bodies :  and  by  consequence,  single 
well-nigh  in  every  kind,  as  they  shew  by  the  semblable 
application  of  their  movings.  If  in  our  members  we  did  not 
trouble  the  j  urisdiction,  which  in  that  belongs  unto  them ; 
it  may  be  thought,  we  should  be  the  better  for  it,  and  that 
nature  hath  given  them  a  just  and  moderate  temperature 
toward  pleasure  and  toward  paine.  And  it  cannot  chuse 
but  be  good  and  just,  being  equall  and  common.  But  since 
we  have  freed  and  alienated  our  selves  from  her  rules,  to 
abandon  our  selves  unto  the  vagabond  libertie  of  our 
fantasies :  let  us  at  least  help  to  bend  them  to  the  most 
agreeing  side.  Plato  feareth  our  sharp  engaging  unto  paine 
and  voluptuousnesse,  forsomuch  as  he  over-strictly  tieth  and 
bindeth  the  soule  unto  the  body :  I  am  rather  opposit  unto 
him,  because  it  is  sundred  and  loosed  from  it.  Even  as  an 
enemie  becommeth  more  furious  when  we  flie  from  him,  so 
doth  paine  grow  more  proud  if  it  see  us  tremble  under  it. 
It  will  stoope  and  yeeld  upon  better  compositions  to  him 
that  shall  make  head  against  it.  A  man  must  oppose  and 
bandy  against  it.  In  recoyling  and  giving  ground,  we  call 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

and  draw  on,  the  ruine  threatning  us.  Even  as  the  body  is 
more  steady  and  strong  to  a  charge,  if  it  stand  stiffely  to  it, 
so  is  the  soule.  But  let  us  come  to  examples  properly  belong 
ing  unto  weak-backt  men,  as  I  am,  where  we  shall  find,  that 
it  is  with  paine,  as  with  stones,  which  take  either  a  higher 
or  deeper  colour,  according  to  the  foyle  that  is  laid  under 
them,  and  holdeth  no  other  place  in  us  than  we  give  it. 
Tantum  doluerunt,  quantum  doloribus  se  inseruerunt.  '  So 
'  much  they  grieved,  as  they  interessed  themselves  in  griefes.' 
We  feele  a  dash  of  a  chirurgions  razor  more  than  ten  blows 
with  a  sword  in  the  heat  of  fight.  The  painfull  throwes  of 
childbearing,  deemed  both  by  Physitians,  and  by  the  word 
of  God  to  be  verie  great,  and  which  our  women  passe  with 
so  many  ceremonies,  there  are  whole  Nations  that  make  no 
reckoning  of  them.  I  omit  to  speake  of  the  Lacedemonian 
women  ;  but  come  we  to  the  Swizzers  of  our  Infanterie,  what 
change  doe  you  perceive  in  them  ?  But  that  trudging  and 
trotting  after  their  husbands,  to  day  you  see  them  carrie  the 
child  about  their  necke,  which  but  yesterday  they  bare  in 
their  wombe.  And  those  counterfeit  roguing  Gyptians, 
whereof  so  many  are  daily  scene  amongst  us,  doe  they  not 
wash  their  children  so  soone  as  they  are  borne  ?  and  in  the 
next  River  that  comes  to  hand  ?  Besides  so  many  harlots, 
which  daily  steale  their  children  in  the  delivery  as  in  the 
conception.  The  beauteous  and  noble  Lady  of  Sabinus,  a 
Roman  Patritian,  for  the  interest  of  others,  did  alone,  with 
out  any  bodies  helpe  or  assistance,  and  without  noise  or 
groning  endure  the  bearing  and  deliverie  of  two  twins.  A 
simple  lad  of  Lacedemon,  having  stolne  a  Fox  (for  they 
more  feared  the  shame  of  their  foolishnesse  in  stealing,  than 
we  feare  the  paine  or  punishment  of  mis-deeds)  and  hiding 
the  same  under  his  cloake,  endured  rather  to  have  his  guts 
gnawne  out  by  her,  than  to  discover  himselfe.  Another  who 
offering  incense  at  a  sacrifice,  suffered  his  flesh  to  burne  to 
the  bone  by  a  coale  falne  into  his  sleeve,  rather  than  he 
would  trouble  that  sacred  mysterie.  And  a  great  number 
have  beene  scene,  for  the  only  essay  of  vertue,  following  their 
institution,  that  at  the  age  of  seven  yeares,  without  so  much 
as  changing  their  countenance,  have  indured  to  be  whipped 
to  death.  And  Cicero  hath  scene  whole  troups,  to  beat  one 

283 


CHAPTER 
XL 

That  the 
taste  of  goods 
or   evils  doth 
greatly       de 
pend    on  the 
opinion  we 
have  of 

them 
AUGUST. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  another  so  long  with  their  fists,  with  their  feet,  and  with 

XL          their  teeth,  till  they  have  fainted  and  fallen   downe  halfe 

taste  of  g-oods  ^eac^   before   ever    they   would    confesse   to   be   overcome. 

or  evils  doth  Nunquam  naturam  mos  vinceret,  est  enim  ea  semper  invicta, 

greatly      de-  sed  nos  umbris,  delitiis,  otio,  languore,  desidia,  animum  in- 

pend  on   ihej^cimus :    opinionibus    maloque    more   delinitum   mollivimus. 

0*hav°n  7°   '  Custome   should   never   overcome  nature,  for  she  is  still 

them        '  invincible  :  but  we  have  infected  our  minde  with  shadowes, 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  '  daintinesse,  idlenesse,  faint-heartednesse,  slothfulnesse,  and 

v.  *  have   effeminated   it,   inveagled   with    opinions    and   evill 

'  custome.'      Every  man  knows  the  story  of  Scevola,  who 

being  entred  the  enemies  campe,  with  a  full  resolution  to 

kill  their  Chieftaine,  and  having  missed  of  his  purpose,  to 

checke  his  effect  with  a  stranger  invention,  and  to  cleare  his 

country,  confessed  unto  Prosenna,  (who  was  the  King  he 

intended  to  kill)  not  only  his  dessigne,  but  added  moreover, 

that  in  his  campe  there  were  a  great  many  Romanes,  who 

had  undertaken  and  sworne  the  verie  same  enterprise,  and 

were  confederates  with  him.      And  to  make  shew  of  his 

dread-lesse  magnanimitie,  having  caused  a  pan  of  burning 

coales  to  be  brought,  he  saw  and  suftred  his  right  arme  (in 

penance  that  it  had  not  effected  his  project)  to  be  parched 

and  wel-nigh   rosted-off:     untill  such  time  as  his  enemie 

himselfe,  feeling  a  kind  of  remorce-full  horror,  commanded 

the  fire  to  be  caried  away.     What  shall  we  say  of  him,  that 

would  not  vouchsafe  to  leave,  or  so  much  as  to  interrupt  the 

reading  of  his  booke,  whiFst  he  had  an  incision  made  into 

him  ?     And  of  him  who  resolved  to  skoffe  and  laugh,  even 

in  spight  and  contempt  of  the  tortures  which  were  inflicted 

upon  him,  so  that  the  raging  crueltie  of  the  hangmen,  that 

held  him,  and  all  the  inventions  of  torments  that  could  be 

devised,  being  redoubled  upon  him,  one   in  the  necke   of 

another,   gave    him    over?      But    he    was   a   Philosopher. 

What  ?  of  one  of  Caesars  gladiators,  who  with  a  cheerefull 

and  smiling  countenance  endured  his  wounds  to  be  slit  and 

Ib.  ii.  sounded  ?     Quis  mediocris  gladiator  ingemuit  f     Quis  vultum 

mutavit  unquam  ?    Quis  non  modd  stetit,  verum  etiam  decubuit 

turpiter?     Quis    cum    decubuisset,  ferrum    recipere   jussus, 

collum  contraxit  ?    '  What  meane  Fencer  hath  once  groned  ? 

'  Which   of    them   hath   once   changed   his    countenance  ? 

284 


THE   FIRST   BOOKE 

6  Which  of  them  not  only  hath  stood  up,  but  even  falne  CHAPTER 
4  with  shame  ?    Which  of  them  when  he  was  downe,  and  was         XL 
6  willed  to  take  his  death,  did  once  shrinke  in  his  necke  ? '    But     That  the  , 
let  us  j  oyne  some  women  unto  them.    Who  hath  not  heard  of  or^evUs  doth 
her  at  Paris,  which  only  to  get  a  fresher  hew  of  a  new  skin,  greatly      de- 
endured  to  have  her  face  flead  all  over  ?     There  are  some,  pend  on  the 
who  being  sound,  and  in  perfit  health,  have  had  some  teeth    opinion  we 
puld-out,  thereby  to  frame   a   daintier  and  more  pleasing 
voyce,  or  to  set  them  in  better  order.     How  many  examples 
of  contempt  of  paine  or  smart  have  we  of  that  kind  and 
sex  ?     What  can  they  not  doe  ?     What  will  they  not  doe  ? 
What  feare  they  to  doe  ?     So  they  may  but  hope  for  some 
amendment  of  their  beautie  ? 

Vellere  queis  cur  a  est  albos  d  stirpe  capillos,  TIBUL.  i.  El. 

Etfaciem  dempta  pelle  referre  novam.  viii.  43. 

Who  take  great  care  to  root  out  their  gray  haire, 
And  skin  flead-off  a  new  face  to  repaire. 

I  have  scene  some  swallow  gravell,  ashes,  coales,  dust, 
tallow,  candles,  and  for  the-nonce,  labour  and  toyle  them 
selves  to  spoile  their  stomacke,  only  to  get  a  pale-bleake 
colour.  To  become  slender  in  wast,  and  to  have  a  straight 
spagnolized  body,  what  pinching,  what  girding,  what  cingling 
will  they  not  indure  ;  Yea  sometimes  with  yron-plates,  with 
whalebones,  and  other  such  trash,  that  their  very  skin,  and 
quicke  flesh  is  eaten  in  and  consumed  to  the  bones ;  Whereby 
they  sometimes  worke  their  owne  death.  It  is  common  to 
divers  nations  of  our  times,  to  hurt  and  gash  themselves  in 
good  earnest,  to  give  credit  to  their  words.  And  our  King 
reporteth  sundrie  examples,  of  what  himselfe  saw  in  Polonia, 
and  towards  himselfe.  But  besides  what  I  know  to  have  by 
some  beene  imitated  in  France ;  when  I  came  from  the 
famous  Parliament  of  Blois ;  I  had  a  little  before  scene  a 
wench  in  Picardie  to  witnes  the  vehemencie  of  her  promises, 
and  also  her  constancie,  with  the  bodkin  she  wore  in  her 
haire,  to  give  her  selfe  foure  or  five  thrusts  in  her  arme, 
which  made  her  skin  to  crack  and  gush  out  bloud.  The 
Turkes  are  wont  to  wound  and  scarre  themselves  for  their 
Ladies  sakes,  and  that  the  marke  may  the  better  appeare, 
and  continue  the  longer,  they  will  presently  lay  fire  upon 

285 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  cuttes ;  and  to  stanch  the  bloud,  and  better  to  forme 
the  cicatrice,  they  wil  keepe  it  on,  an  incredible  while. 
Honest  men  that  have  scene  it,  have  written  the  same,  and 
evHsdoth  sworne  it  unto  me.  And  for  ten  Aspers  you  shall  daily 
greatly  de-  finde  some  amongst  them,  that  will  give  themselves  a  deepe 
pend  on  the  gash  with  a  Scimitarie,  either  in  their  armes  or  thighes.  I 
opinion  we  am  verv  g}a(j  witnesses  are  so  ready  at  hand,  where  we  have 
them  most  need  of  them :  For,  Christendom e  affordeth  many. 
And  after  the  example  of  our  holy  guide,  there  have  beene 
divers,  who  for  devotion  would  needs  beare  the  crosse.  We 
learne  by  a  worthy  testimonie  of  religion,  that  Saint  Lewes 
the  King  wore  a  haire-shirt,  untill  such  time  as  he  was  so 
aged,  that  his  confessor  gave  him  a  dispensation  for  it ;  and 
that  every  friday  he  caused  his  priests  to  beat  his  shoulders 
with  five  little  yron-chaines,  which  to  that  purpose  were 
ever  caried  with  his  nightgeare.  William  our  last  Duke 
of  Guienne,  father  to  that  Eleonore,  who  transferred  that 
Dutchy  unto  the  houses  of  France  and  England,  the  last 
ten  or  twelve  yeares  of  his  life,  for  penance-sake  wore  con 
tinually  a  corselet,  under  a  religious  habit.  Foulkes  Earle 
of  Aniou  went  to  Jerusalem,  there  with  a  rope  about  his 
necke,  to  be  whipped  by  two  of  his  servants,  before  our 
Saviours  sepulchre.  Doe  we  not  upon  every  good-friday, 
in  sundrie  places,  see  a  great  number  of  men  and  women, 
scourge  and  beat  themselves  so  long,  till  they  bruse  and 
teare  their  flesh,  even  to  the  bones  ?  I  have  often  scene  it 
my  selfe,  and  that  without  enchantment ;  And  some  say 
(for  they  are  masked)  there  were  some  amongst  them,  who 
for  monie  would  undertake  thereby  to  warrant  other  mens 
religion,  by  a  contempt  of  smart-full  paine,  so  much  the 
greater,  by  how  much  the  stings  of  devotion  are  of  more 
force,  than  those  of  covetousnes.  Q.  Maximus  buried  his 
son  who  had  beene  Consull :  Marcus  Cato  his,  being  elected 
Pretor ;  and  L.  Paulus  both  his,  within  few  daies,  with  so 
cheerefull  and  setled  a  countenance,  and  without  any  shew 
of  sorrow.  I  have  sometimes  by  way  of  jesting  told  one, 
that  he  had  confronted  divine  justice  :  For,  the  violent 
death  of  three  tall  children  of  his,  comming  unto  his  eares 
all  upon  one  day,  and  sent  him,  as  it  may  be  imagined,  as 
a  great  scourge:  he  was  so  farre  from  mourning,  that  he 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

rather  tooke  it  as  a  favour  and  singular  gratification  at  CHAPTER 
Gods  hand.     I  doe  not  follow  these  monstrous  humors.    Yet          XL 

have  I  lost  two  or  three  my  selfe,  whilst  they  were  young;  ,      hat  the 

T  .«  .,,      J.  i         .  i  J         v?  taste  of  goods 

and  at  nurce,  if  not  without  apprehension  of  sorrow  ;   yet  or  evils  doth 

without  continuance  of  griefe.  And  '  there  is  no  accident  greatly  de- 
4  woundeth  men  deeper,  or  goeth  so  neere  the  heart,  as  the  pend  on  the 
'  losse  of  children.'  I  see  divers  other  common  occasions  of  °pimon  ^'e 
affliction,  which  were  I  assailed  by  them,  I  should  scarcely  then? 
feele.  And  I  have  contemned  and  neglected  some,  when  it 
hath  pleased  God  to  visit  me  with  them,  on  which  the  world 
setteth  so  ugly  and  balefull  a  countenance,  that  I  hardly 
dare  boast  of  them  without  blushing.  Ex  quo  intelligitur,  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
non  in  natura,  sed  in  opinione  esse  cegretudinem.  '  Whereby  U1* 
4  it  is  understood,  that  griefe  consisteth  not  in  nature,  but 
'  opinion/  Opinion  is  a  power-full,  bould,  and  unmeasur- 
able  party.  Who  doth  ever  so  greedily  search  after  rest- 
full  ease  and  quietnes,  as  Alexander  and  Caesar  have  done 
after  difficulties  and  unquietnesse  ?  Terez,  the  father  of 
Sitalcez,  was  wont  to  say,  that  when  he  had  no  warres,  hee 
thought  there  was  no  difference  betweene  him  and  his  horse- 
keeper.  Cato  the  Consull,  to  assure  himselfe  of  certaine 
townes  in  Spaine,  having  only  interdicted  some  of  their 
inhabitants  to  weare  armes,  many  of  them  killed  themselves  : 
Ferox  gens  nullam  vitam  rail  sine  armis  esse.  '  A  fierce 
'  kinde  of  people,  that  thought  there  was  no  life  without 
'  armes.1  How  many  know  wee  who  have  abandoned  and 
forsaken  the  pleasure  of  an  ease-full  and  quiet  life  in  their 
houses,  and  to  live  with  their  friends  and  acquaintance ;  to 
follow  the  toyling-horror  of  unfrequented  deserts,  and  that 
yeelded  and  cast  themselves  unto  the  abjectnesse,  contempt 
and  vilifying  of  the  world,  wherwith  they  have  so  pleased 
themselves,  as  nothing  more ;  Cardinall  Boromeus,  who  died 
lately  at  Milane,  in  the  midst  of  the  pleasures  and  debawches 
to  which  his  Nobilitie,  and  the  great  riches  he  possessed, 
enticed  him,  and  the  ayre  of  Italy  afforded  him,  and  his 
youth  allured  him,  did  ever  keep  himselfe  in  so  an  austere 
forme  of  life,  that  the  same  gowne  which  served  him  in 
Summer  he  wore  in  winter.  He  never  lay  but  upon  straw ; 
the  houres  which  he  might  conveniently  spare  from  his 
charge,  he  bestowed  in  continual  study,  ever  kneeling,  and 

287 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  having  a  smal  quantitie  of  bread  and  water  by  his  bookes 
XL  side,  which  was  all  the  provision  for  his  repast,  and  time  he 
That  *he  employed  in  study.  I  know  some  who  wittingly  have  drawne 
oi-S  evHs^doth  both  profit  and  preferment  from  cuckoldrie,  the  only  name 
greatly  de-  whereof  is  so  yrkesome  and  bail-ful  to  so  many  men.  If 
pend  on  the  sight  be  not  the  most  necessarie  of  our  senses,  at  least  is  it 
opinion  we  £ne  mOst  pleasing :  the  most  plausible  and  profitable  of  our 
them  members,  seeme  those  that  serve  to  beget  us  :  notwithstand 
ing  divers  have  mortally  hated  them,  only  because  they  were 
over  much  amiable,  and  for  their  worths-sake  have  rejected 
them.  So  thought  he  of  his  eies,  that  voluntarily  put  them 
out.  The  most  common  and  soundest  part  of  men,  holdeth 
multitude  of  children  to  be  a  signe  of  great  happinesse  and 
comfort ;  So  do  I,  and  many  others,  the  want  of  them.  And 
when  Thales  was  demanded  Wherfore  he  did  not  marrie, 
he  answered,  because  he  would  leave  no  issue  or  line  of 
himselfe  behinde  him.  That  our  opinion  endeareth  and 
increaseth  the  price  of  things,  it  is  scene  in  a  great  number 
of  them,  which  we  do  not  regard  to  esteeme  them;  but 
for  our  use.  And  we  neither  consider  their  qualities  nor 
utilities,  but  only  our  cost  to  recover  and  attaine  them ;  as 
if  it  were  a  part  of  their  substance  ;  and  we  call  that  worth 
in  them,  not  what  they  bring  us,  but  what  we  bring  to  them. 
According  as  it  weigheth,  and  is  of  consequence,  so  it  serveth. 
W  her  upon  I  perceive,  we  are  thriftie  husbands  of  what  we 
lay  out.  Our  opinion  never  suffers  it  to  run  a  false  gallop. 
The  price  giveth  a  Diamond  his  title,  difficultie  to  vertue, 
paine  unto  devotion,  and  sharpnesse  unto  Physicke.  Such 
a  one  to  come  unto  povertie,  cast  those  fewe  crownes  he  had 
into  the  same  sea,  wherin  so  many  others,  with  such  carke, 
danger,  and  care,  on  all  parts  seeke  to  fish  for  riches. 
Epicurus  saith,  '  that  to  be  rich  is  no  ease,  but  a  charge  of 
6  affaires.'  Verily,  it  is  not  want,  but  rather  plentie  that 
causeth  avarice.  I  will  speake  of  mine  owne  experience, 
concerning  this  subject.  I  have  lived  in  three  kinds  of  con 
dition,  since  I  came  out  of  my  infancie.  The  first  time, 
which  continued  well-nigh  twentie  yeares,  I  have  past  it 
over,  as  one  who  had  no  other  means  but  casual,  and  depend 
ing  from  the  direction  and  helpe  of  others;  without  any 
certaine  maintenance,  or  regular  prescription.  My  expences 
288 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

were  so  much  the  more  carelessely  layed  out,  and  lavishly  CHAPTER 
employed,  by  how  much  more  they  wholy  depended  on  XL 
fortunes  rashnesse  and  exhibition.  I  never  lived  so  well  at  .  Thatf  the , 
ease  :  my  fortune  was  never  to  finde  my  friends  purse  shut :  0^S  evtts^doth 
besides  which,  I  was  to  frame  my  selfe  to  all  necessities  :  the  greatly  de- 
care  I  tooke  to  pay  every  man  at  his  prefixed  day,  which  a  pend  on  the 
thousand  times  they  have  prolonged,  seeing  the  care  I  tooke  °pinion  Je 
to  satish'e  them.  So  that  I  had  gotten  unto  my  selfe  the  them 
credit  of  a  thriftie  kind  of  good  husbandrie,  though  it  were 
something  shifting  and  deceitful.  I  do  naturally  feele  a 
kind  of  pleasing  contentment  in  paying  of  my  debts,  as  if  I 
rid  my  selfe  of  a  burthenous  weight,  and  free  my  selfe  from 
the  yoake  of  bondage  and  ingratitude.  Besides,  me  thinks 
I  feele  a  kinde  of  delight,  that  tickleth  me  to  the  quick,  in 
performing  a  lawfully  just  action,  and  contenting  of  others. 
I  except  payments  that  require  delayes,  covenants,  and  after 
reckonings :  for,  if  I  finde  any  body  that  will  undertake 
them,  I  blushingly  and  injuriously  deferre  them  as  long  as  I 
can,  for  feare  of  that  altercation  or  wrangling,  to  which  my 
humor  and  manner  of  speech  is  altogether  incompatible. 
There  is  nothing  I  hate  more  than  driving  of  bargaines :  It 
is  a  meere  commerce  of  dodging  and  impudencie.  After  an 
houres  debating  and  paltring,  both  parties  will  goe  from 
their  words  and  oaths  for  the  getting  or  saving  of  a  shilling  : 
yet  did  I  borrow  with  great  disadvantage.  For,  having  no 
heart  to  borrow  before  others,  or  by  word  of  mouth,  I  would 
adventure  it  upon  a  peece  of  paper,  which  with  some  hath 
no  great  power  to  move  or  force  to  perswade,  and  which 
greatly  helps  to  refuse,  I  was  wont  to  commit  the  successe 
of  my  wants  more  freely  and  more  carelessely  unto  fortune, 
than  I  have  done  since  unto  my  wit  and  providence.  Most 
good  husbands  thinke  it  strange  and  horrible  to  live  on  such 
uncertainties,  but  they  remember  not,  that  most  men  in  the 
world  live  so.  How  many  good  and  well-borne  men  have 
heretofore,  and  are  daily  scene  to  neglect  and  leave  at  six 
and  seven,  their  patrimonies  and  certaine  goods,  to  follow 
and  seeke  after  court-holy  water,  and  wavering-favours  of 
Princes  and  of  fortune ;  Caesar  engaged  and  endebted  him- 
selfe  above  a  million  of  gold,  more  than  he  was  worth,  to 
become  Caesar.  And  how  many  merchants  and  poore 
2M  289 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  beginners,  set  up  and  begin  their  traffike  by  the  sale  of  their 
XL          farmes  or  cottages  which  they  venter  to  the  Indias  ? 

taste  of  goods  ?A^gL'  E*ig*  Tot  Per  impotentiafreta ; 

or  evils  doth 

greatly      de-      In  so  great  scarcitie  of  devotion,  we  have  thousands  of 

pend   on  the  Colleges,  which  passe  the  time  very  conveniently,  daily  gaping 

opinion  we   an(j  expecting  from  the  liberalise  of  the  heavens,  what  they 

them        must  dine  withall  to  morrow.     Secondly  ;  they  consider  not, 

that  this  certaintie  on  which  they  ground  themselves,  is  not 

much  lesse  uncertaine  and  hazardous,  than  hazard  it  selfe.     I 

see  miserie  as  neere  beyond  two  thousand  crownes  rent,  as  if  it 

were  hard  at  hand.    For,  besides  that  fortune  hath  many-many 

meanes  to  open  a  hundred  gaps  for  povertie  to  enter  at,  even 

through  the  thickest  of  our  riches,  and  that  often  there  is 

no  meane  betweene  the  highest  and  lowest  fortune. 

PROV.  SENEC.  Fortuna  vitrea  est:  turn,  quum  splendet,frangitur. 

Fortune  is  glasse-like,  brittle  as  'tis  bright  : 
Light-gon,  Light-broken^  when  it  lends  best  light. 

And  to  turne  all  our  defences,  and  raisings  of  high  walles 
topsie-turvie  :  I  find  that  want  and  necessitie  is  by  diverse 
or  different  causes,  as  ordinarily  seene  to  accompanie  and 
follow  those  that  are  rich  in  goods,  as  those  that  have  none 
at  all :  and  that  peradventure  it  is  somewhat  lesse  incom 
modious,  when  it  is  alone,  than  when  it  meeteth  with  riches: 
ERAS.  Chil.  ii.  They  rather  come  from  order,  than  from  receit :  Faber  est 
cent.  iv.  eid.     SUO£  quisque  fortunes.     '  Every  man  is  the  forger  of  his  owne 
'  fortune.1     And  me  thinkes  that  a  rich  man,  who  is  needy, 
full  of  businesse,  carke  and  toyle,  and  troubled  in  minde,  is 
SEN.  Epist.       more  miserable,  than  he  that  is  simply  poore.     In  divitiis 
Ixxiv.  p.  inopes,  quod  genus  egestatis  gravissimum   est.      '  In   their 

'  abundance  indigent,  which  is  the  most  grievous  kinde  of 
6  indigence.1  The  richest  and  greatest  princes  are  ordinarily 
urged  by  povertie  and  need  unto  extreme  necessities.  For, 
can  any  be  more  extreme,  than  thereby  to  become  Tyrants, 
and  unjust  usurpers  of  their  subjects  goods.  My  second 
manner  of  life  hath  beene  to  have  monie  ;  which  when  I  had 
once  fingred,  according  to  my  condition  I  sought  to  hoord 
up  some  against  a  rainie  day  ;  esteeming  that  it  was  no 
having,  unlesse  a  man  had  ever  somewhat  besides  his  ordinarie 
290 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

expences  in  possession  :  and  that  a  man  should  not  trust  that  CHAPTER 
good,  which  he  must  live  in  hope  to  receive  ;  and  that,  be         XL 
his  hope  never  so  likely,  hee  may  many  wayes  be  prevented.     That  the 
For,  I  would  say  unto  my  selfe  ;  what  if  I  should  be  surprised  *r  evHs  doth 
by  this  chance,  or  that  accident  ?   What  should  I  doe  then  ?  greatly      de- 
And  in  pursuit  of  these  vaine  and  vicious  imaginations,  I  pend  on  the 
endevoured  by  hooke  or  crooke,  and  by  wile  or  wit  to  provide    opinion  we 
by  this  superfluous  sparing  for  all  inconveniences  that  might        them 
happen  :  And  I  could  answer  him,  that  would  alleage  the 
number  of  inconveniences  to  be  over  infinit ;  which  if  they 
followed  not  all  men,  they  accompanied  some,  and  haply  the 
greatest  number.     An  apprehension  which  I  did  not  passe 
without  some  painfull   care.     I  kept  the  matter  secret,  and 
I  (that  dare  say  so  much  of  my  selfe)  would  never  speak e  of 
my  money  but  falsly  ;  as  others  doe,  who  being  rich,  would 
seeme  to  be  poore,  or  being  poore  would  appeare  rich  :  and 
dispence  with  their  conscience,  never  to  witnesse  sincerely 
what  they  are  worth.     Oh  ridiculous  and  shamefull  prudence. 
Did  I  travell  any  where?  me  thought  I  was  never  sufficiently 
provided  ;  and  the  more  I  had  laden   my  selfe  with  coine, 
the  more  I  had  also  burthened  my  selfe   with  feare  :  some 
times  of  my  wayes-safetie,  othertimes  of  their  trust  that  had 
the  charge  of  my  sumpters  and  baggage,  whereof  as  some 
others  that  I   know,    me  thought  I    was  never  throughly 
assured,  except  it  were  still  in  my  sight.     Left  I  my  kcyes 
or  my  purse  behind  me  ?  how  many  suspitions  and  thornie 
imaginations,   and    which    is    worse,    incommunicable,    did 
uncessantly  haunt  me  ?    My  minde  was  ever  on  my  halfe- 
penney  ;    my  thoughts  ever  that  way.     The  summe  being 
rightly  cast,  there  is  ever  more  paine  in  keeping,  than  in 
getting  of  monie.     If  I  did  not  altogether  so  much  as  I 
say,  I  at  the  least  endevoured  to  doe  it.     Of  commoditie  I 
had  little  or  nothing.     To  have  more  meanes  of  expences,  is 
ever  to  have  increase  of  sorrow.     For  (as  said  Bion)  'The 
hairie  man  doth  grieve  as  much  as  the  bald,  if  he  have  his 
'  haire  pulled  out.1     And  after  you  are  once  accustomed,  and 
have  fixed  your  thoughts  upon  a  heape  of  monie,  it  is  no 
longer  at  your  service ;  you  dare  not  diminish  it ;  it  is  a 
building,  which  if  you  touch  or  take  any  part  from  it,  you 
will  thinke  it  will  all  fall.     Necessitie  must  first  pinch  you 

291 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  by  the  throat,  and  touch  you  neere,  before  you  will  lay 
XL         hands  on  it.     And  I  should  sooner  pawne  my  clothes,  or  sell 

I  iat  the  horse,  with  lesse  care  and  compulsion,  than  make  a  breach 

taste  or  goods  .   •/        111         i  I-ITI  •  T»JJ.I 

or  evils  doth  lnto  that  beloved  purse,  which  1  kept  in  store.     ±>ut  the 

greatly      de-  danger  was,  that  a  man  can  hardly  prefix  any  certaine  limits 
pend  on  the  unto  his  desire  (they  are  hard  to  be  found  in  things  a  man 

opinion  we    deemeth  good)  and  continue  at  one  stay  in   sparing :    A 
have  of  ,     ,,e        '  .1  •    i  i        J          ,  •,    /» 

them        man  shall  ever  encrease  this  heape,  and  augment  it  from  one 

number  to  another  ;  yea  so  long,  till  he  basely  and  niggardly 
deprive  himselfe  of  the  enjoying  of  his  owne  goods,  and 
wholy  fix  it  on  the  safe-keeping  of  them,  and  never  use 
them.  According  to  this  kind  of  usage,  those  are  the 
richest  people  of  the  world,  that  have  the  charge  of  keep 
ing  the  gates  and  walles  of  a  rich  Cittie.  Every  monied  man 
is  covetous,  according  to  mine  opinion.  Plato  marshalleth 
this  humane  or  corporall  goods  ;  health,  beautie,  strength, 
riches  :  '  And  riches,1  (saith  he,)  '  are  not  blind,  but  cleere- 
4  seeing,  if  they  be  illuminated  by  wisdome.1  Dionysius 
the  younger,  plaid  a  notable  part ;  who  being  advertised, 
that  one  of  his  Siracusans,  had  hidden  a  certaine  treasure, 
under  the  ground,  commanded  him  to  bring  it  unto  him, 
which  he  did,  reserving  secretly  one  part  of  it  unto  himselfe, 
with  which  hee  removed  his  dwelling  unto  another  Citie, 
where  having  lost  the  humor  of  hoarding  up  of  treasure, 
began  to  live  a  spending  and  riotous  kinde  of  life  :  which 
Dionysius  hearing,  commanded  the  remainder  of  his  treasure, 
and  which  he  had  taken  from  him,  to  be  restored  unto  him  ; 
saying,  '  That  sithence  he  had  learned  how  to  make  use  of 
'  it,  hee  did  most  willingly  redeliver  the  same  unto  him/  I 
was  some  yeares  of  the  same  humour :  I  wot  not  what 
good  Demon  did  most  profitably  remove  me  from  it,  like  to 
the  Siracusan,  and  made  me  to  neglect  my  sparing.  The 
pleasure  I  apprehended  of  a  farre  and  chargeable  journey, 
having  overthrowne  this  foolish  imagination  in  me  ;  From 
which  I  am  falne  into  a  third  kinde  of  life  (I  speake  what  I 
thinke  of  it)  assuredly  much  more  pleasing  and  formall : 
which  is,  that  I  measure  my  garment  according  to  my  cloth, 
and  let  my  expences  goe  together  with  my  comming  in ; 
sometimes  the  one,  other-whilst  the  other  exceeds  :  But 
they  are  never  farre  a  sunder.  I  live  from  hand  to  mouth, 
292 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

from  day  to  day,  and  have  I  but  to  supply  my  present  and  CHAPTER 
ordinarie  needs,  I  am  satisfied  :  As  for  extraordinarie  wants,         XL 

all  the  provisions  of  the  world  will  not  suffice  them.     And  .   |hat  the 
..  .     ,,  ,,r  .  ,i     ,    i»  -n  m  •      ,1  taste  of  goods 

it  is  tolly  to  expect  that  fortune  will  ever  sumciently  arme  or  evils  doth 

us  against  her  selfe.     It  is  with  our  owne  weapons  that  we  greatly      de- 
must  combat  her.     Casuall  armes  will  betray  us,  when  we  pend  on  the 
shall  have  most  need  of  them.     If  I  lay  up  anything,  it  is    op^°en07e 
for   the   hope    of  some  imployment  at  hand,  and  not  to         them 
purchase  lands,  whereof  I  have  no  need,  but  pleasure  and 
delight.     Non  esse  cupidum,  pecunia  est :  non  esse  emacem,  Cic.  Farad. 
vectigal  est.     '  It  is  currant  coine,  not  to  be  covetous  :  it  is  ulf- 
'  a  thriftie  income,  not  to  be  still  buying.1     I  am  neither 
possessed  with  feare,  that  my  goods  shall  faile  me,  nor  with 
desire   they   should   encrease    and    multiply.      Divitiarum  Il>. 
fructus  est  in  copia :  Copiam  declarat  satietas.     '  The  fruit 
'  of  riches   is   in    plentie :    sacietie  content   with    enough, 
4  approves  that  plentie.1     And  I  singularly  gratifie  my  selfe 
this  correction  came  upon  me  in  an  age  naturally  enclined 
to   covetousnesse,  and  that  I  am  free  from   that  folly  so 
common  and  peculiar  to  old  men,  and  the  most  ridiculous 
of  all  humane  follies.      Feraulez  who  had  passed  through 
both   fortunes,  and  found,  that  encrease  of  goods,  was  no 
accrease  of  appetite,  to  drinke,  to  eat,  to  sleepe,  or  to  embrace 
his  wife  ;  and  who  on  the  other  side  felt  heavily  on  his 
shoulders,  the  importunitie  of  ordering  and  directing  his 
Oeconomicall  affaires,  as  it  doth  on  mine,  determine  with 
himselfe  to  content  a  poore  young  man,  his  faithfull  friend, 
greedily  gaping  after  riches,  and  frankly  made  him  a  present 
donation  of  all  his  great  and   excessive  riches ;  as  also  of 
those,  he  was  likely  everie  day  to  get  by  the  liberalise  and 
bountie  of  his  good  master  Cyrus,  and  by  warre  :   alwayes 
provided,  hee  should  undertake  to  entertaine  and  finde  him 
honestly,  and  in  good  sort,  as  his  guest  and  friend.     In 
which  estate  they  lived  afterward  most  happily,  and  mutually 
content  with  the  change  of  their  condition. 

Loe  heare  a  part,  I  could  willingly  find  in  my  heart  to 
imitate.  And  I  much  commend  the  fortune  of  an  old  prelate, 
whom  I  see,  to  have  so  clearely  given  over  his  purse,  his 
receits,  and  his  expences,  now  to  one  of  his  chosen  servants, 
and  now  to  another,  that  he  hath  lived  many  yeares  as 

293 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ignorant  of  his  houshold  affaires,  as  any  stranger.     The  con- 
XL          fidence   in    others   honesty,  is  no  light  testimonie  of  ones 

That  the     owne  hitegritie  :    therefore  doth  God  willingly  favour  it. 
taste  or  goods    .      -.    ,.      T^  1T  ,         ITT         i  «,i 

or  evils  doth  And  *or  nis  regard,  I  see  no  houshold  order,  neither  more 


greatly      de-  worthily  directed,  nor  more  constantly  managed  than  his. 

pend  on  the  Happy  is  that  man,  that  hath  so  proportionably  directed  his 
^e  estate,  as  his  riches  may  discharge  and  supply  the  same, 
them  without  care  or  encombrance  to  himselfe  ;  and  that  neither 
their  consultation  or  meetings  may  in  any  sort  interrupt 
other  affaires,  or  disturbe  other  occupations,  which  he 
folio  weth,  more  convenient,  more  quiet,  and  better  agreeing 
with  his  heart.  Therefore  doth  ease  and  indigencie  depend 
from  every  mans  owne  opinion  ;  and  wealth  and  riches  no 
more  than  glorie  or  health,  have  either  more  preheminence 
or  pleasure,  than  he  who  possesseth  them,  lendeth  them. 
Every  man  is  either  well  or  ill,  according  as  he  findes  himselfe. 
Not  he  whom  another  thinkes  content,  but  he  is  content 
indeed,  that  thinkes  he  is  so  himselfe  :  And  only  in  that, 
opinion  giveth  it  selfe  essence  and  veritie.  Fortune  doth  us 
neither  good  nor  ill  :  She  only  offereth  us  the  seed  and 
matter  of  it,  which  our  minde,  more  powerfull  than  she, 
turneth  and  applieth  as  best  it  pleaseth  :  as  the  efficient 
cause  and  mistris  of  condition,  whether  happy  or  unhappy. 
Externall  accessions  take  both  savor  and  colour  from  the 
internall  constitution  :  As  garments  doe  not  warme  us  by 
their  heat,  but  by  ours,  which  they  are  fit  to  cover  and 
nourish  :  he  that  with  clothes  should  cover  a  cold  body, 
should  draw  the  very  same  service  from  them  by  cold.  So 
is  snow  and  yce  kept  in  summer.  Verily  as  unto  an  idle  and 
lazie  body,  study  is  but  a  torment  ;  abstinence  from  wine  to 
a  drunkard,  is  a  vexation  ;  frugalitie  is  a  harts  sorrow  to  the 
luxurious  ;  and  exercise  molesteth  an  effeminate  body  :  so  is 
it  of  all  things  else.  Things  are  not  of  themselves  so  irksome, 
nor  so  hard,  but  our  basenes,  and  weaknesse  maketh  them 
such.  To  judge  of  high  and  great  matters,  a  high  and 
great  minde  is  required  ;  otherwise  we  attribute  that  vice 
unto  them,  which  indeed  is  ours.  A  straight  oare  being 
under  water  seemeth  to  be  crooked.  It  is  no  matter  to  see 
a  thing,  but  the  matter  is  how  a  man  doth  see  the  same. 
Well,  of  so  many  discourses,  which  diversly  perswade  men  to 


n. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

contemne  death,  and  patiently  to  endure  paine,  why  shall  we  CHAPTER 
not  finde  some  one  to  make  for  our  purpose  ;  And  of  so          XL 

severall  and  many  kinds  of  imaginations,  that  have  perswaded  .    ±     c  the , 
J . !  r      ,  taste  of  goods 

the  same  unto  others,  why  doth  not  every  man  apply  one  or  evils  doth 

unto    himselfe,  that  is  most   agreeing  with  his  humor;   If  greatly      de- 
he  cannot  digest  a  strong  and  abstersive  drug,  for  to  remove  pend   on  the 
his  evill,  let  him  at  least  take  a  lenitive  pill  to  ease  the  same.    °P"11011  ™e 
Opinio  est  qucedam  effoeminata  ac  levis :  nee  in  dolore  magis,        them 
quam  eadem  in  voluptatc :  qua,  quum  liquescimus  Jluimusque  cic>  TUSC.  Qu. 
mollitia,    apis  aculeum    sine   clamor e  ferre    non  possumus.  i' 
Totum  in  eo  est,  ut   tibi   imperes.      'There   is   a   certaine 
6  effeminate  and  light  opinion,  and  that  no  more  in  sorrow, 
'  than  it  is  in  pleasure,  whereby  when  we  melt  and  run  over 
'  in  daintie  tendernes,  we  cannot  abide  to  be  stung  of  a  Bee, 
'  but  most  rore  and  crie  out.     This  is  the  totall  summe  of 
'  all,  that  you  be  master  of  your  selfe."*     Moreover,  a  man 
doth  not  escape  from  Philosophy,  by  making  the  sharpnes 
of  paines,  and  humane  weaknesse  to  prevaile  so  far  beyond 
measur :  for,  she  is  compelled  to  cast  her  selfe  over  againe 
unto  these  invincible  replications,  If  it  be  bad  to  live  in 
necessitie,  at  least  there  is  no  necessitie,  to  live  in  necessitie. 
No  man  is  long  time  ill,  but  by  his  owne  fault.     He 
that  hath  not  the  heart   to   endure  neither   life 
nor  death,  and  that  will  neither  resist  nor  run 
away,  what   shall  a  man  doe   to   him  ? 


THE  FORTY-FIRST  CHAPTER 

That  a  man  should  not  communicate  his  glorie. 

F  all  the  follies  of  the  world,  the  most 
universall,  and  of  most  men  received,  is 
the  care  of  reputation,  and  study  of 
glorie,  to  which  we  are  so  wedded,  that 
we  neglect,  and  cast-off  riches,  friends, 
repose,  life  and  health  (goods  effectuall 
and  substantiall)  to  follow  that  vaine 
image,  and  idlie-simple  voice,  which  hatli 
neither  body,  nor  hold-fast. 

295 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Lafama,  ch'inuaghisce  a  un  dolce  suono 

XLI  Gli  superbi  mortali,  et  par  si  bella, 

That    a    man  E  un  echo,  un  sogno,  anzi  d'un  sogno  un  ombra, 

should       not  Ch'ad  ogni  vento  si  dilegua  e  sgombra. 
communicate 

his  glorie  Fame  that  enveagl's  high  aspiring  men 

.  With  her  harmonious  sound,  and  seemes  so  faire, 

TASS.  Gier.  c.  ^n  Eccho  is,  a  dreame,  dreames  shadow  rather, 
Which  flies  and  fleets  as  any  winde  doth  gather. 

And  of  mens  unreasonable  humors,  it  seemeth,  that  the 
best  philosophers  doe  most  slowly,  and   more   unwillingly 
cleare  themselves  of  this,  than  of  another:  it  is  the  most 
Cic.  Pro  Art.  peevish,  the  most  forward,  and  the  most  opinative.      Quia 
PO-  etiam  bene  prqftcientes  animos  tentare  non  cessat.    '  Because  it 

'  ceaseth  not  to  tempt  even  those  Mindes  that  profit  best/ 
There  are  not  many  whereof  reason  doth  so  evidently  con- 
demne  vanitie,  but  it  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  us,  as  I  wot  not 
whether  any  man  could  ever  clearely  discharge  himselfe  of  it. 
When  you  have  alleaged  all  the  reasons  you  can,  and 
beleeved  all  to  disavow  and  reject  her,  she  produceth 
contrarie  to  your  discourses,  so  intestine  inclination,  that 
you  have  small  hold  against  her.  For  (as  Cicero  saith,) 
4  Even  those  that  oppugne  her,  will  neverthelesse  have  the 
'  bookes  they  write  against  her,  to  beare  their  names  upon 
'  their  fronts,  endevoring  to  make  themselves  glorious  by 
'  despising  of  glorie.1  All  other  things  fall  within  the  com- 
passe  of  commerce  :  we  lend  our  goods,  we  employ  our  lives, 
if  our  friends  stand  in  need  of  us :  But  seldome  shall  we  see 
a  man  communicate  his  honour,  share  his  reputation,  and 
impart  his  glorie  unto  others.  Catulus  Luctatius  in  the 
warres  against  the  Cymbres,  having  done  the  utmost  of  his 
endevours  to  stay  his  souldiers  that  fled  before  their  enemies, 
put  himselfe  amongst  the  run-awaies,  and  dissembled  to  bee 
a  coward,  that  so  they  might  rather  seeme  to  follow  their 
Captaine,  than  flie  from  the  enemie :  This  was  a  neglecting 
and  leaving  off  his  reputation,  to  conceale  the  shame  and 
reproach  of  other.  When  Charles  the  fifth  passed  into 
Provence,  the  yeare  a  thousand  five  hundred  thirtie  seven, 
some  are  of  opinion,  that  Anthony  de  Leva,  seeing  the 
Emperor  his  master  resolutely  obstinate  to  undertake  that 
voyage,  and  deeming  it  wonderfully  glorious,  maintained 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

neverthelesse  the  contrarie,  and  discounselled  him  from  it,  CHAPTER 
to  the  end  all  the  honour  and  glorie  of  this  counsell  might         XLI 
be  attributed  unto  his  Master ;  and  that  it  might  be  said,  That   a   man 
his  good  advice  and  fore-sight  to  have  beene  such,  that  con-  !™l«n:  "^ 

,         .,          -.-,  ••ii      i.ii          i  i  coiiiinuiiicditJ 

trane  to  all  mens  opinions,  he  had  atchieved  so  glorious  an  his  glorie 
enterprise :  Which  was,  to  honour  and  magnitie  him  at 
his  owne  charges.  The  Thracian  Ambassadors  comforting 
Achileonida  the  Mother  of  Brasidas,  for  the  death  of  her 
son,  and  highly  extolling  and  commending  him,  said,  he  had 
not  left  his  equall  behind  him.  She  refused  this  private 
commendation,  and  particular  praise,  assigning  it  to  the 
publike  state.  '  Doe  not  tell  me  that '  (quoth  she,)  '  For 
4  I  knowe  the  Cittie  of  Sparta  hath  many  greater,  and  more 
6  valiant  Citizens  than  he  was.'  At  the  battell  of  Crecy, 
Edward  the  blacke  Prince  of  Wales,  being  yet  very  young, 
had  the  leading  of  the  vant-gard :  The  greatest  and  chiefe 
violence  of  the  fight,  was  in  his  quarter :  The  Lords  and 
Captains  that  accompanied  him,  perceiving  the  great  danger, 
sent  unto  King  Edward  the  Princes  father,  to  come  and 
help  them  :  which  when  he  heard,  he  enquired  what  plight 
his  sonne  was  in,  and  how  he  did,  and  hearing  that  he  was 
living,  and  on  horse-backe  ;  '  I  should '  (quoth  he)  '  offer  him 
'  great  wrong  to  goe  now,  and  deprive  him  of  the  honour  of 
'  this  combats  victorie,  which  he  already  hath  so  long 
c  sustained ;  what  danger  soever  there  be  in  it,  it  shall 
'  wholy  be  his"1:  and  would  neither  goe  nor  send  unto  him : 
knowing,  that  if  he  had  gone,  or  sent,  it  would  have  beene 
said,  that  without  his  ayd  all  had  beene  lost,  and  that  the 
advantage  of  this  exploit  would  have  beene  ascribed  unto 
him.  Semper  enim  quod  postremum  adjectum  est,  id  rem 
totam  videtur  traxisse.  '  For,  evermore  that  which  was  last 
'  added,  seemes  to  have  drawne  on  the  whole  matter.1  In 
Rome  many  thought,  and  it  was  commonly  spoken,  that  the 
chiefest  glorious  deeds  of  Scipio,  were  partly  due  unto 
Laelius,  who  notwithstanding  did  ever  advance  the  greatnesse, 
further  the  glorie,  and  second  the  renowne  of  Scipio,  without 
any  respect  of  his  owne.  And  Theopompus  King  of 
Sparta,  to  one  who  told  him  that  the  common-wealth  should 
subsist  and  continue  still,  forsomuch  as  he  could  command 
so  well:  'No,1  said  he,  'it  is  rather,  because  the  people 
2  N  297 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  'know  so  well  how  to  obey."     As  the  women  that  succeeded 
XLI         in  the  Peeredomes  of  France,  had  (notwithstanding  their 

vi  ia   man  sex)  right  to  assist,  and  privilege  to  plead  in  cases  appertain- 
snould       not.      '  ,  &  .,        .      .    ,.   ,.      r      ~    &          r  o      ,1       -r.     i    v     .•     n 
communicate  ln£  *o  ™e  jurisdictions  of  Peeres  :  So  the  Ecclesiasticall 
his  glorie     Peeres,  notwithstanding  their  profession  and  function,  were 
bound  to  assist  our  Kings  in  their  warres,  not  only  with  their 
friends,  servants,  and  tenants,  but  in  their  owne   person. 
The  Bishop  of  Beauvais,  being  with  Philip  Augustus  in  the 
battell  of  Bovines,  did  very  couragiously  take  part  with  him 
in  the  effect ;  but  thought  hee  should  not  be  partaker  of  the 
fruit  and  glorie  of  that  bloudy  and  violent  exercise.    He  over 
came,  and  forced  that  day  many  of  the  enemies  to  yeeld  whom 
he  delivered  unto  the  first  gentleman  hee  met  withall,  to  rifle, 
to  take  them  prisoners,  or  at  their  pleasure  to  dispose  of  them. 
Which  he  also  did  with  William  Earle  of  Salisbury,  whom 
he  delivered  unto  the  Lord  lohn  of  Nesle,  with  a  semblable 
subtletie  of  conscience,  unto  this  other.     He  desired  to  fell 
and  strike  downe  a  man,  but  not  to  wound  or  hurt  him  :  and 
therefore  never  fought  but  with  a  great  club.    A  man  in  my 
time  being  accused  to  the  King,  to  have  laid  violent  hands 
upon  a  Priest,  denied  it  very  stoutly,  forsomuch  as  he 
had  only  thumped  and  trampled  him  with  his  feet. 


THE    FORTY-SECOND    CHAPTER 

Of  the  inequalitie  that  is  betweene  us. 


LUTARKE  saith  in  some  place,  '  That  he 
4  findes  no  such  great  difference  betweene 
6  beast  and  beast,  as  he  findeth  diversitie 
'  betweene  man  and  man."*  He  speaketh 
of  the  sufficiencie  of  the  minde,  and  of 
internall  qualities.  Verily  I  finde  Epami- 
nondas  so  farre  (taking  him  as  I  suppose 
him)  from  some  that  I  know  (I  meane 
capable  of  common  sense)  as  I  could  finde  in  my  heart  to 
endeare  upon  Plutarke ;  and  say  there  is  more  difference 
betweene  such  and  such  a  man,  than  there  is  diversitie 
betweene  such  a  man,  and  such  a  beast. 
298 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Hem  vir  viro  quid  pr&stat !  TER.  Phor.  act   CHAPTER 

O  Sir,  how  much  hath  one,  V*  SC*  3>  XLII 

Another  man  out-gone  !  Of  the  in- 

equalitie  that 

And  that  there  be  so  many  degrees  of  spirits,  as  there  are   is  betweene 
steps  betweene  heaven  and  earth,  and  as  innumerable.     But  us 

concerning  the  estimation  of  men,  it  is  marvell,  that  except 
our  selves,  no  one  thing  is  esteemed  but  for  it's  proper 
qualities.  We  commend  a  horse,  because  he  is  strong  and 
nimble, 

— volucrem  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Sic  laudamus  equum,facili  cui  plurima  palrna  viii.  57. 

Fervetj  et  exultat  rauco  victoria  circo. 

We  praise  the  horse,  that  beares  most  bells  with  flying, 
And  triumphs  most  in  races,  hoarse  with  crying, 

and  not  for  his  furniture :  a  grey-hound  for  his  swiftnesse, 
not  for  his  coller :  a  hawke  for  her  wing,  not  for  her  cranes 
or  bells.  Why  do  we  not  likewise  esteeme  a  man  for  that 
which  is  his  owne  ?  He  hath  a  goodly  traine  of  men  follow 
ing  him,  a  stately  pallace  to  dwell  in,  so  great  credit  amongst 
men ;  and  so  much  rent  comming  in :  Alas,  all  that  is 


about  him,  and  not  in  him.     No  man  will  buy  a  pig  in  a 

you  will  take  his  saddle 
clothes  from  him,  you  will  see  him  bare  and  abroad :  or  if 


poke.     If  you  cheapen  a  horse,  you  will  take  his  saddle  and 


he  be  covered  as  in  old  times  they  wont  to  present  them 
unto  Princes  to  be  sold,  it  is  only  his  least  necessarie  parts, 
lest  you  should  ammuse  your  selfe  to  consider  his  colour,  or 
breadth  of  his  crupper ;  but  chiefly  to  view  his  legs,  his 
head,  his  eyes,  and  his  foot,  which  are  the  most  remarkable 
parts,  and  above  all  to  be  considered  and  required  in  him. 

Regibus  hie  mos  est,  ubi  equos  mercantur,  apertos  HOR.  i.  Sat. 

Inspiciunt,  ne  si  fades,  ut  scepe,  decora  ii.  86. 

Mollifalta  pede  est,  emptorem  inducat  hiantem, 
Quod  pulchra  dunes,  breve  quod  caput,  ardua  cervix. 

This  is  Kings  manner,  when  they  horses  buy, 
They  see  them  bare,  lest  if,  as  oft  we  try, 
Faire  face  have  soft  hoofes,  gull'd  the  buyer  be, 
They  buttockes  round,  short  head,  high  crest  may  see. 

When  you  will  esteeme  a  man,  why  should  you  survey 
him  all  wrapt,  and  envelloped?     He  then  but  sheweth  us 

299 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  those  parts  which  are  no  whit  his  owner  and  hideth  those 
XLII  from  us,  by  which  alone  his  worth  is  to  be  judged.  It  is  the 

equalitie  that  g°°dnesse  °f  the  sword  you  seeke  after,  and  not  the  worth  of 
is  betweene  the  scabbard  ;  for  which  peradventure  you  would  not  give  a 
us  farthing,  if  it  want  his  lyning.  A  man  should  be  judged  by 
himselfe,  and  not  by  his  complements.  And  as  an  Ancient 
saith  very  pleasantly :  Doe  you  know  wherefore  you  esteeme 
him  tall  ?  You  account  the  height  of  his  pattens :  The 
Base  is  no  part  of  his  stature :  Measure  him  without  his 
stilts.  Let  him  lay  aside  his  riches  and  externall  honours, 
and  shew  himselfe  in  his  shirt.  Hath  he  a  body  proper  to 
his  functions,  sound  and  cheerefull  ?  What  minde  hath  he  ? 
Is  it  faire,  capable  and  unpolluted,  and  happily  provided 
with  all  her  necessarie  parts  ?  Is  shee  riche  of  her  owne,  or 
of  others  goods  ?  Hath  fortune  nothing  of  hers  to  survay 
therein  ?  If  broad- waking  she  wil  looke  upon  a  naked 
sword :  If  shee  care  not  which  way  her  life  goeth  from  her, 
whether  by  the  mouth,  or  by  the  throat ;  whether  it  be 
setled,  equable,  and  contented :  It  is  that  a  man  must  see 
and  consider,  and  thereby  judge  the  extreme  differences  that 
are  betweene  us  :  Is  he 

HOR.  ii.  Sat.  — sapiens,  sibique  imperiosus, 

vii.  83.  Quern  neque  pauperies,  neque  mors,  neque  vincula  terrent, 

Responsare  cupidinibus,  contemnere  honores 
Fortis,  et  in  seipso  totus  teres  atque  rotundas, 
Externi  ne  quid  valeat  per  Iceve  morari, 
In  quern  manca  rait  semper  fortuna  ? — 

A  wise  man,  of  himselfe  commander  high, 
Whom  want,  nor  death,  nor  bands  can  terrifie, 
Resol'd  t'  affront  desires,  honors  to  scorne, 
All  in  himselfe,  close,  round,  and  neatly-borne, 
As  nothing  outward  on  his  smooth  can  stay, 
Gainst  whom  still  fortune  makes  a  lame  assay. 

Such  a  man  is  five  hundred  degrees  beyond  kingdomes  and 
principalities :  Himselfe  is  a  kingdome  unto  himselfe. 

PLAU.  Trin.  Sapiens  pol  ipse  fingit  fortunam  sibi. 

Trust  me,  who  beares  a  wise  mans  name, 
His  fortune  to  himselfe  may  frame. 

What  is  there  else  for  him  to  wish  for  ? 
300 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

— nonne  videmus  LUCR.  ii.  16.  CHAPTER 

Nil  aliud  sibi  naturam  latrare,  nisi  ut  quoi  XLII 

Corpore  sejunctus  dolor  absit,  mcnte  fruatur ,  Of  the  in- 

lucundo  sensu  cura  semotus  metuque  ?  equalitie  that 

See  we  not  nature  nothing  else  doth  barke  is  betweene 

Unto  her-selfe,  but  he,  whose  bodies  barke  us 
Is  free  from  paines-touch,  should  his  minde  enjoy, 
Remo'd  from  care  and  feare,  with  sense  of  joy  ? 

Compare  the  vulgar  troupes  of  our  men  unto  him,  stupide, 
base,  servile,  wavering,  and  continually  floting  on  the 
tempestuous  Ocean  of  divers  passions,  which  tosse  and 
retosse  the  same,  wholy  depending  of  others :  There  is 
more  difference,  than  is  betweene  heaven  and  earth,  and  yet 
such  is  the  blindnesse  of  our  custome,  that  we  make  little  or 
no  account  of  it.  Whereas,  if  we  consider  a  Cottager  and  a 
King,  a  noble  and  a  handy-crafts  man,  a  magistrate  and  a 
private  man,  a  rich  man  and  a  poore ;  an  extreme  disparitie 
doth  immediatly  present  it  selfe  unto  our  eies,  which,  as  a 
man  may  say,  differ  in  nothing,  but  in  their  clothes.  In 
Thrace,  the  King  was  after  a  pleasant  manner  distinguished 
from  his  people,  and  which  was  much  endeared :  He  had  a 
religion  apart :  a  God  severall  unto  himselfe,  whom  his 
subjects  might  no  waies  adore :  It  was  Mercuric :  And  he 
disdained  their  gods,  which  were  Mars,  Bacchus,  and  Diana; 
yet  are  they  but  pictures,  which  make  no  essential  dissem 
blance.  For,  as  enterlude-plaiers,  you  shal  now  see  them  on 
the  stage,  play  a  King,  an  Emperor,  or  a  Duke,  but  they 
are  no  sooner  off  the  stage,  but  they  are  base  rascals,  vaga 
bond  abjects,  and  porterly  hirelings,  which  is  their  naturall 
and  originall  condition  :  Even  so  the  Emperor,  whose 
glorious  pomp  doth  so  dazle  you  in  publike ; 

Scilicet  et  grandes  viridi  cum  luce  smaragdi  LUCR.  iv.  117. 

Auro  includuntur,  teriturque  Thalassina  vestis 
Assidue,  et  Veneris  sudorem  exercita  potat. 

Great  emerald's  with  their  grasse-greene-light  in  gold 
Are  clos'd,  nor  long  can  marriage  linnen  hold, 
But  worne  with  use  and  heat 

of  Venerie  drink's  the  sweat. 

View   him   behinde   the   curtaine,   and   you  see  but   an 
ordinarie  man,  and  peradventure  more  vile,  and  more  seely, 

301 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  than  the  least  of  his  subjects.     Ille  beatus  introrsum   est; 

Of^11'        'ls^us   bracteata  fodidtas   est.      '  One   is   inwardly    happy ; 

equalitie  that '  ano^ners   felicitie   is   plated   and   guilt-over.'     Cowardise, 

is  betweene   irresolution,  ambition,  spight,  anger,  and  envie,  move  and 

us  worke  in  him  as  in  another  : 


neque  consularis 
HOR    "  Od  Summovet  lictor,  miseros  tumult  us 

xvi    '  llf  Mentis  et  euros  laqueata  circum 

— Tecta  voluntas : 

Nor  treasures,,  nor  Maires  officers  remove 

The  miserable  tumults  of  the  minde, 

Or  cares  that  lie  about,  or  flie  above 

Their  high-rooft  houses  with  huge  beames  combinde, 

And  feare,  and  care,  and  suspect,  haunt  and  follow  him,  even 
in  the  middest  of  his  armed  troupes. 

LUCR.  ii,  46.  Reveraque  metus  hominum,  curceque  sequaces, 

Nee  metuunt  sonitus  armorum,  nee  f era  tela, 
Audacterque  inter  reges,  rerumque  potentes 
Versantur,  neque  fulgorem  reverentur  ab  auro. 

Indeed  mens  still-attending  cares  and  feare, 
Nor  armor's  clashing,  nor  fierce  weapons  feare, 
With  Kings  converse  they  boldly,  and  Kings  peeres, 
Fearing  no  lightning  that  from  gold  appeares. 

Doth  the  ague,  the  megrim,  or  the  gout  spare  him  more 
than  us  ?  When  age  shall  once  seize  on  his  shoulders,  can 
then  the  tall  yeomen  of  his  guard  discharge  him  of  it  ? 
When  the  terror  of  ruthles-balefull  death  shall  assaile  him, 
can  he  be  comforted  by  the  assistance  of  the  gentlemen  of 
his  chamber  ?  If  he  chance  to  be  jealous  or  capricious,  will 
our  lowting-curtzies,  or  putting-off  of  hatts,  bring  him  in 
tune  againe  ?  His  bedstead  enchased  all  with  gold  and 
pearles  hath  no  vertue  to  allay  the  pinching  pangues  of 
the  cholicke. 

ID.  ib.  34.  -^ec  calldce  citius  decedunt  corporefebres, 

Textilibus  si  in  picturis  ostroque  rubenti 
lacteris,  qudm  si  plebeia  in  veste  cubandum  est. 

Feavers  no  sooner  from  thy  body  flie 
If  thou  on  arras  or  red  scarlet  lie 
Tossing,  than  if  thou  rest 
On  coverlets  home-drest. 
302 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

The  flatterers  of  Alexander  the  great,  made  him  beleeve,  CHAPTER 
that  he  was  the  sonne  of  lupiter  ;  but  being  one  day  sore-        XLII 
hurt,  and  seeing  the  bloud  gush  out  of  his  wounds  :  '  And      ^f , ?Jle  in~ 
'  what  thinke  you  of  this  ?'  (said  he  unto  them)  '  Is  not  this  ^betv 
4  bloud  of  a  lively  red  hew,  and  meerly  humane  ?'    Me  think es,          us 
it  is  not  of  that  temper,  which  Homer  faineth  to  trill  from  the 
gods  wounds.     Hermodorus  the  Poet  made  certaine  verses 
in  honour  of  Antigonus,  in  which  he  called  him  the  sonne 
of  Phoebus  ;    to   whom  he  replied ;    '  My  friend,   He  that 
'  emptieth  my  close-stoole  knoweth  well,  there  is  no  such 
'  matter.'    He  is  but  a  man  at  all  assaies  :  And  if  of  himselfe 
he  be  a  man  ill  borne,  the  Empire   of  the   whole  world 
cannot  restore  him. 

—puella  PERS>  sat.  ii. 

Hunc  rapiant,  quicquid  calcaverit,  hie  rosafiat.  37. 

Wenches  must  ravish  him,  what  ever  he 
Shall  tread  upon,  eftsoones  a  rose  must  be. 

What  of  that  ?  If  he  be  of  a  grose,  stupide,  and  senseles 
minde  :  voluptuousnesse  and  good  fortune  it  selfe,  are  not 
perceived  without  vigor,  wit,  and  livelinesse. 

HfBC  perinde  sunt,  ut  illius  animus  qui  ea  possidet,  TER.  Heaut. 

Qui  uti  scit,  ei  bona,  illi  qui  non  utitur  recte,  mala.  act  i.  sc.  ii.  21. 

These  things  are  such,  as  the  possessors  minde, 
Good,  if  well  us'd  ;  if  ill,  them  ill  we  finde. 

Whatsoever  the  goods  of  fortune  are,  a  man  must  have  a 
proper  sense  to  savour  them  :  It  is  the  enjoying,  and  not 
the  possessing  of  them,  that  makes  us  happy. 

Non  domus  etfundus,  non  ceris  acervus  et  auri,  HOR.  i.  Ep.  ii. 

JEgroto  domini  deduxit  corporefebres,  47. 

Non  animo  curas,  valeat  possessor  oportet, 

Qui  comportatis  rebus  bene  cogitat  uti. 

Qui  cupit,  aut  metuit,  juvat  ilium  sic  domus  aut  res, 

Ut  lippum  pictee  tabula,  fomenta  podagram. 

Not  house  and  land,  and  heapes  of  coine  and  gold 
Rid  agues,  which  their  sicke  Lords  body  hold, 
Or  cares  from  minde  :  th'  owner  must  be  in  health, 
That  well  doth  thinke  to  use  his  hoarded  wealth. 
Him  that  desires  or  feares,  house,  goods,  delight, 
As  foments  doe  the  gout,  pictures  sore-sight. 

303 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  He  is  a  foole,  his  taste  is  wallowish  and  distracted,  he 
XLII  enjoy eth  it  more,  than  one  that  hath  a  great  cold  doth  the 
jf  the  in-  sweetnesse  of  Greeke  wine,  or  a  horse  the  riches  of  a  costly- 
^re  furniture,  wherewith  he  is  trapped.  Even  as  Plato 
saith,  '  That  health,  beautie,  strength,  riches,  and  all  things 
'  else  he  calleth  good,  are  equally  as  ill  to  the  unjust,  as  good 
4  to  the  just ;  and  the  evill  contrariwise.'  And  then,  where 
the  body  and  the  soule  are  in  ill  plight,  what  need  these 
externall  commodities  ?  Seeing  the  least  prick  e  of  a  needle, 
and  passion  of  the  mind  is  able  to  deprive  us  of  the  pleasure 
of  the  worlds  Monarchy.  The  first  fit  of  an  ague,  or  the 
first  gird  that  the  gout  gives  him,  what  availes  his  goodly 
titles  of  Majesty  ? 

TIBUL.  i.  Eh  Totus  et  argento  conflatus,  totus  et  auro. 

vii'  7 1  •  All  made  of  silver  fine, 

All  gold  pure  from  the  mine. 

Doth  he  not  forthwith  lose  the  remembrance  of  his  pallaces 
and  states  ?  If  he  be  angrie  or  vexed,  can  his  principalitie 
keepe  him  from  blushing,  from  growing  pale,  from  gnashing 
his  teeth  like  a  Bedlam  ?  Now  if  it  be  a  man  of  worth,  and 
well  borne,  his  royaltie,  and  his  glorious  titles  will  adde  but 
little  unto  his  good  fortune. 

HOR.  i.  Ep.  Si  ventri  bene,  si  lateri  est  pedibusque  tuis,  nil 

xii.  5.  Divitice  poterunt  regales  addere  ma/jus. 

If  it  be  well  with  belly,  feet,  and  sides, 
A  Kings  estate  no  greater  good  provides. 

He  seeth  they  are  but  illusions,  and  vaine  deceits.  He 
may  haply  be  of  King  Seleucus  his  advice  :  '  That  he  who 
'  fore-knew  the  weight  of  a  scepter,  should  he  finde  it  lying 
*  on  the  ground,  he  would  not  daigne  to  take  it  up.'  This  he 
said,  by  reason  of  the  weightie,  irksome  and  painefull 
charges,  that  are  incident  unto  a  good  King.  Truely,  it  is 
no  small  matter  to  governe  others,  since  so  many  crosses 
and  difficulties  offer  themselves,  if  we  will  governe  our  selves 
well.  Touching  commanding  of  others,  which  in  shew 
seemeth  to  be  so  sweet,  considering  the  imbecillitie  of  mans 
judgement,  and  the  difficultie  of  choice  in  new  and  doubtful 
things.  I  am  confidently  of  this  opinion,  that  it  is  much  more 

304 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

easie  and  plausible  to  follow,  than  to  guide  :  and  that  it  is  CHAPTER 
a  great  setling  of  the  minde,  to  be  tied  but  to  one  beaten-        XLII 

path,  and  to  answer  but  for  himselfe.  Of1tJ1.e  *£  + 

equahtie  that 

Vt  satius  multo  jam  sit,  parere  quietum,  is  betweene 

Qudm  regere  imperio  res  velle.  us 

Much  better  'tis,  in  quiet  to  obey,  Luc.  v.  1137. 

Than  to  desire  with  Kings-power  all  to  sway. 

Seeing  Cyrus  said,  '  That  it  belongs  not  to  a  man  to  com- 
4  mand,  that  is  not  of  more  worth,  than  those  whom  he  com- 
4  mandeth.'*  But  King  Hieron  in  Xenophon  addeth  moreover, 
4  That  in  truely-enjoying  of  carnall  sensualities,  they  are  of 
4  much  worse  condition,  than  private  men  ;  forasmuch  as  ease 
4  and  facilitie,  depriveth  them  of  that  sowre-sweet  tickling, 
4  which  we  finde  in  them.1* 

Pinguis  amor  nimiumque  potens,  in  tcedia  nobis  OVID.  Am.  ii. 

Vertitur,  et  stomacho  dulcis  ut  esca  nocet.  El-  xix.  25. 

Fat  over-powerful  I  love  doth  loathsome  grow, 
As  fulsome  sweet-meats  stomackes  overthrow. 

Thinke  wee,  that  high-minded  men  take  great  pleasure 
in  musicke  ?  The  satietie  thereof  makes  it  rather  tedious 
unto  them.  Feasts,  banquets,  revels,  dancings,  masks  and 
turneys,  rejoyce  them  that  but  seldome  see  them,  and  that 
have  much  desired  to  see  them:  the  taste  of  which  becom- 
meth  cloysome  and  unpleasing  to  those  that  daily  see,  and 
ordinarily  have  them  :  Nor  doe  Ladies  tickle  those,  that  at 
pleasure  and  without  suspect  may  be  glutted  with  them. 
He  that  cannot  stay  till  he  be  thirsty,  can  take  no  pleasure 
in  drinking.  Enterludes  and  commedies  rejoyce  and  make 
us  merry,  but  to  players  they  are  tedious  and  tastelesse. 
Which  to  prove,  we  see,  it  is  a  delight  for  Princes,  and  a 
recreation  for  them,  sometimes  to  disguise  themselves,  and 
to  take  upon  them  a  base  and  popular  kinde  of  life. 

Plerumque  grata  principibus  vices,  HOR.  iii.  Od. 

Mundceque  parvo  sub  tare  pauperum  xxix.  13. 

Ccence  sine  auleeis  et  ostro, 
Solicitam  explicuere  frontem. 

Princes  doe  commonly  like  enterchange, 
And  deanery  meales  where  poore-men  poorely  house,, 
Without  all  tapistrie  or  carpets  strange, 
Unwrinkled  have  their  care-knit,  thought-bent  browes. 
20  305 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER       Nothing  doth  sooner  breed  a  distaste  or  satietie,  than 
XLII         plentie.    What  longing  lust  would  not  bee  alaid,  to  see  three 
t  ualiti6  That  nun(^re^  women  at   his  dispose   and  pleasure,  as  hath  the 
is  betweene    Grand  Turke  in  his  Seraille  ?     And  what  a  desire  and  shew 
us  of  hawking  had  he  reserved  to  himselfe  from  his  ancestors, 

that  never  went  abroad  without  seven  thousand  falkners  at 
least  ?  Besides  which,  I  thinke,  the  luster  of  greatnesse, 
brings  no  small  incommodities  to  the  enjoying  of  sweeter 
pleasures  :  they  lie  too  open,  and  are  too  much  in  sight. 
And  I  wot  not  why  a  man  should  longer  desire  them  to 
conceale  or  hide  their  fault :  For,  what  in  us  is  indiscretion, 
the  people  judge th  to  be  tyrannic,  contempt,  and  disdaine 
of  the  lawes  in  them  :  And  sides  the  ready  inclination  unto 
vice,  it  seemeth  they  also  adde  unto  it  the  pleasure  of 
gourmandizing,  and  to  prostrate  publike  observances  under 
their  feet.  Verily  Plato  in  his  Gorgias,  defineth  him  to  be 
a  tyrant,  that  in  a  Citie  hath  leave  and  power  to  doe  what 
ever  he  list.  And  therefore  often,  the  shew  and  publication 
of  their  vice  hurteth  more  than  the  sinne  it  selfe.  Every 
man  feareth  to  be  spied  and  controlled  ;  which  they  are  even 
in  their  countenances  and  thoughts :  All  the  people  esteem 
ing  to  have  right  and  interest  to  judge  of  them.  And  we 
see  that  blemishes  grow  either  lesser  or  bigger,  according  to 
the  eminence,  and  light  of  the  place,  where  they  are  set,  and 
that  a  mole  or  a  wart  in  ones  forehead  is  more  apparently 
perceived,  than  a  scarre  in  another  place.  And  that  is  the 
reason  why  Poets  faine  lupiters  loves  to  have  beene  affected 
under  other  countenances,  than  his  owne ;  And  of  so  many 
amorous-shifts,  and  love  practises,  they  impute  to  him,  there 
is  but  one  (as  farre  as  I  remember)  where  he  is  to  be  seene 
in  his  greatnesse  and  majestic.  But  returne  we  to  Hieron  : 
he  also  relateth,  how  many  incommodities  he  findeth  in  his 
royaltie,  being  so  barred,  that  he  cannot  at  his  libertie 
travell  to  goe  whether  he  pleaseth,  being  as  it  were  a  prisoner 
within  the  limits  of  his  country  ;  and  that  in  all  his  actions 
he  is  encircled  and  hemd-in  with  an  importunate  and  tedious 
multitude.  Truely,  to  see  our  Princes  all  alone,  sitting  at 
their  meat,  beleagred  round  with  so  many  talkers,  whisperers, 
and  gazing  beholders,  unknowne  what  they  are  or  whence 
they  come,  I  have  often  rather  pittied  than  envied  them. 
306 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

King  Alphonsus  was  wont  to  say, '  that  burthen-bearing  asses  CHAPTER 
'  were  in  that,  in  farre  better  condition  than  Kings  ;  for,  XLII 
6  their  masters  suffer  them  to  feed  at  their  ease,  whereas  Kings  Of  *h.e  m~ 
'  cannot  obtaine  that  privilege  of  their  servants.1  And  it  7s  betweene 
could  never  fall  into  my  minde,  that  it  might  be  any  speciall  us 
commoditie  to  the  life  of  a  man  of  understanding,  to  have  a 
score  of  find-faults,  picke-thanks,  and  controlers  about  his 
close-stoole,  nor  that  the  service  of  a  man,  that  hath  a 
thousand  pound  rent  a  yeare,  or  that  hath  taken  Casal, 
or  defended  Sienna,  is  more  commodious  or  acceptable  to 
him,  than  that  of  a  sufficient,  and  well-experienced  groome. 
Princelike  advantages,  are  in  a  manner  but  imaginarie  pre- 
heminences.  Every  degree  of  fortune,  hath  some  image  of 
Principalitie.  Caesar  termeth  all  the  Lords,  which  in  his 
time  had  justice  in  France,  to  be  Kinglets,  or  pettie  Kings. 
And  truly,  except  the  name  of  Sire,  we  goe  very  farre  with 
our  Kings.  Looke  but  in  the  Provinces  remote  and  farre 
from  the  court :  As  for  example,  in  Britanie,  the  attending 
traine,  the  flocking  subjects,  the  number  of  officers,  the 
many  affaires,  the  diligent  service,  the  obsequious  ceremonies 
of  a  Lord,  that  liveth  retired,  and  in  his  owne  house, 
brought  up  amongst  his  owne  servants,  tenants,  and 
followers  :  And  note  also  the  high  pitch  of  his  imaginations, 
and  humours,  there  is  no  greater  royaltie  can  be  scene: 
He  heareth  no  more  talke  of  his  master,  than  of  the  Persian 
King,  and  haply  but  once  a  yeare  :  And  knowes  but  some 
farre-fetcht,  and  old  kindred  or  pedigree,  which  his  Secretarie 
findes  or  keepes  upon  some  ancient  record  or  evidence. 
Verily  our  lawes  are  very  free,  and  the  burthen  of  soveraigntie, 
doth  scarsly  concerne  a  gentleman  of  France  twice  in  his 
whole  life.  Essentiall  and  effectuall  subjection  amongst  us 
doth  not  respect  any,  but  such  as  allure  themselves  unto  it, 
and  that  affect  to  honour,  and  love  to  enrich  themselves  by 
such  service :  For  he  that  can  shrowd  and  retire  himselfe  in 
his  owne  home,  and  can  manage  and  direct  his  house  without 
sutes  in  law,  or  quarrell  with  his  neighbours,  or  domesticall 
encombrances,  is  as  free  as  the  Duke  of  Venice.  Paucos  SEN.  Epist.  22. 
servitus,  plures  servitutem  tenent.  '  Service  holds  few,  but 
4  many  hold  service.1  But  above  all  things  Hieron  seemeth 
to  complaine,  that  he  perceiveth  himselfe  deprived  of  all 

307 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  mutuall  friendship,  reciprocall  societie,  and  familiar   con- 
XLII        versation,  wherein  consisteth  the  most  perfect  and  sweetest 

e  ualitie  that  fruit  of  humane  life-     For>  what  undoubted  testimonie  of 

^betv^eene   affection  and  good  will,  can  I  expect  or  exact   from  him, 

us  that  will  he,  or  nill  he,  oweth  me  all  he  hath,  all  he  can  ? 

Can  I  make  account  of  his  humble  speech,  of  his  low-lowting 

curtzie,  or  of  his  curteous  offers,  since  it  lieth  not  in  his 

power  to  refuse  them  me  ?     The  honour  we  receive  of  those 

which  feare  and  stand  in  awe  of  us,  is  no  true  honour.     Such 

respects  are  rather  due  to  royaltie,  to  majesty,  than  to  me. 

SEN.  Thyest.  — maximum  hoc  regni  bonum  est, 

act  ii.  sc.  i.  Quodfacta  domini  cogitur  populus  sui 

Quamferre,  tarn  laudare. 

This  is  chiefe  good  of  Princes  domination, 

Subjects  are  forc't  their  sov'raignes  actes  and  fashions 

To  beare  with  patience,  passe  with  commendations. 

Doe  I  not  see,  that  both  the  bad  and  the  good  King 
are  served  alike  ?  That  hee  who  is  hated,  and  he  that  is 
beloved  are  both  courted  alike?  And  the  one  as  much 
fawned  upon  as  the  other  ?  My  predecessor  was  served  with 
the  same  apparances,  and  waited  upon  with  the  like 
ceremonies,  and  so  shall  my  successor  be.  If  my  subjects 
offend  me  not,  it  is  no  testimonie  of  any  good  affection. 
Wherfore  shall  I  take  it  in  that  sense,  sithence  they  cannot, 
if  they  would  ?  No  man  followeth  me  for  any  friendship 
that  is  betweene  him  and  me  :  inasmuch  as  no  firme  friend 
ship  can  be  contracted,  where  is  so  small  relation,  so  slender 
correspondencie,  and  such  disparitie.  My  high  degree  hath 
excluded  me  from  the  commerce  of  men.  There  is  too  great 
an  inequalitie,  and  distant  disproportion.  They  follow  for 
countenance,  and  of  custome,  or  rather  my  fortune  than 
my  selfe  :  hoping  thereby  to  encrease  theirs.  Whatsoever 
they  say,  all  they  doe  unto  me,  is  but  a  glosse,  and  but 
dissimulation,  their  libertie  being  every  where  brideled,  and 
checked  by  the  great  power  I  have  over  them.  I  see  nothing 
about  me,  but  inscrutable  hearts,  hollow  mindes,  fained 
lookes,  dissembled  speeches,  and  counterfeit  actions.  His 
Courtiers  one  day  commended  Julian  the  Emperour  for 
ministring  of  right,  and  doing  of  justice;  CI  should  easily 

308 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

'  grow  proud1  (saith  he)  'for  these  praises,  if  they  came  from  CHAPTER 
'  such  as  durst  either  accuse  or  discommend  my  contrary        XLII 

'  actions,  should  I  commit  any.1     All  the  true  commodities    Of  *^.e  ll*~ 
.  i     .    -r,  •  J  .  i  . ,  i  f  equahtie  that 

that  Princes  have,  are  common   unto  them   with   men    of   fs  betweene 

meane  fortune.  It  is  for  Gods  to  mount  winged  horses,  and  Us 
to  feed  on  Ambrosia.  They  have  no  other  sleepe,  nor  no 
other  appetite  than  ours.  Their  steele  is  of  no  better  temper, 
than  that  wherewith  we  arme  our  selves.  Their  crowne, 
their  diadem  can  neither  hide  them  from  the  Sun,  or 
shelter  them  from  the  raine.  Dioclesian  that  wore  one,  so 
much  reverenced,  and  so  fortunate,  did  voluntarily  resigne 
the  same,  to  withdraw  himselfe  unto  the  pleasure  of  a 
private  life;  but  a  while  after,  the  urgent  necessitie  of 
publike  affaires  requiring  his  presence,  and  that  he  should 
returne  to  re-assume  his  charge  againe,  he  answered  those 
that  solicited  him  unto  it ;  '  You  would  never  undertake  to 
'  perswade  me  to  that,  had  you  but  scene  the  goodly  rankes 
'  of  trees,  which  my  selfe  have  planted  in  mine  Orchard,  or 
'  the  faire  muske-melons,  I  have  set  in  my  garden.1  According 
to  Anacharsis  his  opinion,  '  The  happiest  estate  of  a  well 
'  ordered  common-wealth  should  be,  where  all  other  things 
'  being  equally  common,  precedencie  should  be  measured, 
'  and  preferments  suted  according  to  vertue  and  desert,  and 
'  the  contrarie  according  to  vice.1  At  what  time  King  Pirrhus 
undertooke  to  passe  into  Italy,  Cyneas  his  wise  and  trustie 
counsellor,  going  about  to  make  him  perceive  the  vanitie  of 
his  ambition,  one  day  bespake  him  thus.  '  My  good  Sir,1 
(said  he)  'To  what  end  doe  you  prepare  for  so  great  an 
'  enterprise  ? 1  He  answered  suddenly,  '  To  make  my  selfe 
'Lord  of  Italic.1  'That  done,  what  will  you  doe  then?1 
(replied  Cyneas).  'I  will  then  passe1  (said  Pirrhus)  'into  Gaule, 
'  and  then  into  Spaine ' :  'And  what  afterwards  ? '  '  I  will  then 
'  invade  Affrike,  and  subdue  the  same,  and  at  last,  when  I 
'  shall  have  brought  all  the  world  under  my  subjection,  I  will 
'  then  take  my  rest,  and  live  contented  at  mine  ease.1  '  Now, 
'  for  Gods  sake  Sir,1  (replied  Cyneas)  '  Tell  me,  what  hinders 
'  you,  that  you  be  not  now,  if  so  you  please,  in  that  estate  ? 
'  Wherefore  doe  you  not  now  place  your  selfe,  where  you 
'  meane  to  aspire,  and  save  so  much  danger,  30  many  hazards, 
*  and  so  great  troubles  as  you  enterpose  betweene  both  ? 1 

309 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Nimirum  quia  non  bene  norat  quce  esset  habendi 
Finis,  et  omnino  quoad  crescat  vera  voluptas. 

The  cause  forsooth,  he  knew  not  what  should  be  the  end 
Of  having,  nor  how  far  true  pleasure  should  extend. 


CHAPTER  LUCR.  v.  14, 

XLII          43- 
Of  the  in- 
equalitie  that 
is  betweene 

I  will  conclude  and  shut  up  this  treatise  with  an  ancient 
verse,  which  I  singularly  applaud,  and  deeme  fit  to  this 
purpose. 

Mores  cuique  sui  fingunt  fortunam. 

Ev'iy  mans  manners  and  his  mind, 
His  fortune  to  him  frame  and  find. 


us 


ClC.  Farad,  v. 
COR.  NEP. 


THE    FORTY-THIRD    CHAPTER 

Of  sumptuarie  Lawes,  or  Lawes  for  moderating 
of  expences. 


HE  manner  wherewith  our  Lawes  assay  to 
moderate  the  foolish  and  vaine  expences 
of  table-cheare  and  apparell,  seemeth  con- 
trarie  to  it's  end.  The  best  course  were 
to  beget  in  men  a  contempt  of  gold  and 
silk-wearing,  as  of  vaine  and  unprofitable 
things,  whereas  we  encrease  their  credit 
and  price :  A  most  indirect  course  to 
withdraw  men  from  them.  As  for  example,  to  let  none  but 
Princes  eat  dainties,  or  weare  velvets,  and  clothes  of  Tissew, 
and  interdict  the  people  to  doe  it,  what  is  it  but  to  give 
reputation  unto  those  things,  and  to  encrease  their  longing 
to  use  them?  Let  Kings  boldly  quit  those  badges  of 
honour ;  They  have  many  other  besides :  Such  excesse  is 
more  excusable  in  other  men,  than  in  Princes.  We  may, 
by  the  examples  of  divers  Nations,  learne  sundrie  better 
fashions  to  distinguish  our  selves  and  our  degrees  (which 
truly  I  esteeme  requisit  in  an  estate,)  without  nourishing  to 
that  purpose,  this  so  manifest  corruption  and  apparant 
inconvenience.  It  is  strange  how  custome  in  these  indifferent 
things  doth  easily  encroch  and  suddenly  establish  the  foot 
ing  of  her  authoritie.  We  had  scarce  worne  cloth  one  whole 
yeare  at  the  Court,  what  time  we  mourned  for  our  King 
310 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Henrie  the  second,  but  certainly  in  every  mans  opinion,  all  CHAPTER 
manner  of  silks  were  already  become  so  vile  and  abject,  that  XLIII 
was  any  man  scene  to  weare  them,  he  was  presently  judged  Of  sumptu- 
to  be  some  countrie  fellow,  or  mechanicall  man.  They  were  Lawes^i^mo- 
left  only  for  Chyrurgians  and  Physitians.  And  albeit  most  derating  of 
men  were  apparreled  alike,  yet  were  there  other  sufficient  expences 
apparant  distinctions  of  mens  qualities.  How  soone  doe 
plaine  chamoy-jerkins,  and  greasie  can  vase  doublets  creepe 
into  fashion  and  credit  amongst  our  souldiers,  if  they  lie  in 
the  field  ?  And  the  garishnesse,  neatnesse,  and  riches  of 
silken  garments  grow  in  contempt  and  scorne  ?  Let  Kings 
first  begin  to  leave  these  superfluous  expences,  we  shall  all 
follow,  and  within  a  moneth,  without  edicts,  ordinances,  pro 
clamations,  and  acts  of  Parliament,  it  will  be  observed  as  a 
law.  The  statutes  should  speake  contrarie,  as  thus.  That  no 
man  or  woman,  of  what  qualitie  soever,  shall,  upon  paine  of 
great  forfeitures,  weare  any  maner  of  silke,  of  skarlet,  or  any 
gold-smiths  worke,  except  only  Enterlude-players,  Harlots, 
and  Curtizans.  With  such  an  invention  did  Zeleucus  whilome 
correct  the  corrupted  manners  of  the  Locrines.  His  ordi 
nances  were  such.  Be  it  enacted,  that  no  woman  of  free 
condition,  shall  have  any  more  than  one  maid- servant  to 
follow  her  when  she  goeth  abroad,  except  when  she  shall 
be  drunken  ;  And  further,  that  she  may  not  goe  out  of  the 
Citie  by  night,  nor  weare  any  jewels  of  gold,  or  precious 
stones  about  her,  nor  any  gowne  beset  with  gold-smiths 
worke,  or  imbroiderie,  except  she  be  a  publike-professed 
whore :  and  moreover,  that  except  panders  and  bawds,  it 
shall  not  be  lawfull  for  any  man  to  weare  any  gold-rings  on 
his  fingers,  nor  any  rich  garments,  as  are  such  of  cloth  made 
in  the  Citie  of  Miletum.  So  did  he  by  these  reprochfull 
exceptions  ingeniously  drive  his  Citizens  from  vaine  super 
fluities,  and  pernicious  dainties.  It  was  a  most  profitable 
course,  by  honour  and  ambition  to  allure  men  unto  their 
dutie  and  obedience.  Our  Kings  have  the  power  to  addresse 
all  these  externall  reformations.  Their  inclination  serveth 
them  as  a  law.  Quicquid  Principes  faciunt,  prcccipere 
videntur.  'Whatsoever  Princes  doe,  that,  they  seeme  to 
'  command. '  The  rest  of  France  takes  the  modell  of  the 
court,  as  a  rule  unto  it  selfe  to  follow.  Let  Courtiers  first 

311 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  begin  to  leave  off  and  loath  these  filthy  and  apish  breeches, 
XLIII        that  so  openly  shew  our  secret  parts :  the  bumbasting  of 

Of  sumptu-    JQ      pease-cod-bellied  doublets,  which  makes  us  seeme  so  far 
arie  Lawes.  or  „     &  r  ,  i      i  •  i 

Lawes  for  mo- *rom  wna^  we  are?  and  which  are  so  combersome  to  arme  : 
derating  of  These  long,  effeminate,  and  dangling  locks :  That  fond 
expences  custome  to  kisse  what  we  present  to  others,  and  Beso  las 
manos  in  saluting  of  our  friends :  (a  ceremonie  heretofore 
only  due  unto  Princes ;)  And  for  a  gentleman  to  come  to 
any  place  of  respect,  without  his  rapier  by  his  side,  all 
unbraced,  all  untrust,  as  if  he  came  from  his  close-stoole : 
And  that,  against  our  forefathers  manner,  and  the  particular 
libertie  of  our  French  nobilitie,  we  should  stand  bare-headed, 
aloofe-off  from  them,  wheresoever  they  be,  and  as  about 
them,  about  many  others :  So  many  petty-kings,  and  petty- 
petty-kinglets  have  we  now  adayes :  And  so  of  others  like 
new-fangled  and  vicious  introductions :  They  shall  soone 
be  seene  to  vanish  and  be  left.  Although  but  superficiall 
faults,  yet  are  they  of  evill  presages.  And  we  are  warned, 
that  the  foundation  or  maine  summers  of  our  houses  faile 
and  shrinke,  when  we  see  the  quarters  bend,  or  wals  to 
breake.  Plato  in  his  Lawes,  thinkes  there  is  no  worse 
plague,  or  more  pernicious  in  his  Citie,  than  to  suffer  youth, 
to  have  the  reines  of  libertie  in  her  owne  hand,  to  change  in 
their  attires,  in  their  gestures,  dances,  exercises,  and  songs, 
from  one  forme  to  another  :  And  to  remove  their  judgement, 
now  to  this,  now  to  that  place ;  following  new-fangled 
devices,  and  regarding  their  inventors :  By  which,  old 
customes  are  corrupted,  and  ancient  institutions  despised.  In 
all  things,  except  the  wicked,  mutation  is  to  be  feared  ;  yea, 
even  the  alteration  of  seasons,  of  winds,  of  livings,  and  of 
humours.  And  no  lawes  are  in  perfect  credit,  but  those 
to  which  God  hath  given  some  ancient  continuance: 
So  that  no  man  know  their  of-spring,  nor  that 
ever  they  were  other  than  they  are. 


312 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

THE    FORTY-FOURTH   CHAPTER 

Of  Sleeping. 

EASON  doth  appoint  us  ever  to  walke  in 
one  path,  but  not  alwaies  to  keepe  one 
place  :  And  that  a  wise  man  should  not 
permit  humane  passions  to  stray  from  the 
right  carrier;  he  may  (without  prejudice 
unto  his  dutie)  also  leave  it  unto  them 
either  to  hasten  or  to  slow  his  pace,  and 
not  place  himselfe  as  an  immoveable  and 
impassible  Colossus.  Were  vertue  herselfe  corporeall  and 
incarnate,  I  think  her  pulse  would  beat  and  worke  stronger, 
marching  to  an  assault,  than  going  to  dinner :  For,  it  is 
necessarie  that  she  heat  and  move  herselfe.  I  have  therefore 
mark't  it  as  a  rare  thing,  to  see  great  personages  sometimes, 
even  in  their  weightiest  enterprises,  and  most  important 
affaires,  hold  themselves  so  resolutely-assured  in  their  state, 
that  they  doe  not  so  much  as  breake  their  sleepe  for  them. 
Alexander  the  great,  on  the  day  appointed  for  that  furious- 
bloudy  battel  against  Darius,  slept  so  soundly  and  so  long 
that  morning,  that  Parmenion  was  faine  to  enter  his 
chamber,  and  approching  neere  unto  his  bed,  twice  or  thrice 
to  call  him  by  his  name,  to  awaken  him,  the  houre  of  the 
battle  being  at  hand,  and  urging  him.  Otho  the  Emperour 
having  determined  to  kill  himselfe;  the  very  same  night, 
after  he  had  given  order  for  his  domestical  affaires,  shared 
his  monie  among  his  servants,  and  whetted  the  edge  of  a 
sword,  wherewith  he  intended  to  wound  himselfe,  expecting 
no  other  thing,  but  to  know  whether  all  his  friends  were 
gone  to  rest,  fell  into  so  sound  a  sleepe,  that  the  groomes 
of  his  chamber  heard  him  snort  in  another  roome.  This 
Emperours  death  hath  many  parts  semblable  unto  that  of 
great  Cato,  and  namely  this :  For,  Cato  being  prepared  to 
defeat  himselfe,  whilest  he  expected  to  heare  newes,  whether 
the  Senators,  whom  he  caused  to  retire,  were  lanched  out 
from  the  haven  of  Utica,  fell  so  fast  asleep,  that  he  was  heard 
to  snort  into  the  next  chamber :  And  he  whom  he  had  sent 
2P  313 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  toward  the  port,  having  awaked  him,  to  tell  him,  the  storme 
XLIV  was  so  rough,  that  the  Senators  could  not  conveniently  put 

Of  Sleeping  ouj.  .j-o  gea)  he  senj-  another,  and  lying  downe  a  new,  fell 
asleep  againe,  untill  the  last  messenger  assured  him,  they 
were  gone.  We  may  also  compare  him  unto  Alexander,  in 
that  great  and  dangerous  storme,  which  threatned  him,  by  the 
sedition  of  Metellus  the  Tribune,  who  laboured  to  publish 
the  decree  of  Pompeys  re-appeall  into  the  Citie,  together 
with  his  army,  at  what  time  the  commotion  of  Catiline  was 
on  foot :  against  which  decree  only  Cato  did  insist,  and  to 
that  purpose  had  Metellus  and  he  had  many  injurious 
speeches,  and  menaced  one  another  in  the  Senate-house : 
And  it  was  the  next  day,  they  were  like  to  come  to  the  execu 
tion  in  the  market-place,  where  Metellus,  besides  the  favour 
of  the  common  people,  and  of  Caesar,  then  conspiring  and 
complotting  for  the  advancement  of  Pompey,  should  come, 
accompanied  with  a  multitude  of  strange  and  forraine  slaves 
and  fencers,  to  doe  their  utmost :  And  Cato  strengthened 
with  his  only  constancie,  and  with  an  unmated  resolve :  So 
that  his  kinsmen,  his  familiars,  and  many  honest  men  tooke 
great  care,  and  were  in  heavy  anxietie  and  pensivenesse 
for  him :  of  which  many  never  left  him  all  night,  but  sate 
up  together,  without  rest,  eating,  or  drinking,  by  reason  of 
the  danger  they  saw  prepared  for  him ;  yea,  his  wife  and 
sisters  did  nought  but  weep  and  waile,  and  for  his  sake 
torment  themselves  in  their  house,  whereas  contrariwise  he 
alone  comforted  every  body,  and  blamed  them,  for  their 
demissenesse :  And  after  he  had  supped,  (as  he  was  wont) 
he  went  quietly  to  his  bed,  and  slept  very  soundly  untill  the 
next  morning,  that  one  of  his  copartners  in  the  Tribune- 
ship,  came  to  call  him,  to  goe  to  the  skirmish.  The  know 
ledge  we  have  of  this  mans  unmated-haughty  heart,  by  the 
rest  of  his  life ;  may  make  us  judge  with  all  securitie,  that 
it  only  proceeded  from  a  spirit,  so  far  elevated  above  such 
accidents,  that  he  dained  not  so  much  as  to  trouble  his 
minde  with  them,  no  more  than  with  ordinarie  chances.  In 
the  sea-fight,  which  Augustus  gained  against  Sextus  Pompeius 
in  Sicilie,  even  at  the  instant  he  should  goe  to  fight,  was 
surprised  with  so  heavy  a  sleep,  that  his  friends  were  com 
pelled  to  awaken  him,  to  give  the  signall  of  the  battell ; 
314 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

which  afterward  gave  occasion  unto  Marcus  Antonius,  to  CHAPTER 
charge  him  with  this  imputation,  that  he  had  not  dared       ^^IV^ 
with  open  eyes  to  survey  the  marshalling  of  his  army,  and  (>f  Sleeping 
that  his  heart  would   not  suffice  him,  to  present  himselfe 
unto  his  souldiers,  untill  such  time  that  Agrippa  brought 
him  newes  of  the  victorie  he  had  obtained  of  his  enemies. 
But  concerning  young  Marius,  who  committed  a  greater  errour 
(for  on  the  day  of  his  last  battell  against  Sylla,  after  he  had 
marshalled  his  army,  and  given  the  word  or  signall  of  the 
battell)  he  lay  downe  in  the  shadow  under  a  tree,  a  while  to 
rest  himselfe,  and  fell  so  fast  asleep,  that  he  could  hardly  be 
awaked  with  the  rout  and  flight  of  his  men,  having  scene  no 
part  of  the  fight,  they  say,  it  was  because  he  was  so  exceed 
ingly  aggravated  with  travell,  and  over-tired  with  wearinesse, 
and  want  of  sleep,  that  nature  was  overcome,  and  could  no 
longer  endure.    And  touching  this  point,  Phisitians  may  con 
sider  ;  whether  sleep  be  so  necessarie,  that  our  life  must  needs 
depend  of  it :  For  we  finde  that  Perseus  King  of  Macedon, 
prisoner  at  Rome,  being  kept  from  sleep,  was  made  to  die ; 
but  Plinie  aleageth,  that  some  have  lived  a  long  time  without 
any  sleep  at  all.      And    Herodotus   reporteth,  'There   are 
'  nations,  where  men  sleep  and  wake  by  halfe  yeares/ 
And  those  that  write  the  life  of  Epimenides  the 
wise,  affirme,  'that  he  slept  the  continuall 
'  space  of  seven  and  fifty  yeares.1 


THE    FORTY-FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  battell  of  Dreux. 

HERE  hapned  divers  rare  accidents,  and  re 
markable  chances  in  our  battell  of  Dreux  : 
but  those  who  doe  not  greatly  favour  the 
reputation  of  the  Duke  of  Guise,  doe  boldly 
aleage,  that  he  cannot  be  excused,  to  have 
made  a  stand,  and  temporised  with  the 
forces  he  commanded,  whilst  the  Lord  Con 
stable  of  France,  Generall  of  the  Armie,was 
engaged  and  suppressed  with  the  enemies  Artillerie,  and  that 

315 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  it  had  beene  better  for  him,  to  hazard  himselfe,  to  charge  the 
XLV  enemie  flankwise,  than  by  expecting  any  advantage,  to  have 
)f  the  battell  fam  come  behind  him,  to  suffer  so  reprochfull  an  overthrow, 
and  so  shamefull  a  losse.  But  omitting  what  the  event 
thereof  witnessed,  he  that  shall  without  passion  debate  the 
matter,  shall  easily  (in  my  conceit)  confesse,  that  the  ay  me 
and  drift,  not  onely  of  a  Captaine,  but  of  every  particular 
Souldier,  ought  chiefly  to  respect  a  victory  in  great :  And 
that  no  particular  occurrences,  of  what  consequence  soever, 
or  what  interest  may  depend  on  them,  should  never  divert 
him  from  that  point.  Philopcemen  in  an  encounter  with 
Machanidas,  having  sent  before,  a  strong  troupe  of  Archers, 
and  good  marke  men,  to  begin  the  skirmish  :  and  the  enemie, 
after  he  had  put  them  to  rout  and  dis-ranked  them,  ammus- 
ing  himselfe  in  mainly  pursuing  them,  and  following  the 
victory  alongst  the  maine  battell,  where  Philopoemen  was, 
although  his  souldiers  were  much  moved  and  offended  to  see 
their  fellowes  put  to  the  worst,  he  could  not  be  induced  to 
bouge  from  his  place,  nor  make  head  against  his  enemie,  to 
succour  his  men ;  but  rather,  having  suffered  them  to  be 
defeated,  and  cut  in  peeces  before  his  face,  began  then  to 
charge  his  enemies  in  the  battalion  of  their  Infanterie,  when 
he  perceived  them  forsaken  of  their  horsemen :  And  albeit 
they  were  Lacedemonians,  forasmuch  as  he  charged  them,  at 
what  time  (supposing  to  have  gained  the  day)  they  began  to 
disorder  themselves,  he  easily  overcame  them ;  which  done, 
he  pursued  Machanidas.  This  case,  is  cousin-german  unto 
that  of  the  Duke  of  Guise.  In  that  sharpe-bloody  battell 
of  Agesilaus  against  the  Boeotians,  which  Xenophon  (who 
was  there  present)  saith,  '  To  have  beene  the  hottest  and 
'  rudest,  that  ever  he  had  seene ' :  Agesilaus  refused  the 
advantage,  which  fortune  presented  him,  to  let  the  battalion 
of  the  Boeotians  passe,  and  to  charge  them  behind,  what 
certaine  victorie  soever  he  saw  likely  to  follow  the  same, 
esteeming  that  it  were  rather  skill  than  valour,  and  to  shew 
his  prowesse,  and  matchlesse-haughty  courage,  chose  rather 
to  charge  them  in  the  front  of  their  forces :  But  what 
followed  ?  He  was  well  beaten,  and  himselfe  sore-hurt,  and 
in  the  end  compelled  to  leave  his  enterprise,  and  embrace  the 
resolution,  which  in  the  beginning  he  had  refused,  causing  his 
316 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

men  to  open  themselves,  to  give  passage  unto  that  torrent  CHAPTER 

of  the  Boeotians  ;  who  when  they  were  past  through,  per- 

ceiving  them  to  march  in  disaray,  as  they  who  perswaded 

themselves  to  be  out  of  all  danger,  he  pursued  them,  and 

charged  them  flank-wise.     All  which   notwithstanding,  he 

could   never  put  to  rout,  or  force  them  runaway,  for 

they,  orderly,  and  faire  and  softly  made  their  retreit, 

ever  shewing  their  face,  untill  such  time  as  they 

got  safely  into  their  holds  and  trenches. 


THE    FORTY-SIXTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Names. 

HAT  diversitie  soever  there  be  in  herbs,  all 
are  shuffled  up  together  under  the  name 
of  a  sallade.  Even  so,  upon  the  considera 
tion  of  names,  I  will  here  huddle  up  a 
gallymafry  of  diverse  articles.  Every 
several  nation  hath  some  names,  which,  I 
wot  not  how,  are  sometimes  taken  in  ill 
part,  as  with  us  lacke,  Hodge,  Tom,  Will, 
Bat,  JBenet,  and  so  forth.  Item,  it  seemeth  that  in  the 
genealogies  of  Princes,  there  are  certaine  names  fatally 
affected  ;  as  Ptolemeus  with  the  ^Egyptians,  Henries  in 
England,  Charles  in  France,  Baldwins  in  Flanders,  and 
Williams  in  our  ancient  Aquitanie,  whence  some  say  came 
the  name  of  Guienne  ;  which  is  but  a  cold  invention  :  As  if  in 
Plato  himselfe  there  were  not  some  as  harsh  and  ill-sounding. 
Item,  it  is  an  idle  matter,  yet  neverthelesse,  by  reason  of  the 
strangenesse,  worthy  the  memorie,  and  recorded  by  an  ocular 
witnesse,  that  Henrie  Duke  of  Normandie,  sonne  to  Henrie 
the  second  King  of  England,  making  a  great  feast  in  France, 
the  assembly  of  the  Nobilitie  was  so  great,  that  for  pastimes 
sake,  being,  by  the  resemblance  of  their  names,  divided  into 
severall  companies  :  in  the  first  were  found  a  hundred  and 
ten  Knights  sitting  at  one  table,  and  all  called  Williams ; 
besides  private  Gentlemen  and  servants.  It  is  as  pleasant 
to  distribute  the  tables  by  the  names  of  the  assistants,  as  it 

317 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  was  unto  Geta  the  Emperor,  who  would  have  all  his  messes 
XLVI  or  dishes  served  in  at  his  table  orderly  according  to  the  first 
Of  Names  liters  of  their  names  ;  As  for  example,  those  that  began 
with  P.  as  pig,  pie,  pike,  puddings,  pouts,  porke,  pancakes, 
etc.  were  all  served  in  together ;  and  so  of  all  the  rest. 
Item,  it  is  a  common  saying,  '  That  it  is  good  to  have  a  good 
name ' :  As  much  to  say,  good  credit,  or  good  reputation. 
Yet  verely  it  is  very  commodious  to  have  a  well-sounding 
and  smooth  name,  and  which  is  easie  to  be  pronounced,  and 
facile  to  be  remembred:  For  Kings,  Princes,  Lords,  and  Magis 
trates  know  and  remember  us  the  better  by  them,  and  will 
not  so  soone  forget  us.  Marke  but  of  those  that  serve  and 
follow  us,  whether  we  doe  not  more  ordinarily  command,  and 
sooner  employ  such,  whose  names  come  readier  to  our  tongue, 
or  memorie.  I  have  scene  our  King  Henrie  the  second,  who 
could  never  hit  on  the  right  name  of  a  Gentleman  of 
Gascoigne  ;  and  did  ever  call  a  Lady  waiting  on  the  Queene, 
by  the  generall  surname  of  her  house,  because  that  of  her 
father  was  so  harsh,  and  hard  to  be  remembred.  And 
Socrates  saith,  '  It  ought  to  be  a  fathers  speciall  care,  to  give 
4  his  children  good  and  easie-sounding  names.1  Item,  it  is 
reported,  that  the  foundation  of  our  Lady  the  great  at 
Poitiers  had  this  beginning :  4  A  licentious  young  man 
4  having  his  dwelling-house  where  the  Church  now  standeth, 
4  had  one  night  gotten  a  wench  to  lie  with  him,  who  so 
6  soone  as  she  came  to  bed,  he  demanded  her  name,  who 
4  answered,  Marie  :  The  young  man  hearing  that  name,  was 
4  suddenly  so  strucken  with  a  motive  of  religion,  and  an  awefull 
4  respect  unto  that  sacred  name,  of  the  virgin  Marie,  the 
4  blessed  mother  of  our  Saviour  and  Redeemer,  that  he  did 
4  not  oneiy  presently  put  her  away  from  him,  but  reformed 
4  all  the  remainder  of  his  succeeding  life :  And  that  in 
4  consideration  of  this  miracle,  there  was  first  erected  a 
6  Chappell  in  the  place  where  this  young  mans  house  stood, 
4  consecrated  unto  that  holy  name,  and  afterward  the  faire 
4  great  Church,  which  yet  continueth."  This  vocal  and  auri 
cular  correction,  and  so  full  of  devotion,  strucke  right  unto 
his  soule.  This  other  following,  of  the  same  kind,  insinuated 
it  selfe  by  the  corporall  sences.  Pythagoras  being  in 
companie  with  two  young  men,  whom  he  heard  complot  and 
318 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

consult  (being  somewhat  heated  with  feasting  and  drinking)  CHAPTER 
to  go  and  ravish  a  chast-house,  commanded  immediatly  the  XLVI 
minstrels  to  change  their  tune ;  and  so  by  a  solemne,  grave, 
severe,  and  spondaicall  kinde  of  musicke,  did  sweetly 
inchaunt,  allay,  and  in-trance  their  rash,  violent,  and  law- 
lesse  lust.  Item,  shall  not  succeeding  posteritie  say,  that 
our  moderne  reformation  hath  beene  exact  and  delicate,  to 
have  not  only  oppugned  and  resisted  errors  and  vices,  and 
filled  the  world  with  devotion,  humilitie,  obedience,  peace, 
and  every  other  kinde  of  vertue,  but  even  to  have  combated 
their  ancient  names  of  baptism e,  Charles,  Lewis,  Francis,  to 
people  the  world  with  Methusalem,  Ezechiel,  Malachie, 
much  better  feeling  of  a  lively  faith  ?  A  Gentleman  my 
neighbour,  esteeming  the  commodities  of  ancient  times  in 
regard  of  our  daies,  forgot  not  to  aledge  the  fiercenesse  and 
magnificence  of  the  names  of  the  Nobilitie  of  those  times,  as 
Don  Grumedan,  Quedragan,  and  Agesilan  :  And  that,  but 
to  heare  them  sounded,  a  man  might  easily  perceive,  they 
had  beene  other  manner  of  men,  than  Peter,  Guillot,  or 
Michell.  Item,  I  commend,  and  am  much  beholding  to 
lames  Amiot,  in  the  course  of  a  French  oration  of  his  to 
have  still  kept  the  full  ancient  Latine  names,  without  dis 
guising  or  changing  them,  to  give  them  a  new  French 
cadence.  At  the  first  they  seemed  somewhat  harsh  unto 
the  Reader ;  but  now,  by  reason  of  the  credit,  which  his 
Plutarke  hath  deservedly  gotten  amongst  us,  custome  hath 
removed  all  strangenesse  from  us.  I  have  often  wished  that 
those  who  write  histories  in  Latine,  would  leave  us  our 
names  whole,  and  such  as  they  are:  For,  altering  Vaudemont, 
to  Vallemontanus,  and  metamorphosing  them,  by  suting 
them  to  the  Graecian  or  Latin  tongue,  we  know  not  what 
to  make  of  them,  and  are  often  at  a  non-plus.  To  conclude 
my  discourse ;  It  is  an  ill  custome,  and  of  exceeding  bad 
consequence  in  our  countrie  of  France,  to  call  every  man  by 
the  name  of  his  Towne,  Mannor,  Hamlet,  or  Lordship,  as 
the  thing  that  doth  most  confound  houses,  and  bring  sur 
names  out  of  knowledge.  A  cadet  or  yonger-brother  of  a 
good  house,  having  had  for  his  appanage  a  Lordship,  by 
whose  name  he  hath  beene  knowne  and  honoured,  cannot 
well  forsake  and  leave  the  same  ten  yeares  after  his  death  ; 

319 


MONTAIGNES   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  His  Lord-ship  commeth  unto  a  stranger,  who  doth  the  like : 
XLVI  Ghesse  then  where  we  are,  and  how  we  shall  doe  to  come  to 
Of  Names  ^e  perfect  knowledge  of  these  men.  Wee  need  not  goe  far 
for  other  examples,  but  looke  into  our  Royall  house,  where  so 
many  partages,  so  many  sur-names,  and  so  many  severall 
titles  have  so  encumbred  us,  that  the  originall  of  the  stocke 
is  utterly  lost.  There  is  so  much  libertie  in  these  mutations, 
that  even  in  my  time,  I  have  seene  no  man  nor  woman 
advanced  by  fortune  unto  some  extraordinarie  preferment, 
that  hath  not  immediatly  had  adjoyned  unto  him  or  her 
Genealogicall  titles,  new  and  unknowne  to  their  fathers,  and 
that  hath  not  beene  engrafted  into  some  noble  stocke  or 
family.  And  as  good  lucke  serveth,  the  basest  upstart,  and 
most  obscure  houses  are  most  apt  unto  adulteration,  and 
falsification.  How  many  privat  Gentlemen  have  we  in 
France,  which  according  to  their  accompt,  and  blazoning  of 
their  gentrie,  are  of  the  royall  bloud  or  race  ?  I  beleeve  more 
than  others.  Was  it  not  pretily  said,  and  with  a  good  grace, 
by  one  of  my  friends  ?  There  was  a  great  companie  bandied 
together  about  a  quarell  which  a  Gentleman  had  with 
another,  who  in  very  truth  had  some  prerogative  of  titles, 
honours,  and  alliances  above  the  common  sort  of  Nobilitie ; 
upon  which  word  of  his  prerogative,  every  one  seeking  to 
equall  himselfe  unto  him,  alleaged,  some  one  of-spring,  some 
another,  some  the  resemblance  of  his  name,  some  of  his 
armes,  othersome  an  old  far-fetcht  pedigree,  and  the  meanest 
of  them  to  be  the  great  grand-child  of  some  King  beyond  the 
Seas.  When  they  came  all  to  dinner,  this  man  whom  hitherto 
they  had  all  followed,  in  liew  of  taking  his  wonted  place, 
making  low-lowting  reverences,  went  to  the  lowest  end  of 
the  board,  entreating  the  companie  to  hold  him  excused, 
that  through  rash-unadvisednesse  he  had  hitherto  lived  with 
them  companion-like,  but  now  being  lately  enformed  of 
their  right  qualities,  he  began  to  know  them  according  to 
their  ancient  degrees,  and  that  it  did  not  duly  belong  unto 
him  to  sit  above  so  many  Princes.  And  after  he  had  acted 
his  play,  he  began  to  raile  upon  them  with  a  thousand 
injuries  ;  saying  thus  unto  them  :  For  the  love  of  God  con 
tent  your  selves,  with  what  your  forefathers  have  beene 
contented,  and  with  the  state  whereto  God  hath  called  us : 
320 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

we  have  sufficient  if  we  can  maintaine  it  well,  let  us  not  CHAPTER 
disparage  the  fortune  and  condition  of  our  predecessors  ;  and  XLVI 
reject  we  these  fond  imaginations,  which  cannot  faile  any  man, 
whatsoever  he  be,  that  is  so  impudent  as  to  alleage  them. 
Crests,  Armes,  and  Coats  have  no  more  certaintie  than 
surnames.  I  beare  Azure  seme  of  trefoiles,  a  Lions  Paw  in 
faece,  Or,  armed  Gules.  What  privilege  hath  this  Coat, 
that  it  should  for  ever  continue  particularly  to  my  house  ? 
A  sonne  in  law  will  transferre  the  same  into  another  family  : 
Some  silly-upstart  purchaser  of  Armes,  will  make  it  his 
chiefe  Coat.  There  is  nothing  wherein  meet  so  many 
alterations,  and  so  much  confusion. 

But  this  consideration  draweth  me  perforce  unto  another 
field.  Let  us  somewhat  narrowly  search-into,  and  for 
Gods  sake  consider,  on  what  foundation  we  ground  this 
glorie  and  reputation,  for  which  the  world  is  turned  topsie- 
turvie.  On  what  doe  we  establish  this  transitorie  renowne, 
which  with  so  great  mind-possessing  toyle,  and  Industrie 
we  seeke  and  gape-after  ?  In  fine,  it  is  Peter  or  William, 
that  beareth  the  same  (marke  it  well  Reader)  and  to  whom 
it  belongeth.  Is  not  hope  a  couragious  facultie,  which  in  a 
mortall  subject,  and  in  a  moment,  seeks  to  usurp  infinite, 
and  immensitie,  and  to  replenish  his  Masters  indigence  with 
the  possession  of  all  things  he  can  imagine  or  desire,  before 
it  would  ?  Nature  hath  given  us  a  pleasant  joy  to  play 
withall  in  that.  Is  it  Peter  or  William  ?  And  what  is  that 
but  a  word  for  al  mouths  ?  or  three  or  foure  dashes  of  a  pen, 
first,  so  easie  to  be  varied,  as  I  would  willingly  aske  those, 
whom  the  honor  of  so  many  victories  concerneth,  or  whether 
Guesquin,  or  Glesquin,  or  Gueaquin  ?  yet  were  there  more 
apparence  her,  than  in  Lucian  that  2.  did  sue  T.  for, 

— non  levia  aut  ludicra  petuntur  VIRG.  sEn.  xii. 

Prcemia :  764. 

No  light  prize,  no  reward  in  jest 
Is  hunted  after  as  the  best. 

The  wager  goeth  deepe :  The  question  is,  which  letter 
must  be  paid  with  so  many  sieges,  battels,  hurts,  emprison- 
ments,  and  services  done  unto  the  Crowne  of  France  by  her 
ever  renowmed  Constable.  Nicholas  Denisot  hath  had  no 

2Q  321 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  care  but  of  the  letters  of  his  name,  and  hath  changed  all  the 
XLVI  contexture  of  them,  there  out  to  frame  the  Earle  of  Alsinoss, 
Of  Names  wnom  ne  hath  honored  and  presented  with  the  glorie  of  his 
Poesie  and  Painting.  And  Suetonius  the  Historian  hath 
loved  but  the  sense  of  his  owne,  and  having  taken  away 
Lenis,  which  was  his  fathers  surname,  hath  left  Tranquillus 
successor  of  his  compositions  reputation.  Who  would 
beleeve,  Captaine  Bayard  hath  no  honor,  but  that  which 
he  hath  borrowed  from  the  acts  of  Peter  Terraill  ?  And 
that  Antonio  Escalin  (even  before  his  eies)  suffered  Captaine 
Poulin,  and  the  Baron  of  La  Garde,  to  steal  so  many 
Navigations,  voyages,  and  attemps,  both  by  sea  and  land 
from  him  ?  Secondarily,  they  are  dashes,  and  trickes  of  the 
pen,  common  unto  a  thousand  men.  How  many  are  there 
in  all  races  or  families  both  of  one  name  and  surname  ?  And 
how  many  in  divers  families,  races,  ages,  and  countries  ? 
Historic  hath  knowne  three  Socrates,  five  Platoes,  eight 
Aristotles,  seven  Xenophons,  twenty  Demetrius,  twenty 
Theodores :  besides  which,  imagine  how  many  came  not  to 
her  knowledge.  Who  letteth  my  horse  boy  to  call  himselfe 
Pompey  the  great  ?  But  after  all,  what  meanes,  what  devices, 
are  there  that  annex  unto  my  horse-keeper  deceased,  or  to 
that  other  who  had  his  head  cut  off  in  ^Egypt,  or  that  joyne 
unto  them  this  glorified  and  far-renowned  word,  and  these 
pen-dashes  so  much  honoured  that  they  may  thereby 
advantage  themselves  ? 

VIRG.  sEn.  iv.  Id  cinerem  et  manes  credis  curare  sepultos? 

34- 

Thinke  you,,  ghost's  buried,  ashes  dead,, 

Care  much  how  we  alive  are  sped  ? 

What  feeling  motion  of  revenge  have  the  two  com 
panions  in  chiefe  valor  amongst  men  ;  Epaminondas  of  that 
glorious  verse,  which  so  many  ages  since  is  so  common  in  our 
mouthes  for  him  ? 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qn.  Consilils  nostris  laus  est  attrita  Laconum. 

v. 

By  our  complots  the  haught  renowne, 
Of  Spartan  Gallants  was  brought  downe. 

And  Affricanus  of  that  other  : 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

A  sole  exoriente,  supra  Mceotis  paludes 
Nemo  est,  quifactis  me  cequiparare  queat? 

From  Sun  rise  to  the  Scythian-lake,,  of  fame 
None  in  exploits  can  equalize  my  name. 

Those  that  survive  are  tickled  with  the  pleasure  of  these 
words,  and  by  them  solicited  with  jealousie  and  desire,  doe 
presently  without  consideration  transmit  by  fantasie  this 
their  proper  motion  of  revenge  unto  the  deceased ;  and 
with  a  fond-deceiving  hope  perswade  themselves,  when  their 
turne  commeth  to  be  capable  of  it.  God  he  knowes  it, 
neverthelesse : 

— adhcec  se 

Romanus  Grajusque  et  Barbaras  Induperator 

Erexit,  causas  discriminis  atque  laboris 

Inde  habuit,  tanto  major  famee  sitis  est,  quam 

Virtutis. 

Heefto  himselfe  the  Romane  Generall, 
The  Graecian,  the  Barbarian,  rouz'd  and  rais'd  ; 
Heere  hence  drew  cause  of  perils,  travells  all  : 
So  more,  than  to  be  good,  thirst  to  be  prais'd. 


CHAPTER 
XLVI 

Of  Names 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
v. 


luv.  Sat.  x. 
137- 


THE    FORTY-SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  uncertaintie  of  our  judgement. 
T  is  even  as,  that  verse  saith, 


Se  TroAv?  vop.6$  cv6a  Kai  tvda. 

Of  words  on  either  side, 
A  large  doale  they  divide. 

There  is  law  sufficient  to  speake  every 
where,  both  pro  and  contra;  As  for 
example : 

Vinse  Hannibal,  et  non  seppe  usar  poi  pET.  pAR.  i. 

Ben  la  vittoriosa  sua  ventura.  son.  Ixxxvi.  i. 

Hanniball  conquer'd,,  but  he  knew  not  after 
To  use  well  his  victorious  good  fortune. 

He  that  shall  take  this  part,  and  with  our  men  go  about, 
to  make  that  over-sight  prevaile,  that  we  did  not   lately 

323 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  pursue  our  fortune  at  Montcontour :  Or  he  that  shall  accuse 
XLVII  the  King  of  Spaine,  who  could  not  use  the  advantage  he 

3f  the  uncer-  jia(j  against  us  at  Saint  Quintin,  may  say  this  fault  to  have 
•  i  ement  proceeded  from  a  minde  drunken  with  his  good  fortune,  and 
from  a  courage  ful-gorged  with  the  beginning  of  good  lucke  ; 
loseth  the  taste  how  to  encrease  it,  being  already  hindred 
from  digesting  what  he  hath  conceived  of  it :  He  hath  his 
hands  full,  and  cannot  take  hold  any  more  :  Unworthy  that 
ever  fortune  should  cast  so  great  a  good  into  his  lap :  For, 
what  profit  hath  he  of  it,  if  notwithstanding,  he  give  his 
enemie  leasure  and  meanes  to  recover  himselfe  ?  What  hope 
may  one  have,  that  he  will  once  more  adventure  to  charge 
these  re-enforced  and  re-united  forces,  and  new  armed  with 
despite  and  vengeance,  that  durst  not,  or  knew  not  how  to 
pursue  them  being  dismaied  and  put  to  rout  ? 

LUCAN.  vii.  Dumfortuna  calet,  dum  conficit  omnia  terror. 

734«  While  fortune  is  at  height  in  heat, 

And  terror  worketh  all  by  great. 

But  to  conclude,  what  can  he  expect  better,  than  what 
he  hath  lately  lost?  It  is  not,  as  at  Fence,  where  the 
number  of  venies  given,  gets  the  victorie  :  So  long  as  the 
enemie  is  on  foot,  a  man  is  newly  to  begin.  It  is  no 
victorie,  except  it  end  the  warre.  In  that  conflict  where 
Caesar  had  the  worse,  neere  the  Citie  of  Oricum,  he  reproch- 
fully  said  unto  Pompeis  Souldiers,  That  he  had  utterly 
beene  overthrowne,  had  their  Captaine  knowne  how  to 
conquer:  and  paid  him  home  after  another  fashion  when 
it  came  to  his  turne.  But  why  may  not  a  man  also  hold 
the  contrarie  ?  That  it  is  the  effect  of  an  insatiate  and 
rash-headlong  minde,  not  to  know  how  to  limit  or  period 
his  covetousnesse  :  That  it  is  an  abusing  of  Gods  favours,  to 
goe  about  to  make  them  lose  the  measure  he  hath  prescribed 
them,  and  that  a  new  to  cast  himselfe  into  danger  after  the 
victorie,  is  once  more  to  remit  the  same  unto  the  mercie  of 
fortune  :  That  one  of  the  chiefest  policies  in  militarie  pro 
fession,  is,  not  to  drive  his  enemie  unto  despaire.  Silla  and 
Marius  in  the  sociall  warre,  having  discomfited  the  Marsians, 
seeing  one  squadron  of  them  yet  on  foot,  which  through 
despaire,  like  furious  beasts  were  desperately  comming  upon 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

them,  could  not  be  induced  to  stay  or  make  head  against  CHAPTER 
them.     If  the  fervor  of  Monsieur  de  Foix  had  not  drewne       XLVII 

him  over  rashly  and  moodily  to  pursue  the  straglers  of  the  ^    T?f  uncer- 
...       ,  T.     J  i      i      i  ^    ,  i  i       •  i     i  ,  °        .,i    i  •    taintie  of  our 

victone  at  Kavenna,  he  had  not  blemished  the  same  with  his    judgement 

untimely  death  ;  yet  did  the  fresh-bleeding  memorie  of  his 
example  serve  to  preserve  the  Lord  of  Anguien  from  the  like 
inconvenience,  at  Serisoles.  It  is  dangerous  to  assaile  a 
man,  whom  you  have  bereaved  of  all  other  meanes  to  escape 
or  shift  for  himselfe,  but  by  his  weapons :  for,  necessitie  is 
a  violent  school-mistris,  and  which  teacheth  strange  lessons  : 
Gravissimi  sunt  morsus  irritates  necessitates.  '  No  biting  so 
'  grievous,  as  that  of  necessitie  provoked  and  enraged.1 

Vincitur  haud  gratis  jugulo  qui  provocat  hostem.  LUCAN. iv.  278. 

For  nought  you  over-come  him  not, 
Who  bids  his  foe  come  cut  his  throat. 

And  that  is  the  reason,  why  Pharax  empeached  the  King 
of  Lacedaemon,  who  came  from  gaining  of  a  victorie  against 
the  Mantinaeans,  from  going  to  charge  a  thousand  Argians, 
that  were  escaped  whole  from  the  discomfiture ;  but  rather 
to  let  them  passe  with  all  libertie,  lest  he  should  come  to 
make  triall  of  provoked  and  despited  vertue,  through  and 
by  ill  fortune.  Clodomire  King  of  Aquitaine,  after  his 
victorie,  pursuing  Gondemar  King  of  Burgundie,  vanquished 
and  running  away,  forced  him  to  make  a  stand,  and  make 
head  againe :  but  his  unadvised  wilfulnesse  deprived  him  of 
the  fruit  of  the  victorie,  for  he  dyed  in  the  action.  Like 
wise  he  that  should  chuse,  whether  it  were  best  to  keepe  his 
souldiers  richly  and  sumptuously  armed,  or  only  for  necessitie, 
should  seeme  to  yeeld  in  favour  of  the  first,  whereof  was 
Sertorious,  Philopcemen,  Brutus,  Caesar,  and  others,  urging 
that  it  is  ever  a  spur  to  honour  and  glorie,  for  a  souldier  to 
see  himselfe  gorgiously  attired,  and  richly  armed,  and  an 
occasion  to  yeeld  himselfe  more  obstinate  to  fight,  having 
the  care  to  save  his  armes,  as  his  goods  and  inheritance. 
A  reason  (saith  Xenophon)  why  the  Asiatikes  carried  with 
them,  when  they  went  to  warres  their  wives  and  Concu 
bines,  with  all  their  jewels  and  chiefest  wealth.  And 
might  also  encline  to  the  other  side,  which  is,  that  a  man 
should  rather  remove  from  his  souldier,  all  care  to  preserve 

325 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  himselfe,  than  to  encrease  it  unto  him:  for,  by  that  meanes 
Of  ^LVI1  ne  snall  doubly  feare  to  hazard  or  engage  himselfe,  seeing 
i.«in*:f  JJ?^!""  these  rich  spoiles  do  rather  encrease  an  earnest  desire  of 

Loijii.it  uiuu.r.,.A|  .  1*111 

judgement  victone  in  the  enemie :  and  it  hath  beene  observed,  that 
the  said  respect  hath  sometimes  wonderfully  encouraged  the 
Romans  against  the  Samnites.  Antiochus  shewing  the 
Armie,  he  prepared  against  them,  gorgeously  accoutred 
with  all  pompe  and  statelinesse,  unto  Hanniball,  and 
demanding  of  him,  whether  the  Romans  would  be  con 
tented  with  it :  '  Yea  verily,"  answered  the  other,  '  they  will 
4  be  very  well  pleased  with  it :  They  must  needs  be  so, 
4  were  they  never  so  covetous.1  Licurgus  forbad  his  Souldiers, 
not  onely  all  manner  of  sumptuousnesse,  in  their  equipage, 
but  also  to  uncase  or  strip  their  enemies,  when  they  over 
came  them,  willing,  as  he  said,  that  frugalitie  and  povertie 
should  shine  with  the  rest  of  the  battell.  Both  at  sieges, 
and  else-where,  where  occasion  brings  us  neere  the  enemie, 
we  freely  give  our  souldiers  libertie,  to  brave,  to  disdaine, 
and  injurie  him  with  all  manner  of  reproaches:  And  not 
without  apparance  of  reason ;  for,  it  is  no  small  matter,  to 
take  from  them  all  hope  of  grace  and  composition,  in  pre 
senting  unto  them,  that  there  is  no  way  left  to  expect  it, 
from  him,  whom  they  have  so  egregiously  outraged,  and 
that  there  is  no  remedy  left  but  from  victorie.  Yet  had 
Vitellius  but  bad  successe  in  that ;  for,  having  to  deale 
with  Otho,  weaker  in  his  Souldiers  valour,  and  of  long 
disaccustomed  from  warre,  and  effeminated  through  the 
delights  and  pleasures  of  the  Citie,  himselfe  in  the  end  set 
them  so  on  fire  with  his  reproachfull  and  injurious  words, 
upbrayding  them  with  their  pusilanimitie  and  faint-harted- 
nesse,  and  with  the  regret  of  their  Ladies,  banquettings  and 
sensualities,  which  they  had  left  at  Rome,  that  he  put  them 
into  heart  againe,  which  no  perswasions  or  other  means 
could  doe  before ;  and  thereby  drew  them,  whom  nought 
could  have  driven,  to  fight,  and  fall  upon  him.  And  verily, 
when  they  are  injuries  that  touch  a  man  to  the  quicke, 
they  shall  easily  urge  him,  who  was  very  backward  to  fight 
for  his  Kings  quarrel,  to  be  very  forward  in  his  owne  cause 
or  interest.  If  a  man  but  consider  of  what  consequence 
the  preservation,  and  importance,  the  safetie  of  a  generall  is 
326 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

in  an  Armie,  and  how  the  enemies  chief est  ayme,  is  at  the  CHAPTER 
fairest   marke,  which   is   the   head,   from   which   all   other       XLVII 

depend,  it  seemeth  that  that  counsell  cannot  be  doubted  of,  ?f  ^e  u?cei" 
1-1  ,  •  ,    ™  .  f.    •  i  .    .     taintie  of  our 

which    by  sundrie   great  L/nieitaines  we  have    scene  put  in 

practice,  which  is,  in  the  beginning  of  the  fight,  or  in  the 
fury  of  the  battell,  to  disguise  themselves.  Notwithstand 
ing  the  inconvenience  a  man  may  by  this  meanes  incurre,  is 
no  lesse  than  that  mischiefe,  which  a  man  seeketh  to  avoid : 
For  the  Captaine  being  unseene  and  unknowne  of  his 
Souldiers,  the  courage  they  take  by  his  example,  and  the 
heart  they  keep  by  his  presence,  is  therewithal!  empaired  and 
diminished  ;  and  losing  the  knowne  ensignes,  and  accustomed 
markes  of  their  Leader,  they  either  deeme  him  dead,  or  dis- 
pairing  of  any  good  successe,  to  be  fled.  And  touching 
experience,  we  sometimes  see  it  to  favour  the  one,  and  some 
times  the  other  partie.  The  accident  of  Pirrhus  in  the 
battell  he  had  against  the  Consull  Levinus  in  Italie,  serveth 
us  for  both  uses :  For,  by  concealing  himselfe  under  the 
armes  of  Demogacles,  and  arming  him  with  his  owne,  indeed 
he  saved  his  life,  but  was  in  great  danger  to  fall  into  the 
other  mischiefe,  and  lose  the  day.  Alexander,  Caesar,  Lu- 
cullus,  loved  (at  what  time  they  were  to  enter  fight)  to  arme 
and  attire  themselves  with  the  richest  armes,  and  garish 
clothes  they  had,  and  of  particular  bright-shining  colours. 
Agis,  Agesilaus,  and  that  great  Gilippus,  contrarie,  would 
ever  goe  to  warres  meanly  accoutred,  and  without  any 
imperiall  ornament.  Among  other  reproaches,  that  Pompey 
is  charged  withall  in  the  battell  of  Pharsalia,  this  is  one 
speciall,  that  he  idlely  lingred  with  his  Armie,  expecting 
what  his  enemie  would  attempt ;  forasmuch  as  that  (I  will 
heare  borrow  the  very  words  of  Plutarke,  which  are  of  more 
consequence  than  mine)  weakneth  the  violence,  that  run 
ning  giveth  the  first  blowes,  and  therewithall  removeth  the 
charging  of  the  Combattans  one  against  another,  which  more 
than  any  other  thing  is  wont  to  fill  them  with  fury  and 
impetuosity,  when  with  vehemence  they  come  to  enter-shocke 
one  another,  augmenting  their  courage  by  the  crie  and  run 
ning  ;  and  in  a  manner  alayeth  and  quaileth  the  heat  of  the 
Souldiers :  Loe-here  what  he  saith  concerning  this.  But 
had  Caesar  lost,  who  might  not  also  have  said,  that  contrari- 

327 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  wise  the  strongest  and  firmest  situation,  is  that,  wherein  a 
XLVII  man  keeps  his  stand  without  budging,  and  that  who  is 
>f  the  uncer-  se^^e(J  jn  njs  march,  closing,  and  against  any  time  of  need, 
*  sParing  °is  strength  in  himselfe,  hath  a  great  advantage 
against  him,  that  is  in  motion  and  disordered,  and  that 
running  hath  already  consumed  part  of  his  breath  ?  More 
over,  that  an  armie  being  a  body  composed  of  so  many 
severall  parts,  it  is  impossible  it  should  in  such  furie  advance 
it  selfe  with  so  just  a  march,  and  proportioned  a  motion,  and 
not  breake  and  dis-ranke,  or  at  least  alter  her  ordinance, 
and  that  the  nimblest  be  not  grapling  before  his  fellowes 
may  helpe  him.  In  that  drearie  battell  of  the  two  Persian 
brethren,  Clearchus  the  Lacedemonian,  who  commanded  the 
Graecians  that  followed  Cyrus  his  faction,  led  them  faire  and 
gently  without  any  hast-making  to  their  charges ;  but  when 
he  came  within  fifty  paces  of  his  enemies,  he  bad  them 
with  all  speed  to  run  unto  it ;  hoping  by  the  shortnesse  of 
the  distance  to  manage  their  order,  and  direct  their  breath  ; 
in  the  meane  time  giving  them  the  advantage  of  the  impetu- 
ositie,  both  for  their  bodies,  and  for  their  shooting-armes. 
Others  have  ordered  this  doubt  in  their  army  after  this 
manner :  If  your  enemies  headlong  run  upon  you,  stay  for 
them  and  bouge  not :  If  they  without  stirring  stay  for  you, 
run  with  furie  upon  them. 

In  the  passage  which  the  Emperour  Charles  the  fifth  made 
into  Provence,  our  King  Francis  the  first,  stood  a  good  while 
upon  this  choice ;  whether  it  were  best,  by  way  of  preven 
tion,  to  go  and  meet  with  him  in  Italic,  or  to  stay  his  com- 
ming  into  France  :  and  albeit  he  considered  what  an 
advantage  it  is,  for  one  to  preserve  his  house  from  the 
troubles  and  mischiefes  that  warre  brings  with  it,  to  the  end 
that  possessing  her  whole  strength,  it  may  continually  in  all 
times  of  need,  store  him  with  money,  and  supply  him  with 
all  other  helps  ;  and  considering  how  the  necessitie  of  direfull 
warre,  doth  daily  enforce  a  Generall  to  make  spoile  of  goods, 
and  waste  the  Countrie,  which  cannot  well  be  done  in  our 
owne  goods  and  countrie  :  and  if  the  countriman  doth  not  as 
patiently  indure  this  ravage  at  his  friends  hands,  as  at  his 
enemies,  so  as  seditions  may  ensue  amongst  our  owne  factions, 
and  troubles  among  our  friends :  That  licence  to  rob  and 

328 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

spoile,  which  in  his  Countrie  may  not  be  tolerated,  is  a  great  CHAPTER 
furtherance  in  a  Souldier,  and  makes  him  the  more  willing,       XLVII 

to  endure  the  miseries  and  toylings  that  follow  warre  :  And  .     J£f  uncer- 
...  i  *?i       o      i  T        •         iv  i  taintie  of  our 

what  a  hard  matter  it  is  to  keep  the  Souldier  in  office  and    judgement 

heart,  who  hath  no  other  hope  of  profit,  but  his  bare  pay, 
and  is  so  neere  his  wife,  his  children,  his  friends,  and  his 
home :  That  he  who  layeth  the  cloth,  is  ever  put  to  the 
greatest  charges :  That  there  is  more  pleasure  in  assailing 
than  in  defending :  And  that  the  apprehension  of  a  battell 
lost  in  our  owne  home  and  entrailes,  is  so  violent,  that  it  may 
easily  shake  the  whole  frame,  and  distemper  the  whole  body. 
Seeing  there  is  no  passion  so  contagious,  as  that  of  feare, 
nor  so  easie  apprehended  and  taken  a-trust,  or  doth  more 
furiously  possesse  all  parts  of  man :  And  that  the  Cities  or 
Townes,  which  have  either  heard  the  bustling  noise  of  the 
Tempest,  or  scene  the  sparkles  of  this  all-consuming  fire 
at  their  gates,  or  have  perhaps  received  their  Captaines 
wounded,  their  Citizens  pursued,  and  their  Souldiers  spoiled, 
and  all  out  of  breath,  if  they  be  not  more  than  obstinately 
constant,  it  is  a  thousand  to  one,  if  in  that  brunt  of  furie, 
they  doe  not  headlong  cast  themselves  into  some  desperate 
resolution :  yet  did  he  conclude  and  chose  this  resolve  for 
the  best.  First  to  revoke  his  forces,  he  had  beyond  the 
Mountaines  in  Italic,  and  to  stay  his  enemies  approches. 
For,  he  might  on  the  contrarie  part  imagine,  that  being  in 
his  owne  Countrie,  and  amidst  good  friends,  he  had  the 
better  leasure  to  re-enforce  his  decayed  forces,  and  more 
opportunity,  to  strengthen  Townes,  to  munite  Castles,  to 
store  Rivers  with  all  necessaries  they  wanted,  and  to  keepe 
all  passages  at  his  devotion,  which  done,  all  the  wayes  should 
be  open  for  him,  and  might  by  them  have  all  manner  of 
victuals,  money,  and  other  habilements  of  warre  brought 
him,  in  safety,  and  without  convoy :  that  he  should  have 
his  subjects  so  much  the  more  affectionate  unto  him,  by  how 
much  nearer  they  should  see  the  danger :  That  having  so 
many  Cities,  Townes,  Holds,  Castles,  and  Barres  for  his 
securitie,  he  might  at  all  times,  according  to  opportunitie 
and  advantage,  appoint  and  give  Law  unto  the  fight :  And 
if  he  were  pleased  to  temporize,  whilest  he  tooke  his  ease, 
kept  his  forces  whole,  and  maintained  himself  in  safety,  he 
2R  329 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  might  see  his  enemy  consume  and  waste  himself,  by  the 
XLVII  difficulties  which  daily  must  necessarily  assault,  environ  and 
uncer-  COmbat  him,  as  he  who  should  be  engaged  in  an  enemie- 
countrie  and  foe-land ;  Where  he  should  have  nothing,  nor 
meet  with  any  thing,  either  before,  or  behind  him,  or  of  any 
side,  that  did  not  offer  him  continuall  warre :  no  way  nor 
meanes  to  refresh,  to  ease  or  give  his  armie  elbow-roome,  if 
any  sicknesse  or  contagion  should  come  amongst  his  men ; 
nor  shelter  to  lodge  his  hurt  and  maymed  Souldiers :  where 
neither  monie,  munition,  nor  victuals  might  come  unto  him, 
but  at  the  swords  point ;  where  he  should  never  have  leasure 
to  take  any  rest,  or  breath ;  where  he  should  have  no 
knowledge  of  places,  passages,  woods,  foords,  rivers,  or 
countrie,  that  might  defend  him  from  ambuscados,  or  sur 
prises  :  And  if  he  should  unfortunately  chance  to  lose  a 
battell,  no  hope  to  save,  or  meanes  to  re-unite  the  reliques 
of  his  forces.  And  there  want  not  examples  to  strengthen 
both  sides.  Scipio  found  it  better  for  him  to  invade  his 
enemies  countrie  of  Affrica,  than  to  defend  his  owne,  and 
fight  with  him  in  Italie,  where  he  was,  wherein  he  had  good 
successe.  But  contrariwise,  Hanniball,  in  the  same  warre 
wrought  his  owne  overthrow,  by  leaving  the  conquest  of  a 
forraine  countrie,  for  to  goe  and  defend  his  owne.  The 
Athenians  having  left  the  enemie  in  their  owne  land,  for  to 
passe  into  Sicilie,  had  very  ill  successe,  and  were  much  con- 
traried  by  fortune :  whereas  Agathocles  King  of  Siracusa 
prospered  and  was  favoured  by  her,  what  time  he  passed 
into  Affrica,  and  left  the  warre  on  foot  in  his  owne  countrie. 
And  we  are  accustomed  to  say  with  some  shew  of  reason, 
that  especially  in  matters  of  warre,  the  events  depend  (for 
the  greatest  part)  on  fortune ;  which  seldome  will  yeeld,  or 
never  subject  her  selfe  unto  our  discourse  or  wisdome,  as  say 
these  ensuing  verses. 

MANIL.  Astr.  Et  male  consultis  pretium  est,  prudentia  fallax } 

iv.  95.  Necfortuna  probat  causas  sequiturque  merentes  : 

Sed  vaga  per  cunctos  nullo  discrimine  fertur : 
Scilicet  est  aliud  quod  nos  cogatque  regatque 
Majus,  et  in  proprias  ducat  mortalia  leges. 

'Tis  best  for  ill  advis'd,  wisdome  may  faile, 
Fortune  proves  not  the  cause  that  should  prevaile, 

330 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

But  here  and  there  without  respect  doth  saile,  CHAPTER 

A  higher  power  forsooth  us  over-drawes,  XLVII 

And  mortall  states  guides  with  immortall  lawes.  Of  the  uncer- 

But  if  it  be  well  taken,  it  seemeth  that  our  counsels  and    judgement 

deliberations,  doe  as  much  depend  of  her ;  and  that  fortune 

doth  also  engage  our  discourses  and   consultations  in  her 

trouble  and  uncertaintie.     'We  reason  rashly,  and  dis- 

'  course  at  randon,1  saith  Timeus  in  Plato  :   '  For,  even 

4  as  we,  so  have  our  discourses  great  participation 

'  with  the  temeritie  of  hazard.' 


THE    FORTY-EIGHTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Steeds,  called  in  French  Destriers. 

EHOLD,  I  am  now  become  a  Gramarian, 
I,  who  never  learn't  tongue  but  by  way 
of  roat,  and  that  yet  know  not  what 
either  Adjective,  Conjunctive,  or  Ablative 
meaneth.  As  far  as  I  remember,  I  have 
sometimes  heard  say,  that  the  Romanes 
had  certaine  horses,  which  they  called 
Funales,  or  Dextrarios,  which  on  the  right 
hand  were  led  by,  as  spare  horses,  to  take  them  fresh  at  any 
time  of  need  :  And  thence  it  commeth,  that  we  call  horses 
of  service  Destriers,  And  our  ancient  Romanes  doe  ordinarily 
say,  to  Adexter,  in  steed  of,  to  accompanie.  They  also 
called  Desultorios  equos,  certaine  horses  that  were  so  taught, 
that  mainly-running  with  all  the  speed  they  had,  joyning 
sides  to  one  another,  without  either  bridle  or  saddle,  the 
Roman  gentlemen  armed  at  all  assayes,  in  the  middest  of 
their  running-race,  would  cast  and  recast  themselves  from 
one  to  another  horse.  The  Numidian  men  at  armes,  were 
wont  to  have  a  second  spare-horse  led  by  hand,  that  in  the 
greatest  furie  of  the  battell,  they  might  shift  and  change 
horse  :  Quibus,  desultorum  in  modum,  binos  trahentibus  equos,  Liv.  Bel.  Pun. 
Inter  acerrimam  scepe  pugnam  in  recentem  equum  ex  fesso  dea  iu-  4 
armatis  transultare,  mos  erat.  Tanta  velocitas  ipsis,  tamque 
docile  equorum  genus.  '  Whose  manner  was,  as  if  they  had 

331 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  beene  vaulters,  leading  two  horses  with  them  in  armour  to 
XLVIII  <  leap  from  their  tired  horse  to  the  fresh-one,  even  in  the 

catewTita  '  hottest  of  the  fight.  So  great  agilitie  was  in  themselves, 
French  '  an(^  so  apt  to  be  taught  was  the  race  of  their  horses/ 

Destriers  There  are  many  horses  found,  that  are  taught  to  helpe  their 
master,  to  run  upon  any  man  shall  offer  to  draw  a  naked 
sword  upon  them ;  furiously  to  leap  upon  any  man,  both 
with  feet  to  strike,  and  with  teeth  to  bite,  that  shall  affront 
them;  but  that  for  the  most  part  they  rather  hurt  their 
friends  than  their  enemies.  Considering  also,  that  if  they 
once  be  grapled,  you  cannot  easily  take  them  off',  and  you 
must  needs  stand  to  the  mercie  of  their  combat.  Artibius, 
Generall  of  the  Persian  armie  had  very  ill  lucke  to  be 
mounted  upon  a  horse  fashioned  in  this  schoole,  at  what 
time  he  fought  man  to  man  against  Onesilus  King  of 
Salamis ;  for,  he  was  the  cause  of  his  death,  by  reason  the 
shield-bearer  or  squire  of  Onesilus  cut  him  with  a  faulchon 
betweene  the  two  shoulders,  even  as  he  was  leaping  upon  his 
master.  And  if  that,  which  the  Italians  report  be  true,  that 
in  the  battell  of  Fornovo,  King  Charles  his  horse  with  kick 
ing,  winching,  and  flying,  rid  both  his  master  and  himselfe 
from  the  enemies  that  encompast  him,  to  dismount  or  kill 
him,  and  without  that,  he  had  beene  lost :  He  committed 
himselfe  to  a  great  hazard,  and  scap^t  a  narrow  scowring. 
The  Mammalukes  boast,  that  they  have  the  nimblest  and 
readiest  horses  of  any  men  at  armes  in  the  world.  That 
both  by  nature  they  are  instructed  to  discerne,  and  by 
custome  taught  to  distinguish  their  enemie,  on  whom  they 
must  leap  and  wince  with  feet,  and  bite  with  teeth,  accord 
ing  to  the  voice  their  master  speaketh,  or  rider  giveth  them. 
And  are  likewise  taught  to  take  up  from  the  ground,  lances, 
darts,  or  any  other  weapons  with  their  mouths,  and  as  he 
commandeth  to  present  them  to  their  rider.  It  is  said  of 
Caesar,  and  of  Pompey  the  Great,  that  amongst  their  many 
other  excellent  qualities,  they  were  also  most  cunning  and 
perfect  horsemen ;  and  namely  of  Caesar,  that  in  his  youth 
being  mounted  upon  a  horse,  and  without  any  bridle,  he 
made  him  run  a  full  cariere,  make  a  sodaine  stop,  and  with 
his  hands  behind  his  backe  performe  what  ever  can  be 
expected  of  an  excellent  ready  horse.  And  even  as  nature 
332 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

was  pleased  to  make  both  him  and  Alexander  two  matchlesse  CHAPTER 
miracles  in  militarie  profession,  so  would  you  say,  she  hath  XLVIII 
also  endevoured,  yea,  enforced  herselfe  to  arme  them  extra-  ^if*|ej^ 
ordinarily ;  For,  all  men  know,  that  Alexanders  horse  called  French 
Bucephalus,  had  a  head  shaped  like  unto  that  of  a  bull ;  that  Destriers 
he  suffered  no  man  to  get-on  and  sit  him,  but  his  master ; 
that  none  could  weald  and  manage  him  but  he;  what 
honours  were  done  him  after  his  death,  all  know,  for  he  had 
a  Citie  erected  in  his  name.  Caesar  likewise  had  another, 
who  had  his  fore-feet  like  unto  a  mans,  with  hoofes  cloven 
in  forme  of  fingers,  who  could  never  be  handled,  drest,  or 
mounted  but  by  Caesar,  who  when  he  died,  dedicated  his 
image  to  the  Goddesse  Venus.  If  I  be  once  on  horse-backe, 
I  alight  very  unwillingly;  for,  it  is  the  seat  I  like  best, 
whether  I  be  sound  or  sicke.  Plato  commendeth  it  to  be 
availefull  for  health :  And  Plinie  affirmeth  the  same  to 
be  healthfull  for  the  stomacke,  and  for  the  joynts.  And 
si  thence  we  be  falne  into  this  subject,  let  us  a  little  follow 
it  I  pray  you.  We  read  of  a  law  in  Xenophon,  by  which 
all  men  that  either  had  or  were  able  to  keepe  a  horse,  were 
expresly  forbidden  to  travell  and  goe  a  foot.  Trogus  and 
lustinus  report,  that  the  Parthians  were  not  only  accustomed 
to  warre  on  horse-backe,  but  also  to  dispatch  all  their 
businesse,  and  negotiate  their  affaires  both  publike  and 
privat ;  as  to  bargaine,  to  buy,  to  sell,  to  parly,  to  meet,  to 
entertaine  one  another,  and  to  converse  and  walke  together ; 
and  that  the  chiefest  difference  betweene  free  men  and 
servants  amongst  them,  is,  that  the  first  ever  ride,  and  the 
other  goe  alwaies  on  foot.  An  institution  first  devised  by 
King  Cyrus.  There  are  many  examples  in  the  Romane 
histories  (and  Suetonius  doth  more  particularly  note  it  in 
Caesar)  of  Captaines  that  commanded  their  horsemen  to 
alight,  whensoever,  by  occasion,  they  should  be  urged  unto 
it,  thereby  to  remove  all  manner  of  hope  from  their  Souldiers 
to  save  themselves  by  flight,  and  for  the  advantage  they 
hoped  for  in  this  manner  of  fight :  Quo  hand  dubie  superat  Liv.  dec.  i.  3 
Romanus.  '  Wherein  undantedly  the  Romanes  is  superiour  et  7- 
'  to  all,1  saith  Titus  Livius :  yet  shall  we  see,  that  the  first 
provision,  and  chiefe  meanes  they  used  to  bridle  rebellion 
amongst  their  new  conquered  nations,  was  to  deprive  them 

333 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  of  all  armes  and  horses.     Therefore  finde  we  so  often  in 
XLVIII       Cnesar  ;  Anna  profcrrl^  jumcnta  produc j,  obsidcs  dari  jubet  : 
^alled^1    * He  comma"ds  ^  tne*r  ar^our  should  be  brought  forth,  all 
French1      *  their  cattell  should  be  driven  out,  and  hostages  should  be 
Destriers     *  delivered/     The  great  Turke  doth  not  permit  at  this  day 
Cxs.Comment.  anv  Christian  or  Jew,  to  have  or  keepe  any  horse  for  him- 
vii.  selfe,  throughout  all  his  large  Empire.     Our  ancestors,  and 

especially  at  what  time  we  had  warres  with  the  English,  in 
all  solenme  combats,  or  set  battels,  would  (for  the  most  part) 
alight  from  their  horses,  and  fight  on  foot,  because  they 
would  not  adventure  to  hazard  so  precious  a  thing  as  their 
honour  and  life,  but  on  the  trust  of  their  owne  proper 
strength,  and  vigour  of  their  undanted  courage,  and  con 
fidence  of  their  limbs.  Let  Chrisanthes  in  Xenophon  say 
what  he  pleaseth  :  whosoever  fighteth  on  horse-backe, 
engageth  his  valour,  and  hazardeth  his  fortune  on  that  of 
his  horse ;  his  hurts,  his  stumbling,  his  death,  drawes  your 
life  and  fortune  into  consequence,  if  he  chance  to  startle  or 
be  afraid,  then  are  you  induced  to  doubt  or  feare :  if  to 
leape  forward,  then  to  become  rash  and  fond-hardy :  if  he 
want  a  good  mouth  or  a  timely  spurre,  your  honour  is  bound 
to  answer  for  it.  And  therefore  doe  not  I  finde  it  strange, 
that  those  combats  were  more  firme  and  furious,  than  those 
which  now  we  see  foughten  on  horse-backe. 


—  cedebant  pariter,  pariterque  ruebant 

Victores,  victique,  neque  hisfuga  nota,  neque  illis. 


VlRG.  .: 

756. 

The  victors  and  the  vanquisht  both  together 

Gave  backe,  came  on  :  the  flight  was  knowue  in  neither. 


Their  battels  are  seene  much  better  compact  and  con 
trived  :  They  are  now  but  bickerings  and  routs  :  primus 
clamor  atque  impetus  rem  decernit.  '  The  first  shout  and 
'  shocke  makes  an  end  of  the  matter/  And  the  thing  we  call 
to  helpe  us,  and  keepe  us  company  in  so  great  and  hazardous 
an  adventure,  ought  as  much  as  possible  may  be,  lie  still  in 
our  disposition  and  absolute  power.  As  I  would  counsell  a 
gentleman  to  chuse  the  shortest  weapons,  and  such  as  he 
may  best  assure  himselfe  of.  It  is  most  apparant,  that  a 
man  may  better  assure  himselfe  of  a  sword  he  holdeth  in  his 
hand,  than  of  a  bullet  shot  out  of  a  pistoll,  to  which  belong 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

so  many  severall  parts,  as  powder,  stone,  locke,  snap-hanse,  CHAPTER 
barrell,  stocke,  scowring-peece,  and  many  others,  whereof  if      ^^}  ^ 
the  least  faile,  or  chance  to  breake,  and  be  distempered,  it     ^n^ 
is  able  to  overthrow,  to  hazard,  or  miscarry  your  fortune.       French 
Seldom e  doth  that  blow  come  or  light  on  the  marke  it  is     Destriers 
aymed  at,  which  the  ayre  doth  carry. 

Et  qubferre  velint  permittere  vulnera  ventis,  LUCAN.  viiL 

En*i*  habet  tire*,  et  gems  qiuzcunque  virorum  est,  3^4- 

Bella  gerit  gladii. 

Giving  windes  leave  to  give  wounds  as  they  list, 
But  swords  have  strength,  and  right  men  never  mist 
With  sword  t'  assalt,  and  with  sword  to  resist. 

But  concerning  that  weapon,  I  shall  more  amply  speake 
of  it,  where  I  will  make  a  comparison  betweene  ancient  and 
moderne  armes  :  And  except  the  astonishment  and  frighting 
of  the  eare,  which  nowadaies  is  growne  so  familiar  amongst 
men,  that  none  doth  greatly  feare  it ;  I  thinke  it  to  be  a 
weapon  of  small  effect,  and  hope  to  see  the  use  of  it 
abolished.  That  wherewith  the  Italians  were  wont  to  throw, 
with  fire  in  it,  was  more  frightfull  and  terrour-moving. 
They  were  accustomed  to  name  a  kinde  of  javelin,  Phalarica, 
armed  at  one  end  with  an  yron  pike  of  three  foot  long,  that 
it  might  pierce  an  armed  man  through,  which  lying  in  the 
field  they  used  to  lanch  or  hurle  with  the  hand,  and  some 
times  to  shoot  out  of  certaine  engines,  for  to  defend  besieged 
places :  the  staffe  whereof  being  wreath'd  about  with  hemp 
or  flax,  all  pitched  and  oiled  over,  flying  in  the  ayre,  would 
soone  be  set  afire,  and  lightning  upon  any  body  or  target, 
deprived  the  partie  hit  therewith,  of  all  use  of  weapons  or 
limbes :  Me  thinkes  neverthelesse,  that  comming  to  grapple, 
it  might  as  well  hinder  the  assailant,  as  trouble  the  assailed, 
and  that  the  ground  strewed  with  such  burning  truncheons, 
might  in  a  pell-mell-confusion  produce  a  common  incom- 
moditie. 

— magnum  stridens  contorta  phalarica  venit  VIRG.  ALn.  ix. 

Fulminis  acta  modo.  705. 

With  monstrous  buzzing  came  a  fire-dart  thirled, 
As  if  a  thunder-bolt  had  there  beene  whirled. 

They  had  also  other  meanes,  to  the  use  of  which  custome 

335 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  enured  them,  and  that  by  reason  of  inexperience  seeme  in- 
XLVIII      credible  to  us ;  wherewith  they  supplied  the  defect  of  our 
Of  Steeds,    powder  and  bullets.     They  with  such  fury  darted  their  Piles, 
French1     anc^  w^n  sucn  force  hurled  their  javelins,  that  they  often 
Destriers     pierced  two  targets  and  two  armed  men  through,  as  it  were 
with  a  spit.     They  hit  as  sure  and  as  farre  with  their  slings, 
Liv.  dec.  iv.  8.  as  with  any  other  shot :  Sax-is  globosisjunda,  mare  apertum 
incessentes :    coronas  modici  circuli  magno  ex  intervallo  loci 
assueti  trajkere :    non  capita  modb  hostium  vulnerabant,  sed 
quern   locum   destinassent.     '  While   they   were   boyes,  with 
round  stones  in  a  sling,  making  ducks  and  drakes  upon  the 
sea,  they  accustomed  to  cast  through  round  marks  of  small 
compasse  a  great  distance  off:  whereby  they  not  only  hit 
and  hurt  the  heads  of  their  enemies,  but  would  strike  any 
place   they   aymed   at/     Their    battering   or   murthering 
peeces  represented,  as  well  the  effect,  as  the  clattering  and 
thundering  noise  of  ours :    ad  ictus  mcemum  cum  terribili 
sonitu  editos,  pavor  et  trepidatio  ccepit.     '  At  the  batterie  of 
'  the  walles  made  with  a  terrible  noise,  feare  and  trembling 
'  began  to  attach  them  within.'     The  Gaules  our  ancient 
forefathers  in  Asia,  hated   mortally  such   treacherous   and 
flying  weapons,  as  they  that  were  taught  to  fight  hand  to 
II).  hand,  and  with  more  courage.     Non  tarn  patentibus  plagis 

moventur,  ubi  latior  quam  altior  plaga  est,  etiam  gloriosius 
se  pugnare  putant ;  iidem  quurn  aculeus  sagittce,  aut  glandis 
abditce  introrsus  tenui  vulnere  in  speciem  urit :  turn  in  rabiem 
et  pudorem  tarn  parvcc  perimentis  pestis  versi,  prosternunt 
corpora  humi.  c  They  are  not  so  much  moved  with  wide 
'  gashes,  where  the  wound  is  more  broad  than  it  is  deepe, 
'  there  they  thinke,  that  they  fight  with  more  bravery ;  but 
6  when  the  sting  of  an  arrow  or  a  bullet,  with  a  small  wound 
'  to  shew,  gals  them  inwardly,  then  falling  into  rage  and 
4  shame  that  so  slight  a  hurt  should  kill  them,  they  cast 
'  their  bodies  on  the  ground." 

A  model  or  picture  very  neere  unto  an  harquebusada. 
The  ten  thousand  Grsecians  in  their  long-lingring,  and  farre- 
famous  retreat,  encountered  with  a  certaine  nation,  that  ex 
ceedingly  much  endomaged  them  with  stiffe,  strong  and 
great  blowes,  and  so  long  arrowes,  that  taking  them  up, 
they  might  throw  them  after  the  manner  of  a  dart,  and  with 


Of  Steeds, 

called  in 

French 

Destriers 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

them  pierce  a  target  and  an  armed  man  thorow  and  thorow.  CHAPTER 
The  engines  which  Dionysius  invented  in  Siracusa,  to  shoot  XLV1I 
and  cast  mightie  big  arrowes,  or  rather  timber-peeces,  and 
huge-great  stones,  so  farre  and  with  such  force,  did  greatly 
represent,  and  come  very  neere  our  moderne  inventions.  We 
may  not  also  forget,  the  pleasant  seat,  which  one  named 
master  Peter  Pol,  doctor  in  divinitie  used  to  sit  upon  his 
mule,  who  as  Monstrelet  reporteth,  was  wont  to  ride  up  and 
downe  the  streets  of  Paris,  ever  sitting  sideling,  as  women 
use.  He  also  saith  in  another  place,  that  the  Gascoines  had 
certaine  horses,  so  fierce  and  terrible,  taught  to  turne  and 
stop  suddenly  in  running,  whereat  the  French,  the  Piccards, 
the  Flemmings,  and  Brabantins  (as  they  who  were  never 
accustomed  to  see  the  like)  were  greatly  amazed,  and 
thought  it  a  wonder :  I  use  his  very  words.  Caesar  speaking 
of  those  of  Swethen,  saith,  In  any  skirmish  or  fight  on  horse- 
backe,  they  often  alight  to  combat  on  foot,  having  so  trayned 
and  taught  their  horses,  that  so  long  as  the  fight  lasteth, 
they  never  bouge  from  their  masters  side,  that  if  need  re 
quire,  they  may  suddenly  mount  up  againe :  and  according 
to  their  naturall  custome,  there  is  nothing  accounted  more 
base  or  vile,  than  to  use  saddles  or  bardels,  and  they  greatly 
contemne  and  scorne  such  as  use  them :  So  that  a  few  of 
them  feare  not  to  encounter  with  a  troupe  farre  exceeding 
them  in  number.  That  which  I  have  other  times  wondered 
at,  to  see  a  horse  fashioned  and  taught,  that  a  man  having 
but  a  wand  in  his  hand,  and  his  bridle  loose  hanging  over 
his  eares,  might  at  his  pleasure  manage,  and  make  him  turne, 
stop,  run,  cariere,  trot,  gallop,  and  what  ever  else  may  be 
expected  of  an  excellent  ready  horse,  was  common  amongst 
the  Massilians,  who  never  used  either  bridle  or  sadle. 

Et  gens  qutB  nudo  residens  Massilia  dorso,  LUCAN.  iv. 

Ora  fanflectityfrcenorum  nescia  virga.  68 1. 

Massilian  horsemen  on  bare  horse-backe-sifc 
Manage  with  light  rod,  without  reynes  or  hit. 

Et  Numidce  wfreeni  cingunt.  VIRG.  ALH.  iv. 

Numidians  who  their  horses  ride  41- 

Without  bit,  round  about  us  bide. 

Egui  sine  frcems,  deformis  ipse   cursus,  rigida  cervice  et 
2S  337 


MONTAIGNES   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  extento  caplte  currentium :  'The  horses  being  without  bridles, 
XLVIII  «  their  course  is  ill  favoured,  they  running  with  a  stiffe  necke, 
"^H  i^S)  '  and  outstretch^  head '  (like  a  roasted  Pigge :)  Alphonsus 
French  King  of  Spaine,  that  first  established  the  order  of  Knights, 
Destriers  called  the  order  of  the  Bend  or  skarfe,  amongst  other  rules 
devised  this  one,  that  none  of  them,  upon  paine  to  forfeit  a 
marke  of  silver,  for  every  time  offending,  should  ever  ride 
either  mule  or  mulet ;  as  I  lately  read  in  Guevaras  epistles, 
of  which  whosoever  called  them  his  golden  epistles,  gave  a 
judgement  farre  different  from  mine.  The  Courtier  saith, 
'  That  before  his  time,  it  was  counted  a  great  shame  in  a 
'  gentleman  to  be  seene  riding  upon  a  mule ' :  Whereas  the 
Abyssines  are  of  a  contrarie  opinion,  who  accordingly  as  they 
are  advanced,  to  places  of  honour,  or  dignitie,  about  their 
Prince,  called  Prester-Iohn,  so  doe  they  more  and  more  affect 
in  signe  of  pompe  and  state,  to  ride  upon  large-great  mules. 
Xenophon  reporteth,  that  the  Assirians  were  ever  wont  to 
keepe  their  horses  fast-tied  in  fetters  or  gyves,  and  ever  in 
the  stable,  they  were  so  wilde  and  furious.  And  for  that 
they  required  so  much  time  to  unshackle,  and  to  harnish 
them,  (lest  protracting  of  so  long  time,  might,  if  they  should 
chance  at  unawares,  and  being  unready,  to  be  surprised  by 
their  enemies,  endomage  them)  they  never  tooke  up  their 
quarter  in  any  place,  except  it  were  well  dyked  and  in 
trenched  :  His  Cirus,  whom  he  maketh  so  cunning  in  horse 
manship,  did  alwaies  keepe  his  horses  at  a  certaine  stint,  and 
would  never  suffer  them  to  have  any  meat  before  they  had 
deserved  the  same  by  the  sweat  of  some  exercise.  If  the 
Scithians  in  time  of  warre  chanced  to  be  brought  to  any 
necessitie  of  victuals,  the  readiest  remedy  they  had,  was  to 
let  their  horses  bloud,  and  therewithall  quenched  their  thirst, 
and  nourished  themselves. 

MART.  Sped.  Venit  et  epoto  Sarmata  pastus  equo. 

iii.  4. 

The  Scithian  also  came,  who  strangely  feedes 

On  drinking  out  his  horse  (or  that  hee  bleedes). 

Those  of  Crotta  being  hardly  besieged  by  Metellus,  were 
reduced  to  so  hard  a  pinch,  and  strait  necessitie  of  all 
manner  of  other  beverage,  that  they  were  forced  to  drinke 
the  stale  or  urine  of  their  horses.  To  verifie  how  much 

338 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

better  cheape  the  Turkes  doe  both  levie,  conduct,  and  CHAPTER 
maintaine  their  armies,  than  we  Christians  doe ;  They  report,  XLVIII 
that  besides  their  souldiers  never  drinke  any  thing  but  water,  ^f  Steeds, 
and  feed  on  nothing  but  rice,  and  drie-salt  flesh,  which  they  French* 
reduce  into  a  kinde  of  powder  (whereof  every  private  man  Destriers 
doth  commonly  cary  so  much  about  him,  as  will  serve  for 
a  moneths  provision)  and  for  a  shift,  will  live  a  long  time 
with  the  bloud  of  their  horses ;  wherein  they  use  to  put 
a  certain  quantitie  of  salt,  as  the  Tartars  and  Moskovites 
doe.  These  new  discovered  people  of  the  Indies,  when  the 
Spaniards  came  first  amongst  them,  esteemed  that  aswell 
men  as  horses,  were  either  gods,  or  creatures  far  beyond, 
and  excelling  their  nature  in  nobilitie.  Some  of  which, 
after  they  were  vanquished  by  them,  comming  to  sue  for 
peace  and  beg  pardon  at  their  hands,  to  whom  they  brought 
presents  of  gold,  and  such  viands  as  their  countrie  yeelded ; 
omitted  not  to  bring  the  same,  and  as  much  unto  their 
horses,  and  with  as  solemne  Oration  as  they  had  made  unto 
men,  taking  their  neighings,  as  a  language  of  truce  and 
composition.  In  the  nether  Indies,  the  chiefe  and  royallest 
honour  was  anciently  wont  to  be,  to  ride  upon  an  Elephant ; 
the  second  to  goe  in  Coaches  drawne  with  foure  horses ;  the 
third,  to  ride  upon  a  Camell ;  the  last  and  basest,  was  to  be 
carried  or  drawne  by  one  horse  alone.  Some  of  our  moderne 
Writers  report,  to  have  scene  some  Countries  in  that  climate, 
where  the  people  ride  oxen,  with  packe-saddles,  stirrops, 
and  bridles,  by  which  they  were  carried  very  easily.  Quintus 
Fabius  Maximus  Rutilianus,  warring  against  the  Samnites, 
and  seeing  that  his  horsemen,  in  three  or  foure  charges  they 
gave,  had  missed  to  breake  and  run  through  his  enemies 
battalion,  at  last  resolved  thus,  that  they  should  all  unbridle 
their  horses,  and  with  maine  force  of  sharpe  spurres  pricke 
and  broach  them ;  which  done,  the  horses  as  enraged,  tooke 
such  a  running,  thorow,  and  athwart  the  enemies  campe, 
armes  and  men,  that  nought  was  able  to  resist  them  ;  and 
with  such  a  furie,  that  by  opening,  shouldring,  and  over 
throwing,  the  battallion,  they  made  way  for  his  Infanterie, 
which  there  committed  a  most  bloudy  slaughter,  and  obtained 
a  notable  victorie.  The  like  was  commanded  and  effected 
by  Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus  against  the  Celtiberians  :  Id  cum 

339 


CHAPTER 
XLVIII 

Of  Steeds, 

called  in 

French 

Destriers 

Liv.  dec.  iv. 
10. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

mqjore  vi  equorum  facietis,  si  effrcenatos  in  hostes  equos 
immittitis ;  quod  sccpe  Romanos  equites  cum  laude  fecisse 
memoriae  proditum  cat.  Detractisque  frcenis  bis  idtrb  citroque 
cum  magna  sir  age  hostium,  infractis  omnibus  liastis,  tram- 
currerunt.  '  That  shall  you  doe  with  more  violence  of  horse, 
'  if  you  force  your  horse  unbridled  on  the  enemie ;  which  it 
6  is  recorded,  the  Roman  horsemen  have  often  performed 
4  with  great  proofe  and  praise.  So  pulling  off  the  bridles, 
'  they  twice  ran  through  forward,  and  backe  againe  with  great 
'  slaughter  of  the  enemie,  all  their  launces  broken." 

The  duke  of  Moscovie  did  anciently  owe  this  reverence 
unto  the  Tartars,  at  what  time  soever  they  sent  any 
Ambassadors  to  him,  that  he  must  goe  meet  them  on  foot, 
and  present  them  with  a  goblet  full  of  mares-milke  (a  drinke 
counted  very  delicious  amongst  them)  which  whilst  they 
were  drinking,  if  any  drop  chaunced  to  be  spilt  upon  their 
horses  haires,  he  was,  by  dutie,  bound  to  licke  the  same  up 
with  his  tongue.  The  armie  which  the  Emperor  Bajazeth 
had  sent  into  Russia,  was  overwhelmed  by  so  horrible 
a  tempest  of  snow,  that  to  find  some  shelter,  and  to  save 
themselves  from  the  extremitie  of  the  cold,  many  advised  to 
kill  and  unpanch  their  horses,  and  enter  into  their  panches, 
to  enjoy  and  find  some  ease  by  that  vitall  heat.  Bajazeth 
after  that  bloudy  and  tragical  conflict  wherein  he  was  over- 
throwne  by  the  Scithian  Tamburlane,  in  seeking  to  escape, 
had  no  doubt  saved  himselfe,  by  the  swiftnesse  of  an  Arabian 
mare,  on  which  he  was  mounted  that  day,  if  unluckily  he 
had  not  beene  forced  to  let  her  drinke  her  fill  in  passing 
over  a  river,  which  made  her  so  faint  and  foundred,  that  he 
was  easily  overtaken  and  apprehended  by  those  that  pursued 
him.  The  common  saying  is,  that  to  let  a  horse  stale 
after  a  full  cariere,  doth  take  downe  his  speed,  but  I  would 
never  have  thought  that  drinking  had  done  it,  but  rather 
strengthened  and  heartned  him. 

Croesus  passing  alongst  the  citie  of  Sardis,  found  certaine 
thickets,  wherin  were  great  store  of  snakes  and  serpents, 
on  which  his  horses  fed  verie  hungerly,  which  thing,  as 
Herodotus  saith,  was  an  ill-boding-prodigy  unto  his  affaires. 
We  call  him  an  entire  horse,  that  hath  his  full  mane,  and 
whole  eares,  and  which  in  shew,  or  at  a  muster,  doth  not 

340 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

exceed  others.      The   Lacedemonians   having    defeated   the  CHAPTER 
Athenians  in  Sicilie,  returning  in  great  pompe  and  glory      XLVIII 
from  the  victory,  into  the  City  of  Siracusa,  among  other    Of  Steeds, 
v»  /»  .  i     •  111  iiii  called  in 

Bravadoes  of  theirs,  caused  such  horses  as  they  had  taken       French 

from  their  enemies  to  be  shorne  all  over,  and  so  led  them  in  Destriers 
triumph.  Alexander  fought  with  a  nation  called  Dahas, 
where  they  went  to  warre  two  and  two,  all  armed  upon  one 
horse,  but  when  they  came  to  combat,  one  must  alight,  and 
so  successively  one  fought  on  foot,  and  the  other  on  horse 
backe,  each  in  his  turne  one  after  another.  I  am  perswaded 
that  in  respect  of  sufficiencie,  of  comlinesse,  and  of  grace 
on  horseback,  no  Nation  goeth  beyond  us.  A  good  horse 
man,  (speaking  according  to  our  phrase)  seemeth  rather  to 
respect  an  undismayed  courage,  than  an  affected  cleane  seat. 
The  man  most  skilfull,  best  and  surest-sitting,  comeliest- 
graced,  and  nimblest-handed,  to  sit,  to  ride,  and  mannage 
a  horse  cunningly,  that  ever  I  knew,  and  that  best  pleased 
my  humor,  was  Monsieur  de  Carnavalet,  who  was  Master 
of  the  horse  unto  our  King  Henry  the  second.  I  have 
scene  a  man  take  his  full  cariere,  standing  boult-up-right 
on  both  his  feet  in  the  saddle,  leap  downe  to  the  ground 
from  it,  and  turning  backe,  take  oft'  the  saddle,  and 
presently  set  it  on  againe  as  fast  as  ever  it  was,  and  then 
leap  into  it  againe,  and  al  this  did  he  whilst  his  horse  was 
running  as  fast  as  might  be  with  his  bridle  on  his  necke. 
I  have  also  seene  him  ride  over  a  bonet  or  cap,  and  being 
gone  a  good  distance  from  it,  with  his  bow  shooting  back 
ward,  to  sticke  many  arrowes  in  the  same ;  then  sitting 
still  in  the  saddle,  to  take  up  any  thing  from  the  ground, 
to  set  one  foot  to  the  ground,  and  keepe  the  other  in  the 
stirrop,  and  continually  running  doe  a  thousand  such 
tumbling  and  apish  tricks,  wherewith  he  got  his  living. 
There  have  in  my  time  two  men  beene  seene  in  Con 
stantinople,  both  at  once  upon  one  horse,  and  who  in  his 
speediest  running,  would  by  turnes,  first  one,  and  then 
another,  leape  downe  to  the  ground,  and  then  into  the 
saddle  againe,  the  one  still  taking  the  others  place.  And 
another,  who  only  with  teeth,  and  without  the  helpe  of  any 
hand,  would  bridle,  curry,  rub,  dresse,  saddle,  girt,  and 
harnish  his  horse.  Another,  that  betweene  two  horses, 

341 


French 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  both  saddled,  standing  upright,  with  one  foot  in  the 
XLVIII      one?  and   the  second  in  the  other,  did  beare  another  man 
on    k*s   armes'  standing  upright,  run  a  full  speedy  course, 
anc^  the  uppermost  to  shoot  and    hit   any  marke  with  his 
Destriers     arrowes.      Divers   have    beene  scene,  who  standing  on  their 
heads,  and  with  their  legs  out-stretched  aloft,  having  many 
sharp-pointed    cimitaries   fastned   round  about  the  saddle, 
to  gallop  a  full  speed.      While  I  was  a  young  lad,  I  saw 
the    Prince    of    Sulmona   at   Naples,  manage  a   young,  a 
rough   and   fierce   horse,   and   shew   all    manner    of  horse 
manship  ;    To  hold  testons,  or  reals  under  his  knees 
and  toes,  so  fast,  as  if  they  had  beene  nayled 
there,  and  all  to  shew  his  sure,  steady, 
and   unmoveable   sitting. 


THE    FORTY-NINTH    CHAPTER 

Of  ancient  customes. 


WOULD  willingly  excuse  our  people  for 
having  no  other  patterne  or  rule  of  per 
fection,  but  his  owne  customes,  his  owne 
fashions:  For,  it  is  a  common  vice,  not 
only  in  the  vulgar  sort,  but  as  it  were  in 
all  men,  to  bend  their  ayme,  and  frame 
their  thoughts  unto  the  fashions,  wherein 
they  were  borne.  I  am  pleased  when  he 
shall  see  Fabricius  or  Lselius,  who  because  they  are  neither 
attired,  nor  fashioned  according  to  our  manner,  that  he 
condemne  their  countenance  to  be  strange,  and  their  cariage 
barbarous.  But  I  bewaile  his  particular  indiscretion,  in 
that  he  suffereth  himselfe  to  be  so  blinded,  and  deceived  by 
the  authoritie  of  present  custome,  and  that  if  custome 
pleaseth,  he  is  ready  to  change  opinion,  and  varie  advice, 
every  moneth,  nay  every  day,  and  judgeth  so  diversly  of 
himselfe.  When  he  wore  short-wasted  doublets,  and  but 
little  lower  then  his  breast,  he  would  maintaine  by  militant 
reasons,  that  the  waste  was  in  his  right  place :  but  when  not 
long  after  he  came  to  weare  them  so  longwasted,  yea  almost 


THE    FIRST   BOOKE 

so  low  as  his  privities,  than  began  he  to  condemne  the  former  CHAPTER 
fashion,  as  fond,  intolerable  and  deformed  ;  and  to  commend        XLIX 
the  latter,  as  comely,  handsome,  and  commendable.     A  new    (  f  ancient 
fashion  of  apparell  creepeth  no  sooner  into  use,  but  presently 
he   blameth,  and   dispraiseth    the    old,   and   that   with    so 
earnest  a   resolution,    and    universall  a  consent,    that   you 
would  say,  it  is  some  kind  of  madnesse,  or  selfe  fond  humor, 
that  giddieth  his  understanding. 

And  forasmuch  as  our  changing  or  altering  of  fashions, 
is  so  sudden  and  new-fangled,  that  the  inventions,  and  new 
devices  of  all  the  tailors  in  the  world,  cannot  so  fast  in 
vent  novelties,  it  must  necessarily  follow,  that  neglected 
and  stale  rejected  fashions  doe  often  come  into  credit  and 
use  againe  :  And  the  latest  and  newest,  within  a  while  after 
come  to  be  outcast  and  despised,  and  that  one  selfe-same 
judgement  within  the  space  of  fifteene  or  twentie  yeares 
admitteth,  not  only  two  or  three  different,  but  also  cleane 
contrarie  opinions,  with  so  light  and  incredible  inconstancie, 
that  any  man  would  wonder  at  it.  There  is  no  man  so 
suttle-crafty  amongst  us,  that  suffreth  not  himselfe  to  be 
enveigled  and  over-reached  by  this  contradiction,  and  that 
is  not  insensibly  dazeled,  both  with  his  inward  and  externall 
eies.  I  will  heere  huddle-up  some  few  ancient  fashions 
that  I  remember  :  Some  of  them  like  unto  ours,  other-some 
farre  differing  from  them  :  To  the  end,  that  having  ever 
this  continuall  variation  of  humane  things  in  our  minde, 
we  may  the  better  enlighten  and  confirme  our  transported 
judgement.  That  manner  of  fight  which  we  use  now  adaies 
with  rapier  and  cloke,  was  also  used  among  the  Romans, 
as  saith  Caesar.  Sinistris  sagos  involvunt,  gladiosque  CALS.  Bel.  Civ. 
distringunt :  '  They  wrap  their  left  armes  in  their  clokes, i- 
'  and  draw  their  swords.1  We  may  to  this  day  observe  this 
vice  to  be  amongst  us,  and  which  we  have  taken  from  them, 
that  is,  to  stay  such  passengers  as  we  meet  by  the  way, 
and  force  them  to  tell  us,  who  they  are,  whence  they  come, 
whither  they  goe,  and  to  count  it  as  an  injurie,  and  cause 
of  quarrell,  if  they  refuse  to  answer  our  demand.  In  Baths, 
which  our  forefathers  used  daily  before  meales,  as  ordinarily 
as  we  use  water  to  wash  our  hands,  when  first  they  came 
into  them,  they  washed  but  their  armes  and  legges,  but 

343 


customes 


MART.  ii. 
Epig.  Ixii.  I. 


IB.  vi.  Epig. 
xciii.  9. 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  afterward  (which  custome  lasted  many  after-ages  ;  and  to  this 
XLIX  day  continueth  amongst  divers  nations  of  the  world)  their 
wno^e  body  over,  with  compounded  and  perfumed  waters, 
in  such  sort  as  they  held  it  as  a  great  testimonie  of  sim- 
plicitie,  to  wash  themselves  in  pure  and  uncompounded 
water  :  Such  as  were  most  delicate,  and  effeminate,  were 
wont  to  perfume  their  whole  bodies  over  and  over,  three 
or  foure  times  every  day ;  And  often  (as  our  French  women 
have  lately  taken  up)  to  picke  and  snip  out  the  haires  of 
their  forehead,  so  they  of  all  their  body. 

Quod  pectus,  quod  crura  tibi,  quod  brachia  vellis. 

That  you  from  breast,  legges,  armes,  the  haire 
Neatly  pull  off  (to  make  them  faire). 

Although  they  had  choice  of  ointments  fit  for  that  purpose. 

Psilotro  nitet,  aut  arida  latet  abdita  creta. 

She  shines  with  ointments  that  make  haire  to  fall, 
Or  with  dry  chalke  she  over-covers  all. 

They  loved  to  lie  soft,  and  on  fine  downe-beds,  alleaging 
lying  on  hard  matresses  as  a  signe  of  patience.  They  fed 
lying  on  their  beds,  neere  after  the  manner  of  the  Turkes 
nowadaies. 

Inde  thoro  pater  JEneas  sic  orsus  ab  alto. 

Father  ^Eneas  thus  gan  say,, 

From  stately  couch  where  then  he  lay. 

And  it  is  reported  of  Cato  Junior,  that  after  the  battell 
of  Pharsalia,  and  that  he  began  to  mourne  and  bewaile  the 
miserable  state  of  the  common- wealth,  and  ill  condition  of 
publike  affaires,  he  ever  eat  sitting  on  the  ground,  folowing 
an  austere,  and  observing  a  strict  kinde  of  life.  The  Beso 
las  manos  was  used  as  a  signe  of  honour  and  humilitie,  only 
toward  great  persons.  If  friends  met,  after  friendly  saluta 
tions,  they  used  to  kisse  one  another,  as  the  Venetians  doe 
at  this  day. 

Gratatusque  darem  cum  dulcibus  oscula  verbis. 


VIRG.  ALn.  ii. 
2. 


OVID.  Pont.iv. 
EL  ix.  13. 


344 


Give  her  I  would  with  greetings  graced, 
Kisses  with  sweet  words  enterlaced. 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

And  in  saluting  or  suing  to  any  great  man,  they  touched  CHAPTER 
his  knees.  Pasicles  the  Philosopher,  brother  unto  Crates,  com-  XLIX 
ming  to  salute  one,  wheras  he  should  have  carried  his  hand  * 
to  his  knee,  carried  the  same  unto  his  genitories  :  The  partie 
saluted,  having  rudely  push't  him  away  ;  'What?1  quoth  he, 
6  is  not  that  part  yours  as  well  as  the  other  ?'  Their  manner 
of  feeding  was  as  ours,  their  fruit  last.  They  were  wont  to 
wipe  their  tailes  (this  vaine  superstition  of  words  must  be  left 
unto  women)  with  a  sponge,  and  that's  the  reason  why 
Spongia  in  Latine  is  counted  an  obscene  word  :  which  sponge 
was  ever  tied  to  the  end  of  a  staffe,  as  witnesseth  the  storie 
of  him,  that  was  carried  to  be  devoured  of  the  wild  beasts 
before  the  people,  who  desiring  leave  to  goe  to  a  privie 
before  his  death,  and  having  no  other  meanes  to  kill  himselfe, 
thrust  downe  the  sponge  and  staffe,  hee  found  in  the  privie, 
into  his  throte,  wherewith  he  choked  himselfe.  Having 
ended  the  delights  of  nature,  they  were  wont  to  wipe  their 
privities  with  perfumed  wooll. 

At  tibinilfaciam,  sed  lotd  mentula  land.  MART.  xi. 

To  thee  no  such  thing  will  I  bring,  Eplg'  h<  "' 

But  with  wash't  wooll  another  thing. 

In  every  street  of  Rome  were  placed  tubs,  and  such  vessels 
for  passengers  to  make  water  in. 

Pusi  scepe  lacum  propter ,  se  ac  dolia  curta  LucR.iv.  1018. 

Somno  dejuncti  credunt  extollere  vestem. 

Children  asleepe  oft  thinke  they  take  up  all 
Neere  to  some  pissing  tub,  some  lake,  some  wall. 

They  used  to  breake  their  fast,  and  nonchion  betweene 
meales,  and  all  summer  time,  had  men  that  sold  snowe  up  and 
downe  the  streets,  wherewith  they  refreshed  their  wines ;  of 
whom  some  were  so  daintie,  that  all  winter  long  they  used  to 
put  snow  into  their  wine,  not  deeming  it  cold  enough.  Prin- 
cipall,  and  noble  men  had  their  cup-bearers,  tasters,  carvers 
and  buffons  to  make  them  merrie.  In  Winter  their  viandes 
were  brought  and  set  on  the  boord  upon  arches,  as  we  use 
chafing  dishes  ;  and  had  portable  kitchins  (of  which  I  have 
scene  some)  wherein  might  be  drawne,  wheresoever  one  list, 
a  whole  service  and  messe  of  meat. 

2  T  345 


CHAPTER 
XLIX 

Of  ancient 
customes 

MART.  vii. 
Epig.  xlvii.5. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

Has  vobis  epulas  habete  lauti, 
Nos  offendimur  ambulante  ccena. 

Take  you  daintie-mouth'd  such  stirring  feasts  ; 
With  walking  meales  we  are  offended  guests. 

And  in  summer  they  often  caused  cold  water  (being 
carried  through  pipes)  to  drill  upon  them  as  they  sate  in  their 
dining-chambers,  or  lowe  parlers,  where  in  cesterns,  they 
kept  store  of  fish  alive,  which  the  by-stand  ers  might  at  their 
pleasure,  chuse  and  take  with  their  hands,  and  have  it  drest 
every  man  according  to  his  fantasie.  Fish  hath  ever  had 
this  privilege,  as  at  this  day  it  hath ;  that  chiefe  Gentlemen, 
are  pleased,  and  have  skill  to  dress-it  best :  And  to  say 
truth,  the  taste  of  fish  is  much  more  delicat  and  exquisit, 
than  that  of  flesh,  at  least  in  mine.  But  in  all  manner  of 
magnificence,  delitiousnes,  riotous  gluttonie,  inventions  of 
voluptuousnes,  wantonnes,  and  sumptuositie,  we  truly  en- 
devour,  as  much  as  may  be,  to  equall  and  come  neere  them  : 
For,  our  will  and  taste  is  as  much  corrupted  as  theirs,  but 
our  skill,  and  sufficiencie  is  farre  short  of  them :  Our  wit  is 
no  more  capable,  and  our  strength  no  more  able  to  approach 
and  match  them  in  these  vitious  and  blame-worthy  parts, 
than  in  vertuous  and  commendable  actions  :  For,  both  pro- 
ceede  from  a  vigor  of  spirit,  and  farre-reaching  wit ;  which, 
without  comparison,  was  much  greater  in  them,  than  now  in 
us.  And  mindes,  by  how  much  more  strong,  and  excellent 
they  are,  so  much  lesse  facultie  and  meanes  have  they,  to 
doe,  either  excellently  well,  or  notoriously  ill.  The  chiefest 
aime  amongst  them,  was  a  meane  or  mediocrity.  The 
Foremost  or  Last,  in  writing  or  speaking,  had  no  signification 
of  preheminence  or  greatnes,  as  may  evidently  appeare  by 
their  writings.  They  would  as  familiarly  and  as  soone  say, 
Oppius  and  Caesar,  as  Caesar  and  Oppius;  and  as  indifferently, 
I  and  thou,  as  thou  and  I.  And  that 's  the  reason  why  I 
have  heretofore  noted  in  the  life  of  Flaminius,  in  our  French 
Plutarke,  a  place,  where  it  seemeth  that  the  Author,  speak 
ing  of  the  jealousie  of  glorie,  that  was  betweene  the^Etolians 
and  the  Romans,  for  the  gaine  of  a  battell,  which  they  had 
obtained  in  common,  maketh  for  the  purpose,  that  in  Greeke 
songs  the  ^Etolians  were  named  before  the  Romans,  except 
there  bee  some  Amphibology  in  the  French  words  :  for,  in 
346 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

that  toung  I  reade  it.     When  Ladies  came  unto  stoves  or  CHAPTER 
hot-houses,  they  made  it  not  daintie  to  admit  men  into  their        XLIX 
companie,  and  to  be  washed,  rubbed,  chafed  and  annointed 
by  the  hands  of  their  groomes  and  pages. 

Inguina  succinctus  nigra  tibi  servus  alutd  MART.  vii. 

— Slat,  quoties  calidis  nudafoveris  cequis.  Epig.  xxxiv.  i. 

Your  man,  whose  loynes  blacke-lether  gird's,  stand's-by_, 
Whilst  in  warme  water  you  starke-naked  lie. 

They  also  used  to  sprinkle  themselves  all  over  with 
certaine  powders,  thereby  to  alay  and  represse  all  manner  of 
filth  or  sweat.  The  ancient  Gaules  (saith  Sidonius  Apolli- 
naris)  wore  their  haire  long  before,  and  all  the  hinder  part 
of  their  head  shaven,  a  fashion  that  our  wanton  youths  and 
effeminate  gallants,  have  lately  renued,  and  in  this  new 
fangled  and  fond-doting  age,  brought  up  againe,  with  wear 
ing  of  long-dangling  locks  before.  The  ancient  Romans, 
paid  the  water-men  their  fare  or  due  so  soone  as  they  came 
into  the  boat,  whereas  we  pay  it  when  they  set  us  on  shore. 

— dum  as  exigitur,  dum  mula  ligatur,  HOR.  i.  Sat.  v. 

Tota  abit  hora.  13- 

While  they  call  for  their  fare,  tie  drawe-mule  to, 
There  runs  away,  a  full  houre,  if  not  two. 

Women  were  wont  to  lie  on  the  utmost  side  of  the  bed,  and 

therefore  was  Caesar  called  Sponda  Regis  Nicomedis  :  '  King  SUET./W/.  Cas. 

6  Nicomedes  his  beds  side':  They  tooke  breath  while  they  c-  49- 

were  drinking,  and  used  to  baptise,  or  put  water  in  their 

wines. 

— quis  puer  ocius  HOR.  ii.  Od. 

Restinguet  ardenlis  falerni  xi.  18. 

Pocula  prtstereunte  limphd  ? 

What  boy  of  mine  or  thine 

Shall  coole  our  cup  of  wine 

With  running  water  fine  ? 

Those  cousening  and  minde-deceiving  countenances  of  lakeis 

were  also  amongst  them. 

0  lane,  a  tergo  quern  nulla  ciconia  pinsit  PERS.  Sat.  i. 

Nee  manus  auriculas  imitata  est  mobilis  albas,  58. 

Nee  linguce  quantum  sitiet  canis  Apula  tantum. 
O  lanus,  whom  behinde  no  Storks-bill  doth  deride, 
Nor  nimble  hand  resembling  mak's  eares  white  and  wide 
Nor  so  much  tongue  liTd  out  as  dogges  with  thirst  ore- 
dride. 

347 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER       The  Argian  and  Romane  Ladies,  mourned   in  white,  as 
XLIX       our  dames  wont  to  doe;   and  if  I  might  be  credited,  and 
f  ancient       beare-sway  amongst  them,  they  should  continue  it  still. 
But  because  there  are  many  bookes,  that  treat  of  this 
argument,  I  will  say  no  more  of  it. 


customes 


THE    FIFTIETH    CHAPTER 

Of  Democritus  and  Heraclitus. 


UDGEMENT  is  an  instrument  for  all  sub 
jects,  and  medleth  every  where,  And 
therefore  in  the  Essayes  I  make  of  it, 
there  is  no  maner  of  occasion,  I  seeke  not 
to  employ  therein.  If  it  be  a  subject  I 
understand  not  my  selfe,  therein  I  make 
triall  of  it,  sounding  afarre  off  the  depth 
of  the  ford,  and  finding  the  same  over 
deepe  for  my  reach,  I  keepe  my  selfe  on  the  shoare.  And 
to  acknowledge  not  to  be  able  to  wade  through,  is  a  part  of 
it's  effect,  yea  of  such,  whereof  he  vanteth  most.  If  I  light 
upon  a  vaine  and  idle  subject,  I  assay  to  trie,  and  endevour 
to  see,  whether  I  may  find  a  good  ground  to  worke  upon, 
and  matter  to  frame  a  body,  and  wherewith  to  build  and 
under-lay  it.  Sometimes  I  addresse  my  judgement  and 
contrive  it  to  a  noble  and  out-worne  subject,  wherein  is 
nothing  found  subsisting  of  it  selfe,  the  high  way  to  it,  being 
so  bare-trodden,  that  it  cannot  march,  but  in  other  steps. 
There  he  pleaseth  himselfe  in  chusing  the  course  he  thinkes 
best,  and  a  thousand  paths  sometimes  he  saith,  this  or  that 
was  best  chosen.  I  take  my  first  Argument  of  fortune  :  All 
are  alike  unto  me :  And  I  never  purpose  to  handle  them 
throughly :  For,  there  is  nothing  wherein  I  can  perceive  the 
full  perfection  :  Which  they  doe  not  that  promise  to  shew 
it  us.  Of  a  hundred  parts  and  visages  that  every  thing 
hath,  I  take  one,  which  sometimes  I  slightly  runne  over,  and 
other  times  but  cursorily  glance  at.  And  yet  other  whilst 
I  pinch  it  to  the  quicke.  And  give  it  a  Stockado,  not  the 
widest,  but  the  deepest  I  can.  And  for  the  most  part  I 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

love  to  seize  upon  them  by  some  unwonted  lustre.     I  would  CHAPTER 
adventure  to  treat  and  discourse  of  some  matter  to  the  ^ 

depth ;  knew  I  my  selfe  lesse,  or  were  I  deceived  in  mine  ^tus^and 
owne  impuissance  ;  Scattering  here  one  and  there  another  Heraclitus 
word  :  Scantlings  taken  from  their  maine  ground-work,  dis 
orderly  dispersed,  without  any  well-grounded  designe  and 
promise.  I  am  not  bound  to  make  it  good,  nor  without 
varying  to  keepe  my  selfe  close-tied  unto  it ;  whensoever  it 
shall  please  me  to  yeeld  my  selfe  to  doubt,  to  uncertaintie, 
and  to  my  Mistris  forme,  which  is  ignorance.  Each  motion 
sheweth  and  discovereth  what  we  are.  The  very  same  minde 
of  Caesar,  we  see  in  directing,  marshalling,  and  setting  the 
battel  of  Pharsalia,  is  likewise  scene  to  order,  dispose,  and 
contrive,  idle,  trifling  and  amorous  devices.  We  judge  of  a 
horse,  not  only  by  seeing  him  ridden,  and  cunningly  managed, 
but  also  by  seeing  him  trot,  or  pace  ;  yea,  if  we  but  looke 
upon  him  as  he  stands  in  the  stable.  Amongst  the  functions 
of  the  soule,  some  are  but  mearie  and  base.  He  that  seeth 
her  no  further,  can  never  know  her  thorowly.  And  he  that 
seeth  her  march  her  naturall  and  simple  pace,  doth  per- 
adventure  observe  her  best.  The  winds  of  passions  take  her 
most  in  her  highest  pitch,  seeing  she  entirely  coucheth  her- 
selfe  upon  every  matter,  and  wholy  therein  exerciseth  her- 
selfe :  and  handleth  but  one  at  once ;  not  according  to  it, 
but  according  to  herselfe.  Things  severall  in  themselves 
have  peradventure,  weight,  measure,  and  condition  :  But 
inwardly,  in  us,  she  cuts  it  out  for  them,  as  she  understandeth 
the  same  herselfe.  Death  is  fearefull  and  ugly  unto  Cicero ; 
wished  for  and  desired  of  Cato  :  and  indifferent  unto  Socrates. 
Health,  well-fare,  conscience,  authoritie,  riches,  glorie,beautie, 
and  their  contraries  are  dispoyled  at  the  entrance,  and 
receive  a  new  vesture  at  the  soules  hand.  Yea,  and  what 
coulour  she  pleaseth  ;  browne,  bright,  greene,  sad,  or  any 
hew  else :  sharpe  or  sweete,  deepe  or  superficiall,  and  what 
each  of  them  pleaseth.  For  none  of  them  did  ever  verifie 
their  stiles,  their  rules,  or  formes  in  common ;  each  one 
severally  is  a  Queene  in  her  owne  estate.  Therefore  let  us 
take  no  more  excuses  from  externall  qualities  of  things.  To 
us  it  belongeth  to  give  our  selves  accoumpt  of  it.  Our  good, 
and  our  evill  hath  no  dependancy,  but  from  our  selves.  Let 

349 


Heraclitus 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  us  offer  our  vowes  and  offerings  unto  it  ;  and  not  to  fortune. 
L  She   hath  no  power  over  our  manners.     Why  shall  I  not 

Of  Demo-  jucjge  of  Alexander,  as  I  am  sitting  and  drinking  at  Table, 
anc^  talking  in  good  company  ?  Or  if  hee  were  playing  at 
Chesse,  what  string  of  his  wit  doth  not  touch  or  harpe  on 
this  fond-childish,  and  time-consuming  play  ?  I  lothe  and 
shun  it,  only  because  there  is  not  sport  enough  in  it,  and 
that  in  his  recreation,  he  is  over  serious  with  us,  being 
ashamed  I  must  apply  that  attention  therunto,  as  might  be 
imployed  on  some  good  subject.  He  was  no  more  busied  in 
levying  his  forces  and  preparing  for  his  glorious  passage  into 
India  ;  nor  this  other  in  disintangling  and  discovering  of  a 
passage,  whence  dependeth  the  well-fare  and  safety  of  man 
kind.  See  how  much  our  mind  troubleth  this  ridiculous 
ammuzing,  if  all  her  sinnewes  bandy  not.  How  amply  she 
giveth  every  one  Law  in  that,  to  know  and  directly  to  judge 
of  himselfe.  I  doe  not  more  universally  view  and  feele  my 
selfe  in  any  other  posture.  What  passion  doth  not  exercise 
us  thereunto  ?  Choller,  spight,  hatred,  impatience,  and 
vehement  ambition  to  overcome,  in  a  matter  wherein  it  were 
haply  more  excusable  to  be  ambitious  for  to  be  vanquished. 
For,  a  rare  pre-excellencie,  and  beyond  the  common  reach, 
in  so  frivolous  a  thing,  is  much  mis-seeming  a  man  of 
honour.  What  I  say  of  this  example,  may  be  spoken  of  all 
others.  Every  parcell,  every  occupation  of  a  man,  accuseth, 
and  sheweth  him  equal  unto  another.  Democritus  and 
Heraclitus  were  two  Philosophers,  the  first  of  which,  finding 
and  deeming  humane  condition  to  be  vaine  and  ridiculous, 
did  never  walke  abroad,  but  with  a  laughing,  scorneful  and 
mocking  countenance  :  Whereas  Heraclitus  taking  pitie  and 
compassion  of  the  very  same  condition  of  ours,  was  con 
tinually  scene  with  a  sad,  mournfull,  and  heavie  cheere,  and 
with  teares  trickling  downe  his  blubbered  eyes. 

JUVEN.  Sat.  x.  —  Alter 

28.  Ridebat  quoties  a  limine  mover  at  unum 

Protuleratque  pedem,  flebat  contrarius  alter. 

One  from  his  doore,  his  foot  no  sooner  past, 
But  straight  he  laught  ;  the  other  wept  as  fast. 

I  like  the  first  humor  best,  not  because  it  is  more  pleasing 
350 


Heraclitus 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

to  laugh,  than  to  weepe  ;  but  for  it  is  more  disdainfull,  and  CHAPTER 
doth  more  condemne  us  than  the  other.     And  me  thinkes  L 

we  can   never   bee    sufficiently  despised,  according;   to    our          Demo- 
•  ,        -r»         •*•  i  •          ,•  •       i       •,!       critus  and 

merit.     Bewailing   and   commiseration,  are  commixed  with 

some  estimation  of  the  thing  moaned  and  wailed.  Things 
scorned  and  contemned,  are  thought  to  be  of  no  worth.  I 
cannot  be  perswaded,  there  can  be  so  much  ill  lucke  in  us, 
as  there  is  apparant  vanitie,  nor  so  much  malice,  as  sottish- 
nesse.  We  are  not  so  full  of  evill,  as  of  voydnesse  and  in- 
anitie.  We  are  not  so  miserable,  as  base  and  abject.  Even 
so  Diogenes,  who  did  nothing  but  trifle,  toy,  and  dally  with 
himselfe,  in  rumbling  and  rowling  of  his  tub,  and  flurting  at 
Alexander,  accompting  us  but  flies,  and  bladders  puft  with 
winde,  was  a  more  sharp,  a  more  bitter,  and  a  more  stinging 
judge,  and  by  consequence,  more  just  and  fitting  my  humor, 
than  Timon,  surnamed  the  hater  of  all  mankinde.  For 
looke  what  a  man  hateth,  the  same  thing  he  takes  to  hart. 
Timon  wisht  all  evill  might  light  on  us  ;  He  was  passionate 
in  desiring  our  ruine.  He  shunned  and  loathed  our  con 
versation,  as  dangerous  and  wicked,  and  of  a  depraved 
nature  :  Whereas  the  other  so  little  regarded  us,  that  wee 
could  neither  trouble  nor  alter  him  by  our  contagion  ;  for- 
sooke  our  company,  not  for  feare,  but  for  disdaine  of  our 
commerce  :  He  never  thought  us  capable  or  sufficient  to  doe 
either  good  or  evill.  Of  the  same  stampe  was  the  answer  oi 
Statilius  to  whom  Brutus  spake  to  win  him  to  take  part, 
and  adhere  to  the  conspiracie  against  Caesar:  He  allowed 
the  enterprize  to  be  very  just,  but  disalowed  of  the  men 
that  should  performe  the  same,  as  unworthy  that  any  man 
should  put  himself  in  any  adventure  for  them  :  Conformable 
to  the  discipline  of  Hegesias,  who  said,  'That  a  wise  man 
'  ought  never  to  doe  any  thing,  but  for  himselfe  '  ;  foras 
much  as  he  alone  is  worthy  to  have  any  action  performed 
for  him  :  and  to  that  of  Theodorus,  6  who  thought  it  an  in- 
4  justice,  that  a  wise  man  should  in  any  case  hazard  him- 
4  selfe  for  the  good  and  benefit  of  his  countrie,  or  to 
'  indanger  his  wisdome  for  fooles.'  Our  owne  con 
dition  is  as  ridiculous,  as  risible;  as  much 
to  be  laught  at,  as  able  to  laugh. 


351 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

THE    FIFTY-FIRST    CHAPTER 

Of  the  vanitie  of  Words. 

RETHORICIAN  of  ancient  times,  said, 
that  his  trade  was,  to  make  small  things 
appeare  and  seeme  great.  It  is  a  shooe- 
maker,  that  can  make  great  shooes  for  a 
little  foot.  Had  hee  lived  in  Sparta,  he 
had  doubtlesse  beene  well  whipped,  for 
professing  a  false,  a  couzening  and  deceit- 
full  art.  And  I  thinke,  Archidamus  King 
of  that  Citie  did  not  without  astonishment  listen  unto  the 
answer  of  Thucydides,  of  whom  he  demanded,  whether  he, 
or  Pericles,  was  the  strongest  and  nimblest  wrestler ;  whose 
answer  was  this,  '  Your  question  Sir,  is  very  hard  to  be 
6  decided  ;  for  if  in  wrestling  with  him,  I  give  him  a  fall, 
'  with  his  faire  words  he  perswadeth  those  that  saw  him  on 
'  the  ground,  that  he  never  fell,  and  so  gets  the  victorie.1 
Those  that  maske  and  paint  women,  commit  not  so  foule  a 
fault ;  for  it  is  no  great  losse,  though  a  man  see  them  not, 
as  they  were  naturally  borne  and  unpainted  :  Whereas  these 
professe  to  deceive  and  beguile,  not  our  eies,  but  our  judge 
ment  ;  and  to  bastardize  and  corrupt  the  essence  of  things. 
Those  common-wealths,  that  have  maintained  themselves  in 
a  regular,  formal,  and  well  governed  estate,  as  that  of  Creete 
and  Lacedemon,  did  never  make  any  great  esteeme  of 
Orators.  Ariston  did  wisely  define  Rhetorike  'to  be  a 
'  Science,  to  perswade  the  vulgar  people ' :  Socrates  and 
Plato,  'to  be  an  Art  to  deceive  and  flatter.'  And  those 
which  denie  it  in  the  generall  description,  doe  every  where 
in  their  precepts  verifie  the  same.  The  Mahometans,  by 
reason  of  it's  inutilitie,  forbid  the  teaching  of  it  to  their 
children.  And  the  Athenians,  perceiving  how  pernicious 
the  profession  and  use  thereof  was,  and  of  what  credit  in 
their  Citie,  ordained,  that  their  principall  part,  which  is  to 
move  affections,  should  be  dismissed  and  taken  away,  together 
with  all  exordiums  and  perorations.  It  is  an  instrument 
devised,  to  busie,  to  manage,  and  to  agitate  a  vulgar  and 
352 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

disordered  multitude;  and  is  an  implement  imployed,  but  CHAPTER 
about  distempered  and  sicke  mindes,  as  Physicke  is  about 
crazed  bodies.  And  those  where  either  the  vulgar,  the 
ignorant,  or  the  generalitie  have  had  all  power,  as  that  of 
Rhodes,  those  of  Athens,  and  that  of  Rome,  and  where 
things  have  ever  beene  in  continuall  disturbance  and  up- 
roare,  thither  have  Orators  and  the  professors  of  that  Art 
flocked.  And  verily,  if  it  be  well  looked  into,  you  shall 
finde  very  few  men  in  those  common-wealths,  that  without 
helpe  of  eloquence  have  attained  to  any  worthy  estimation 
and  credit :  Pompey,  Caesar,  Crassus,  Lucullus,  Lentulus, 
Metellus,  have  thence  taken  their  greatest  stay  and  further 
ance,  whereby  they  have  ascended  unto  that  height  and 
greatnesse  of  authoritie,  whereunto  they  at  last  attained, 
and  against  the  opinion  of  better  times  have  more  prevailed 
with  words  than  with  armes.  For,  L.  Volumnius  speaking 
publikely  in  favour  of  the  election,  which  some  had  made 
of  Quintus  Fabius,  and  Publius  Decius,  to  be  Consuls ;  saith 
thus ;  '  They  are  men  borne  unto  warre,  of  high  spirits,  of 
'  great  performance,  and  able  to  effect  any  thing,  but  rude, 
'  simple,  and  unarted  in  the  combat  of  talking ;  minds  truly 
6  consulare.  They  only  are  good  Pretors,  to  do  justice  in  the 
'  Citie '  (saith  he)  '  that  are  subtile,  cautelous,  well-spoken, 
'  wily  and  lip- wise.1  Eloquence  hath  chiefly  flourished  in 
Rome  when  the  common- wealths  affaires  have  beene  in 
worst  estate,  and  that  the  devouring  Tempest  of  civill 
broyles,  and  intestine  warres  did  most  agitate  and  turmoyle 
them.  Even  as  a  rancke,  free  and  untamed  soyle,  beareth 
the  rankest  and  strongest  weeds,  whereby  it  seemeth  that 
those  common-weales,  which  depend  of  an  absolute  Monarch, 
have  lesse  need  of  it  than  others :  For,  that  foolishnesse  and 
facilitie,  which  is  found  in  the  common  multitude,  and  which 
doth  subject  the  same,  to  be  managed,  perswaded,  and  led 
by  the  eares,  by  the  sweet  alluring  and  sense-entrancing 
sound  of  this  harmonic,  without  duely  weighing,  knowing,  or 
considering  the  trueth  of  things  by  the  force  of  reason  : 
This  facilitie  and  easie  yeelding,  I  say,  is  not  so  easily  found 
in  one  only  ruler,  and  it  is  more  easie  to  warrant  him  from 
the  impression  of  this  poyson,  by  good  institution  and  sound 
counsell.  There  was  never  scene  any  notable  or  farre- 
2U  353 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  renowned  Orator  to  come  out  of  Macedon  or  Persia.  What 
LI  I  have  spoken  of  it,  hath  beene  upon  the  subject  of  an 

Of  *h^ai\ltie  Italian,  whom  I  have  lately  entertained  into  my  service. 
Who  during  the  life  of  the  whilom  cardinal  Caraffa  served 
him  in  the  place  of  steward  of  his  house.  Enquiring  of  his 
charge,  and  particular  qualitie,  he  told  me,  a  long,  formall, 
and  eloquent  discourse  of  the  science  or  skill  of  epicurisme 
and  gluttonie,  with  such  an  Oratorie-gravitie,  and  Magis- 
trale  countenance,  as  if  he  had  discoursed  of  some  high 
mysterious  point  of  divinitie,  wherein  he  hath  very  methodi 
cally  decifred  and  distinguished  sundrie  differences  of  appe 
tites  :  First  of  that  which  a  man  hath  fasting,  then  of  that 
men  have  after  the  first,  the  second,  and  third  service.  The 
severall  means  how  sometimes  to  please  it  simply,  and  other 
times  to  sharpen  and  provoke  the  same  ;  the  policie  and  rare 
invention  of  his  sawces :  First,  in  general  terms,  then  par 
ticularizing  the  qualities  and  severall  operations  of  the 
ingredients,  and  their  effects :  The  differences  of  salad es 
according  to  their  distinct  seasons,  which  must  be  served  in 
warme,  and  which  cold :  The  manner  how  to  dresse,  how  to 
adorne,  and  embellish  them,  to  make  them  more  pleasing  to 
the  sight.  After  that,  he  entred  into  a  large  and  farre- 
fetcht  narration,  touching  the  true  order,  and  due  method 
of  service,  full  of  goodly  and  important  considerations. 

JUVEN.  Sat.  v.  — Nee  minima  sane  discrimine  refert, 

I27-  Quo  gestu  lepores,  et  quo  gallina  secetur. 

What  grace  we  use,  it  makes  small  difference,  when 
We  carve  a  Hare,  or  else  breake  up  a  Hen. 

And  all  that,  filled  up  and  stuffed  with  rich  magnificent 
words,  well  couched  phrases,  oratorie  figures,  and  patheti- 
call  metaphors ;  yea  such  as  learned  men  use  and  imploy  in 
speaking  of  the  Government  of  an  Empire,  which  made  me 
remember  my  man. 

TER.  AdeL  act.  Hoc  salsum  est,  hoc  adustum  est,  hoc  lautum  est  parum, 

iii.  sc.  iv.  62.  Ulud  recte,  iterum  sic  memento,  sedulb, 

Moneo  quce  possum  pro  mea  sapientia. 
Postremb  tanquam  in  speculum,  in  patinas,  Demer, 
Inspicere  jubeo,  et  moneo  quid  facto  usus  sit. 
354 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

This  dish  is  salt,  this  burnt,  this  not  so  fine,  CHAPTER 

That  is  well  done,  doe  so  againe  ;  Thus  I  LI 

As  my  best  wisdome  serves,  all  things  assigne.  Of  the  vanitie 

Lastly  Sir,  I  command.,  they  neatly  prie,  of  Words 

On  dishes,  as  a  glasse, 

And  shew  what  needfull  was. 

Yet  did  those  strict  Graecians  commend  the  order  and 
disposition,  which  Paulus  ^Emilius  observed  in  the  banquet 
he  made  them  at  his  returne  from  Macedon :  But  here  I 
speake  not  of  the  effects,  but  of  the  \vords.  I  know  not 
whether  they  worke  that  in  others,  which  they  doe  in  mee. 
But  when  I  heare  our  Architects  mouth-out  those  big,  and 
ratling  words  of  Pilasters,  Architraves,  Comixes,  Frontis- 
pices,  Corinthian,  and  Dorike  works,  and  such  like  fustian- 
termes  of  theirs,  I  cannot  let  my  wandering  imagination 
from  a  sodaine  apprehension  of  Apollidonius  his  pallace,  and 
I  find  by  effect,  that  they  are  the  seely,  and  decayed  peeces 
of  my  Kitchin-doore.  Doe  but  heare  one  pronounce  Metony- 
mia,  Metaphore.  Allegory,  Etimologie,  and  other  such  trash- 
names  of  Grammer,  would  you  not  thinke,  they  meant  some 
forme  of  a  rare  and  strange  language ;  They  are  titles  and 
words  that  concerne  your  chamber-maids  tittle-tattle.  It  is 
a  fopperie  and  cheating  tricke,  cousin-Germane  unto  this, 
to  call  the  offices  of  our  estate  by  the  proud  titles  of  the 
ancient  Romans,  though  they  have  no  resemblance  at  all  of 
charge,  and  lesse  of  authoritie  and  power.  And  this  like 
wise,  which  in  mine  opinion  will  one  day  remaine  as  a 
reproch  unto  our  age,  unworthily,  and  undeservedly  to 
bestow  on  whom  we  list,  the  most  glorious  Surnames  and 
loftiest  titles,  wherewith  antiquitie  in  many  long-continued 
ages  honoured  but  one  or  two  persons.  Plato  hath  by  such 
an  universall  consent  borne-away  the  surname  of  Divine, 
that  no  man  did  ever  attempt  to  envie  him  for  it.  And  the 
Italians,  which  vaunt  (and  indeed  with  some  reason)  to  have 
generally  more  lively,  and  farre  reaching  wits,  and  their  dis 
course  more  sound  and  sinnowy,  than  other  nations  of  their 
times,  have  lately  therewith  embellished  Peter  Aretine ;  in 
whom  except  it  be  an  high-raised,  proudly-pufft,  mind- 
moving,  and  heart-danting  manner  of  speech,  yet  in  good 
sooth  more  than  ordinarie,  wittie  and  ingenious ;  But  so 

355 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  new  fangled,  so  extravagant,  so  fantastical!,  so  deep-laboured; 
LI  and  to  conclud,  besides  the  eloquence,  which  be  it  as  it  may 

Of  the  vanitie  ^  j  cannot  perceive  any  thing  in  it,  beyond  or  exceeding 
iat  of  many  other  writers  of  his  age,  much  lesse  that  it 
in  any  sort  approacheth  that  ancient  divinitie.     And 
the    surname  Great,  we  attribute  and  fasten  the 
same  on  Princes,  that  have  nothing  in  them 
exceeding  popular  greatnesse. 


of  Words 


THE    FIFTY-SECOND    CHAPTER 

Of  the  parcimonie  of  our  Forefathers. 

TTILIUS  REGULUS,  Generall  of  the 
Romans  armie  in  Affrike,  in  the  middest  of 
his  glorie  and  victorie  against  the  Cartha 
ginians,  writ  unto  the  common- wealth, 
that  a  hyne  or  plough-boy,  whom  he  had 
left  alone  to  oversee  and  husband  his 
land  (which  in  all  was  but  seven  acres  of 
ground)  was  run  away  from  his  charge, 
and  had  stolne  from  him  all  his  implements  and  tools, 
belonging  to  his  husbandrie,  craving  leave  to  be  discharged, 
and  that  he  might  come  home  to  looke  to  his  businesse,  for 
feare  his  wife  and  children  should  therby  be  endomaged : 
the  Senate  tooke  order  for  him,  and  appointed  another  man 
to  looke  to  his  land  and  businesse,  and  made  that  good 
unto  him,  which  the  other  had  stolne  from  him,  and 
appointed  his  wife  and  children  to  be  maintained  at  the 
common-wealths  charge.  Cato  the  elder  returning  Consul 
from  Spaine,  sold  his  horse  of  service,  to  save  the  monie  he 
should  have  spent  for  his  transport  by  sea  into  Italy :  And 
being  chiefe  governor  in  Sardinia,  went  all  his  visitations  a 
foot,  having  no  other  traine,  but  one  officer  of  the  common- 
welth,  who  carried  his  gowne,  and  a  vessell  to  do  sacrifice  in, 
and  for  the  most  part  carried  his  male  himselfe.  He  boasted 
that  he  never  woare  gowne,  that  cost  him  more  than  ten 
crowns,  nor  sent  more  than  one  shilling  sterling  to  the 
market  for  one  whole  daies  provision,  and  had  no  Countrie 
356 


THE   FIRST    BOOKE 

house  rough-cast  or  painted  over.     Scipio  ^Emilianus,  after  CHAPTER 
he  had  triumphed  twice,  and  twice  been  Consull,  went  on  a          LI* 

solemne  Legation,  accompanied  and  attended  on  only  with  Of  t.he  Parci" 
,         TL  •  i     i    .1     i    T-T  11  monie  01  our 

seven  servants.     It  is  reported  that  Homer  had  never  any    Forefathers 

more  than   one    servant,  Plato  three,  and  Zeno   chiefe    of 

the  Stoikes  sect,  none  at  all.     Tiberius  Gracchus,  being  then 

one  of  the  principal  men  amongst  the  Romanes,  and 

sent  in  commission  about  weightie  matters  of  the 

common-wealth,  was  allotted  but  six-pence 

halfe-penie  a  day  for  his  charges. 


THE     FIFTY-THIRD    CHAPTER 

i 
Of  a  saying  of  Caesar. 

F  we  shall  sometimes  ammuse  our  selves  and 
consider  our  estate,  and  the  time  we  spend 
in  controling  others,  and  to  know  the 
things  that  are  without  us  ;  would  we  but 
emploie  the  same  in  sounding  our  selves 
throughly,  we  should  easily  perceive  how 
all  this  our  contexture  is  built  of  weake 
and  decaying  peeces.  Is  it  not  an  especiall 
testimonie  of  imperfection,  that  we  cannot  settle  our  content 
ment  on  any  one  thing,  and  that  even  of  our  owne  desire  and 
imagination,  it  is  beyond  our  power  to  chuse  what  we  stand 
in  need  of?  Whereof  the  disputation  that  hath  ever  beene 
amongst  Philosophers  beareth  sufficient  witnes,  to  finde  out 
the  chiefe  felicitie  or  summum  bonum  of  man,  and  which  yet 
doth,  and  shall  eternally  last  without  resolution  or  agree 
ment. 

— dum  abest  quod  avemus,  id  exuperare  videtur  LUCR.  iii.  25. 

Ccetera,  post  aliud  cum  contiglt  lllud  avemus, 
Et  sitis  aqua  tenet. 

While  that  is  absent  which  we  wish,  the  rest 
That  seemes  to  passe,  when  ought  else  is  addrest, 
That  we  desire,  with  equall  thirst  opprest. 

Whatsoever  it  be  that  falleth  into  our   knowledge  and 
jovissance,  we  finde,  it  doth  not  satisfie  us,  and  we  still  follow 

357 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  gape  after  future,  uncertaine,  and  unknowne  things, 
LIII  because  the  present  and  knowne  please  us  not,  and  doe  not 
satisfie  us-  Not  (as  l  thinke)  because  they  have  not  suffi 
ciently  wherewith  to  satiate  and  please  us,  but  the  reason 
is,  that  we  apprehend  and  seize  on  them  with  an  unruly, 
disordered,  and  diseased  taste  and  hold-fast. 

LUCR.  ix.  Nam  cum  vidit  hie  ad  usum  quceflagitat  usus, 

Omnia  jam  ferme  mortalibus  esse  parata, 
Divitiis  homines  et  honore  et  laude  potentes 
Affluere,  atque  bond  natorum  excellere  famd, 
Nee  minus  esse  domi,  cuiquam  tamen  anocia  corda, 
Atque  animum  infestis  cogi  servire  querelis : 
Intellexit  ibi  vitium  vas  facer e  ipsum, 
Omniaque  illius  vitio  corrumpier  intus 
Quce  collataforis  et  commoda  qua  que  venirent. 
For  when  the  wiseman  saw,  that  all  almost, 
That  use  requires,  for  men  prepared  was, 
That  men  enriches,  honors,  praises  boast, 
In  good  report  of  children  others  passe, 
Yet  none  at  home  did  beare  lesse  pensive  heart, 
But  that  the  minde  was  forst  to  serve  complaint, 
He  knew,  that  fault  the  vessell  did  empart, 
That  all  was  marr'd  within  by  vessels  taint, 
What  ever  good  was  wrought  by  any  art. 

Our  appetite  is  irresolute,  and  uncertaine ;  it  can  neither 
hold    nor    enjoy  any  thing  handsomly  and    after    a    good 
fashion.     Man  supposing  it  is  the  vice  and  fault  of  things 
he  possesseth,  feedeth  and  filleth  himselfe  with  other  things, 
which  he  neither  knoweth,  nor  hath  understanding  of,  where 
to  he  applyeth  both  his  desires  and  hopes,  and  taketh  them 
CES.  Bel  Civ.  as  an  honour  and  reverence  to  himselfe  ;  as  saith  Caesar,  Com- 
"•  muni  Jit  vitio  naturae,  ut  invisis,  latitantibus  atque  incognitis 

rebus   magis   corifidamus,    vehementiusque    exterreamur.     'It 
6  hapneth  by  the  common  fault  of  nature,  that  both  wee 
6  are  more  confident,  and  more  terrified  by  things 
'  unseene,  things  hidden,  and  unknowne.' 


358 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

THE    FIFTY-FOURTH    CHAPTER 

Of  vaine  Subtilties,  or  subtill  Devices. 

[HERE  are  certaine  frivolous  and  vaine 
inventions,  or  as  some  call  them,  subtilties 
of  wit,  by  meanes  of  which,  some  men  doe 
often  endevour  to  get  credit  and  repu 
tation  :  as  divers  Poets,  that  frame  whole 
volumes  with  verses  beginning  with  one 
letter  :  we  see  Egges,  Wings,  Hatchets, 
Crosses,  Globes,  Columnes,  and  divers 
other  such  like  figures  anciently  fashioned  by  the  Graecians, 
with  the  measure  and  proportion  of  their  verses,  spreading, 
lengthning,  and  shortning  them,  in  such  sort  as  they  justly 
represent  such  and  such  a  figure.  Such  was  the  science 
and  profession  of  him,  who  long  time  busied  himselfe,  to 
number  how  many  severall  waies  the  letters  of  the  Alphabet 
might  be  ranged,  and  found  out  that  incredible  number 
mentioned  by  Plutarke.  I  allow  of  his  opinion,  who  having 
one  brought  before  him,  that  was  taught  with  such  industrie, 
and  so  curiously  to  cast  a  graine  of  Millet  with  his  hand,  that 
without  ever  missing,  he  would  every  time  make  it  goe 
through  a  needles-eye  ;  and  being  entreated  to  bestow  some 
thing  upon  him,  (as  a  reward  for  so  rare  a  skill,)  verie 
pleasantly  and  worthily,  commanded  that  this  cunning 
workman  should  have  two  or  three  peckes  of  Millet  delivered 
him,  to  the  end  his  rare  art  and  wittie  labour  might  not 
remaine  without  daily  exercise.  It  is  a  wonderfull  testi- 
monie  of  our  judgements  imbecili  tie,  that  it  should  commend 
and  allow  of  things,  either  for  their  rarenesse  or  noveltie,  or 
for  their  difficultie,  though  neither  goodnesse  or  profit  be 
joyned  unto  them.  We  come  but  now  from  my  house, 
where  we  have  a  while  recreated  our  selves,  with  devising 
who  could  find  out  most  things,  that  held  by  both  extreme 
ends  ;  As  for  example,  Sir,  is  in  our  tongue  a  title  only  given 
to  the  most  eminent  person  of  our  state,  which  is  the  King, 
and  yet  is  commonly  given  to  some  of  the  vulgar  sort,  as 
unto  Merchants  and  Pedlers,  and  nothing  concerneth  those 

359 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  of  the  middle  sort,  and  that  are  betweene  both.     Women  of 
LIV         chiefest  calling  and  qualitie  are  called  Dames,  the  meane  sort 

tifto^r sub  Damoisels>  and  those  of  the  basest  ranke>  are  also  entitled 
till  Devices  Dames.  The  clothes  of  estate,  which  we  see  set  over  tables 
and  chaires,  are  only  allowed  in  Princes  houses,  yet  we  see 
them  used  in  Tavernes.  Democritus  was  wont  to  say,  '  That 
6  Gods  and  beasts,  had  quicker  senses  and  sharper  wits  than 
c  men,  who  are  of  the  middle  ranke.1  The  Romanes  used  to 
weare  one  selfe  same  garment  on  mourning  and  on  festivall 
daies.  It  is  most  certaine,  that  both  an  extreme  feare,  and 
an  exceeding  heat  of  courage,  doe  equally  trouble  and  dis 
temper  the  belly.  The  nick-name  of  Tremblant,  wherewith 
Zanchio  the  twelfth  King  of  Navarre  was  surnamed,  teacheth, 
that  boldnesse,  aswel  as  feare,  engender  a  startling  and 
shaking  of  the  limbs.  Those  which  armed  either  him,  or 
any  other  of  like  nature,  whose  skin  would  quiver,  assaied 
to  re-assure  him,  by  diminishing  the  danger  wherein  he  was 
like  to  fall  ;  you  have  no  perfect  knowledge  of  me  (said  he,) 
for  if  my  flesh  knew  how  far  my  courage  will  ere-long  carrie 
it,  it  would  presently  fall  into  a  flat  swoune.  That  chilnesse, 
or  as  I  may  terme  it,  faintnesse,  which  we  feele  after  the 
exercises  of  Venus,  the  same  doth  also  proceed  of  an  over 
vehement  appetite  and  disordered  heat.  Excessive  heat 
and  extreme  cold  doe  both  boile  and  rost.  Aristotle  saith, 
'  That  leaden  vessels  doe  as  well  melt  and  consume  away  by 
6  an  excessive  cold  and  rigor  of  winter,  as  by  a  vehement 
'  heat."  Both  desire  and  satietie  fill  the  seats  with  sorrow, 
both  above  and  under  voluptuousnesse.  Folly  and  wisdome 
meet  in  one  point  of  feeling  and  resolution,  about  the 
suffering  of  humane  accidents.  The  wiser  sort  doth  gour- 
mondise  and  command  evill,  and  others  know  it  not.  The 
latter,  (as  a  man  would  say)  short  of  accidents,  the  other, 
beyond.  Who  after  they  have  well  weighed  and  considered 
their  qualities,  and  duly  measured,  and  rightly  judged  what 
they  are,  over-leap  them  by  the  power  of  a  vigorous  courage. 
They  disdaine  and  tread  them  under  foot,  as  having  a 
strong  and  solide  mind,  against  which,  if  fortunes  parts 
chance  to  light,  they  must  of  necessitie  be  blunted  and 
abated,  meeting  with  so  resisting  a  body,  as  they  cannot 
pierce,  or  make  any  impression  therein.  The  ordinarie  and 
360 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

meane  condition  of  men  abideth  betweene  these  two  ex-  CHAPTER 
tremities ;  which  are  those  that  perceive  and  have  a  feeling  LIV 
of  mischiefes,  but  cannot  endure  them.  Both  infancie  and  ?£-vame  Su 
decrepitude  meet  with  weaknesse  of  the  braine.  Covetise  till  Devices" 
and  profusion  in  a  like  desire  to  acquire  and  hoard  up.  It 
may  with  likelyhood  be  spoken,  that  there  is  a  kind  of 
Abecedarie  ignorance,  preceding  science :  another  doctoral!, 
following  science :  an  ignorance,  which  science  doth  beget : 
even  as  it  spoileth  the  first.  Of  simple,  lesse-curious,  and 
least-instructed  spirits  are  made  good  Christians,  who  simply 
beleeve  through  reverence  and  obedience,  and  are  kept  in 
awe  of  the  lawes.  In  the  meane  vigor  of  spirits,  and  slender 
capacitie  is  engendred  the  error  of  opinions  :  They  follow 
the  apparance  of  the  first  sense ;  and  have  some  title  to 
interpret  it  foolishnesse  and  sottishnesse,  that  we  are  con 
firmed  in  ancient  waies,  respecting  us,  that  are  nothing 
therein  instructed  by  study.  The  best,  most-setled,  and 
clearest-seeing  spirits,  make  another  sort  of  well-beleevers, 
who  by  long  and  religious  investigation,  penetrate  a  more 
profound,  and  find  out  a  more  abstruse  light  in  scriptures, 
and  discover  the  mysterious  and  divine  secrets  of  our 
ecclesiasticall  policie.  And  therefore  see  we  some  of  them, 
that  have  reached  unto  this  last  ranke,  by  the  second,  with 
wonderfull  fruit  and  confirmation ;  as  unto  the  furthest 
bounds  of  Christian  intelligence  :  and  in  joy  their  victorie 
with  comfort,  thanks-giving,  reformation  of  manners,  and 
great  modesty.  In  which  ranke,  my  purpose  is  not  to  place 
these  others,  who  to  purge  themselves  from  the  suspicion  of 
their  forepassed  errors,  and  the  better  to  assure  us  of  them, 
become  extreme,  indiscreet, and  unjust  in  the  conduct  of  our 
cause,  and  tax  and  taint  the  same  with  infinit  reproches  of 
violence.  The  simple  peasants  are  honest  men :  so  are 
Philosophers,  (or  as  our  time  nameth  them,  strong  and  cleare 
natures)  enriched  with  a  large  instruction  of  profitable 
sciences.  The  mongrell  sort  of  husband-men,  who  have  dis 
dained  the  first  forme  of  ignorance  of  letters,  and  could  never 
reach  unto  the  other  (as  they  that  sit  betweene  two  stooles, 
of  which  besides  so  many  others  I  am  one)  are  dangerous, 
peevish,  foolish,  and  importunate,  and  they  which  trouble 
the  world  most.  Therefore  doe  I  (as  much  as  lieth  in  me) 
2  X  361 


till  Devices 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  withdraw  my  selfe  into  the  first  and  naturall  seat,  whence 
LIV         I  never  assaied  to  depart.     Popular  and    meerely  naturall 
Of  yaine  Sub-  poesje  hath  certaine  graces,  and  in-bred  livelinesse,  whereby 
[es'°l      '"it  concurreth  and  compareth  it  selfe  unto    the   principall 
beautie  of  perfect  and  artificiall  Poesie,  as  may  plainly  be 
scene  in  the  Villannelles,  homely  gigs,  and  countrie  songs 
of  Gasconie,  which  are  brought  unto  us  from  Nations  that 
have  no  knowledge  at  all,  either  of  any  learning,  or  so  much 
as  of  writing.     Meane  and  indifferent  Poesie,  and  that  con- 
sisteth  betweene  both,  is  scorned,  and  contemned,  and  passeth 
without  honour  or   esteeme.     But   forasmuch  as  since  the 
passage  hath  beene  opened  unto  the  spirit,  I  have  found  (as 
it  commonly  hapneth)  that  we  had  apprehended  that  which 
is  neither  so  nor  so  for  a  difficult  exercise,  and  of  a  rare 
subject;  And  that  since  our  invention  hath  beene  set  on 
lire,  it   disco vereth   an   infinit   number   of  like   examples ; 
I  will  onely  adde   this    one :    That  if  these   Essayes  were 
worthy  to  be  judged  of,  it  might  in  mine  opinion  happen, 
that  they  would  not  greatly  please  the  common  and  vulgar 
spirits,  and  as  little  the  singular  and  excellent.     The 
first  will  understand  but  little  of  them,  the  latter 
over  much  ;  they  might  perhaps  live  and  rub 
out  in  the  middle  region. 


THE    FIFTY-FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Smels  and  Odors. 

T  is  reported  of  some,  namely  of  Alexander, 
that  their  sweat,  through  some  rare  and 
extraordinary  complexion,  yeelded  a  sweet 
smelling  savour ;    whereof  Plutarke   and 
others  seeke  to  finde  out  the  cause.     But 
the  common  sort  of  bodies  are  cleane  con- 
trarie,  and  the  best  qualitie  they  have,  is 
to  be  cleare  of  any  smell  at  all.    The  sweet- 
nesse  of  the  purest  breaths  hath  nothing  more  perfect  in  them, 
than  to  bee  without  savour,  that  may  offend  us  :  as  are  those 
of  healthy  sound  children.     And  therefore  saith  Plautus  : 
362 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

Mulier  turn  bene,  olet,  ubi  nihil  olet.  PLAU.  Mostel.    CHAPTER 

Then  smel's  a  woman  purely  well,  act<  *•  sc>  3-  LV 

When  she  of  nothing  else  doth  smell.  Of  Smels  and 

Odors 

Ihe  most  exquisit  and  sweetest  savour  of  a  woman,  it  is 
to  smell  of  nothing;  and  sweet,  well-smelling,  strange 
savours,  may  rightly  be  held  suspicious  in  such  as  use  them ; 
and  a  man  may  lawfully  thinke,  that  who  useth  them,  doth 
it  to  cover  some  naturall  defect :  whence  proceed  these 
ancient  Poeticall  sayings.  '  To  smell  sweet,  is  to  stinke.' 

Rides  nos  Coracine  nil  olentes,  M ART.  vi. 

Malo  quam  bene  olere,  nil  olere,  Iv.  4. 

You  laugh  at  us  that  we  of  nothing  savour, 
Rather  smell  so,  than  sweeter  (by  your  favour). 

And  else  where. 

Posthume  non  bene  olet,  qui  bene  semper  olet.  IB.  ii.  Epig. 

Good  sir,  he  smels  not  ever  sweet,  X11<  4> 

Who  smels  still  sweeter  than  is  meet. 

Yet  love  I  greatly  to  be  entertained  with  sweet  smels,  and 
hate  exceedingly  all  manner  of  sowre  and  ill  savours,  which 
I  shall  sooner  smell,  than  any  other. 

— Namque  sagacius  unus  odoror,  HOR.  Epod. 

Polypus,  an  grams  hirsutis  cubet  hircus  in  alis,  xii.  4. 

Qudm  canis  acer  ubi  lateat  sus. 

Sooner  smell  I,  whether  a  cancred  nose, 

Or  ranke  gote-smell  in  hairie  arme-pits  lie, 

Than  sharpest  hounds,  where  rowting  bores  repose. 

The  simplest  and  meerely-naturall  smels  are  most  pleasing 
unto  me ;  which  care  ought  chiefly  to  concerne  women.  In 
the  verie  heart  of  Barbaric,  the  Scithian  women,  after  they 
had  washed  themselves,  did  sprinkle,  dawbe,  and  powder  all 
their  bodies  and  faces  over,  with  a  certaine  odoriferous  drug, 
that  groweth  in  their  Countrie :  which  dust  and  dawbing 
being  taken  away,  when  they  come  neere  men,  or  their 
husbands,  they  remaine  verie  cleane,  and  with  a  verie  sweet- 
savouring  perfume.  What  odor  soever  it  be,  it  is  strange  to 
see,  what  hold  it  will  take  on  me,  and  how  apt  my  skin  is  to 
receive  it.  He  that  complaineth  against  nature,  that  she 
hath  not  created  man  with  a  fit  instrument,  to  carrie  sweet 

363 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  smels  fast-tied  to  his  nose,  is  much  to  blame  :  for,  they  carrie 
LV  themselves.  As  for  me  in  particular,  my  mostachoes,  which 
and  are  verie  thicke,  serve  me  for  that  purpose.  Let  me  but 
approach  my  gloves  or  my  hand-kercher  to  them,  their  smell 
will  sticke  upon  them  a  whole  day.  They  manifest  the 
place  I  come  from.  The  close-smacking,  sweetnesse-moving, 
love-alluring,  and  greedi-smirking  kisses  of  youth,  were 
heretofore  wont  to  sticke  on  them  many  houres  after;  yet 
am  I  little  subject  to  those  popular  diseases,  that  are  taken 
by  conversation,  and  bred  by  the  contagion  of  the  ayre : 
And  I  have  escaped  those  of  my  time,  of  which  there  hath 
beene  many  and  severall  kinds,  both  in  the  Townes  about 
me,  and  in  our  Armie.  We  read  of  Socrates,  that  during 
the  time  of  many  plagues  and  relapses  of  the  pestilence, 
which  so  often  infested  the  Citie  of  Athens,  he  never  for- 
sooke  or  went  out  of  the  Towne :  yet  was  he  the  only  man, 
that  was  never  infected,  or  that  felt  any  sicknesse.  Physitians 
might  (in  mine  opinion)  draw  more  use  and  good  from 
odours,  than  they  doe.  For,  my  selfe  have  often  perceived, 
that  according  unto  their  strength  and  qualitie,  they  change 
and  alter,  and  move  my  spirits,  and  worke  strange  effects  in 
me  :  which  makes  me  approve  the  common  saying,  that  the 
invention  of  incense  and  perfumes  in  Churches,  so  ancient 
and  so  far-dispersed  throughout  all  nations  and  religions, 
had  an  especiall  regard  to  rejoyce,  to  comfort,  to  quicken,  to 
rowze,  and  to  purifie  our  senses,  that  so  we  might  be  the 
apter  and  readier  unto  contemplation.  And  the  better  to 
judge  of  it,  I  would  I  had  my  part  of  the  skill,  which  some 
Cookes  have,  who  can  so  curiously  season  and  temper  strange 
odors  with  the  savour  and  rellish  of  their  meats.  As  it  was 
especially  observed  in  the  service  of  the  King  of  Tunes,  who 
in  our  dayes  landed  at  Naples,  to  meet  and  enter-parly  with 
the  Emperour  Charles  the  fifth.  His  viands  were  so  ex 
quisitely  farced,  and  so  sumptuously  seasoned  with  sweet 
odoriferous  drugs,  and  aromaticall  spices,  that  it  was  found 
upon  his  booke  of  accompt,  the  dressing  of  one  peacocke, 
and  two  fesants  amounted  to  one  hundred  duckets ;  which 
was  their  ordinarie  manner  of  cooking  his  meats.  And  when 
they  were  carved  up,  not  only  the  dining  chambers,  but  all 
the  roomes  of  his  pallace,  and  the  streets  round  about  it 
364 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

were  replenished  with  an  exceeding  odoriferous  and  aromati-  CHAPTER 
call  vapour,  which  continued  a  long  time  after.    The  principall         LV 
care  I  take,  wheresoever  I  am  lodged,  is  to  avoid,  and  be  far  Of 
from  all  manner  of  filthy,  foggy,  ill-savouring,  and  unwhol- 
some  aires.     These  goodly  Cities  of  strangely-seated  Venice, 
and  huge-built  Paris,  by  reason  of  the  muddy,  sharp,  and 
offending  savors,  which  they  yeeld  ;  the  one  by  her  fennie 
and  marish  situation,  the  other  by  her  durtie  unclean- 
nesse,  and  continual!  mire,  do  greatly  alter  and 
diminish  the  favour  which  I  beare  them. 


THE    FIFTY-SIXTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Praiers  and  Orisons. 

[PROPOSE  certaine  formelesse  and  irresolute 
fantasies,  as  do  those  schollers,  who  in 
schooles  publish  doubtfull  and  sophisti 
cal!  questions  to  be  disputed  and  canvased : 
not  to  establish  the  truth,  but  to  find  it 
out:  which  I  submit  to  their  judgements, 
to  whom  the  ordering  and  directing,  not 
only  of  my  actions  and  compositions,  but 
also  of  my  thoughts,  belongeth.  The  condemnation,  as  well 
as  the  approbation  of  them,  will  be  equally  acceptable  and 
profitable  unto  me,  deeming  it  absurd  and  impious,  if  any 
thing  be,  either  ignorantly,  or  unadvisedly  set  downe  in  this 
rapsody,  contrarie  unto  the  sacred  resolutions,  and  repug 
nant  to  the  holy  prescriptions  of  the  Catholike,  Apostolike, 
and  Romane  Church,  wherein  I  was  borne,  and  out  of  which 
I  purpose  not  to  die.  And  therefore  alwaies  referring  my 
selfe  unto  their  censures  that  have  all  power  over  me,  doe  I 
meddle  so  rashly,  to  write  of  all  manner  of  purposes  and 
discourses,  as  I  doe  here.  I  wot  not  whether  I  be  deceived, 
but  sithence,  by  an  especiall  and  singular  favour  of  Gods 
divine  bountie,  a  certaine  forme  of  Praier,  hath  by  the  very 
mouth  of  God,  word  by  word  been  prescribed  and  directed 
unto  us,  I  have  ever  thought  the  use  of  its,  hould  be  more 
ordinarie  with  us,  than  it  is.  And  might  I  be  believed, 

365 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  both    rising    and    going    to    bed,  sitting  downe  and  rising 
LVI         from    boord,    and    going    about    any    particular    action    or 

,  ^r.aiers    businesse,  I  would    have    all    good    Christians,  to    say    the 
and  Orisons    „   ,  ,   .„  ,1      &       •  ,  J 

rater  nosier,  and  11  no  other  praier,  at  least  not  to  omit 

that.  The  Church  may  extend,  amplifie,  and  diversifie 
praiers  according  to  the  need  of  our  instruction :  For,  I 
know  it  is  alwaies  the  same  substance,  and  the  same  thing. 
But  that  one  should  ever  have  this  privilege,  that  all 
manner  of  people,  should  at  all  times,  and  upon  every 
occasion  have  it  in  their  mouth :  For,  it  is  most  certaine, 
that  only  it  containeth  whatsoever  we  want,  and  is  most  fit, 
and  effectuall  in  all  events.  It  is  the  onely  praier  I  use  in 
every  place,  at  all  times,  and  upon  every  accident ;  and  in 
stead  of  changing,  I  use  often  repetition  of  it :  whence  it 
commeth  to  passe,  that  I  remember  none  so  well  as  that  one. 
I  was  even  now  considering,  whence  this  generall  errour 
commeth,  that  in  all  our  desseignes  and  enterprises,  of  what 
nature  soever,  we  immediatly  have  recourse  unto  God,  and 
in  every  necessitie,  we  call  upon  his  holy  name :  And  at 
what  time  soever  we  stand  in  need  of  any  help,  and  that 
our  weaknesse  wanteth  assistance,  we  only  invoke  him,  with 
out  considering  whether  the  occasion  be  just  or  unjust ;  and 
what  estate  or  action  we  be  in,  or  goe  about,  be  it  never  so 
vicious  or  unlawfull,  we  call  upon  his  name  and  power. 
Indeed,  he  is  our  only  protector,  and  of  power  to  affoord  us 
all  manner  of  help  and  comfort ;  but  although  he  vouchsafe 
to  honour  us  with  this  joy-bringing  fatherly  adoption,  yet 
is  he  as  just  as  he  is  good;  and  as  good  and  just,  as  he  is 
mightie :  But  oftner  useth  his  justice  than  his  might,  and 
favoureth  us  according  to  the  reason  of  the  same,  and  not 
according  to  our  requests.  Plato  in  his  lawes  maketh  three 
forts  of  injurious  beliefe  in  the  Gods:  First,  that  there  is 
none  at  all ;  Secondly,  that  they  meddle  not  with  our 
affaires ;  Thirdly,  that  they  never  refuse  any  thing  unto  our 
vowes,  offerings,  and  sacrifices.  The  first  errour,  according 
to  his  opinion,  did  never  continue  immutable  in  man,  even 
from  his  first  infancie  unto  his  latter  age.  The  two  succeding 
may  admit  some  constancie.  His  justice  and  power  are 
inseparable.  It  is  but  in  vaine  to  implore  his  power  in  a 
bad  cause.  Man  must  have  an  unpolluted  some  when  he 
366 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

praieth  (at  least  in  that  moment  he  addresseth  himselfe  to  CHAPTER 
pray)  and  absolutely  free  from  all  vicious  passions ;  other 
wise  we  our  selves  present  him  the  rods  to  scourge  us  withall.  ( 
In  liew  of  redressing  our  fault,  we  redouble  the  same,  by 
presenting  him  with  an  affection  fraught  with  irreverence, 
sinne,  and  hatred,  to  whom  only  we  should  sue  for  grace  and 
forgivenesse.  Loe  here,  why  I  doe  not  willingly  commend 
those  Pharisaicall  humours,  whom  I  so  often  behold,  and 
more  than  ordinarie,  to  pray  unto  God,  except  their  actions 
immediately  preceding  or  succeeding  their  praiers  witnesse 
some  shew  of  reformation  or  hope  of  amendment. 

— Si  nocturnus  adulter  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Tempora  sanctonico  velas  adoperta  eucullo.  viii.  144. 

If  in  a  cape-cloake-hood  befrenchifide 

Thou  a  night-whore-munger  thy  head  dost  hide. 

And  the  state  of  a  man  that  commixeth  devotion  unto  an 
execrable  life,  seemeth  in  some  sort  to  be  more  condemnable, 
than  that  of  one,  that  is  conformable  unto  himselfe,  and 
every  way  dissolute.  Therefore  doth  our  Church  continually 
refuse,  the  favour  of  her  enterance  and  societie,  unto  customes 
and  manners,  wilfully-obstinate  on  some  egregious  villanie. 
We  only  pray  by  custome  and  use,  and  for  fashion  sake,  or 
to  say  better,  we  but  reade  and  pronounce  our  prayers :  To 
conclude,  it  is  nothing  but  a  shew  of  formalitie,  and  a  formall 
shew.  And  it  greeveth  me  to  see  many  men,  who  at  grace 
before  and  after  meat,  will  with  great  shew  of  devotion, 
crosse  themselves  three  or  foure  times,  (and  it  vexeth  me  so 
much  the  more,  when  I  call  to  mind,  that  it  is  a  signe  I 
greatly  reverence,  and  have  in  continual  use,  yea,  if  I  be  but 
gaping)  and  there  whilst,  shall  you  see  them  bestow  all  other 
houres  of  the  day  in  all  maner  of  hatred,  malice,  covetous- 
nesse,  and  injustice.  Many  houres  spend  they  about  vice, 
but  one  to  God,  and  that  as  it  were  by  way  of  recompence 
and  composition.  It  is  wonderous  .to  see,  so  far  different  and 
divers  actions,  continue  with  so  even  a  tenor,  that  no  inter 
ruption  or  alteration  at  all  can  be  perceived,  either  about 
their  confines,  or  passage  from  one  unto  another.  What 
prodigious  conscience  can  be  at  any  harts-ease,  fostring, 
and  feeding  with  so  mutuall,  quiet,  and  agreeing  society 

367 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  in  one  selfe  same  mansion,  both  crime  and  judge?  A  man 
LVI  whose  Paillardize  and  luxurie,  doth  uncessantly  sway  and 
A  J?r.aiers  rule  the  head,  and  who  judgeth  the  same  abhominable  and 
5  most  hatefull  in  the  sight  of  God ;  what  saith  he  unto  his 
all-seeing  Majesty,  when  he  openeth  his  lips,  either  of  mouth 
or  hart,  to  speake  to  him  of  it  ?  He  reclaimeth  himselfe, 
but  falleth  sodainly  againe.  '  If  the  object  of  his  divine 
'justice,  and  his  presence  should  strike,1  (as  he  saith)  'and 
6  chastise  his  soule,  how  short-soever  the  penitence  were  feare 
'  it  self  would  so  often  cast  his  thought  on  it,  that  he  would 
'  presently  perceive  himselfe  master  of  those  vices,  which  are 
'  habituated,  inbred,  setled,  and  enfleshed  in  him/  But 
what  of  those,  which  ground  a  whole  life  upon  the  fruit  and 
benefit  of  that  sinne,  they  know  to  be  mortall  ?  How  many 
trades,  professions,  occupations,  and  vocations,  have  we  daily 
and  continually  used,  frequented,  and  allowed  amongst  us, 
whose  essence  is  vicious  and  most  pernicious  ?  And  he  that 
would  needs  confesse  himselfe  unto  me,  and  of  his  owne 
accord  told  me,  that  for  feare  of  losing  his  credit,  and  to 
keepe  the  honour  of  his  offices;  he  had  for  a  whole  age, 
made  shew  and  profession,  and  acted  the  effects  of  a  religion, 
which  in  his  owne  selfe-accusing  conscience,  he  judged 
damnable,  and  cleane  contrarie  unto  that  he  had  in  his  hart : 
How  could  he  admit  and  foster  so  contradictorie  and  im 
pious  a  discourse  in  his  hart  ?  With  what  language  enter- 
taine  they  divine  justice  concerning  this  subject  ?  Their 
repentance,  consisting  in  visible  amends,  and  manageable 
reparation ;  they  lose  both  towards  God  and  us,  the  meanes 
to  alleage  the  same.  Are  they  so  malapart  and  fond-hardy 
as  to  crave  pardon  without  satisfaction,  and  sans  repentance? 
I  thinke  it  goeth  with  the  first,  as  with  these  last :  But 
obstinacie  is  not  herein  so  easie  to  be  vanquished.  This  so 
suddaine  contrarietie,  and  violent  volubilitie  of  opinion, 
which  they  faine  unto  us,  seemeth  to  me  a  miracle.  They 
present  us  with  the  state  of  an  indigestible  agonie.  How 
fantastical!  seemed  their  imagination  unto  me,  who  these 
latter  yeares  had  taken  up  a  fashion,  to  checke  and  reprove 
all  men,  that  professed  the  Catholike  Religion,  in  whom 
shined  any  extraordinarie  brightnesse  of  spirit,  saying,  that 
it  was  but  fained :  and  to  doe  him  honour,  held,  that  what- 
368 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

soever  he  said  in  apparance,  he  could  not  inwardly  chuse  but  CHAPTER 
have  his  beliefe  reformed  according  to  their  byase.  It  is  a  LVI 
peevish  inh'rmitie,  for  a  man  to  thinke  himselfe  so  firmely  ^  Praiers 
grounded,  as  to  perswade  himselfe,  that  the  contrarie  may 
not  be  believed :  And  more  peevish  also,  to  be  perswaded  by 
such  a  spirit,  that  preferreth  I  wot  not  what  disparitie  of 
fortune,  before  the  hopes  and  threats  of  eternall  life.  They 
may  beleeve  me  :  If  any  thing  could  have  attempted  my 
youth,  the  ambition  of  the  hazard,  and  difficultie,  which 
followed  this  late-moderne  enterprize,  should  have  had  good 
part  therein.  It  is  not  without  great  reason,  in  my  poore 
judgement,  that  the  Church  forbiddeth  the  confused,  rash 
and  indiscreet  use  of  the  sacred  and  divine  songs,  which  the 
holy  spirit  hath  indited  unto  David.  God  ought  not  to  be 
commixed  in  our  actions,  but  with  awful  reverence,  and  an 
attention  full  of  honour  and  respect.  The  word  or  voice  is 
too  divine,  having  no  other  use  but  to  exercise  our  lungs, 
and  to  please  our  eares.  It  is  from  the  conscience  and  not 
from  the  tongue  that  it  must  proceed.  It  is  not  consonant 
unto  reason,  that  a  prentise  or  shop-keeping  boy,  amiddest 
his  idle,  vaine,  and  frivolous  conceits,  should  be  suffered  to 
entertaine  himselfe,  and  play  therewith.  Nor  is  it  seemely, 
or  tolerable,  to  see  the  sacred'  booke  of  our  beliefes- Mysteries, 
tossed  up  and  downe  and  plaid  withall,  in  a  shop,  or  a 
hall,  or  a  kitchin.  They  have  heretofore  beene  accompted 
mysteries,  but  through  the  abuse  of  times,  they  are  now  held 
as  sports  and  recreations.  So  serious,  and  venerable  a  study  • 

should  not,  by  way  of  pastime,  and  tumultuarie  be  handled. 
It  ought  to  be  a  fixed,  a  purposed,  and  setled  action,  to 
which  this  preface  of  our  office  wr.mm  corda  should  ever  be 
adjoyned  ;  and  the  very  exterior  parts  of  the  body,  should 
with  such  a  countenance,  be  referred  unto  it,  that  to  all 
mens  eyes  it  may  witnesse  a  particular  attention  and  duteous 
respect.  It  is  not  a  study  fitting  all  men,  but  only  such  as 
have  vowed  themselves  unto  it,  and  whom  God  hath,  of  his 
infinit  mercie,  called  thereto.  The  wicked,  the  ungodly,  and 
the  ignorant  are  thereby  empaired.  It  is  no  historic  to  be 
fabulously  reported,  but  a  historic  to  be  dutifully  reverenced, 
awfully  feared,  and  religiously  adored.  Are  they  not  plea- 
santlv  conceited,  who  because  they  have  reduced  the  same 
2  Y  369 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  into  the  vulgar  tongues,  and  that  all  men  may  understand 
LVI .  it,  perswade  themselves,  that  the  people  shall  the  better 
^f,  O1^16^  conce^ve  and  digest  the  same  ?  Consisteth  it  but  in  the 
words,  that  they  understand  not  all  they  find  written  ? 
Shall  I  say  more  ?  By  approaching  thus  little  unto  it,  they 
goe  backe  from  it.  Meere  ignorance,  and  wholy  relying  on 
others,  was  verily  more  profitable  and  wiser,  than  is  this 
verball,  and  vaine  knowledge,  the  nurse  of  presumption,  and 
sourse  of  temeritie.  Moreover,  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the 
uncontrouled  libertie,  that  all  men  have  to  wrest,  dissipate, 
and  wyre-draw  a  word  so  religious,  and  important,  to  so 
many  severall  idiomes,  hath  much  more  danger  than  profit 
following  it.  The  Jewes,  the  Mahometans,  and  well-nigh 
all  other  nations,  are  wedded  unto,  and  reverence  the 
language,  wherein  their  mysteries  and  religion  had  originally 
beene  conceived ;  and  any  change  or  translation  hath  not 
without  apparance  of  reason  beene  directly  forbidden.  Know 
we  whether  there  be  Judges  enow  in  Basque  and  in  Brittanie 
to  establish  this  translation  made  in  their  tongue  ?  The 
universall  Church  hath  no  more  difficult  and  solemne  judge 
ment  to  make.  Both  in  speaking  and  preaching  the  inter 
pretation  is  wandring,  free,  and  mutable,  and  of  one  parcell ; 
so  is  it  not  alike.  One  of  our  Graecian  Historians  doth 
justly  accuse  his  age,  forasmuch  as  the  secrets  of  Christian 
religion  were  dispersed  in  all  publike  places,  and  even 
amongst  the  basest  artificers  ;  and  that  every  man  might,  at 
his  pleasure,  dispute  of  it,  and  at  randon  speake  his  mind  of 
the  same.  And  it  should  be  a  great  shame  for  us,  who  by 
the  unspeakable  grace  of  God  injoy  the  pure  and  sacred 
mysteries  of  piety,  to  suffer  the  same  to  be  profaned  in  the 
mouthes  of  ignorant  and  popular  people,  seeing  the  very 
Gentiles  interdicted  Socrates  and  Plato,  and  the  wisest,  to 
meddle,  enquire  or  speake  of  things  committed  unto  the 
Priestes  of  Delphos.  Saying  moreover,  '  That  the  factions 
'  of  Princes,  touching  the  subject  of  Divinitie,  are  armed, 
'  not  with  zeale,  but  with  anger.  That  zeale  dependeth  of 
'  divine  reason  and  justice,  holding  an  orderly  and  moderate 
'  course,  but  that  it  changeth  into  hatred  and  envie,  and  in 
4  stead  of  corne  and  grape,  it  produceth  nettles  and  darnell, 
4  if  it  be  directed  by  humane  passion.'  And  justly  saith 
370 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

this    other,    who    counselling    the    Emperour   Theodosius,  CHAPTER 
affirmed  '  that  disputations  did  not  so   much  appease  and         LVI 
*  lull  asleepe  the  schismes  of  the  Church,  as  stir  up  and  Pf,   Pr.aiers 
'  cause  heresies.1     And  therefore  it  behooved,  to  avoid  all 
contentions,  controversies,  and  logicall  arguings,  and  wholy 
and  sincerely  refer  himselfe  unto  the  prescriptions  and  orders 
of  faith,  established  by  our  forefathers.     And  Andronicus 
the  Emperour,  finding  by  chance  in  his  pallace,  certaine 
principall  men  very  earnestly  disputing  against  Lapodius, 
about  one  of  our  points  of  great  importance,  taunted  and 
rated  them  very  bitterly,  and  threatned  if  they  gave  not 
over,  he  would  cause  them  to  be  cast  into  the  river.     Chil 
dren  and  women  doe  now  adaies  governe  and  sway  the  oldest 
and  most  experienced  men  concerning  Ecclesiasticall  Lawes  : 
whereas   the   first   that   Plato    made,    forbiddeth    them   to 
enquire  after  the  reason  of  civill  Lawes,  and  which  ought  to 
stand  in  place  of  divine  ordinances.     Allowing  aged  men  to 
communicate  the  same  amongst  themselves,  and  with  the 
Magistrate,  adding  more-over,  alwaies  provided   it  be   not 
in  the  presence  of  young  men,  and  before  profane  persons. 
A  notable  Bishop  hath  left  written,  that  in  the  other  end  of 
the  world,  there  is  an   Hand  called    of  our   predecessours 
Dioscorida,  very  commodious,  and  fertile  of  all  sorts  of  fruits 
and  trees,  and  of  a  pure  and  wholesome  ayre ;  whose  people 
are    Christians,  and   have    Churches   and  Altars;    adorned 
with  nothing  else  but  crosses,  without  other  images ;  great 
observers  of  fastings  and  holy  daies ;  exact  payers  of  their 
priests  tithes ;  and  so  chaste,  that  none  of  them  may  law 
fully  all  his  life  long  know  any  more  than  one  wife.     And 
in  all  other  matters  so  well  pleased  with  their  fortune,  that 
being  seated  in  the  middest  of  the  sea,  they  have  and  know 
no  use  of  ships :  and  so  simple,  that  of  their  religion,  which 
they  so  diligently  and  awfully  observe,  they  know  not,  nor 
understand  so  much  as  one  only  word.     A  thing  incredible, 
to  him  that  knew  not  how  the  Pagans,  who  are  so  devout 
and  zealous  idolaters,  know  nothing  of  their  Gods,  but  only 
their  bare  names  and  statues.     The  ancient  beginning  of 
Menalippe,  a  tragedie  of  Euripides,  importeth  thus. 

0  lupiter,  car  de  toy  rien  sinon,  EURIP. 

le  ne  coqnois  seulement  que  le  nom. 

371 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  O  lupiter,  for  unto  me, 

LVJ  Only  the  name  is  knowne  of  thee. 

d  Qr-aiers  I  nave  also  in  my  time  heard  certain e  writings  com 
plained  of,  forsomuch  as  they  are  meerly  humane  and 
Philosophicall,  without  medling  with  divinitie.  He  that 
should  say  to  the  contrarie  (which  a  man  might  doe  with 
reason)  that  heavenly  doctrine,  as  a  Queene  and  governesse 
doth  better  keepe  her  ranke  apart;  that  she  ought  to  be 
chiefe  ruler  and  principall  head  evere  where,  and  not 
suffragant  and  subsidiarie.  And  that  peradventure  examples 
in  Grammar,  llethorike,  and  Logike,  might  more  fitly  and 
sortably  be  taken  from  elsewhere,  than  from  so  sacred  and 
holy  a  subject,  as  also  the  arguments  of  theatres,  plots  of 
plaies,  and  grounds  of  publike  spectacles.  That  mysteriously 
divine  reasons  are  more  venerably  and  reverently  considered 
alone,  and  in  their  native  stile,  than  joyned  and  compared 
to  humane  discourse.  That  this  fault  is  oftner  seene,  which 
is,  that  Divines  write  too  humanely,  than  this  other,  that 
humanists  write  not  Theologically  enough.  '  Philosophy,"1 
saith  S.  Chrysostome,  '  is  long  since  banished  from  sacred 
c  schools,  as  an  unprofitable  servant,  and  deemed  unworthy 
4  to  behold,  but  in  passing  by  the  entrie,  or  the  vestrie  of 
'  the  sacred  treasures  of  heavenly  doctrine.'  That  the 
formes  of  humane  speech,  are  more  base,  and  ought  by  no 
meanes  to  make  any  use  of  the  dignitie,  majesty  and  pre- 
heminence  of  divine  speech.  As  for  my  part,  I  give  it  leave 
to  say,  Verbis  indisciplinatis,  '  with  undisciplined  words,1 
Fortune,  destinie,  chance,  accident,  fate,  good  lucke,  ill  lucke, 
the  Gods,  and  other  phrases,  as  best  it  pleaseth.  I  propose 
humane  fantasies  and  mine  owne,  simply  as  humane  conceits, 
and  severally  considered ;  not  as  setled,  concluded,  and 
directed  by  celestiall  ordinance,  incapable  of  any  doubt  or 
alteration.  A  matter  of  opinion,  and  not  of  faith.  What 
I  discourse  according  to  my  selfe,  not  what  I  beleeve  accord 
ing  unto  God,  with  a  laicall  fashion,  and  not  a  clericall 
manner ;  yet  ever  most  religious.  As  children  propose  their 
essayes,  instructable,  not  instructing.  And  might  not  a 
man  also  say  without  apparance,  that  the  institution,  which 
willeth,  no  man  shall  dare  to  write  of  Religion,  but  sparingly, 
and  reservedly,  except  such  as  make  expresse  profession  of  it, 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

would  not  want  some  shew  of  profit  and  justice  ;  and  happily  CHAPTER 

to  me  to  be  silent.     It  hath  beene  told  me,  that  even  those         LVI 

which  are  not  of  our  consent,  doe  flatly  inhibite  amongst 

themselves  the  use  of  the  sacred  name  of  God  in  all  their  a 

vulgar  and  familiar  discourses.     They  would  have  no  man 

use  it  as  an  interjection,  or  exclamation,  nor  to  be  alleaged 

as  a  witnesse,   or  comparison ;    wherein    I    find   they   have 

reason.     And   howsoever  it  be,  that  we  call  God   to   our 

commerce  and  societie,  it  should  be  zealously,  seriously,  and 

religiously.      There  is  (as  far  as  I    remember)  such  a  like 

discourse  in  Xenophon,   wherein   he   declareth,   '  That  we 

'  should  more  rarely  pray  unto  God  :  forasmuch  as  it  is  not 

'  easie,  we  should  so  often  settle  our  minds  in  so  regular,  so 

4  reformed,  and  so  devout  a  seat,  where  indeed  it  ought  to 

'  be,  to  pray  aright  and  effectually ' :  otherwise  our  praiers 

are,  not  only  vaine  and  unprofitable,  but  vicious.     '  Forgive 

'  us '  (say  we)  '  our  offences,  as  we  forgive  them  that  trespasse 

'  against  us.1     What  else  inferre  we  by  that  petition,  but 

that  we  offer  him  our  soule  void  of  all  revenge  and  free  from 

all  rancour  ?     We  neverthelesse  invoke  God  and  call  on  his 

aid,  even  in  the  complot  of  our  grievousest  faults,  and  desire 

his  assistance  in  all  manner  of  injustice  and  iniquitie. 

Quce  nisi  seductis  nequeas  committere  divis.  PERS.  Sat.  ii. 

Which  you  to  Saints  not  drawne  aside, 
Would  thinke  unfit  to  be  applide. 

The  covetous  man  sueth  and  praieth  unto  him  for  the 
vaine  increase  and  superfluous  preservation  of  his  wrong- 
gotten  treasure.  The  ambitious,  he  importuneth  God  for 
the  conduct  of  his  fortune,  and  that  he  may  have  the 
victorie  of  all  his  desseignes.  The  theefe,  the  pirate,  the 
murtherer,  yea  and  the  traitor,  all  call  upon  him,  all  implore 
his  aid,  and  all  solicite  him,  to  give  them  courage  in  their 
attempts,  constancie  in  their  resolutions,  to  remove  all  lets 
and  difficulties,  that  in  any  sort  may  withstand  their  wicked 
executions,  and  impious  actions ;  or  give  him  thanks,  if 
they  have  had  good  successe ;  the  one  if  he  have  met  with 
a  good  bootie,  the  other  if  he  returne  home  rich,  the  third 
if  no  man  have  seen  him  kill  his  enemie,  and  the  last,  though 
he  have  caused  any  execrable  mischiefe.  The  Souldier,  if  he 

373 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  but   goe  to  besiege  a  cottage,  to    scale   a  Castle,  to    rob 
LVI          a  Church,  to  pettard  a  gate,  to  force  a  religious  house,  or 

a  *™ers  any  villanous  act,  before  he  attempt  it,  praieth  to  God  for 

and  Orisons  ,.J       .  .  , ,          i     i  •     •    •      .  11  u     c  n  f         i  i. 

his  assistance,  though  his  intents  and  hopes  be  full-fraught 

with  crueltie,  murther,  covetise,  luxurie,  sacrilege,  and  all 
iniquitie. 

PERS.  Sat.  ii.  Hoc  ipsum  quo  tu  lovis  aurem  impellere  tentas, 

21.  Die  agedum,  Stalo,  proh  lupiter,  6  bone,  clamet, 

lupiter,  at  sese  non  clamet  lupiter  ipse. 

Go-to  then,  say  the  same  to  some  bad  fellow, 
Which  thou  prepar'st  for  Gods  eares  :  let  him  bellow, 
O  God,  good  God  ;  so  God, 
On  himselfe  would  not  plod. 

Margaret  Queene  of  Navarre,  maketh  mention  of  a  young 
Prince  (whom  although  she  name  not  expresly,  yet  his 
greatnesse  hath  made  him  sufficiently  knowne)  who  going 
about  an  amorous  assignation,  and  to  lie  with  an  Advocates 
wife  of  Paris,  his  way  lying  alongst  a  Church,  he  did  never 
passe  by  so  holy  a  place,  whether  it  were  in  going  or  comming 
from  his  lecherie,  and  cukolding-labour,  but  would  make  his 
praiers  unto  God,  to  be  his  help  and  furtherance.  I  would 
faine  have  any  impartiall  man  tell  me,  to  what  purpose  this 
Prince  invoked  and  called  on  God  for  his  divine  favour, 
having  his  mind  only  bent  to  sinne,  and  his  thoughts  set  on 
luxurie :  Yet  doth  she  alleage  him  for  a  speciall  testimonie 
of  singular  devotion.  But  it  is  not  only  by  this  example, 
a  man  might  verifie,  that  women  are  not  very  fit  to  manage 
or  treat  matters  of  Religion  and  Divinitie.  A  true  and 
hartie  praier,  and  an  unfained  religious  reconciliation  from 
us  unto  God,  cannot  likely  fall  into  a  wicked  and  impure 
soule,  especially  when  Sathan  swaieth  the  same.  He  that 
calleth  upon  God  for  his  assistance,  whilst  he  is  engulphed 
and  wallowing  in  filthy  sinne,  doth  as  the  cut-purse,  that 
should  call  for  justice  unto  his  ayd,  or  those  that  produce 
God  in  witnesse  of  a  lie. 

LUCAN.  v.  94.  — tacito  mala  vota  susurro 

Concipimus. 

With  silent  whispering  we, 
For  ill  things  suppliants  be. 

374 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

There  are  few  men,  that  would  dare  to  publish  the  secret  CHAPTER 

requests  they  make  to  God.  LVI 

Of     Praiers 

Hand  cuivis  promptum  est,  murmur  que  humilesque  and  Orisons 

susurros  PERS  Saf  ^ 

Tollere  de  Templis,  et  aperto  vivere  voto.  ^ 

From  Church  low-whispering  murmurs  to  expell, 
Tis  not  for  all,  or  with  knowne  vowes  live  well. 

And  that's  the  reason,  why  the  Pythagorians  would  have 
them  publike,  that  all  might  heare  them,  that  no  man 
should  abusively  call  on  God,  and  require  any  undecent  or 
unjust  thing  of  him,  as  that  man  ; 

— dare  cum  dixit,  Apollo,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Labra  movet  metuens  audiri :  pulchra  Laverna  xvi-  59- 

Da  mihi  fatter  e,  dajustum  sanctumque  videri. 
Noctem  peccatis,  etfraudibus  objice  nubem. 

When  he  alowd  hath  said,,  Apollo  heare,, 
Loth  to  be  heard,  Goddesse  of  theeves,  said  he, 
Grant  me  to  cousen,  and  yet  just  appeare, 
My  faults  in  night,  my  fraud's  in  clouds  let  be. 

The  Gods  did  grievously  punish  the  impious  vowes  of 
Oedipus,  by  granting  them  unto  him.  His  praier  was,  that 
his  children  might  betweene  themselves  decide  in  armes  the 
succession  of  his  estate ;  he  was  so  miserable,  as  to  be  taken 
at  his  word.  A  man  should  not  request  that  all  things 
follow  our  will,  but  that  it  may  follow  wisdome.  Verily, 
it  seemeth,  that  we  make  no  other  use  of  our  praiers,  than 
of  a  companie  of  gibrish  phrases  :  And  as  those  who  employ 
holy  and  sacred  words  about  witchcraft  and  magicall  effects ; 
and  that  we  imagine  their  effect  dependeth  of  the  contexture, 
or  sound,  or  succession  of  words,  or  from  our  countenance. 
For,  our  soule,  being  full-fraught  with  concupiscence,  and  all 
manner  of  ungodly  thoughts,  nothing  touched  with  repent 
ance,  nor  moved  with  new  reconciliation  towards  God,  we 
headlong  present  unto  him  those  heedlesse  words,  which 
memorie  affoordeth  our  tongue,  by  which  we  hope  to  ob- 
taine  an  expiation  and  remission  of  our  offences.  There  is 
nothing  so  easie,  so  sweet,  so  comfortable  and  favourable,  as 
the  law  of  God  ;  she  (of  his  infinit  mercie)  calleth  us  unto 
him,  how  faultie  and  detestable  soever  we  be ;  she  gently 
stretcheth  forth  her  armes  unto  us,  and  mildly  receiveth 

375 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  us  into  her  lap,  how  guiltie,  polluted,  and  sinfull  soever  we 
LVI          are,  and  may  be  in  after-times.     But  in  recompence  of  so 

j  Pr.aiers  boundlesse  and  unspeakable  a  favour,  she  must  be  thank- 
ana  Orisons    „  n  ,    j         j  r,        ~  n  ,  ',  , 

fully  accepted,  and  cheerfully  regarded  :  and  so  gracious  a 

pardon  must  be  received  with  a  gratitude  of  the  soule,  and 
at  least,  in  that  instant,  that  we  addresse  our  selves  unto 
her  presence ;  to  have  our  soule  grieved  for  her  faults, 
penitent  of  her  sinnes,  hating  those  passions  and  affections, 
that  have  caused  or  provoked  us  to  transgresse  his  lawes, 
to  offend  his  Majestic,  and  to  breake  his  commandements. 
Plato  saith,  '  That  neither  the  Gods,  nor  honest  men  will 
'  ever  accept  the  offering  of  a  wicked  man." 


HOR.  iii.  Od. 
xxiii.  17. 


Immunis  aram  si  tetigit  manus, 
Non  sumptuosa  blandior  hostia 
Mollwit  aversos  Penates, 
Farre  pio  et  salients  mica. 

If  guiltlesse  hand  the  Altar  tuch, 

No  offring,,  cost  it  ne're  so  much, 

Shall  better  please  our  God  offended, 

Than  come  with  crackling-corne-salt  blended. 


THE    FIFTY-SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Age. 

CANNOT  receive  that  manner,  whereby  we 
establish  the  continuance  of  our  life.  I 
see  that  some  of  the  wiser  sort  doe  greatly 
shorten  the  same,  in  respect  of  the  common 
opinion.  What  said  Cato  Junior,  to  those 
who  sought  to  hinder  him  from  killing 
himselfe?  'Doe  I  now  live  the  age,  wherein 
'  I  may  j  ustly  be  reproved  to  leave  my  life 
'  too  soone  ? '  Yet  was  he  but  eight  and  fortie  yeares  old. 
He  thought  that  age  very  ripe,  yea,  and  well  advanced, 
considering  how  few  men  come  unto  it.  And  such  as  en- 
tertaine  themselves  with,  I  wot  not  what  kind  of  course, 
which  they  call  naturall,  promiseth  some  few  yeares  beyond, 
might  do  it,  had  they  a  privilege  that  could  exempt  them 
from  so  great  a  number  of  accidents,  unto  which  each  one 
376 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

of  us  stands  subject  by  a  naturall  subjection,  and  which  CHAPTER 
may  interrupt  the  said  course,  they  propose  unto  themselves.  LVII 
What  fondnesse  is  it,  for  a  man  to  thinke  he  shall  die,  Of  Age 
for,  and  through,  a  failing  and  defect  of  strength,  which 
extreme  age  draweth  with  it,  and  to  propose  that  terme  unto 
our  life,  seeing  it  is  the  rarest  kind  of  all  deaths,  and  least 
in  use  ?  We  only  call  it  naturall,  as  if  it  were  against  nature 
to  see  a  man  breake  his  necke  with  a  fall ;  to  be  drowned 
by  shipwracke ;  to  be  surprised  with  a  pestilence,  or  pleurisie, 
and  as  if  our  ordinarie  condition  did  not  present  these  in 
conveniences  unto  us  all.  Let  us  not  flatter  our  selves  with 
these  fond-goodly  words ;  a  man  may  peradventure  rather 
call  that  naturall,  which  is  generall,  common  and  universall. 
To  die  of  age,  is  a  rare,  singular,  and  extraordinarie  death, 
and  so  much  lesse  naturall  than  others :  It  is  the  last  and 
extremest  kind  of  dying :  The  further  it  is  from  us,  so  much 
the  lesse  is  it  to  be  hoped  for  :  Indeed  it  is  the  limit,  beyond 
which  we  shal  not  passe,  and  which  the  law  of  nature  hath 
prescribed  unto  us,  as  that  which  should  not  be  outgone 
by  any  ;  but  it  is  a  rare  privilege  peculiar  unto  her  selfe, 
to  make  us  continue  unto  it.  It  is  an  exemption,  which 
through  some  particular  favour  she  bestoweth  on  some  one 
man,  in  the  space  of  two  or  three  ages,  discharging  him  from 
the  crosses,  troubles,  and  difficulties,  she  hath  enterposed 
betweene  both,  in  this  long  cariere  and  pilgrimage.  There 
fore  my  opinion  is,  to  consider,  that  the  age  unto  which 
we  are  come,  is  an  age  whereto  few  arive :  since  men  come 
not  unto  it  by  any  ordinarie  course,  it  is  a  signe  we  are 
verie  forward.  And  since  we  have  past  the  accustomed 
bounds,  which  is  the  true  measure  of  our  life,  we  must  not 
hope,  that  we  shall  goe  much  further.  Having  escaped  so 
many  occasions  of  death,  wherein  we  see  the  world  to  fall, 
we  must  acknowledge  that  such  an  extraordinarie  fortune, 
as  that  is,  which  maintaineth  us,  and  is  beyond  the  common 
use,  is  not  likely  to  continue  long.  It  is  a  fault  of  the 
verie  lawes,  to  have  this  false  imagination  :  They  allow  not 
a  man  to  be  capable  and  of  discretion,  to  manage  and  dis 
pose  of  his  owne  goods,  untill  he  be  five  and  twentie  yeares 
old,  yet  shall  he  hardly  preserve  the  state  of  his  life  so  long. 
Augustus  abridged  five  yeares  of  the  ancient  Romane  Lawes, 
?Z  377 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  declared,  that  for  any  man  that  should  take  upon  him 
kVII  the  charge  of  judgement,  it  sufficed  to  be  thirtie  yeares 
old.  Servius  Tullius  dispensed  with  the  Knights,  who  were 
seven  and  fortie  yeares  of  age,  from  all  voluntarie  services 
of  warre.  Augustus  brought  them  to  fortie  and  five.  To 
send  men  to  their  place  of  sojourning  before  they  be  five 
and  fiftie  or  three  score  yeares  of  age,  me  seemeth,  carrieth  no 
great  apparance  with  it.  My  advice  would  be,  that  our 
vacation,  and  employment  should  be  extended,  as  far  as 
might  be  for  the  publike  commoditie  ;  but  I  blame  some,  and 
condemne  most,  that  we  begin  not  soone  enough  to  employ 
our  selves.  The  same  Augustus  had  been  universall  and 
supreme  judge  of  the  world,  when  he  was  but  nineteene 
yeares  old,  and  would  have  another  to  be  thirtie,  before  he 
shall  bee  made  a  competent  Judge  of  a  cottage  or  farme. 
As  for  my  part,  I  thinke  our  minds  are  as  full  growne  and 
perfectly  joynted  at  twentie  yeares,  as  they  should  be,  and 
promise  as  much  as  they  can.  A  mind  which  at  that  age 
hath  not  given  some  evident  token  or  earnest  of  her  sufficiencie, 
shall  hardly  give  it  afterward  ;  put  her  to  what  triall  you 
list.  Natural  qualities  and  vertues,  if  they  have  any  vigorous 
or  beauteous  thing  in  them,  will  produce  and  shew  the  same 
within  that  time,  or  never.  They  say  in  Daulphine, 

French  prov.  Si  I'espine  nou  picque  quand  nai, 

A  peine  que  picque  jamai. 

A  thorne,  unlesse  at  first  it  pricke, 
Will  hardly  ever  pearce  to  th'  quicke. 

Of  all  humane  honourable  and  glorious  actions,  that  ever 
came  unto  my  knowledge,  of  what  nature  soever  they  be, 
I  am  perswaded,  I  should  have  a  harder  taske,  to  number 
those,  which  both  in  ancient  times,  and  in  ours,  have  beene 
produced  and  atchieved  before  the  age  of  thirtie  yeares, 
than  such  as  were  performed  after  :  yea,  often  in  the  life 
of  the  same  men.  May  not  I  boldly  speak  it  of  those  of 
Hanniball,  and  Scipio  his  great  adversarie  ?  They  lived  the 
better  part  of  their  life  with  the  glorie  which  they  had 
gotten  in  their  youth  :  And  though  afterward  they  were 
great  men,  in  respect  of  all  others,  yet  were  they  but  meane 
in  regard  of  themselves.  As  for  my  particular,  I  am  verily 

378 


THE    FIRST    BOOKE 

pers waded,  that  since  that  age,  both  my  spirit  and  my  body,  CHAPTER 
have  more  decreased    than  encreased,   more   recoyled   than         LVII 
advanced.     It  may  be,  that  knowledge  and  experience  shall  ^e 

encrease  in  them,  together  with  life,  that  bestow  their  time 
well :  but  vivacitie,  promptitude,  constancie,  and  other  parts 
much  more  our  owne,  more  important  and  more  essentiall, 
they  droope,  they  languish,  and  they  faint. 

— ubi  jam  validis  quassatum  est  viribus  cevi  LUCR.  iii.  457. 

Corpus,  et  obtusis  ceciderunt  viribus  art  us,  > 
Claudicat  ingenium,  delirat  linguaque  mensque. 

When  once  the  body  by  shrewd  strength  of  yeares 

Is  shak't,  and  limmes  drawne  downe  from  strength  that 

weares, 

Wit  halts,  both  tongue  and  mind 
Doe  daily  doat,  we  find. 

It  is  the  body,  which  sometimes  yeeldeth  first  unto  age ; 
and  other  times  the  mind  :  and  I  have  seene  many,  that 
have  had  their  braines  weakned  before  their  stomacke  or 
legges.  And  forasmuch,  as  it  is  a  disease,  little  or  nothing 
sensible  unto  him  that  endureth  it,  and  maketh  no  great 
shew,  it  is  so  much  the  moj£  dangerous.  Here  I  exclaime 
against  our  Lawes,  not  because  they  leave  us  so  long,  and 
late  in  working  and  employment,  but  that  they  set  us  a 
worke  no  sooner,  and  it  is  so  late  before  we  be  employed. 
Me  thinkes  that  considering  the  weaknesse  of  our  life,  and 
seeing  the  infinit  number  of  ordinarie  rockes,  and  naturall 

dangers  it  is  subject  unto,  we  should  not  so  soone  as  we 

come  into  the  world,  alot  so  great  a  share  thereof  unto 

unprofitable  wantonnesse  in  youth,  il-breeding 

idlenesse,  and  slow-learning  prentissage. 


THE    END    OF    THE    FIRST    BOOKE 


379 


EDINBURGH 

T.   &•   A.    CONSTABLE 

Printers  to  Her  Majesty 

1892 


Montaigne,  Michel  Eyquem  de 
164.2      The  essays  of  Montaigne 


1892 
t.l 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

24.  Of  the  Roman  greatnesse, ....  422 

25.  How  a  man  should  not  counterfeit  to  be  sicke,      .  424 

26.  Of  Thumbs,             .....  426 

27.  Cowardize,  the  mother  of  Crueltie,              .              .  428 

28.  All  things  have  their  season,           .             .             .  439 

29.  OfVertue,.  .  .  .  .  .441 

30.  Of  a  monstrous  Child,         ....  450 

31.  Of  anger  and  choler,            .              .              .              .  452 

32.  A  defence  of  Seneca  and  Plutarch,              .              .  460 

33.  The  Historic  of  Spurina,    ....  468 

34.  Observations   concerning    the   meanes    to    warre 

after  the  maner  of  lulius  Caesar,              .              .  476 

35.  Of  three  good  women,        ....  487 

36.  Of  the  worthiest  and  most  excellent  men,               .  496 

37.  Of  the  resemblance  betweene  children  and  fathers,  504 


THE     SECOND     BOOKE 


TER 

icon- 

'  our 


THE    FIRST    CHAPTER 

Of  the  inconstancie  of  our  actions. 

HOSE  which  exercise  themselves  in  con- 
trouling  humane  actions,  finde  no  such  let 
in  any  one  part,  as  to  peece  them  together, 
and  bring  them  to  one  same  lustre  :  For, 
they  commonly  contradict  one  another  so 
strangely,  as  it  seemeth  impossible  they 
should  be  parcels  of  one  Warehouse. 
Young  Marius  is  sometimes  found  to  be 
the  sonne  of  Mars,  and  other  times  the  childe  of  Venus. 
Pope  Boniface  the  Eight,  is  reported  to  have  entred  into 
his  charge,  as  a  Fox ;  to  have  carried  himselfe  therein,  as  a 
Lion ;  and  to  have  died  like  a  dog.  And  who  would  thinke 
it  was  Nero,  that  lively  image  of  cruelty,  who  being  required 
to  signe  (as  the  custome  was)  the  sentence  of  a  criminall 
offender,  that  had  beene  condemned  to  die,  that  ever  he 
should  answer  ?  Oh  would  to  God  I  could  never  have 
written  !  So  neare  was  his  heart  grieved  to  doome  a  man  to 
death.  The  world  is  so  full  of  such  examples,  that  every 
man  may  store  himselfe ;  and  I  wonder  to  see  men  of  under 
standing  trouble  themselves  with  sorting  these  parcels : 
Sithence  (me  seemeth)  irresolution  is  the  most  apparant  and 
common  vice  of  our  nature ;  as  witnesseth  that  famous  verse 
of  Publius  the  Comcedian  : 


Malum  concilium  est,  quod  mutari  non  potest. 

The  counsell  is  but  bad, 
Whose  change  may  not  be  had. 


PUB.  Mini. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


PTER  There  is  some  apparence  to  judge  a  man  by  the  most 
{  common  conditions  of  his  life,  but  seeing  the  naturall  insta- 
Afl/ncori-  biijty  Of  our  customes  and  opinions  ;  I  have  often  thought, 
actions  i  ^h&t  even  g°°d  Authors,  doe  ill,  and  take  a  wrong  course, 
wilfully  to  opinionate  themselves  about  framing  a  constant 
and  solide  contexture  of  us.  They  chuse  an  universall  ay  re, 
and  following  that  image,  range  and  interpret  all  a  mans 
actions ;  which  if  they  cannot  wrest  sufficiently,  they  remit 
them  unto  dissimulation.  Augustus  hath  escaped  their 
hands ;  for  there  is  so  apparent,  so  sudden  and  continuall  a 
variety  of  actions  found  in  him,  through  the  course  of  his 
life,  that  even  the  boldest  Judges  and  strictest  censurers, 
have  beene  faine  to  give  him  over,  and  leave  him  undecided. 
There  is  nothing  I  so  hardly  beleeve  to  be  in  man,  as  con- 
stancie,  and  nothing  so  easie  to  be  found  in  him,  as  incon 
stancy.  He  that  should  distinctly  and  part  by  part, 
judge  of  him,  should  often  jumpe  to  speake  truth.  View 
all  antiquity  over,  and  you  shall  finde  it  a  hard  matter,  to 
chuse  out  a  dozen  of  men>  that  have  directed  their  life  unto 
one  certaine,  setled,  and  assured  course ;  which  is  the  surest 
drift  of  wisdome.  For,  to  comprehend  all  in  one  word, 
saith  an  ancient  Writer,  and  to  embrace  all  the  rules  of  our 
life  into  one,  it  is  at  all  times  to  will,  and  not  to  will  one 
same  thing.  I  would  not  vouchsafe,  (saith  he)  to  adde  any 
thing  ;  alwayes  provided  the  will  be  just :  for,  if  it  be  unjust, 
it  is  impossible  it  should  ever  continue  one.  Verily,  I  have 
heretofore  learned,  that  vice  is  nothing  but  a  disorder,  and 
want  of  measure,  and  by  consequence,  it  is  impossible  to 
fasten  constancy  unto  it.  It  is  a  saying  of  Demosthenes, 
(as  some  report,)  c  That  consultation  and  deliberation,  is 
'  the  beginning  of  all  vertue ;  and  constancie,  the  end  and 
4  perfection.1  If  by  reason  or  discourse  we  should  take  a 
certaine  way,  we  should  then  take  the  fairest :  but  no  man 
hath  thought  on  it. 

HOR.  i.  Epist.  Quod  petiit,  spernit,  repetit  quod  nuper  omisit, 

i.  98.  Astuat,  et  vit(e  disconvenit  ordine  toto. 

He  scorns  that  which  he  sought,  seek's  that  he  scorn'd 

of  late, 
He  flowes,  ebbes,  disagrees  in  his  lifes  whole  estate. 

6 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Our  ordinary  manner  is  to  follow  the  inclination  of  our       PTER 
appetite,  this  way  and  that  way ;  on  the  left,  and  on  the        incon_ 
right   hand;    upward   and    downe-ward,    according   as    the  ^      Ofour 
winde  of  occasions  doth  transport  us :  we  never  thinke  on        )ns 
what  we  would  have,  but  at  the  instant  we  would  have  it : 
and  change  as  that  beast  that  takes  the  colour  of  the  place 
wherein  it  is  laid.     What  we  even  now  purposed,  we  alter 
by  and  by,  and  presently  returne  to  our  former  biase :  all  is 
but  changing,  motion,  and  inconstancy : 

Ducimur  ut  nervis  alienis  mobile  lignum.  HOR. 

So  are  we  drawne,  as  wood  is  shoved, 
By  others  sinnewes  each  way  moved. 

We  goe  not,  but  we  are  carried  :  as  things  that  flote,  now 
gliding  gently,  now  hulling  violently ;  according  as  the 
water  is,  either  stormy  or  calme. 

— nonne  videmus  LucR.iii.  i 

Quid  sibi  quisque  velit  nescire  et  qucerere  semper, 
Commutare  locum  quasi  onus  deponere  possit  ? 

See  we  not,  every  man  in  his  thoughts  height 

Knowes  not  what  he  would  have,  yet  seekes  he  streight 

To  change  place,  as  he  could  lay  downe  his  weight  ? 

Every  day  new  toyes,  each  houre  new  fantasies,  and  our 
humours  move  and  fleet  with  the  fleetings  and  movings  of 
time. 

Tales  sunt  hominum  mentes,  quali  Pater  ipse  Cic.  Fragm. 

lupiter  auctifero  lustravit  lumine  terras. 

Such  are  mens  mindes,  as  that  great  God  of  might 
Surveies  the  earth  with  encrease  bearing  light. 

We  float  and  waver  betweene  divers  opinions :  we  will 
nothing  freely,  nothing  absolutely,  nothing  constantly.  Had 
any  man  prescribed  certaine  Lawes,  or  established  assured 
policies  in  his  owne  head ;  in  his  life  should  we  daily  see, 
to  shine  an  equality  of  customes,  an  assured  order,  and  an 
infallible  relation  from  one  thing  to  another  (Empedocles 
noted  this  deformity  to  be  amongst  the  Agrigentines,  that 
they  gave  themselves  so  over  unto  delights,  as  if  they  should 
die  to  morrow  next,  and  built  as  if  they  should  never  die) 
the  discourse  thereof  were  easie  to  be  made.  As  is  scene 

7 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

in  young  Cato :  He  that  toucht  but  one  step  of  it,  hath 
touched  all.  It  is  an  harmony  of  well  according  tunes  and 
which  cannot  contradict  it  selfe.  With  us  it  is  cleane 
contrary,  so  many  actions,  so  many  particular  judgements 
are  there  required.  The  surest  way  (in  mine  opinion)  were 
to  refer  them  unto  the  next  circumstances,  without  entering 
into  further  search,  and  without  concluding  any  other  conse 
quence  of  them.  During  the  late  tumultuous  broiles  of 
our  mangled  estate,  it  was  told  me,  that  a  young  woman, 
not  farre  from  mee,  had  head-long  cast  her  selfe  out  of  a 
high  window,  with  intent  to  kill  herselfe,  only  to  avoid 
the  ravishment  of  a  rascaly-base  souldier,  that  lay  in  her 
house,  who  offered  to  force  her :  and  perceiving  that  with 
the  fall  she  had  not  killed  herselfe,  to  make  an  end  of  her 
enterprize,  she  would  have  cut  her  owne  throat  with  a 
knife,  but  that  she  was  hindered  by  some  that  came  in 
to  her :  Neverthelesse  having  sore  wounded  herselfe,  she 
voluntarily  confessed,  that  the  Souldier  had  yet  but  urged 
her  with  importunate  requests,  suing  -  solicitations,  and 
golden  bribes,  but  she  feared  he  would  in  the  end  have 
obtained  his  purpose  by  compulsion  :  by  whose  earnest 
speeches,  resolute  countenance,  and  gored  bloud  (a  true 
testimony  of  her  chaste  vertue)  she  might  appeare  to  be 
the  lively  patterne  of  another  Lucrece,  yet  know  I  certainly, 
that  both  before  that  time,  and  afterward,  she  had  beene 
enjoyed  of  others  upon  easier  composition.  And  as  the 
common  saying  is  ;  Faire  and  soft,  as  squemish-honest  as 
she  seemes,  although  you  misse  of  your  intent,  conclude  not 
rashly  an  inviolable  chastitie  to  be  in  your  Mistresse ;  For, 
a  groome  or  a  horse-keeper  may  finde  an  houre  to  thrive  in  ; 
and  a  dog  hath  a  day.  Antigonus  having  taken  upon  him 
to  favour  a  Souldier  of  his,  by  reason  of  his  vertue  and 
valour,  commanded  his  Physitians  to  have  great  care  of  him, 
and  see  whether  they  could  recover  him  of  a  lingring  and 
inward  disease,  which  had  long  tormented  him,  who  being 
perfectly  cured,  he  afterward  perceiving  him  to  be  nothing 
so  earnest  and  diligent  in  his  affaires,  demanded  of  him,  how 
he  was  so  changed  from  him  selfe,  and  become  so  ocwardish  : 
Your  selfe  good  Sir  (answered  he)  have  made  me  so,  by  rid 
ding  me  of  those  infirmities,  which  so  did  grieve  me,  that  I 
8 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

made  no  accompt  of  my  life.     A  Souldier  of  Lucullus,  hav-  H AFTER 
ing  by  his  enemies  beene  robbed  of  all  he  had,  to  revenge        I 
himselfe  undertooke  a  notable  and  desperat  atempt  upon  f  1    e  incon~ 
them  ;  and  having  recovered  his  losses,  Lucullus  conceived  a  S1lctions°U 
very  good  opinion  of  him,  and  with  the  greatest  shewes  of 
assured  trust  and  loving  kindnesse  he  could  bethinke  him 
selfe,  made  especiall  accompt  of  him,  and  in  any  dangerous 
enterprize  seemed  to  trust  and  employ  him  only : 

Verbis  qute  timido  quoque  possent  adders  mentem :  HOR. 

With  words,  which  to  a  coward  might 
Adde  courage,  had  he  any  spright. 

Imploy  (said  he  unto  him)  some  wretch-stripped  and  robbed  Qu. 

Souldier 

— (quantumvis  rusticus  ibit,  39. 

Ibit  eo,  quovis,  qui  zonam  perdidit,  inquit. ) 

(None  is,  saith  he,  so  clownish,  but  will-on, 
Where  you  will  have  him,  if  his  purse  be  gone) 

and  absolutely  refused  to  obey  him.  When  we  reade  that 
Mahomet,  having  outragiously  rated  Chasan,  chiefe  leader 
of  his  Janizers,  because  he  saw  his  troup  wel-nigh  defeated 
by  the  Hungarians,  and  hee  to  behave  himselfe  but  faintly 
in  the  fight,  Chasan  without  making  other  reply,  alone 
as  he  was,  and  without  more  adoe,  with  his  weapon  in  his 
hand  rushed  furiously  in  the  thickest  throng  of  his 
enemies  that  he  first  met  withall,  of  whom  hee  was  instantly 
slaine :  This  may  haply  be  deemed,  rather  a  rash  conceit, 
than  a  justification  ;  and  a  new  spight,  than  a  naturall 
prowes.  He  whom  you  saw  yesterday  so  boldly-venturous, 
wonder  not  if  you  see  him  a  dastardly  meacocke  to  morrow 
next :  for  either  anger  or  necessitie,  company  or  wine,  a 
sudden  fury  or  the  clang  of  a  trumpet,  might  rowze-up 
his  heart,  and  stir  up  his  courage.  It  is  no  heart  nor  courage 
so  framed  by  discourse  or  deliberation  :  These  circumstances 
have  setled  the  same  in  him :  Therefore  it  is  no  marvell  if 
by  other  contrary  circumstance  he  become  a  craven  and 
change  coppy.  This  supple  variation,  and  easie  yeelding 
contradiction,  which  is  scene  in  us,  hath  made  some  to 
imagine,  that  wee  had  two  soules,  and  others,  two  faculties ; 
B  9 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

whereof  every  one  as  best  she  pleaseth,  accompanieth  and 
doth  agitate  us ;  the  one  towards  good,  the  other  towards 
"  evill.  Forsomuch  as  such  a  rough  diversitie  cannot  wel  sort 
IT  and  agree  in  one  simple  subject.  The  blast  of  accidents 
doth  not  only  remove  me  according  to  his  inclination ;  for 
besides,  I  remove  and  trouble  my  selfe  by  the  instability  of 
my  posture,  and  whosoever  looketh  narrowly  about  himselfe, 
shall  hardly  see  himselfe  twise  in  one  same  state.  Sometimes 
I  give  my  soule  one  visage,  and  sometimes  another,  accord 
ing  unto  the  posture  or  side  I  lay  her  in.  If  I  speake 
diversly  of  my  selfe,  it  is  because  I  looke  diversly  upon  my 
selfe.  All  contrarieties  are  found  in  her,  according  to  some 
turne  or  removing ;  and  in  some  fashion  or  other.  Shame- 
fast,  bashfull,  insolent,  chaste,  luxurious,  peevish,  pratling, 
silent,  fond,  doting,  labourious,  nice,  delicate,  ingenious, 
slow,  dull,  fro  ward,  humorous,  debonaire,  wise,  ignorant, 
false  in  words,  true-speaking,  both  liberall,  covetous,  and 
prodigall.  All  these  I  perceive  in  some  measure  or  other  to 
bee  in  mee,  according  as  I  stirre  or  turne  my  selfe ;  And 
whosoever  shall  needfully  survay  and  consider  himselfe,  shall 
finde  this  volubility  and  discordance  to  be  in  himselfe,  yea 
and  in  his  very  judgement.  I  have  nothing  to  say  entirely, 
simply,  and  with  soliditie  of  my  selfe,  without  confusion, 
disorder,  blending,  mingling ;  and  in  one  word,  Distmguo  is 
the  most  universall  part  of  my  logike.  Although  I  ever 
purpose  to  speake  good  of  good,  and  rather  to  enterpret 
those  things,  that  will  beare  it,  unto  a  good  sense ;  yet  is  it 
that,  the  strangenesse  of  our  condition  admitteth  that  we 
are  often  urged  to  do  well  by  vice  it  selfe,  if  well  doing  were 
not  judged  by  the  intention  only.  Therefore  may  not  a 
couragious  act  conclude  a  man  to  be  valiant.  He  that  is  so, 
when  just  occasion  serveth,  shall  ever  be  so,  and  upon  all 
occasions.  If  it  were  an  habitude  of  vertue,  and  not  a 
sudden  humour,  it  would  make  a  man  equally  resolute  at  all 
assayes,  in  all  accidents :  Such  alone,  as  in  company ;  such 
in  a  single  combat,  as  in  a  set  battel ;  For,  whatsoever  some 
say,  valour  is  all  alike,  and  not  one  in  the  street  or  towne, 
and  another  in  the  campe  or  field.  As  couragiously  should 
a  man  beare  a  sickenesse  in  his  bed,  as  a  hurt  in  the  field  and 
feare  death  no  more  at  home  in  his  house,  than  abroad  in  an 
10 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

assault.  We  should  not  then  see  one  same  man 
the  breach,  or  charge  his  enemie  with  an  assured  and 
undouted  fiercenesse,  and  afterward  having  escaped  thatj,  to 
vexe,  to  grive  and  torment  himselfe  like  unto  a  seely  woman, 
or  faint-hearted  milke-sop  for  the  losse  of  a  sute,  or  death  of 
a  childe.  If  one  chance  to  be  carelesly  base-minded  in  his 
infancie,  and  constantly-resolute  in  povertie ;  if  he  be  timor- 
ously-fearefull  at  sight  of  a  Barbers  razor,  and  afterw 
stowtly-undismayed  against  his  enemies  swords  :  The  action 
is  commendable,  but  not  the  man.  Divers  Graecians  (sa 
Cicero)  cannot  endure  to  looke  their  enemy  in  the  face, 
are  they  most  constant  in  their  sickenesses  ;  whereas  tie 


ter  CHAPTER 
I 


actions 


CiC.  Tusc.  Qu. 


11.  f. 


Cimbrians,  and  Celtiberians,  are  meere  contrary.    Nihil  eni 
potest  esse  cequabile,  quod  non  a  certa  ratione  proficiscatw 
'  For  nothing  can  beare  it  selfe  even,  which  proceedeth  n< 
'  from  resolved  reason.'     There  is  no  valor  more  extreme  ii 
his  kinde,  than  that  of  Alexander ;  yet  is  it  but  in  speci< 
nor  every  where  sufficiently  full  and  universall.     As  incoml 
parable  as  it  is,  it  hath  his  blemishes,  which  is  the  reasoi 
that  in  the  idleest  suspitions,  he  apprehendeth  at  the  con 
spiracies  of  his   followers  against  his  life,  we  see  him   s( 
earnestly  to  vex,  and  so  desperately  to  trouble  himselfe :  In  I 
search  and  pursuit  whereof  he  demeaneth  himselfe  with  sol 
vehement  and  indiscreet  an  injustice,  and  with  such  a  demisse 
feare,  that   even   his   naturall  reason  is  thereby  subverted.  I 
Also  the  superstition,  wherewith  he  is  so  throughly  tainted, 
beareth  some  shew  of  pusilanimitie.     And   the   unlimited 
excesse  of  the  repentance  he  shewed  for  the    murther   of 
Clitus,  is  also  a  witnesse  of  the  inequalitie  of  his  courage. 
Our  matters  are  but  parcels  hudled  up,  and  peeces  patched 
together,    and   we    endevour   to   acquire    honour   by    false 
meanes,  and  untrue  tokens.     Vertue  will  not  bee  followed, 
but  by  her  selfe:  And  if  at  any  time  wee  borrow  her  maske, 
upon  some  other  occasion,  she  will  as  soone  pull  it  from  our 
face.     It  is  a  lively  hew,  and  strong  die,  if  the  soule  be  once 
dyed  with  the  same  perfectly,  and  which  will  never  fade  or 
be  gone,  except  it  carry  the  skin  away  with  it.    Therefore  to 
judge  a  man,  we  must  a  long  time  follow,  and  very  curiously 
marke  his  steps ;  whether  constancie  doe  wholy  subsist  and 
continue  upon  her  owne  foundation  in  him,  Cui  Vivendi  via  CxcLud  v. 

11 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


con- 


CH AFTER  consderata  atque  provisa  est :    '  Who  hath  forecast  and 

'  slc£red  the  way  of  life ' ;  whether  the  variety  of  occurrences 
Of  the  mcon-  maf    ,  .         ,     J  u  •  *       u  • 

stancie  of  our     7e  nim  change  his  pace  (I  meane  his  way,  for  his  pace 
actions       mT  either  be  hastened  or  slowed)  let  him  run-on :  such  a 
°M(as  sayeth  the  imprease  of  our  good  Talbot)  goeth  before 
wind.     It  is  no  marvell  (saith  an  old  writer)  that  hazard 
such  power  over  us,  since  wee  live  by  hazard.     It  is 
sible  for  him  to  dispose  of  his  particular  actions,  that 
not  in  grose  directed  his  life  unto  one  certaine  end.     It 
[impossible  for  him  to  range  all  peeces  in  order,  that  hath 
)t  a  plot  or  forme  of  the  totall  frame  in  his  head.     What 
rayleth  the  provision  of  all  sorts  of  colours  unto  one  that 
Inowes  not  what  he  is  to  draw  ?    No  man  makes  any  certaine 
fesigne  of  his  life,  and  we  deliberate  of  it  but  by  parcels.    A 
dlfull  archer  ought  first  to  know  the  marke  he  aimeth  at, 
md  then  apply  his  hand,  his  bow,  his  string,  his  arrow  and 
ds  motion  accordingly.     Our  counsels  goe  a  stray,  because 
'they  are  not  rightly  addressed,  and  have  no  fixed  end.     No 
winde  makes  for  him,  that  hath  no  intended  port  to  saile 
unto.     As  for  me,  I  allow  not  greatly  of  that  judgement, 
which  some  made  of  Sophocles,  and  to  have  concluded  him 
sufficient  in  the  managing  of  domesticall  matters,  against  the 
accusation  of  his  owne  Sonne,  only  by  the  sight  of  one  of 
his  tragedies.     Nor  doe  I  commend  the  conjecture  of  the 
Parians,  sent  to  reforme  the  Milesians,  as  sufficient  to  the 
consequence  they  drew  thence.     In  visiting  and  surveying 
the  He,  they  marked  the  Landes  that  were  best  husbanded, 
and  observed  the  country  houses  that  were  best  governed. 
And  having  registred  the  names  of  their  owners  ;  and  after 
ward  made  an  assembly  of  the  Townes-men  of  the  Citie,  they 
named  and  instituted  those  owners  as  new  Governours  and 
Magistrates,  judging    and    concluding,    that    being    good 
husbands  and  carefull  of  their  houshold  affaires,  they  must 
consequently  be  so  of  publike  matters.     We  are  all  framed 
of  flaps  and  patches  and  of  so  shapelesse  and  diverse  a  con 
texture,  that  every  peece  and  every  moment   playeth    his 
part.     And  there  is  as  much  difference  found  betweene  us 
and  our  selves,  as  there  is  betweene  our  selves  and   other. 
Magnam   rem  puta,  unum   hominem  agere.     'Esteeme  it  a 
'  great  matter,  to  play  but  one  man.' 
12 


actions 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Since  ambition  may  teach  men  both  valour,  temperance,  CHAPTER 
liberality,  yea  and  justice  :  Sith  covetousnesse  may  settle  in  I 

the  minde  of  a  Shop-prentise-boy,  brought  up  in  ease  and  **  incon- 
idlenesse,  a  dreadlesse  assurance  to  leave  his  home-bred  ease,  s 
and  forgoe  his  place  of  education,  and  in  a  small  barke  to 
yeeld  himselfe  unto  the  mercy  of  blustring  waves,  mercilesse 
windes  and  wrathfull  Neptune  ;  and  that  it  also  teacheth 
discretion  and  wisdome  ;  And  that  Venus  her  selfe  ministreth 
resolution  and  hardinesse  unto  tender  youth  as  yet  subject 
to  the  discipline  of  the  rod,  and  teacheth  the  ruthlesse 
Souldier,  the  soft  and  tenderly  effeminate  heart  of  women  in 
their  mothers  laps. 

Hacducecustodesfurtimtransgressajaccntes,  TIB.  ii.  El.  i. 

— Ad  juvenem  tenebris  sola puella  venit.  75. 

The  wench  by  stealeth  her  lodg'd  guards  having  stript, 
By  this  guide,  sole,  i'  th'  darkex  to  th'  yonker  skipt. 

It  is  no  part  of  a  well-grounded  judgement,  simply  to 
judge  our  selves  by   our  exteriour  actions  :    A  man    must 
thorowly   sound    himselfe,   and    dive   into   his   heart,   and 
there  see  by  what  wards  or  springs  the  motions  stirre. 
But  forasmuch  as  it  is  a  hazardous  and  high  en 
terprise,    I   would    not    have   so  many  to 
meddle  with  it  as  doe. 


THE    SECOND    CHAPTER 

Of  Drunkennesse. 


HE  world  is  nothing  but  variety,  and  dis 
semblance.  Vices  are  all  alike,  inasmuch 
as  they  are  all  vices :  And  so  doe  haply 
the  Stoikes  meane  it.  But  though  they 
are  equally  vices,  they  are  not  equall 
vices  ;  And  that  hee  who  hath  started  a 
hundred  steps  beyond  the  limits, 


Quos  ultra  citraque  nequit  consistere  rectum, 

On  this  side,  or  beyond  the  which 
No  man  can  hold  a  right  true  pitch, 


HOR.  i.  Sat.  i. 
107. 


13 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  is  not  of  worse  condition,  than  he  that  is  ten  steps  short  of 
11  it,  is  no  whit  credible  :  and  that  sacriledge  is  not  worse  than 

Of  Drunken-  the  steaiing  of  a  Colewort  out  of  a  Garden. 

nesse 

HOR.  i.  Sat.  in.  Nee  vincet  ratio,  tantundem  ut  peccet  idemque, 

! !  cj.  *  Qtii  teneros  caules  alieni  fregerit  horti, 

Et  qui  nocturnus  divum  sacra  legerit. 

No  reason  can  evict,  as  great  or  same  sinne  taints 
Him  that  breakes  in  anothers  Garden  tender  plants, 
And  him   that   steales  by  night  things    consecrate   to 
Saints. 

There  is  as  much  diversity  in  that  as  in  any  other  thing. 
The  confusion  of  order  and  measure  of  crimes,  is  dangerous  : 
Murtherers,  Traitors  and  Tyrants,  have  too  much  gaine  by 
it :  it  is  no  reason  their  conscience  should  be  eased,  in  that 
some  is  either  idle  or  lascivious,  or  lesse  assiduous  unto 
devotion.  Every  man  poiseth  upon  his  fellowes  sinne,  and 
elevates  his  owne.  Even  teachers  doe  often  range  it  ill  in 
my  conceit.  As  Socrates  said,  that  the  chiefest  office  of 
wisdome,  was  to  distinguish  goods  and  evils.  We  others,  to 
whom  the  best  is  ever  in  vice,  should  say  the  like  of  know 
ledge,  to  distinguish  vices.  Without  which,  and  that  very 
exact,  both  vertuous  and  wicked  men  remaine  confounded 
and  unknowen.  Now  drunkennesse  amongst  others,  appeareth 
to  mee  a  grose  and  brutish  vice.  The  minde  hath  more  part 
else  where ;  and  some  vices  there  are,  which  (if  it  may  lawfully 
be  spoken)  have  a  kinde  of  I  wot  not  what  generosity  in 
them.  Some  there  are,  that  have  learning,  diligence,  valour, 
prudence,  wit,  cunning,  dexterity,  and  subtlety  joyned  with 
them  ;  whereas  this  is  meerely  corporall,  and  terrestriall. 
And  the  grosest  and  rudest  nation,  that  liveth  amongst  us 
at  this  day,  is  only  that  which  keepeth  it  in  credit.  Other 
vices  but  alter  and  distract  the  understanding,  whereas  this 
utterly  subverteth  the  same,  and  astonieth  the  body. 

LUCR.  iii.  479.  — cum  vini  vis  penetravit, 

Consequitur  gravitas  membrorum,  prcepediuntur 
Crura  vacillanti,  tardescit  lingua,  madct  mens, 
Nant  oculi,  clamor,  singultus,jurgiagliscunt. 

When  once  the  force  of  wine  hath  inly  pierst, 
Limbes-heavinesse  is  next,  legs  faine  would  goe, 
But  reeling  cannot,  tongue  drawles,  mindes  disperst, 
Eyes  swimme,  cries,  hickups,  brables  grow. 
14 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

The  worst  estate  of  man,  is  where  he  loseth  the  knowledge  CHAPTER 
and  government  of  himselfe.     And  amongst  other  things,  it  H 

is  said,  that  as  must  wine  boyling  and  working  in  a  vessell,  ° 
workes  and  sends  upward  what  ever  it  containeth  in  the 
bottome,  so  doth  wine  cause  those  that  drinke  excessively  of 
it,  worke  up,  and  breake  out  their  most  concealed  secrets. 

— tu  sapientium  HOR.  iii.  Od. 

Curas,  et  arcanum  jocoso  xxi.  14. 

Consilium  retegis  Lyceo. 

Thou  (wine-cup)  doest  by  wine  reveale 
The  cares,  which  wise  men  would  conceale, 
And  close  drifts,  at  a  merry  meale. 

losephus  reporteth,  that  by  making  an  Ambassador  to 
tipple-square,  whom  his  enemies  had  sent  unto  him,  he 
wrested  all  his  secrets  out  of  him.  Neverthelesse  Augustus 
having  trusted  Lucius  Piso,  that  conquered  Thrace,  with  the 
secretest  affaires  he  had  in  hand,  had  never  cause  to  be 
discontented  with  him  ;  Nor  Tiberius  with  Cossus,  to  whom 
he  imparted  all  his  seriousest  counsels,  although  we  know 
them  both  to  have  so  given  themselves  to  drinking  of  wine, 
that  they  were  often  faine  to  be  carried  from  the  Senat,  and 
both  were  reputed  notable  drunkards. 

— Hesterno  inflatum  venas  de  more  Lyceo.  VIRG.  Buc.Ec. 

Veines  pufft  up,,  as  is  used  alway, 
By  wine  which  was  drunke  yesterday. 

And  as  faithfully  as  the  complot  and  purpose  to  kill  Caesar 
committed  unto  Cimber,  who  would  daily  be  drunke  with 
quaffing  of  wine,  as  unto  Cassius,  that  drunke  nothing  but 
water,  whereupon  he  answered  very  pleasantly, '  What  ?  shall 
'  I  beare  a  Tyrant,  that  am  not  able  to  beare  wine  ? '  We  see 
our  carowsing  tospot  German  souldiers,  when  they  are  most 
plunged  in  their  cups,  and  as  drunke  as  Rats,  to  have  perfect 
remembrance  of  their  quarter,  of  the  watch  word,  and  of 
their  files. 

— necfacilis  victoria  de  madidls,  et  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Blcesis,  atque  mero  titubantibus.  xv.  47. 

Nor  is  the  conquest  easie  of  men  sow'st, 
Lisping  and  reeling  with  wine  they  carow'st. 

15 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  is  not  of  worse  condition,  than  he  that  is  ten  steps  short  of 
H  it,  is  no  whit  credible  :  and  that  sacriledge  is  not  worse  than 

Drunken-  the  stealing  of  a  Colewort  out  of  a  Garden. 

IlGSSG 

HOR.  i.  Sat.  iii.  Nee  vincet  ratio,  tantundem  ut  peccet  idemque, 

115.  Qui  teneros  caules  alieni  fregerit  horti, 

Et  qui  nocturnus  divum  sacra  legerit. 

No  reason  can  evict,  as  great  or  same  sinne  taints 
Him  that  breakes  in  anothers  Garden  tender  plants, 
And  him    that    steales  by  night  things    consecrate   to 
Saints. 

There  is  as  much  diversity  in  that  as  in  any  other  thing. 
The  confusion  of  order  and  measure  of  crimes,  is  dangerous  : 
Murtherers,  Traitors  and  Tyrants,  have  too  much  gaine  by 
it :  it  is  no  reason  their  conscience  should  be  eased,  in  that 
some  is  either  idle  or  lascivious,  or  lesse  assiduous  unto 
devotion.  Every  man  poiseth  upon  his  fellowes  sinne,  and 
elevates  his  owne.  Even  teachers  doe  often  range  it  ill  in 
my  conceit.  As  Socrates  said,  that  the  chiefest  office  of 
wisdome,  was  to  distinguish  goods  and  evils.  We  others,  to 
whom  the  best  is  ever  in  vice,  should  say  the  like  of  know 
ledge,  to  distinguish  vices.  Without  which,  and  that  very 
exact,  both  vertuous  and  wicked  men  remaine  confounded 
and  unknowen.  Now  drunkennesse  amongst  others,  appeareth 
to  mee  a  grose  and  brutish  vice.  The  minde  hath  more  part 
else  where ;  and  some  vices  there  are,  which  (if  it  may  lawfully 
be  spoken)  have  a  kinde  of  I  wot  not  what  generosity  in 
them.  Some  there  are,  that  have  learning,  diligence,  valour, 
prudence,  wit,  cunning,  dexterity,  and  subtlety  joyned  with 
them  ;  whereas  this  is  meerely  corporall,  and  terrestriall. 
And  the  grosest  and  rudest  nation,  that  liveth  amongst  us 
at  this  day,  is  only  that  which  keepeth  it  in  credit.  Other 
vices  but  alter  and  distract  the  understanding,  whereas  this 
utterly  subverteth  the  same,  and  astonieth  the  body. 

LUCR.  iii.  479.  — cum  vini  vis  penetravit, 

Consequitur  gravitas  memb?'orum,  prespediuntur 
Crura  vacillanti,  tardescit  lingua,  madct  mens, 
Nant  oculi,  clamor,  singultus ,  jurgia  gliscunt. 

When  once  the  force  of  wine  hath  inly  pierst, 
Limbes-heavinesse  is  next,  legs  faine  would  goe, 
But  reeling  cannot,  tongue  drawles,  mindes  disperst, 
Eyes  swimme,  cries.,  hickups,  brables  grow. 
14 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

The  worst  estate  of  man,  is  where  he  loseth  the  knowledge  CHAPTER 
and  government  of  himselfe.     And  amongst  other  things,  it  n 

is  said,  that  as  must  wine  boyling  and  working  in  a  vessell,        n™g^  ei 
workes  and  sends  upward  what  ever  it  containeth  in  the 
bottome,  so  doth  wine  cause  those  that  drinke  excessively  of 
it,  worke  up,  and  breake  out  their  most  concealed  secrets. 

— tu  sapientium  HOR.  iii.  Od. 

Curas,  et  arcanum  jocoso  xxi.  14. 

Concilium  retegis  Lyceo. 

Thou  (wine-cup)  doest  by  wine  reveale 
The  cares,  which  wise  men  would  conceale, 
And  close  drifts,  at  a  merry  meale. 

losephus  reporteth,  that  by  making  an  Ambassador  to 
tipple-square,  whom  his  enemies  had  sent  unto  him,  he 
wrested  all  his  secrets  out  of  him.  Neverthelesse  Augustus 
having  trusted  Lucius  Piso,  that  conquered  Thrace,  with  the 
secretest  affaires  he  had  in  hand,  had  never  cause  to  be 
discontented  with  him  ;  Nor  Tiberius  with  Cossus,  to  whom 
he  imparted  all  his  seriousest  counsels,  although  we  know 
them  both  to  have  so  given  themselves  to  drinking  of  wine, 
that  they  were  often  faine  to  be  carried  from  the  Senat,  and 
both  were  reputed  notable  drunkards. 

— Hesterno  inflatum  venas  de  more  Lyceo.  VIRG.  Buc.Ec. 

VI      I C 

Veines  pufft  up,  as  is  used  alway, 
By  wine  which  was  drunke  yesterday. 

And  as  faithfully  as  the  complot  and  purpose  to  kill  Caesar 
committed  unto  Cimber,  who  would  daily  be  drunke  with 
quaffing  of  wine,  as  unto  Cassius,  that  drunke  nothing  but 
water,  whereupon  he  answered  very  pleasantly, 6  What  ?  shall 
4  I  beare  a  Tyrant,  that  am  not  able  to  beare  wine  ? '  We  see 
our  carowsing  tospot  German  souldiers,  when  they  are  most 
plunged  in  their  cups,  and  as  drunke  as  Rats,  to  have  perfect 
remembrance  of  their  quarter,  of  the  watch  word,  and  of 
their  files. 

— necfacilis  victoria  de  madidis,  et  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Blcesis,  atque  mero  titubantibus.  xv.  47. 

Nor  is  the  conquest  easie  of  men  sow'st, 
Lisping  and  reeling  with  wine  they  carow'st. 

15 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  a  palat.     The  Germans  doe  in  a  manner  drinke  equally  of 
II  all  sorts  of  wine  with  like  pleasure.     Their  end  is  rather  to 

ken"  SulPe  {i  downe  freely>  than  to  tast  it  kindly.  And  to  say 
truth  they  have  it  better  cheape.  Their  voluptuousnesse  is 
more  plenteous  and  fuller.  Secondarily,  to  drinke  after  the 
French  manner,  as  two  draughts  and  moderatly,  is  over 
much  to  restraine  the  favours  of  that  God.  There  is  more 
time  and  constancie  required  thereunto.  Our  forefathers 
were  wont  to  spend  whole  nights  in  that  exercise,  yea  often 
times  they  joyned  whole  long  dayes  unto  them.  And  a  man 
must  proportion  his  ordinarie  more  large  and  firme.  I  have 
in  my  dayes  scene  a  principall  Lord  ;  a  man  of  great  employ 
ment  and  enterprises,  and  famous  for  good  successe,  who 
without  straining  himselfe,  and  eating  but  an  ordinary 
meales-meat,  was  wont  to  drinke  little  lesse  than  five  pottles 
of  wine,  yet  at  his  rising  seemed  to  be  nothing  distempered, 
but  rather  as  we  have  found  to  our  no  small  cost  in  managing 
of  our  affaires,  over-wise  and  considerate.  The  pleasure  of 
that,  whereof  we  would  make  account  in  the  course  of  our 
life  ought  to  be  employed  longer  space.  It  were  necessary, 
as  shop-boyes  or  labouring  people,  that  we  should  refuse  no 
occasion  to  drinke  and  continually  to  have  this  desire  in  our 
minde.  It  seemeth  that  wee  daily  shorten  the  use  of  this  : 
and  that  in  our  houses,  (as  I  have  seene  in  mine  infancie) 
breakefasts,  nunchions,  and  beavers  should  be  more  frequent 
and  often  used,  than  now  adayes  they  are.  And  should  wee 
thereby  in  any  sort  proceed  towards  amendment  ?  No 
verily.  But  it  may  be,  that  we  have  much  more  given  our 
selves  over  unto  paillardise  and  all  manner  of  luxurie  than 
our  fathers  were.  They  are  two  occupations,  that  enter- 
hinder  one  another,  in  their  vigor.  On  the  one  side,  it  hath 
empaired  and  weakned  our  stomacke,  and  on  the  other, 
sobrietie  serveth  to  make  us  more  jolly-quaint,  lusty,  and 
wanton  for  the  exercise  of  love  matters.  It  is  a  wonder  to 
thinke  on  the  strange  tales  I  have  heard  my  father  report,  of 
the  chastitie  of  his  times.  He  might  well  speake  of  it,  as 
he  that  was  both  by  art  and  nature  proper  for  the  use  and 
solace  of  Ladies.  He  spake  little  and  well,  few  words,  but 
to  the  purpose,  and  was  ever  wont  to  entermixe  some 
ornament  taken  from  vulgar  bookes,  and  above  all,  Spanish, 
18 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

amongst  his  common  speeches  :  And  of  all  Spanish  Authors,  CHAPTER 
none  was  more  familiar  unto  him   than  Marcus  Aurelius.  II 

His  demeanour  and  carriage  was  ever  milde,  meeke,  gentle, 
and  very  modest,  and  above  all,  grave  and  stately.  There  is 
nothing  he  seemed  to  be  more  carefull  of,  than  of  his  honesty, 
and  observe  a  kinde  of  decencie  of  his  person,  and  orderly 
decorum  in  his  habits,  were  it  on  foot  or  on  horsebacke. 
He  was  exceeding  nice  in  performing  his  word  or  promise ; 
And  so  strictly  conscientious  and  obsequous  in  religion, 
that  generally  he  seemed  rather  to  encline  toward  supersti 
tion,  than  the  contrary.  Though  he  were  but  a  little  man, 
his  courage  and  vigor  was  great :  he  was  of  an  upright, 
and  well  proportioned  stature,  of  a  pleasing,  cheerefull- 
looking  countenance,  of  a  swarthy  hue,  nimbly  addicted, 
and  exquisitely  nimble  unto  all  noble  and  gentleman -like 
exercises.  I  have  scene  some  hollow  staves  of  his  filled 
with  lead,  which  hee  wont  to  use  and  exercise  his  armes 
withall,  the  better  to  enable  himselfe  to  pitch  the  barre,  to 
throw  the  sledge,  to  cast  the  pole  and  to  play  at  fence: 
and  shooes  with  leaden  soles,  which  he  wore  to  enure  him 
selfe,  to  leape,  to  vault  and  to  run.  I  may  without  blushing 
say,  that  in  memory  of  himselfe,  he  hath  left  certaine  petie 
miracles  amongst  us.  I  have  seene  him  when  hee  was  past 
threescore  yeares  of  age  mocke  at  all  our  sports,  and  out- 
countenance  our  youthfull  pastimes,  with  a  heavy  furred 
Gowne  about  him  to  leap  into  his  saddle;  to  make  the 
pommada  round  about  a  Table  upon  his  thumb ;  and 
seldome  to  ascend  any  staires  without  skipping  three  or 
foure  steps  at  once.  And  concerning  my  discourse,  hee 
was  wont  to  say,  that  in  a  whole  Province  there  was  scarse 
any  woman  of  qualitie,  that  had  an  ill  name.  Hee  would 
often  report  strange  familiarities,  namely  of  his  owne,  with 
very  honest  women,  without  any  suspicion  at  all.  And 
protested  very  religiously,  that  when  he  was  married,  he 
was  yet  a  pure  Virgine ;  yet  had  he  long  time  followed  the 
warres  beyond  the  Mountaines,  and  therein  served  long, 
whereof  hee  hath  left  a  Journall-Booke  of  his  owne 
collecting,  wherein  hee  hath  particularly  noted,  what 
soever  happened  day  by  day  worthy  the  observation,  so 
long  as  he  served,  both  for  the  publike  and  his  particular 

19 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  use.     And  he  was  well  strucken  in  yeares,  when  he  tooke 
II  a  wife.     For   returning   out  of  Italie,  in  the   yeare  of  our 

ness?611"  -^ord,  one  thousand  five  hundred  eight  and  twenty,  and 
being  full  three  and  thirty  yeares  old,  by  the  way  hee  chose 
himselfe  a  wife.  But  come  we  to  our  drinking  again e. 
The  incommodities  of  age,  which  need  some  helpe  and 
refreshing,  might  with  some  reason  beget  in  me  a  desire  or 
longing  of  this  faculty :  for,  it  is  in  a  man  the  last  pleasure, 
which  the  course  of  our  years  stealeth  upon  us.  Good 
fellowes  say,  that  naturall  heat  is  first  taken  in  our  feet : 
That  properly  belongeth  to  infancie.  From  thence  it 
ascendeth  unto  the  middle  region,  where  it  is  setled  and 
continueth  a  long  time  :  and  in  mine  opinion,  there  pro- 
duceth  the  only  true,  and  moving  pleasures  of  this  corporall 
life.  Other  delight  and  sensualities  in  respect  of  that,  doe 
but  sleepe ;  in  the  end,  like  unto  a  vapour,  which  by  little 
and  little  exhaleth,  and  mounteth  aloft,  it  comes  unto  the 
throat,  and  there  makes  her  last  bode.  Yet  could  I  never 
conceive,  how  any  man  may  either  encrease  or  prolong 
the  pleasure  of  drinking  beyond  thirst,  and  in  his  imagina 
tion  frame  an  artificial  appetite,  and  against  nature.  My 
stomacke  could  not  well  reach  so  farre :  it  is  very  much 
troubled  to  come  to  an  end  of  that  which  it  takes  for  his 
need.  My  constitution  is,  to  make  an  accompt  of  drinking, 
but  to  succeed  meat,  and  therefore  doe  I  ever  make  my  last 
draught  the  greatest.  And  forasmuch  as  in  age,  we  have  the 
roofe  of  our  mouthes  commonly  furred  with  rhume,  or  dis 
tempered,  distasted  and  altered  through  some  other  evill 
constitution,  wine  seemeth  better  unto  us  and  of  a  quicker 
relish,  according  as  our  pores  be  either  more  or  lesse  open 
and  washed.  At  least  I  seldome  relish  the  same  very  well, 
except  it  be  the  first  draught  I  take.  Anacharsis  wondered 
to  see  the  Graecians  drinke  in  greater  glasses  at  the  end  of 
their  meales,  than  in  the  beginning.  It  was  (as  I  imagine) 
for  the  very  same  reason,  that  the  Germans  doe  it,  who  never 
begin  to  carouse,  but  when  they  have  well  fed.  Plato  for- 
biddeth  children  to  drinke  any  wine,  before  they  be  eighteene 
yeeres  of  age,  and  to  be  drunke  before  they  come  to  forty. 
But  to  such  as  have  once  attained  the  age  of  fortie,  he  is 
content  to  pardon  them,  if  they  chance  to  delight  themselves 
20 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

with  it,  and  alloweth  them  somwhat  largely  to  blend  the  CHAPTER 
influence  of  Dionysius  in  their  banquets,  that  good  God,  who  II 

bestoweth  cheerfulnesse  upon  men,  and  youth  unto  aged  Of  Drunken- 
men,  who  layeth  and  aswageth  the  passions  of  the  minde, 
even  as  yron  is  made  flexible  by  the  fire :  and  in  his  pro 
fitable  lawes  drinking-meetings  or  quaffing  companies  as 
necessary  and  commendable  (alwaies  provided  there  be  a 
chiefe  leader  amongst  them  to  containe  and  order  them) 
drunkennesse  being  a  good  and  certaine  tryall  of  everie  mans 
nature ;  and  therewithall  proper  to  give  aged  men  the 
courage  to  make  merry  in  dancing  and  in  musicke ;  things 
alowable  and  profitable,  and  such  as  they  dare  not  undertake 
being  sober  and  setled.  That  wine  is  capable  to  supply  the 
mind  with  temperance,  and  the  bodie  with  health.  Not 
withstanding,  these  restrictions,  partly  borrowed  of  the 
Carthaginians,  please  him  well.  Let  those  forbeare  it  that 
are  going  about  any  expedition  of  warre.  Let  every  magis 
trate,  and  all  judges  abstain  from  it  at  what  time  they  are 
to  execute  their  charge,  and  to  consult  of  publike  affaires. 
Let  none  bestow  the  day  in  drinking,  as  the  time  that  is  due 
unto  more  serious  negotiations,  nor  the  nights  wherein  a 
man  intendeth  to  get  children.  It  is  reported,  that  Stilpo 
the  Philosopher,  finding  himselfe  surcharged  with  age,  did 
purposely  hasten  his  end,  by  drinking  of  pure  wine.  The 
like  cause  (though  not  wittingly)  did  also  suffocate  the  vital 
forces,  crazed  through  old  age  of  the  Philosopher  Arcesilaus. 
But  it  is  an  old  and  pleasant  question,  whether  a  wisemans 
mind  were  like  to  yeeld  unto  the  force  of  wine. 

Si  munitce  adhibet  vim  sapientice.  HOR.  Od. 

If  unresisted  force  it  bends, 

Gainst  wisdome  which  it  selfe  defends. 

Unto  what  vanity  doth  the  good  opinion  we  have  of  our 
selves  provoke  us  ?  The  most  temperate  and  perfectest 
minde  of  the  world,  findes  it  too  great  a  taske  to  keep  her- 
selfe  upright,  lest  she  fall  by  her  owne  weaknesse.  Of  a 
thousand  there  is  not  one  perfectly  righteous  and  setled  but 
one  instant  of  her  life,  and  question  might  be  made,  whether 
according  to  her  naturall  condition  she  might  at  any  time  be 
so.  But  to  joyne  constancie  unto  it  in  her  last  perfection  :  I 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  meane  if  nothing  should  shocke  her:  which  a  thousand 
II  accidents  may  doe.  Lucretius  that  famous  Poet,  may  Philo- 

Of  Drunken-  ^p^jg  anj  "bandie  at  his  pleasure :  Loe  where  he  lieth 
senslesse  of  an  amorous  potion.  Thinkes  any  man,  that  an 
Apoplexie  cannot  as  soone  astonish  Socrates,  as  a  poore 
labouring  man  ?  Some  of  them  have  by  the  force  of  a  sicke- 
nesse  forgot  their  owne  names,  and  a  slight  hurt  hath  over- 
throwne  the  judgement  of  others.  Let  him  be  as  wise  as  he 
can,  in  the  end  he  is  but  a  man ;  what  is  more  fraile,  more 
miserable,  or  more  vaine  ?  Wisdome  forceth  not  our 
naturall  conditions. 

LUCR.  iii.  155.  Sudores  itaque,  et  pallor  em  existere  toto 

Corpore,  et  infringi  llnguam  vocemque  aboriri 
Caligare  oculos,  sonare  aures,  succidere  artus, 
Denique  concidere  ex  animi  terrore  videmus. 

We  see  therefore,  palenesse  and  sweats  ore-grow, 
Our  bodies,  tongues  doe  falter,  voyce  doth  breake, 
Eyes  dazle,  eares  buzze,  joints  doe  shrinke  below, 
Lastly  we  swoune  by  hart-fright,  terrours  weake. 

He  must  feele  his  eyes  against  the  blow  that  threatneth 
him,  being  neere  the  brimme  of  a  percipise,  he  must  cry  out 
like  a  child.  Nature  having  purposed  to  reserve  these  light 
markes  of  her  aucthoritie  unto  herselfe,  inexpugnable  unto 
our  reason,  and  to  the  Stoicke  vertue :  to  teach  him  his 
mortalitie,  and  our  insipiditie.  He  waxeth  pale  for  feare, 
he  blusheth  for  shame,  he  groaneth  feeling  the  cholike,  if  not 
with  a  desperate  and  lowd-roaring  voyce,  yet  with  a  low, 
smothered  and  hoarse-sounding  noyse. 

Humani  a  se  nihil  alienum  putat. 

He  thinkes,  that  nothing  strange  be  can, 
To  him,  that  longs  to  any  man. 

Giddie-headed  Poets,  that  faine  what  they  list,  dare  not 
so  much  as  discharge  their  Heroes  from  teares. 

Sicfatur  lachrymans,  classique  immitit  habenas. 

So  said  he  weeping,  and  so  saide, 
Himselfe  hand  to  the  sterage  laide. 

Let  it  suffice  him  to  bridle  his  affections,  and  moderate 
his  inclinations ;  for,  it  is  not  in  him  to  beare  them  away. 


TER.  Heaut. 
act.  i.  sc.  i.  25. 


VIRG. 
i. 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Plutarke  himselfe,  who  is  so  perfect  and  excellent  a  judge  of  CHAPTER 
humane  actions,  seeing  Brutus  and  Torquatus  to  kill  their  II 

owne  children,  remaineth  doubtfull,  whether  vertue  could 
reach  so  farre,  and  whether  such  men  were  not  rather  moved 
by  some  other  passion.  All  actions  beyond  the  ordinarie 
limits,  are  subject  to  some  sinister  interpretation :  Foras 
much  as  our  taste  doth  no  more  come  unto  that  which  is 
above  it,  than  to  that  which  is  under  it.  Let  us  omit  that 
other  sect,  which  maketh  open  profession  of  fiercenes.  But 
when  in  the  very  same  sect,  which  is  esteemed  the  most 
demisse,  we  heare  the  bragges  of  Metrodorus :  Occupavite,  Metr.  Cic. 
Fortuna,  atque  cepi :  omnesque  aditus  tuos  interclusi  ut  ad  me  Tusc.  Quast.  5. 
aspirare  non  posses.  'Fortune,  I  have  prevented,  caught, 
4  and  overtaken  thee :  I  have  mured  and  ramd  up  all  thy 
'  passagis,  whereby  thou  mightest  attaine  unto  mee/  When 
Anaxarcus,  by  the  appointment  of  Nicocreon,  the  tyrant 
of  Cipres,  being  laid  along  in  a  trough  of  stone,  and  smoten 
with  yron  sledges,  ceaseth  not  to  crie  out,  streeke,  smite, 
and  breake ;  it  is  not  Anaxarcus,  it  is  but  his  vaile  you 
martyr  so.  When  we  heare  our  martyrs,  in  the  middest  of 
a  flame  crie  aloude  unto  the  Tyrant,  this  side  is  rosted 
enough,  chop  it,  eat  it,  it  is  full  rosted,  now  begin  on  the 
other.  When  in  losephus  wee  heare  a  childe  all  to  rent 
with  biting  snippers,  and  pierced  with  the  breath  of 
Antiochus,  to  defie  him  to  death,  crie  with  a  lowde- 
assured  and  undismaid  voyce ;  Tyrant  thou  losest  time,  loe 
I  am  still  at  mine  ease ;  where  is  that  smarting  paine, 
where  are  those  torments,  wherewith  whilom  thou  didst 
so  threaten  me  ?  My  constancie  doth  more  trouble  thee, 
than  I  have  feeling  of  thy  crueltie :  Oh  faint  hearted 
varlet,  doest  thou  yeeld  when  I  gather  strength  ?  Make 
mee  to  faint  or  shrinke,  cause  me  to  moane  or  lament, 
force  me  to  yeeld  and  sue  for  grace  if  thou  canst ;  encour 
age  thy  satellites,  harten  thy  executioners ;  loe  how  they 
droope  and  have  no  more  power ;  arme  them,  strengthen 
them,  flesh  them.  Verely  wee  must  needs  confesse  there  is 
some  alteration,  and  some  furie  (how  holy  soever)  in  those 
mindes.  When  we  come  unto  these  Stoick  evasions ;  I  had  . 
rather  be  furious  than  voluptuous  :  the  saying  of  Antisthenes.  DIOGEN. 

iriv  (JL(*)\\OV  TJ  aOelrjv,  'Rather  would  I  be  mad,  than  LAF.RT. vi.  c.  i . 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  <  merry/     When  Sextius  telleth  us,  he  had  rather  be  sur- 

Of  D*1  k       Prise(l  with  paine,  than  sensuality;  when  Epicurus  under- 

nesse  6  *~  takes  to  have  the  goute,  to  wantonize  and  faune  upon  him, 

and  refusing  ease  and  health,  with  a  hearty  cheerefulnesse 

defie  all  evils,  and  scornefully  despising  lesse  sharpe  griefes, 

disdayning  to  grapple  with  them,  he  blithely  desireth  and 

calleth  for  sharper,  more  forcible,  and  worthy  of  him  : 

YIRG.  sEn.  iv.  Spumantemque  dari  pecora  inter  inertia  votis 

I5°m  Optat  aprum  autfulvum  descenders  monte  leonem: 

He  wisht,  mongst  hartlesse  beasts  some  foming  Bore^ 
Or  mountaine-Lyon  would  come  downe  and  rore. 

Who  would  not  judge  them  to  be  prankes  of  a  courage 
removed  from  his  wonted  seate  ?  Our  minde  cannot  out  of 
her  place  attaine  so  high.  She  must  quit  it  and  raise  her 
selfe  aloft,  and  taking  the  bridle  in  her  teeth,  carry  and 
transport  her  man  so  farre,  that  afterward  hee  wonder  at 
himselfe,  and  rest  amazed  at  his  actions.  As  in  exploits  of 
warre,  the  heat  and  earnestnesse  of  the  fight  doth  often 
provoke  the  noble  minded  souldiers,  to  adventure  on  so 
dangerous  passages,  that  afterward  being  better  advised, 
they  are  the  first  to  wonder  at  it.  As  also  Poets,  are  often 
surprised  and  rapt  with  admiration  at  their  owne  labours, 
and  forget  the  trace,  by  which  they  past  so  happy  a  career. 
It  is  that,  which  some  terme  a  fury  or  madnesse  in  them. 
And  as  Plato  saith,  that  a  setled  and  reposed  man,  doth  in 
vaine  knocke  at  Poesies  gate.  Aristotle  likewise  saith,  that 
no  excellent  minde  is  freely  exempted  from  some  or  other 
entermixture  of  folly.  And  he  hath  reason,  to  call  any 
starting  or  extraordinarie  conceit  (how  commendable  soever) 
and  which  exceedeth  our  judgement  and  discourse,  folly. 
Forsomuch  as  '  wisdome,  is  an  orderly  and  regular  managing 
4  of  the  minde,  and  which  she  addresseth  with  measure,  and 
4  conducteth  with  proportion";  And  take  her  owne  word  for 
it.  Plato  disputeth  thus ;  that  the  facultie  of  prophesying 
and  divination  is  far  above  us,  and  that  when  wee  treat  it, 

we  must  be  besides  our  selves :  our  wisdome  must  be 

darkened  and  over  shadowed  by  sleepe,  by  sicke- 

nesse,  or  by  drowzinesse ;  or  by  some  celestiall 

fury,  ravished  from  her  owne  seat. 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 


THE    THIRD    CHAPTER 

A  custome  of  the  He  of  Cea. 


F, as  some  say,  to  philosophate  be  to  doubt; 
with  much  more  reason,  to  rave  and 
fantastiquize,  as  I  doe,  must  necessarily 
be  to  doubt :  For,  to  enquire  and  debate, 
belongeth  to  a  scholler,  and  to  resolve 
appertaines  to  a  cathedrall  master.  But 
know,  my  cathedrall,  it  is  the  authoritie 
of  Gods  divine  will,  that  without  any 
contradiction  doth  sway  us,  and  hath  her  ranke  beyond  these 
humane  and  vaine  contestations.  Philip  being  with  an 
armed  hand  entred  the  Countrie  of  Peloponnesus,  some  one 
told  Damidas,  the  Lacedemonians  were  like  to  endure  much, 
if  they  sought  not  to  reobtaine  his  lost  favour.  Oh  varlet 
as  thou  art  (answered  he.)  And  what  can  they  suffer,  who 
have  no  feare  at  all  of  death  ?  Agis  being  demanded,  how  a 
man  might  do  to  live  free,  answered  ;  '  Despising  and  con- 
c  temning  to  die.'  These  and  a  thousand  like  propositions, 
which  concurre  in  this  purpose,  do  evidently  inferre  some  thing 
beyond  the  patient  expecting  of  death  it  selfe,  to  be  suffered 
in  this  life:  witnesse  the  Lacedemonian  child,  taken  by 
Antigonus,  and  sold  for  a  slave,  who  urged  by  his  master,  to 
performe  some  abject  service ;  Thou  shalt  see  (said  he) 
whom  thou  hast  bought ;  for,  it  were  a  shame  for  me  to 
serve,  having  libertie  so  neere  at  hand,  and  therewithall 
threw  himselfe  headlong  downe  from  the  top  of  the  house. 
Antipater,  sharply  threatning  the  Lacedemonians,  to  make 
them  yeeld  to  a  certaine  request  of  his  ;  they  answered, 
Should est  thou  menace  us  worse  than  death,  we  will  rather 
die.  And  to  Philip,  who  having  written  unto  them,  that  he 
would  hinder  all  their  enterprises ;  What  ?  (say  they)  wilt 
thou  also  hinder  us  from  dying  ?  That  is  the  reason,  why 
some  say,  that  the  wiseman  liveth  as  long  as  he  ought,  and 
not  so  long  as  he  can.  And  that  the  favourablest  gift,  nature 
hath  bequeathed  us,  and  which  removeth  all  meanes  from  us 
to  complaine  of  our  condition,  is,  that  she  hath  left  us  the 
D  25 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  key  of  the  fields.    She  hath  appointed  but  one  entrance  unto 
life,  but  many  a  thousand  wayes  out  of  it :  Well  may  we 
f  want  ground  to  live  upon,  but  never  ground  to  die  in.    As 
^ea         Boiocatus  answered  the  Romanes.    Why  dost  thou  complaine 
against  this  world  ?    It  doth  not  containe  thee  :    If  thou 
livest  in  paine  and  sorrow,  thy  base  courage  is  the  cause  of 
it.     To  die  there  wanteth  but  will. 

SEN.  Theb.  act.  Ubique  mors  est:  optime  hoc  cavit  Deus, 

i.  sc.  i.  Eripere  vitam  nemo  non  homini  potest : 

At  nemo  mortem :  mille  ad  hanc  aditus  patent. 

Each  where  death  is :  God  did  this  well  purvay, 
No  man  but  can  from  man  life  take  away, 
But  none  barr's  death,  to  it  lies  many  a  way. 

And  it  is  not  a  receipt  to  one  malady  alone  ;  Death  is  a 
remedy  against  all  evils :  It  is  a  most  assured  haven,  never 
to  be  feared,  and  often  to  be  sought  :  All  comes  to  one 
period,  whether  man  make  an  end  of  himselfe,  or  whether  he 
endure  it ;  whether  he  run  before  his  day,  or  whether  he 
expect  it :  whence  soever  it  come,  it  is  ever  his  owne,  where 
ever  the  threed  be  broken,  it  is  all  there,  it's  the  end  of 
the  web.  The  voluntariest  death,  is  the  fairest.  Life 
dependeth  on  the  will  of  others,  death  on  ours.  In  nothing 
should  we  so  much  accommodate  our  selves  to  our  humors, 
as  in  that.  Reputation  doth  nothing  concerne  such  an 
enterprise,  it  is  folly  to  have  any  respect  unto  it.  To  live  is 
to  serve,  if  the  libertie  to  dye  be  wanting.  The  common 
course  of  curing  any  infirmitie,  is  ever  directed  at  the  charge 
of  life  :  we  have  incisions  made  into  us,  we  are  cauterized, 
we  have  limbes  cut  and  mangled,  we  are  let  blond,  we  are 
dieted.  Goe  we  but  one  step  further,  we  need  no  more 
physicke,  we  are  perfectly  whole.  Why  is  not  our  jugular 
or  throat-veine  as  much  at  our  command  as  the  mediane  ? 
To  extreme  sicknesses,  extreme  remedies.  Servius  the 
Grammarian  being  troubled  with  the  gowt,  found  no  better 
meanes  to  be  rid  of  it,  than  to  apply  poison  to  mortifie  his 
legs.  He  cared  not  whether  they  were  Podagrees  or  no,  so 
they  were  insensible.  God  giveth  us  sufficient  privilege, 
when  he  placeth  us  in  such  an  estate,  as  life  is  worse  than 
death  unto  us.  It  is  weaknesse  to  yeeld  to  evils,  but  folly  to 
foster  them.  The  Stoikes  say,  it  is  a  convenient  naturall 

26 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

life,  for  a  wise  man,  to  forgoe  life,  although  he  abound  in  all  CHAPTER 

happinesse ;  if  he  doe  it  opportunely  :   And  for  a  foole  to         III 

prolong  his  life,  albeit  he  be  most  miserable,  provided  he  be  A  custome  of 

in  most  part  of  things,  which  they  say  to  be  according  unto      '  e^. 

nature.     As  I  offend  not  the  lawes  made  against  theeves, 

when  I  cut  mine  owne  purse,  and  carry  away  mine  owne 

goods  ;  nor  of  destroyers  when  I  burne  mine  owne  wood  :  so 

am  I  nothing  tied  unto  lawes  made  against  murtherers,  if  I 

deprive  my  selfe  of  mine  owne  life.     Hegesias  was  wont  to  say, 

that  even  as  the  condition  of  life,  so  should  the  qualitie  of 

death  depend  on  our  election.     And  Diogenes  meeting  with 

the   Philosopher   Speusippus,   long  time  afflicted  with  the 

dropsie,  and  therefore    carried  in  a  litter,   who    cried   out 

unto   him ;   All   haile  Diogenes :    And   to  thee  no  health 

at   all,   (replied    Diogenes)    that    endurest    to   live   in   so 

wretched    an    estate.       True    it    is,    that   a   while    after, 

Speusippus  as  overtired  with  so  languishing  a  condition  of 

life,  compassed  his  owne  death.     But  this  goeth  not  without 

some  contradiction  :  For,  many  are  of  opinion,  that  without 

the  expresse  commandement  of  him,  that  hath  placed  us  in  this 

world,  we  may  by  no  meanes  forsake  the  garrison  of  it,  and 

that  it  is  in  the  hands  of  God  only,  who  therein  hath  placed 

us,  not  for  our  selves  alone,  but  for  his  glory,  and  others 

service,  when  ever  it  shall  please  him  to  discharge  us  hence, 

and  not  for  us  to  take  leave:  That  we  are  not  borne  for 

our  selves,  but  for  our  Countrie :  The  Lawes  for  their  owne 

interest  require  an  accompt  at  our  hands  for  our  selves,  and 

have  a  just  action  of  murther  against  us.     Else  as  forsakers 

of  our  owne  charge,  we  are  punished  in  the  other  world. 

Proximo,  delude  tenent  moesti  loca,  qui  sibi  let/mm  VIRG.  sEn.  vi. 

Insontes  peperere  manu,  lucemque  perosi  434. 

Projecere  animas. 

Next  place  they  lamentable  hold  in  hell, 

Whose   hand  their  death   caus'd    causelesse,   (but  not 

well) 
And  hating  life  did  thence  their  soules  expell. 

There  is  more  constancie  in  using  the  chaine  that  holds 
us,  than  in  breaking  the  same ;  and  more  triall  of  stedfast- 
nesse  in  Regulus,  than  in  Cato.  It  is  indiscretion  and 
impatience  that  hastneth  our  way.  No  accidents  can  force  a 

27 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  man    to    turne  his  backe  from  lively  vertue :   She  seeketh 
HI          out  evils  and  sorrowes  as  her  nourishment.      The  threats 
thUeSIirof0f°f  fel1   tyra*1*8'   tortures   and  torments;    executioners  and 
Cea         torturers,  doe  animate  and  quicken  her. 

HOR.  iv.  Od.  Duris  ut  ilex  tonsa  bipennibus 

iv.  57.  Nigrce  feraci  frondis  in  Algido 

Per  damna,  per  ccedes,  ab  ipso 

Ducit  opes  animumque  ferro. 

As  holme-tree  doth  with  hard  axe  lopt 
On  hils  with  many  holme-trees  topt, 
From  losse,  from  cuttings  it  doth  feele, 
Courage  and  store  rise  ev'n  from  steele. 

And  as  the  other  saith. 

SEN.  Theb.  act.  Non  est  ut  putas  virtus,  pater, 

i.  sc.  i.  Timer e  vitam,  sed  magis  ingentibus 

Obstare,  nee  se  vertere  ac  retro  dare. 

Sir,,  'tis  not  vertue,,  as  you  understand,, 

To  feare  life,  but  grosse  mischiefe  to  withstand, 

Not  to  retire,  turne  backe,  at  any  hand. 

MART.  xi.  Rebus  in  adver  sis  facile  est  contemnere  mortem. 

Epig.  Ivi.  15.  Fortius  illefacit,  qui  miser  esse  potest. 

'Tis  easie  in  crosse  chance  death  to  despise  : 
He  that  can  wretched  be,  doth  stronger  rise. 

It  is  the  part  of  cowardlinesse,  and  not  of  vertue,  to  seek 
to  squat  it  selfe  in  some  hollow-lurking  hole,  or  to  hide 
her  selfe  under  some  massie  tombe,  thereby  to  shun  the 
strokes  of  fortune.  She  never  forsakes  her  course,  nor  leaves 
her  way,  what  stormie  weather  soever  crosse-her. 

HOR.  Hi!  Od.  Sifractus  illabatur  orbis, 

iii-  7-  Impavidam  ferient  ruince. 

If  the  world  broken  should  upon  her  fall, 
The  ruines  may  her  strike,  but  not  appall. 

The  avoyding  of  other  inconveniences  doth  most  commonly 
drive  us  into  this,  yea,  sometimes  the  shunning  of  death, 
makes  us  to  run  into  it. 

MART. \\.Epig.  Hie,  rogo,  non furor  est,  ne  moriare,  mori? 

1XXX.   2.  .     , 

Madnesse  is  t  not,  say  I, 
To  dye,  lest  you  should  dye  ? 
28 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

As  those  who  for  feare  of  a  break-necke  downe-fall,  doe  CHAPTER 

headlong  cast  themselves  into  it.  m 

A  custome  of 

— multos  in  summa  pencula  misit  ^e  jje  of 

Verturi  timor  ipse  mail:  fortissimus  ille  est,  Cea 

Qui  promptus  metuenda  pati,  si  cominus  instent, 
Et  differre  potest.  LUCAN.  vii. 

The  very  feare  of  ils  to  come,  hath  sent 
Many  to  mighty  dangers  :  strongest  they, 
Who  fearfull  things  t'endure  are  ready  bent, 
If  they  confront  them,  yet  can  them  delay. 

— usque  adeo  mortis  formidine,  vita  LUCR.  iii.  79. 

Percipit  humanos  odium,  lucisque  videndcs, 
Ut  sibi  consciscant  mcerenti  pectore  lethum, 
Oblitifontem  cur  arum  hunc  esse  timor  em. 

So  far  by  feare  of  death,  the  hate  of  life, 
And  seeing-light,  doth  men  as  men  possesse, 
They  grieving  kill  themselves  to  end  the  strife, 
Forgetting,  feare  is  spring  of  their  distresse. 

Plato  in  his  lawes,  alots  him  that  hath  deprived  his 
neerest  and  deerest  friend  of  life  (that  is  to  say,  himselfe) 
and  abridged  him  of  the  destinies  course,  not  constrained  by 
any  publike  judgement,  nor  by  any  lewd  and  inevitable 
accident  of  fortune,  nor  by  any  intolerable  shame  or  infamy, 
but  through  basenesse  of  minde,  and  weaknesse  of  a  faint- 
fearfull  courage,  to  have  a  most  ignominious,  and  ever- 
reproachfull  buriall.  And  the  opinion  which  disdaineth 
our  life,  is  ridiculous  :  For,  in  fine  it  is  our  being.  It  is  our 
all  in  all.  Things  that  have  a  nobler  and  richer  being, 
may  accuse  ours:  But  it  is  against  nature,  we  should  de 
spise,  and  carelesly  set  our  selves  at  naught :  It  is  a  parti 
cular  infirmitie,  and  which  is  not  scene  in  any  other  creature, 
to  hate  and  disdaine  himselfe.  It  is  of  like  vanitie,  that  we 
desire  to  be  other,  than  we  are.  The  fruit  of  such  a  desire 
doth  not  concerne  us,  forasmuch  as  it  contradicteth  and 
hindereth  it  selfe  in  it  selfe.  He  that  desireth  to  be  made 
of  a  man  an  Angell,  doth  nothing  for  himselfe :  He  should 
be  nothing  the  better  by  it :  And  being  no  more,  who  shall 
rejoyce  or  conceive  any  gladnesse  of  this  change  or  amend 
ment  for  him  ? 

Debet  enim  miser  e  cui  forte  cegreque  futurum  est,  /^_  QQC 

Ipse  quoque  esse  in  eo  turn  tempore,  cum  male  possit 

Accidere. 

29 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  For  he,  who  shall  perchance  prove  miserable,, 

III  And  speed  but  ill,  should  then  himselfe  be  able 

A  custome  of  To  be  himselfe,  when  ils  may  chance  unstable, 

the  He  of 

Cea  The  security,  mdolencie,  impassibility,  and  privation  of 

this  lives  evils,  which  we  purchase  at  the  price  of  death, 
bring  us  no  commoditie  at  all.  In  vaine  doth  he  avoid 
warre,  that  cannot  injoy  peace;  and  bootlesse  doth  he  shun 
paine,  that  hath  no  meanes  to  feele  rest.  Amongst  those  of 
the  first  opinion,  great  questioning  hath  beene,  to  know 
what  occasions  are  sufficiently  just  and  lawfull  to  make  a 
man  undertake  the  killing  of  himselfe,  they  call  that  ev\oyov 
egayooyrjv,  6a  reasonable  orderly  out-let.1  For,  although 
they  say,  a  man  must  often  dye  for  slight  causes,  since  these 
that  keepe  us  alive,  are  not  very  strong ;  yet  is  some  measure 
required  in  them.  There  are  certaine  fantasticall  and  braine- 
sicke  humors,  which  have  not  only  provoked  particular  men, 
but  whole  Nations  to  defeat  themselves.  I  have  heretofore 
aleaged  some  examples  of  them :  And  moreover  we  read  of 
certaine  Milesian  virgins,  who  upon  a  furious  conspiracie 
hanged  themselves  one  after  another,  untill  such  time  as  the 
Magistrate  provided  for  it,  appointing  that  such  as  should 
be  found  so  hanged,  should  with  their  owne  halters  be 
dragged  naked  thorow  the  streets  of  the  Citie.  When 
Threicion  perswadeth  Cleomenes  to  kill  himselfe,  by  reason 
of  the  bad  and  desperate  estate  his  affaires  stood  in,  and 
having  escaped  a  more  honourable  death  in  the  battell  which 
he  had  lately  lost,  moveth  him  to  accept  of  this  other,  which 
is  second  to  him  in  honour,  and  give  the  Conqueror  no 
leisure  to  make  him  endure,  either  another  death,  or  else  a 
shamefull  life.  Cleomenes  with  a  Lacedemonian  and  Stoike 
courage,  refuseth  this  counsell  as  base  and  effeminate :  It  is 
a  receipt,  (saith  he)  which  can  never  faile  me,  and  whereof 
a  man  should  make  no  use,  so  long  as  there  remaineth  but 
one  inch  of  hope :  That  to  live,  is  sometimes  constancie  and 
valour ;  That  he  will  have  his  very  death  serve  his  Countrie, 
and  by  it,  shew  an  act  of  honour  and  of  vertue.  Threicion 
then  beleeved,  and  killed  himselfe.  Cleomenes  did  after 
wards  as  much,  but  not  before  he  had  tried  and  assayed  the 
utmost  power  of  fortune.  All  inconveniences  are  not  so 
much  worth,  that  a  man  should  dye  to  eschue  them.  More- 
30 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

over,  there  being  so  many  sudden  changes,  and  violent  altera-  CHAPTER 
tions  in  humane  things,  it  is  hard  to  judge  in  what  state  or          HI 
point  we  are  justly  at  the  end  of  our  hope  : 


Sperat  et  in  sceva  victus  gladiator  arena,  Cea 

—  Sit  licet  infesto  pollice  turba  minax. 

The  Fencer  hopes,  though  downe  in  lists  he  lye, 
And  people  with  turn'd  hand  threat's  he  must  dye. 

All  things,  saith  an  ancient  Proverb,  may  a  man  hope  for, 
so  long  as  he  liveth  :  yea,  but  answereth  Seneca,  wherefore 
shall  I  rather  have  that  in  minde  ;  that  fortune  can  do  all 
things  for  him  that  is  living,  than  this  ;  that  fortune  hath 
no  power  at  all  over  him,  who  knoweth  how  to  dye  ?  Joseph 
is  scene  engaged  in  so  an  apparent-approaching  danger,  with 
a  whole  nation  against  him,  that  according  to  humane  reason, 
there  was  no  way  for  him  to  escape  ;  notwithstanding  being 
(as  he  saith)  counselled  by  a  friend  of  his,  at  that  instant,  to 
kill  himselfe,  it  fell  out  well  for  him  to  opinion  ate  himselfe 
yet  in  hope  :  for  fortune,  beyond  all  mans  discourse,  did  so 
turne  and  change  that  accident,  that  without  any  incon 
venience  at  all,  he  saw  himselfe  delivered  :  whereas  on  the 
contrarie  Brutus  and  Cassius,  by  reason  of  the  down-fall  and 
rashnesse,  wherewith  before  due  time  and  occasion,  they 
killed  themselves  ;  did  utterly  lose  the  reliques  of  the 
Roman  libertie,  whereof  they  were  protectors.  The  Lord  of 
Anguien  in  the  battell  of  Serisolles,  as  one  desperate  of  the 
combats  successe,  which  on  his  side  went  to  wracke,  attempted 
twice  to  run  himselfe  thorow  the  throat  with  his  rapier,  and 
thought  by  precipitation  to  bereave  himselfe  of  the  enjoying 
of  so  notable  a  victorie.  I  have  scene  a  hundred  Hares  save 
themselves  even  in  the  Grey-hounds  j  awes  :  Aliquis  carnifici  SEN.  Epist. 
mo  superstes  fuit.  '  Some  man  hath  out-lived  his  Hang-  x*"- 
4  man.' 

Multa  dies  variusque  labor  mutabilis  evi  VIRG.  ALn.  xi. 

Rettulit  in  melius,  multos  alterna  revisens  426. 

Lusit,  et  in  solido  rursus  fortuna  locavit. 

Time,  and  of  turning  age  the  divers  straine, 

Hath  much  to  better  brought,  fortunes  turn'd  traine, 

Hath  many  mock't,  and  set  them  fast  againe. 

Plinie  saith,  there  are  but  three  sorts  of  sicknesses,  which 

31 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  avoid,  a  man  may  have  some  colour  of  reason  to  kill  him- 
!H  selfe.  The  sharpest  of  all  is  the  stone  in  the  bladder,  when 
thTlleTof  ^e  urine  is  there  stopped.  Seneca,  those  onely,  which  for 
Cea  long  time  disturbe  and  distract  the  offices  of  the  minde.  To 
avoid  a  worse  death,  some  are  of  opinion,  a  man  should  take 
it  at  his  owne  pleasure.  Democritus  chiefe  of  the  ^Etolians, 
being  led  captive  to  Rome,  found  meanes  to  escape  by  night : 
but  being  pursued  by  his  keepers,  rather  than  he  would  be 
taken  againe,  ran  himselfe  thorow  with  his  Sword.  Antinoiis 
and  Theodotus,  their  Citie  of  Epirus  being  by  the  Romans 
reduced  unto  great  extremitie,  concluded,  and  perswaded  all 
the  people  to  kill  themselves.  But  the  counsell,  rather  to 
yeeld,  having  prevailed:  they  went  to  seeke  their  owne 
death,  and  rushed  amidst  the  thickest  of  their  enemies,  with 
an  intention,  rather  to  strike,  than  to  ward  themselves.  The 
Hand  of  Gosa,  being  some  yeares  since  surprised  and  over 
run  by  the  Turkes,  a  certaine  Sicilian  therein  dwelling, 
having  two  faire  daughters  ready  to  be  married,  killed  them 
both  with  his  owne  hands,  together  with  their  mother,  that 
came  in  to  help  them.  That  done,  running  out  into  the 
streets,  with  a  crosse-bow  in  one  hand,  and  a  caliver  in  the 
other,  at  two  shoots,  slew  the  two  first  Turks  that  came  next 
to  his  gates,  then  resolutely  drawing  his  Sword,  ran  furiously 
among  them ;  by  whom  he  was  suddenly  hewen  in  peeces : 
Thus  did  he  save  himselfe  from  slavish  bondage,  having  first 
delivered  his  owne  from  it.  The  Jewish  women,  after  they 
had  caused  their  children  to  be  circumcized,  to  avoid  the 
crueltie  of  Antiochus,  did  headlong  precipitate  themselves 
and  them  unto  death.  I  have  heard  it  credibly  reported, 
that  a  Gentleman  of  good  qualitie,  being  prisoner  in  one 
of  our  Gaoles,  and  his  parents  advertized  that  he  should 
assuredly  be  condemned,  to  avoid  the  infamie  of  so  reproach- 
full  a  death,  appointed  a  Priest  to  tell  him,  that  the  best 
remedy  for  his  deliverie,  was  to  recommend  himselfe  to  such 
a  Saint,  with  such  and  such  a  vow,  and  to  continue  eight 
dayes  without  taking  any  sustenance,  what  faintnesse  or 
weaknesse  soever  he  should  feele  in  himselfe.  He  beleeved 
them,  and  so  without  thinking  on  it,  was  delivered  both  of 
life  and  danger.  Scribonia  perswading  Libo  his  nephew  to 
kill  himselfe,  rather  than  to  expect  the  stroke  of  justice, 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

told  him,  that  for  a  man  to  preserve  his  owne  life,  to  put  it  CHAPTER 
into  the  hands  of  such  as  three  or  foure  dayes  after  should  HI 
come  and  seek  it,  was  even  to  dispatch  another  mans  busi-  custome  of 
nesse,  and  that  it  was  no  other,  than  for  one  to  serve  his  6(je^  ° 
enemies,  to  preserve  his  bloud,  therewith  to  make  food. 
We  read  in  the  Bible,  that  Nicanor  the  persecutor  of  Gods 
Law,  having  sent  his  Satellites  to  apprehend  the  good  old 
man  Rasias,  for  the  honour  of  his  vertue,  surnamed  the 
father  of  the  lewes;  when  that  good  man  saw  no  other 
meanes  left  him,  his  gate  being  burned,  and  his  enemies 
ready  to  lay  hold  on  him,  chose,  rather  than  to  fall  into  the 
hands  of  such  villaines,  and  be  so  basely  abused,  against  the 
honour  of  his  place,  to  dye  nobly,  and  so  smote  himselfe 
with  his  owne  sword ;  but  by  reason  of  his  haste,  having  not 
throughly  slaine  himselfe,  he  ran  to  throw  himselfe  downe 
from  an  high  wall,  amongst  the  throng  of  people,  which 
making  him  roome,  he  fell  right  upon  his  head.  All  which 
notwithstanding,  perceiving  life  to  remaine  in  him,  he  tooke 
heart  againe ;  and  getting  up  on  his  feet,  all  goared  with 
bloud,  and  loaden  with  strokes,  making  way  through  the 
prease,  came  to  a  craggy  and  downe-steepy  rocke,  where  un 
able  to  go  any  further,  by  one  of  his  wounds,  with  both  his 
hands  he  pulled  out  his  guts,  and  tearing  and  breaking  them, 
cast  them  amongst  such  as  pursued  him,  calling  and  attest 
ing  the  vengeance  of  God  to  light  upon  them.  Of  all 
violences  committed  against  conscience,  the  most  in  mine 
opinion  to  be  avoided,  is  that  which  is  offered  against  the 
chastitie  of  women,  forasmuch  as  there  is  naturally  some 
corporall  pleasure  commixt  with  it :  And  therefore  the 
dissent  cannot  fully  enough  be  joyned  thereunto:  And  it 
seemeth,  that  force  is  in  some  sort,  intermixed  with  some 
will.  The  ecclesiasticall  Storie  hath  in  especiall  reverence, 
sundry  such  examples  of  devout  persons,  who  called  for 
death  to  warrant  them  from  the  out-rages  which  some 
tyrants  prepared  against  their  religion  and  consciences. 
Pelagia  and  Sophronia,  both  canonized ;  the  first,  together 
with  her  mother  and  sisters,  to  escape  the  outragious  rapes 
of  some  souldiers,  threw  her  selfe  into  a  river ;  the  other,  to 
shun  the  force  of  Maxentius  the  Emperour,  slew  her  selfe. 
It  shall  peradventure  redound  to  our  honour  in  future  ages, 
E  33 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  that  a  wise  Author  of  these  dayes,  and  namely  a  Parisian, 
doth  labour  to  perswade  the  Ladies  of  our  times,  rather  to 
ef  hazard  upon  any  resolution,  than  to  embrace  so  horrible  a 
°  counsell  of  such  desperation.  I  am  sorie,  that  to  put 
amongst  his  discourses,  he  knew  not  the  good  saying  I  learnt 
of  a  woman  at  Tholouse,  who  had  passed  through  the  hands 
of  some  souldiers :  God  be  praised  (said  she)  that  once  in 
my  life,  I  have  had  my  belly-full  without  sinne.  Verily 
these  cruelties  are  not  worthy  of  the  French  curtesie.  And 
God  be  thanked,  since  this  good  advertisement ;  our  ay  re  is 
infinitely  purged  of  them.  Let  it  suffice,  that  in  doing  it, 
they  say,  No,  and  take  it,  following  the  rule  of  Marot. 
The  historic  is  very  full  of  such,  who  a  thousand  wayes 
have  changed  a  lingering-toy Isome  life  with  death.  Lucius 
Aruntius  killed  himselfe  (as  he  said)  to  avoid  what  was  past, 
and  eschue  what  was  to  come.  Granius  Sylvanus,  and 
Statius  Proximus,  after  they  had  beene  pardoned  by  Nero, 
killed  themselves,  either  because  they  scorned  to  live  by  the 
favour  of  so  wicked  a  man,  or  because  they  would  not 
another  time  be  in  danger  of  a  second  pardon,  seeing  his 
so  easie-yeelding  unto  suspicions  and  accusations  against 
honest  men.  Spargapises  sonne  unto  Queene  Tomiris, 
prisoner  by  the  law  of  warre  unto  Cyrus,  employed  the  first 
favour  that  Cyrus  did  him,  by  setting  him  free,  to  kill  him 
selfe,  as  he  who  never  pretended  to  reap  other  fruit  by  his 
liberty,  than  to  revenge  the  infamie  of  his  taking  upon  him 
selfe.  Boges  a  Governour  for  King  .Xerxes  in  the  country 
of  Ionia,  being  besieged  by  the  Athenians  army  under  the 
conduct  of  Cymon,  refused  the  composition,  to  returne 
safely,  together  with  his  goods  and  treasure  into  Asia,  as 
one  impatient  to  survive  the  losse  of  what  his  Master  had 
given  him  in  charge ;  and  after  he  had  stoutly  and  even  to 
the  last  extremity,  defended  the  Towne,  having  no  manner 
of  victuals  left  him ;  first  he  cast  all  the  gold,  and  treasure, 
with  whatsoever  he  imagined  the  enemy  might  reap  any 
commoditie  by,  into  the  river  Strimon ;  Then  having  caused 
a  great  pile  of  wood  to  be  set  on  fire,  and  made  all  women, 
children,  concubines  and  servants  to  be  stripped  and  throwne 
into  the  flames,  afterward  ran-in  himselfe,  where  all  were 
burned.  Ninachetuen  a  Lord  in  the  East  Indies,  having 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

had  an  inkling  of  the  King  of  Portugales  Viceroyes  delibera-  CHAPTER 
tion  to  dispossesse  him,  without  any  apparant  cause,  of  the 
charge  he  had  in  Malaca,  for  to  give  it  unto  the  King  of A  ^Q™®fo 
Campar;  of  himselfe  resolved  upon  this  resolution:  First,  (jea 
he  caused  an  high  scaffold  to  be  set  up,  somewhat  longer 
than  broad,  underpropped  with  pillars,  all  gorgeously 
hanged  with  rich  tapestrie,  strewed  with  flowers,  arid 
adorned  with  pretious  perfumes :  Then  having  put-on  a 
sumptuous  long  roabe  of  cloth  of  gold,  richly  beset  with 
store  of  pretious  stones  of  inestimable  worth,  he  came  out  of 
the  palace  into  the  street,  and  by  certaine  steps  ascended 
the  scaffold,  in  one  of  the  corners  whereof,  was  a  pile  of 
aromaticall  wood  set  afire.  All  the  people  of  the  Citie  were 
flocked  together,  to  see  what  the  meaning  of  such  un 
accustomed  preparation  might  tend  unto.  Ninachetuen  with 
an  undanted-bold,  yet  seeming-discontented  countenance, 
declared  the  manifold  obligations,  which  the  Portugal  Nation 
was  endebted  unto  him  for ;  expostulated  how  faithfully  and 
truly  he  had  dealt  in  his  charge;  that  having  so  often 
witnessed,  armed  at  all  assayes  for  others ;  that  his  honour 
was  much  dearer  unto  him  than  life,  he  was  not  to  forsake 
the  care  of  it  for  himselfe;  that  fortune  refusing  him  all 
meanes  to  oppose  himselfe  against  the  injurie  intended 
against  him,  his  courage,  at  the  least  willed  him  to  remove 
the  feeling  thereof,  and  not  become  a  laughing  stocke  unto 
the  people,  and  a  triumph  to  men  of  lesse  worth  than  him 
selfe  :  which  words  as  he  was  speaking,  he  cast  himselfe  into 
the  fire.  Sextilia  the  wife  of  Scaurus  and  Praxea  wife  unto 
Labeo,  to  encourage  their  husbands,  to  avoid  the  dangers, 
which  pressed  them,  wherein  they  had  no  share  (but  in 
regard  of  the  interest  of  their  conjugal  affection)  voluntarily 
engaged  their  life,  in  this  extreme  necessitie,  to  serve  them, 
as  an  example  to  imitate,  and  company  to  regard.  What 
they  performed  for  their  husbands  ;  Cocceius  Nerva  acted  for 
his  countrie,  and  though  lesse  profitable,  yet  equall  in  true 
love.  That  famous  Interpreter  of  the  lawes,  abounding  in 
riches,  in  reputation,  in  credit,  and  flourishing  in  health 
about  the  Emperour,  had  no  other  cause  to  rid  himselfe  of 
life,  but  the  compassion  of  the  miserable  estate,  wherein  he 
saw  the  Romane  common- wealth.  There  is  nothing  can  be 

35 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  added  unto  the  daintinesse  of  Fulvius  wives  death,  who  was 
HI          so    inward   with    Augustus.     Augustus   perceiving   he    had 

A  custome  of  blabbed  a  certaine  secret  of  importance,  which  he  on  trust 
the  He  of     i     i  i   j  i  •  •  •  • ,  i  • 

£ea         had  revealed  unto  him  ;  one  morning  comming  to  visit  him, 

he  seemed  to  frowne  upon  him  for  it ;  whereupon  as  guilty, 
he  returneth  home,  as  one  full  of  despaire,  and  in  piteous 
sort  told  his  wife,  that  sithence  he  was  falne  into  such  a 
mischiefe,  he  was  resolved  to  kill  himselfe ;  shee  as  one  no 
whit  dismaied,  replied  unto  him ;  Thou  shalt  doe  but 
right,  since  having  so  often  experienced  the  incontinence  of 
my  tongue,  thou  hast  not  learnt  to  beware  of  it,  yet  give 
me  leave  to  kill  my  selfe  first,  and  without  more  adoe,  ran 
her  selfe  thorow  with  a  sword.  Vibius  Virius  dispairing  of 
his  Cities  safetie,  besieged  by  the  Romans,  and  mistrusting 
their  mercie ;  in  their  Senates  last  consultation,  after  many 
remonstrances  employed  to  that  end,  concluded,  that  the 
best  and  fairest  way,  was  to  escape  fortune  by  their  owne 
hands.  The  very  enemies  should  have  them  in  more 
honour,  and  Hanniball  might  perceive  what  faithfull  friends 
he  had  forsaken :  Enviting  those  that  should  allow  of  his 
advice,  to  come,  and  take  a  good  supper,  which  was  prepared 
in  his  house,  where  after  great  cheere,  they  should  drinke 
together  whatsoever  should  be  presented  unto  him  :  a  drinke 
that  shall  deliver  our  bodies  from  torments,  free  our  mindes 
from  injuries,  and  release  our  eyes  and  eares  from  seeing  and 
hearing  so  many  horrible  mischiefes,  which  the  conquered 
must  endure  at  the  hands  of  most  cruell  and  offended  con 
querors  :  I  have  (quoth  he)  taken  order,  that  men  fit  for 
that  purpose  shall  be  ready,  when  we  shall  be  expired,  to 
cast  us  into  a  great  burning  pile  of  wood.  Diverse  approved 
of  his  high  resolution,  but  few  did  imitate  the  same.  Seven 
and  twentie  Senators  followed  him;  who  after  they  had 
attempted  to  stifle  so  irkesome,  and  suppresse  so  terror- 
moving  a  thought,  with  quaffing  and  swilling  of  wine,  they 
ended  their  repast  by  this  deadly  messe :  and  entre-embrac- 
ing  one  another,  after  they  had  in  common  deplored  and 
bewailed  their  countries  mis-fortunes ;  some  went  home  to 
their  owne  houses,  othersome  stayed  there,  to  be  entombed 
with  Vibius  in  his  owne  fire;  whose  death  was  so  long 
and  lingring,  forsomuch  as  the  vapor  of  the  wine  having 
36 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

possessed   their   veines,  and   slowed   the    effect  and   opera-  CHAPTER 
tion  of  the  poyson,  that   some   lived  an  houre  after  they          III 

had  scene   their  enemies    enter   Capua,  which   they   caried  A  custome  of 

T  ,    .  .       .        J     i  the  He  of 

the   next   day   after,   and   incurred   the    miseries,  and   saw          ^ea 

the  calamities,  which  at  so  high  a  rate  they  had  sought 
to  eschue.  Taurea  lubellius,  another  citizen  there,  the 
Consull  Fulvius  returning  from  that  shameful  slaughter, 
which  he  had  committed  of  225  Senators,  called  him 
churlishly  by  his  name  and  having  arrested  him  ;  Command 
(quoth  he  unto  him)  that  I  also  be  massacred  after  so  many 
others,  that  so  thou  maist  brag  to  have  murthered  a  much 
more  valiant  man  than  ever  thou  wast.  Fulvius,  as  one 
enraged,  disdaining  him  ;  forasmuch  as  he  had  newly  received 
letters  from  Rome  contrarie  to  the  inhumanitie  of  his  execu 
tion,  which  inhibited  him  to  proceed  any  further ;  lubellius 
continuing  his  speech,  said  ;  Sithence  my  Countrie  is  taken, 
my  friends  butchered,  and  having  with  mine  owne  hands 
slaine  my  wife  and  children,  as  the  onely  meane  to  free  them 
from  the  desolation  of  this  ruine ;  I  may  not  dye  the  death 
of  my  fellow-citizens,  let  us  borrow  the  vengeance  of  this 
hatefull  life  from  vertue :  And  drawing  a  blade,  he  had 
hidden  under  his  garments,  therewith  ran  himselfe  thorow, 
and  falling  on  his  face,  died  at  the  Consuls  feet.  Alexander 
besieged  a  Citie  in  India,  the  inhabitants  whereof,  perceiv 
ing  themselves  brought  to  a  very  narrow  pinch,  resolved 
obstinately  to  deprive  him  of  the  pleasure  he  might  get  of 
his  victorie,  and  together  with  their  Citie,  in  despite  of  his 
humanitie,  set  both  the  Towne  and  themselves  on  a  light 
fire,  and  so  were  all  consumed.  A  new  kinde  of  warring, 
where  the  enemies  did  all  they  could,  and  sought  to  save 
them,  they  to  loose  themselves,  and  to  be  assured  of  their 
death,  did  all  a  man  can  possible  effect  to  warrant  his  life. 
Astapa  a  Citie  in  Spain e,  being  very  weake  of  wals,  and 
other  defences,  to  withstand  the  Romanes  that  besieged  the 
same ;  the  inhabitants  drew  all  their  riches,  and  wealth  into 
the  market-place,  whereof  having  made  a  heap,  and  on  the 
top  of  it  placed  their  wives  and  children,  and  encompassed 
and  covered  the  same  with  drie  brush  wood,  that  it  might 
burne  the  easier,  and  having  appointed  fifty  lusty  young  men 
of  theirs  for  the  performance  of  their  resolution,  made  a 

37 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  sally,  where  following  their   determined  vow,  seeing   they 

IIJ          could  not  vanquish,  suffered  themselves  to  be  slaine  every 

A  custome  of       therg  childe.     The  fifty,  after  they  had  massacred  every 

the  He  of     ,.   .  .    .        •     ?i      ^i..«  i       ,   n  ,11        J 

Cea          living  soule  remaining  in  the  Litie,  and  set  tire  to  the  heap, 

joyfully  leaped  there-into,  ending  their  generous  liberty  in 
a  state  rather  insensible,  than  dolorous  and  reprochfull ; 
shewing  their  enemies,  that  if  fortune  had  beene  so  pleased, 
they  should  aswell  have  had  the  courage  to  bereave  them  of 
the  victory,  as  they  had  to  yeeld  it  them  both  vaine  and 
hideous,  yea,  and  mortall  to  those,  who  allured  by  the 
glittering  of  the  gold,  that  moulten  ran  from  out  the  flame, 
thicke  and  three-fold  approching  greedily  unto  it,  were 
therein  smothered  and  burned,  the  formost  being  unable  to 
give  bake,  by  reason  of  the  throng  that  followed  them. 
The  Abideans  pressed  by  Philip,  resolved  upon  the  very 
same,  but  being  prevented,  the  King  whose  heart  yerned 
and  abhorred  to  see  the  fond-rash  precipitation  of  such  an 
execution  (having  first  seized- upon  and  saved  the  treasure, 
and  moveables,  which  they  had  diversly  condemned  to  the 
flames  and  utter  spoyle)  retiring  all  the  Souldiers,  granting 
them  the  full  space  of  three  dayes  to  make  themselves  away, 
that  so  they  might  doe  it  with  more  order  and  leasure ; 
which  three  dayes  they  replenished  with  bloud  and  murther 
beyond  all  hostile  cruelty :  And  which  is  strange,  there  was 
no  one  person  saved,  that  had  power  upon  himselfe.  There 
are  infinite  examples  of  such-like  popular  conclusions,  which 
seeme  more  violent,  by  how  much  more  the  effect  of  them 
is  more  universall.  They  are  lesse  than  severall,  what  dis 
course  would  not  dee  in  every  one,  it  doth  in  all :  The 
vehemence  of  societie,  ravishing  particular  judgements. 
Such  as  were  condemned  to  dye  in  the  time  of  Tiberius,  and 
delaid  their  execution  any  while,  lost  their  goods,  and  could 
not  be  buried ;  but  such  as  prevented  the  same,  in  killing 
themselves,  were  solemnly  enterred,  and  might  at  their 
pleasure  bequeath  such  goods  as  they  had  to  whom  they  list. 
But  a  man  doth  also  sometimes  desire  death,  in  hope  of  a 
greater  good.  I  desire  (saith  Saint  Paul)  to  be  out  of  this 
world,  that  I  may  be  with  lesus  Christ:  and  who  shal 
release  me  out  of  these  bonds?  Cleombrotus  Ambraciota 
having  read  Platoes  Phceton,  was  so  possessed  with  a  desire 
38 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

and  longing  for  an  after-life,  that  without  other  occasion  CHAPTER 
or  more  adoe,  he  went  and  headlong  cast  himselfe  into  III 
the  sea.  Whereby  it  appeareth  how  improperly  we  call  this  custome  of 
voluntarie  dissolution,  despaire ;  unto  which  the  violence  of  eCe^  ' 
hope  doth  often  transport  us,  and  as  often  a  peacefull  and 
setled  inclination  of  judgement.  laques  du  Castell  Bishop 
of  Soissons,  in  the  voyage  which  Saint  Lewes  undertooke 
beyond  the  Seas,  seeing  the  King  and  all  his  Army  ready  to 
returne  into  France,  and  leave  the  affaires  of  Religion  im 
perfect,  resolved  with  himselfe  rather  to  goe  to  heaven  ;  And 
having  bidden  his  friends  farewell,  in  the  open  view  of  all 
men,  rushed  alone  into  the  enemies  troops  of  whom  he  was 
forthwith  hewen  in  peeces.  In  a  certaine  kingdome  of  these 
late-discovered  Indies,  upon  the  day  of  a  solemne  procession, 
in  which  the  Idols  they  adore,  are  publikely  carried  up  and 
downe,  upon  a  chariot  of  exceeding  greatnesse  :  besides  that, 
there  are  many  scene  to  cut  and  slice  great  mammocks  of 
their  quicke  flesh,  to  offer  the  said  Idols ;  there  are  numbers 
of  others  scene,  who  prostrating  themselves  alongst  upon  the 
ground,  endure  very  patiently  to  be  mouldred  and  crushed 
to  death,  under  the  Chariots  wheeles,  thinking  thereby  to 
purchase  after  their  death,  a  veneration  of  holinesse,  of  which 
they  are  not  defrauded.  The  death  of  this  Bishop,  armed  as 
we  have  said,  argueth  more  generositie,  and  lesse  sence :  the 
heat  of  the  combat  ammusing  one  part  of  it.  Some  common 
wealths  there  are,  that  have  gone  about  to  sway  the  justice, 
and  direct  the  opportunitie  of  voluntarie  deaths.  In  our 
Citie  of  Marseille,  they  were  wont  in  former  ages,  ever  to 
keepe  some  poison  in  store,  prepared  and  compounded  with 
hemlocke,  at  the  Cities  charge,  for  such  as  would  upon  any 
occasion  shorten  their  daies,  having  first  approved  the 
reasons  of  their  enterprise  unto  the  six  hundred  Elders  of  the 
Towne,  which  was  their  Senate :  For,  otherwise  it  was  un- 
lawfull  for  any  body,  except  by  the  Magistrates  permission, 
and  for  very  lawfully-urgent  occasions,  to  lay  violent  hands 
upon  himselfe.  The  very  same  law  was  likewise  used  in 
other  places.  Sextus  Pompeius  going  into  Asia,  passed 
thorow  the  Hand  of  Cea,  belonging  to  Negropont ;  it  fortuned 
whilst  he  abode  there,  (as  one  reporteth  that  was  in  his  com- 
panie)  that  a  woman  of  great  authority,  having  first  yeelded 

39 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

* 

CHAPTER  an  accompt  unto  her  Citizens,  and  shewed  good  reasons  why 
she  was  resolved  to  end  her  life,  earnestly  entreated  Pompey 
the5  OtTof0  ^°  be  an  assistan"t  at  her  death,  that  so  it  might  be  esteemed 
Cea  more  honourable,  which  he  assented  unto  ;  and  having  long 
time  in  vaine  sought,  by  vertue  of  his  eloquence  (wherein  he 
was  exceeding  ready)  and  force  of  perswasion,  to  alter  her 
intent,  and  remove  her  from  her  purpose,  in  the  end  yeelded 
to  her  request.  She  had  lived  foure  score  and  ten  yeares  in 
a  most  happy  estate  of  minde  and  body,  but  then  lying 
on  her  bed,  better  adorned  than  before  she  was  accustomed 
to  have  it,  and  leaning  on  her  elbow,  thus  she  bespake : 
The  Gods,  Oh  Sextus  Pompeius,  and  rather  those  I  for- 
goe,  than  those  I  goe  unto,  reward  and  appay  thee,  for 
that  thou  hast  vouchsafed  to  be  botli  a  counseller  of 
my  life,  and  a  witnesse  of  my  death.  As  for  my  part, 
having  hitherto  ever  tasted  the  favourable  visage  of  for 
tune,  for  feare  the  desire  of  living  overlong  should  make 
me  taste  of  her  frownes,  with  an  happy  and  successefull 
end,  I  will  now  depart,  arid  licence  the  remainder  of  my 
soule,  leaving  behind  me  two  daughters  of  mine,  with  a 
legion  of  grand-children  and  nephewes.  That  done,  having 
preached  unto,  and  exhorted  all  her  people  and  kinsfolks 
to  an  unitie  and  peace,  and  divided  her  goods  amongst 
them,  and  recommended  her  houshold  Gods  unto  her  eldest 
daughter,  with  an  assuredly- staide  hand  she  tooke  the  cup, 
wherein  the  poyson  was,  and  having  made  her  vowes  unto 
Mercurie,  and  prayers,  to  conduct  her  unto  some  happy  place 
in  the  other  world,  roundly  swallowed  that  mortal!  potion ; 
which  done,  she  intertained  the  company  with  the  progresse 
of  her  behaviour,  and  as  the  parts  of  her  body  were  one  after 
another  possessed  with  the  cold  operation  of  that  venom ; 
untill  such  time  as  shee  said,  shee  felt-it  worke  at  the  heart 
and  in  her  entrals  shee  called  her  daughter  to  doe  her  the 
last  office,  and  close  her  eyes.  Plinie  reporteth  of  a  certaine 
Hiperborean  nation,  wherein,  by  reason  of  the  milde  tem 
perature  of  the  aire,  the  inhabitants  thereof,  commonly 
never  dye,  but  when  they  please  to  make  themselves  away, 
and  that  being  weary  and  tired  with  living,  they  are  accus 
tomed  at  the  end  of  a  long-long  age ;  having  first  made 
merry  and  good  cheare  with  their  friends,  from  the  top 
40 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 


of  an   high-steepy   rocke,    appointed   for  that  purpose,    to  CHAPTER 
cast   themselves   headlong   into   the  Sea.      Grieving-smart,          HI 

and  a  worse  death  seeme  to  me  the  most  A  custome  of 

the  He  of 
Cea 


excusable  incitations. 


THE    FOURTH    CHAPTER 

To  morrow  is  a  new  day. 

DO  with  some  reason,  as  me  seemeth,  give 
pricke  and  praise  unto  laques  Amiot  above 
all  our  French  writers,  not  only  for  his 
natural  purity,  and  pure  elegancie  of  the 
tongue,  wherin  he  excelleth  all  others, 
nor  for  his  indefatigable  constancie  of  so 
long  and  toyle-some  a  labour,  nor  for  the 
unsearchable  depth  of  his  knowledge, 
having  so  successefully-happy  been  able  to  explaine  an  Author 
so  close  and  thorny,  and  unfold  a  writer  so  mysterious  and 
entangled  (for,  let  any  man  tell  me  what  he  list ;  I  have  no 
skill  of  the  Greeke,  but  I  see  thorowout  al  his  translation  a 
sense  so  closely -joynted,  and  so  pithily-continued,  that  either 
he  hath  assuredly  understood  and  inned  the  very  imagination, 
and  the  true  conceit  of  the  Author,  or  having  through  a 
long  and  continuall  conversion,  lively  planted  in  his  minde  a 
generall  Idea  of  that  of  Plutarke,  he  hath  at  least  lent  him 
nothing  that  doth  belye  him,  or  mis-seeme  him)  but  above 
all,  I  kon  him  thanks  that  he  hath  had  the  hap  to  chuse, 
and  knowledge  to  cull-out  so  worthy  a  worke,  and  a  booke 
so  fit  to  the  purpose,  therewith  to  make  so  unvaluable  a 
present  unto  his  Countrie.  We  that  are  in  the  number  of 
the  ignorant  had  beene  utterly  confounded,  had  not  his 
booke  raised  us  from  out  the  dust  of  ignorance:  God-a- 
mercy  his  endevours  we  dare  not  both  speake  and  write : 
Even  Ladies  are  therewith  able  to  confront  Masters  of  arts : 
It  is  our  breviarie.  If  so  good  a  man  chance  to  live,  I  be 
queath  Xenophon  unto  him,  to  doe  as  much.  It  is  an  easier 
peece  of  worke,  and  so  much  the  more  agreeing  with  his  age. 
Moreover,  I  wot  not  how  me  seemeth,  although  he  roundly 
F  41  ' 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  clearly  disintangle  himselfe  from  hard  passages,  that  not- 

IV      .    withstanding  his  stile  is  more  close  and  neerer  it  selfe,  when 

To  morrow  is  -^  ^    noj.  laboured  anc{  wrested,  and  that  it  glideth  smoothly 

a  new  day        ,1-1  T  T          p  ,  i  i      J 

at  his  pleasure.    1  was  even  now  reading  01  that  place,  where 

Plutarke  speaketh  of  himselfe,  that  Rusticus  being  present 
at  a  declamation  of  his  in  Rome,  received  a  packet  from  the 
Emperour,  which  he  temporized  to  open  untill  he  had  made 
an  end :  wherein  (saith  he)  all  the  assistants  did  singularly 
commend  the  gravitie  of  the  man.  Verily,  being  on  the 
instance  of  curiositie,  and  on  the  greedy  and  insatiate  passion 
of  newes,  which  with  such  indiscreet  impatience,  and  im 
patient  indiscretion,  induceth  us  to  neglect  all  things,  for  to 
entertaine  a  new-come  guest,  and  forget  al  respect  and  coun 
tenance,  whersoever  we  be,  suddenly  to  break  up  such  letters 
as  are  brought  us ;  he  had  reason  to  commend  the  gravitie 
of  Rusticus :  to  which  he  might  also  have  added  the  com 
mendation  of  his  civilitie  and  curtesie,  for  that  he  would 
not  interrupt  the  course  of  his  declamation ;  But  I  make  a 
question,  whether  he  might  be  commended  for  his  wisdome : 
for,  receiving  unexpected  letters,  and  especially  from  an 
Emperour,  it  might  very  well  have  fortuned,  that  his  defer 
ring  to  read  them,  might  have  caused  some  notable  incon 
venience.  Rechlesnes  is  the  vice  contrarie  unto  curiositie ; 
towards  which  I  am  naturally  enclined,  and  wherein  I  have 
seen  many  men  so  extremely  plunged,  that  three  or  foure 
dayes  after  the  receiving  of  letters,  which  hath  beene  sent 
them,  they  have  beene  found  in  their  pockets  yet  unopened. 
I  never  opened  any,  not  only  of  such  as  had  beene  committed 
to  my  keeping,  but  of  such  as  by  any  fortune  came  to  my 
hands.  And  I  make  a  conscience,  standing  neare  some  great 
person,  if  mine  eyes  chance,  at  unwares,  to  steale  some 
knowledge  of  any  letters  of  importance  that  he  readeth. 
Never  was  man  lesse  inquisitive,  or  pryed  lesse  into  other 
mens  affaires,  than  I.  In  our  fathers  time ;  the  Lord  of 
Boutieres  was  like  to  have  lost  Turwin,  forsomuch  as  being 
one  night  at  supper  in  very  good  company,  he  deferred  the 
reading  of  an  advertisement,  which  was  delivered  him  of  the 
treasons  that  were  practised  and  complotted  against  that 
Citie,  wheie  he  commanded.  And  Plutarke  himselfe  hath 
taught  me,  that  lulius  Caesar  had  escaped  death,  if  going  to 
42 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

the   Senate-house,  that   day  wherein  he  was  murthered  by  CHAPTER 
the  Conspirators,  he  had  read  a  memorial  which  was  pre-          IV 
sented  unto  him.     Who  likewise   reporteth   the   storie   ofT° 
Archias,  the  Tyrant  of  Thebes,  how  the  night  fore-going  the 
execution  of  the  enterprise  that  Pelopidas  had  complotted 
to  kill  him,  thereby  to  set  his  Countrie  at  libertie :  another 
Archias  of  Athens  writ  him  a  letter,  wherein  he  particularly 
related   unto   him   all   that  was  conspired  and  complotted 
against   him;  which  letter  being  delivered  him  whilst  he 
sate  at  supper,  he  deferred  the  opening  of  it,  pronouncing 
this  by-word  :  '  To  morrow  is  a  new  day,'  which  afterward  was 
turned  to  a  Proverb  in  Greece.     A  wise  man  may,  in  mine 
opinion,  for  the  interest  of  others,  as  not  unmannerly  to 
breake  companie,  like  unto  Rusticus,  or  not  to  discontinue 
some  other  affaire  of  importance,  remit  and  defer  to  under 
stand  such  newes  as  are  brought  him  :  but  for  his  owne  private 
interest  or  particular  pleasure,  namely,  if  he  be  a  man  having 
publike  charge,  if  he  regard  his  dinner  so  much,  that  he  will 
not  break  it  off,  or  his  sleepe,  that  he  will  not  interrupt  it : 
to  doe  it,  is  inexcusable.     And  in  former  ages  was  the  Con- 
sulare-place  in  Rome,  which  they  named  the  most  honourable 
at  the  table,  because  it  was  more  free  and  more  accessible 
for  such  as  might  casually  come  in,  to  entertaine  him  that 
should  be  there  placed.     Witnesse,  that  though  they  were 
sitting  at  the  board,  they  neither  omitted  nor  gave  over  the 
managing  of  other  affaires,  and  following  of  other  accidents. 
But  when  all  is  said,  it  is  very  hard,  chiefely  in  humane 
actions,  to  prescribe  so  exact   rules   by   discourse 
of  reason,  that   fortune   doe   not  sway,  and 
keepe  her  right  in  them. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE    FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Conscience. 


brother  the  Lord  of  Brouze  and  my  selfe, 
during  the  time  of  our  civill  warres,  travel 
ling  one  day  together,  we  fortuned  to  meet 
upon  the  way  with  a  Gentleman,  in  out 
ward  semblance,  of  good  demeanour :  He 
was  of  our  contrarie  faction,  but  foras 
much  as  he  counterfeited  himselfe  other 
wise;  I  knew  it  not.  And  the  worst  of 
these  tumultuous  intestine  broyles,  is,  that  the  cards  are  so 
shuffled  (your  enemie  being  neither  by  language  nor  by 
fashion,  nor  by  any  other  apparent  marke  distinguished  from 
you ;  nay,  which  is  more,  brought  up  under  the  same  lawes 
and  customes,  and  breathing  the  same  ay  re)  that  it  is  a  very 
hard  matter  to  avoid  confusion  and  shun  disorder.  Which 
consideration,  made  me  not  a  little  fearefull  to  meet  with 
our  troopes,  especially  where  I  was  not  knowne,  lest  I  should 
be  urged  to  tell  my  name,  and  haply  doe  worse.  As  other 
times  before  it  had  befalne  me ;  for,  by  such  a  chance,  or 
rather  mistaking,  I  fortuned  once  to  lose  all  my  men  and 
horses,  and  hardly  escaped  my  selfe :  and  amongst  other  my 
losses,  and  servants  that  were  slaine,  the  thing  that  most 
grieved  me,  was  the  untimely  and  miserable  death  of  a  young 
Italian  Gentleman,  whom  I  kept  as  my  Page,  and  very  care 
fully  brought  up,  with  whom  dyed,  as  forward,  as  budding 
and  as  hopefull  a  youth  as  ever  I  saw.  But  this  man  seemed 
so  fearfully-dismaid,  and  at  every  encounter  of  horsemen, 
and  passage,  by,  or  thorow  any  Towne  that  held  for  the 
King,  I  observed  him  to  be  so  strangely  distracted,  that  in  the 
end  I  perceived,  and  ghessed  they  were  but  guilty  alarums 
that  his  conscience  gave  him.  It  seemed  unto  this  seely 
man,  that  all  might  apparently,  both  through  his  blushing 
selfe-accusing  countenance,  and  by  the  crosses  he  wore  upon 
his  upper  garments,  read  the  secret  intentions  of  his  faint 
heart.  Of  such  marvailous-working  power  is  the  sting  of 
conscience :  which  often  induceth  us  to  bewray,  to  accuse, 
44 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

and  to  combat  our  selves;  and  for  want  of  other  evidences  CHAPTER 

shee  produceth  our  selves  against  our  selves.  V 

Of  conscience 

Occultum  quatiente  animo  tortore  flagellum.  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Their  minde,  the  tormentor  of  sinne,  x"i-  J95- 

Shaking  an  unseene  whip  within. 

The  storie  of  Bessus  the^Pcenian  is  so  common,  that  even 
children  have  it  in  their  mouths,  who  being  found  fault 
withall,  that  in  mirth  he  had  beaten  downe  a  nest  of  young 
Sparrowes,  and  then  killed  them,  answered,  he  had  great 
reason  to  doe  it ;  forsomuch  as  those  young  birds  ceased  not 
falsly  to  accuse  him  to  have  murthered  his  father,  which 
parricide  was  never  suspected  to  have  beene  committed  by 
him ;  and  untill  that  day  had  layen  secret ;  but  the  revenge- 
full  furies  of  the  conscience,  made  the  same  partie  to  reveale 
it,  that  by  all  right  was  to  doe  penance  for  so  hatefull  and 
unnaturall  a  murther.  Hesiodus  correcteth  the  saying  of 
Plato,  That  punishment  doth  commonly  succeed  the  guilt, 
and  follow  sinne  at  hand :  for,  he  affirmeth,  that  it  rather  is 
borne  at  the  instant,  and  together  with  sinne  it  selfe,  and 
they  are  as  twinnes  borne  at  one  birth  together.  Whoso 
ever  expects  punishment,  suffereth  the  same,  and  whosoever 
deserveth  it,  he  doth  expect  it.  Impietie  doth  invent,  and 
iniquitie  doth  frame  torments  against  it  selfe. 

Malum  consilium  consuttori  pessimum.  ERAS.  Chil.  i. 

Bad  counsell  is  worst  for  the  counsellor  that  gives        cent.  ii.  ad.  14. 
the  counsell. 

Even  as  the  Waspe  stingeth  and  offendeth  others,  but  her 
selfe  much  more ;  for,  in  hurting  others,  she  loseth  her  force 
and  sting  for  ever. 

— vitasque  in  vulnere  ponunt.  VIRG.  Georg. 

They,  while  they  others  sting,  lv*  2^' 

Death  to  themselves  doe  bring. 

The  Cantharides  have  some  part  in  them,  which  by  a 
contrarietie  of  nature  serveth  as  an  antidot  or  counterpoison 
against  their  poison  :  so  likewise,  as  one  taketh  pleasure 
in  vice,  there  is  a  certaine  contrarie  displeasure  engendred 
in  the  conscience,  which  by  sundry  irksome  and  painfull 

45 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  imaginations,  perplexeth  and  tormenteth  us,  both  waking 
and  asleepe. 


Of  conscience 
6°' 


Quippe  ubi  se  multi  per  somnia  scepe  loquentes, 
Aut  morbo  delirantes  procraxe  ferantur  , 
Et  celata  diu  in  medium  peccata  dedisse. 

Many  in  dreames  oft  speaking,  or  unhealed, 

In  sicknesse  raving  have  themselves  revealed, 

And  brought  to  light  their  sinnes  long  time  concealed. 

Apollodorus  dreamed  he  saw  himselfe  first  flead  by  the 
Scythians,  and  then  boy  led  in  a  pot,  and  that  his  owne 
heart  murmured,  saying  ;  I  only  have  caused  this  mischiefe 
to  light  upon  thee.  Epicurus  was  wont  to  say,  that  no 
lurking  hole  can  shroud  the  wicked  ;  for,  they  can  never 
assure  themselves  to  be  sufficiently  hidden,  sithence  con 
science  is  ever  ready  to  disclose  them  to  themselves. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  —  prima  est  hose  ultio,  quod  se 

xiii.  2.  ludice  nemo  nocens  absolvitur. 

This  is  the  first  revenge,  no  guilty  mind 
Is  quitted,  though  it  selfe  be  judge  assign'd. 

Which  as  it  doth  fill  us  with  feare  and  doubt,  so  doth  it 
store  us  with  assurance  and  trust.  And  I  may  boldly  say, 
that  I  have  waded  thorow  many  dangerous  hazards,  with 
a  more  untired  pace,  only  in  consideration  of  the  secret 
knowledge  I  had  of  mine  owne  will,  and  innocence  of  my 
desseignes. 

OVID.  Fast.  i.  Conscia  mens  ut  cuique  sua  est,  ita  concipit  infra 

485.  Pectora  pro  facto  spemque  metumque  suo. 

As  each  mans  minde  is  guiltie,  so  doth  he 
Inlie  breed  hope  and  feare,  as  his  deeds  be. 

Of  examples,  there  are  thousands  ;  It  shall  suffice  us  to 
alleage  three  only,  and  all  of  one  man.  Scipio  being  one 
day  accused  before  the  Romane  people,  of  an  urgent  and 
capitall  accusation  ;  in  stead  of  excusing  himselfe,  or  flatter 
ing  the  Judges  ;  turning  to  them,  he  said  :  It  will  well  be- 
seeme  you  to  undertake  to  judge  of  his  head,  by  whose 
meanes  you  have  authoritie  to  judge  of  all  the  world. 
The  same  man,  another  time,  being  vehemently  urged  by  a 
Tribune  of  the  people,  who  charged  him  with  sundry 

46 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

imputations,  in  liew  of  pleading  or  excusing  his  cause,  gave  CHAPTER 
him   this  sudden  and  short  answer.      Let  us   goe,   (quoth  v 

he)  my  good  Citizens ;  let  us  forthwith  goe  (I  say)  to  ° 
give  hartie  thankes  unto  the  Gods  for  the  victorie,  which 
even  upon  such  a  day  as  this  is,  they  gave  me  against  the 
Carthaginians.  And  therewith  advancing  himselfe  to  march 
before  the  people,  all  the  assembly,  and  even  his  accuser 
himselfe  did  undelayedly  follow  him  towards  the  Temple. 
After  that,  Petilius  having  beene  animated  and  stirred  up 
by  Cato  to  solicite  and  demand  a  strict  accompt  of  him,  of 
the  money  he  had  managed,  and  which  was  committed  to 
his  trust,  whilst  he  was  in  the  Province  of  Antioch ;  Scipio 
being  come  into  the  Senate-house,  of  purpose  to  answer  for 
himselfe,  pulling  out  the  booke  of  his  accompts  from  under 
his  gowne,  told  them  all,  that  that  booke  contained  truly, 
both  the  receipt  and  laying  out  thereof ;  and  being  required 
to  deliver  the  same  unto  a  Clarke  to  register  it,  he  refused 
to  doe  it,  saying  he  would  not  doe  himselfe  that  wrong 
or  indignitie  ;  and  thereupon  with  his  owne  hands,  in 
presence  of  all  the  Senate,  tore  the  booke  in  peeces.  I 
cannot  apprehend  or  beleeve,  that  a  guiltie-cauterized  con 
science  could  possibly  dissemble  or  counterfet  such  an 
undismayed  assurance :  His  heart  was  naturally  too  great, 
and  enured  to  overhigh  fortune  (saith  Titus  Livius)  to 
know  how  to  be  a  criminall  offender,  and  stoopingly  to  yeeld 
himselfe  to  the  basenesse,  to  defend  his  innocencie.  Torture 
and  racking  are  dangerous  inventions,  and  seeme  rather  to 
be  trials  of  patience  than  Essayes  of  truth.  And  both  he 
that  can,  and  he  that  cannot  endure  them,  conceale  the 
truth.  For  wherefore  shall  paine  or  smart,  rather  compell 
me  to  confesse  that,  which  is  so  indeed,  than  force  me  to 
tell  that  which  is  not  ?  And  contrariwise,  if  he  who  hath 
not  done  that  whereof  he  is  accused,  is  sufficiently  patient 
to  endure  those  torments ;  why  shall  not  he  be  able  to 
tolerate  them,  who  hath  done  it,  and  is  guilty  indeed  ;  so 
deare  and  worthy  a  reward  as  life  being  proposed  unto  him  ? 
I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  ground  of  his  invention,  pro- 
ceedeth  from  the  consideration  of  the  power  and  facultie 
of  the  conscience.  For,  to  the  guilty,  it  seemeth  to  give 
a  kinde  of  furtherance  to  the  torture,  to  make  him  confesse 

47 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  his  fault,  and  weakneth  and  dismayeth  him  :  and  on  the 
V  other  part,  it  encourageth  and  strengthneth  the  innocent 

)f  conscience  against  torture.  To  say  truth,  it  is  a  meane  full  of  un 
certainty  and  danger.  What  would  not  a  man  say ;  nay, 
what  not  doe,  to  avoid  so  grievous  paines,  and  shun 
such  torments  ? 

SEN.  Prover.  Etiam  innocentes  cogit  mentiri  dolor. 

Torment  to  lye  sometimes  will  drive, 
Ev'n  the  most  innocent  alive. 

Whence  it  followeth,  that  he  whom  the  Judge  hath 
tortured,  because  he  shall  not  dye  an  innocent,  he  shall 
bring  him  to  his  death,  both  innocent  and  tortured.  Many 
thousands  have  thereby  charged  their  heads  with  false  con 
fessions.  Amongst  which  I  may  well  place  Phylotas,  con 
sidering  the  circumstances  of  the  endictment  that  Alexander 
framed  against  him,  and  the  progresse  of  his  torture.  But 
so  it  is,  that  (as  men  say)  it  is  the  least  evill  humane 
weaknesse  could  invent :  though,  in  my  conceit,  very 
inhumanely,  and  there withall  most  unprofitably.  Many 
Nations  lesse  barbarous  in  that,  than  the  Graecian,  or  the 
Romane,  who  terme  them  so,  j  udge  it  a  horrible  and  cruell 
thing,  to  racke  and  torment  a  man  for  a  fault  whereof  you 
are  yet  in  doubt.  Is  your  ignorance  long  of  him  ?  What 
can  he  doe  withall?  Are  not  you  unjust,  who  because  you 
will  not  put  him  to  death  without  some  cause,  you  doe 
worse  than  kill  him  ?  And  that  it  is  so,  consider  but  how 
often  he  rather  chuseth  to  dye  guiltlesse,  than  passe  by 
this  information,  much  more  painfull,  than  the  punishment 
or  torment ;  and  who  many  times,  by  reason  of  the  sharp- 
nesse  of  it,  preventeth,  furthereth,  yea,  and  executeth  the 
punishment.  I  wot  not  whence  I  heard  this  story,  but  it 
exactly  hath  reference  unto  the  conscience  of  our  Justice. 
A  countrie  woman  accused  a  souldier  before  his  Generall, 
being  a  most  severe  Justicer,  that  he,  with  violence,  had 
snatched  from  out  her  poore  childrens  hands,  the  small 
remainder  of  some  pap  or  water-gruell,  which  shee  had  onely 
left  to  sustaine  them,  forsomuch  as  the  Army  had  ravaged 
and  wasted  all.  The  poore  woman  had  neither  witnesse 
nor  proofe  of  it ;  It  was  but  her  yea,  and  his  no ;  which 

48 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

the  Generall  perceiving,  after  he  had  summoned  her  to  be  CHAPTER 
well  advised  what  shee  spake,  and   that   shee  should  not  v  . 

accuse  him  wrongfully ;  for,  if  shee  spake  an  untruth,  shee  Of  conscience 
should  then  be  culpable  of  his  accusation  :   But  shee  con 
stantly  persisting  to  charge  him,  he  forthwith,  to  discover 
the  truth,  and  to  be  throughly  resolved,  caused  the  accused 
Souldiers  belly  to  be  ripped,  who  was  found  faulty, 
and  the  poore  woman  to  have  said  true;    where 
upon  shee  was  discharged.      A  condemna 
tion  instructive  to  others. 


THE     SIXTH     CHAPTER 

Of  Exercise  or  Practice. 


T  is  a  hard  matter  (although  our  conceit 
doe  willingly  apply  it  selfe  unto  it)  that 
Discourse  and  Instruction,  should  suffi 
ciently  be  powerful,  to  direct  us  to  action, 
and  addresse  us  to  performance,  if  over 
and  besides  that,  we  doe  not  by  experience 
exercise  and  frame  our  minde,  to  the 
traine  whereunto  we  will  range  it :  other 


wise,  when  we  shall  be  on  the  point  of  the  effects,  it  will 
doubtlesse  finde  it  selfe  much  engaged  and  empeached.  And 
that  is  the  reason  why  amongst  Philosophers,  those  that 
have  willed  to  attaine  to  some  greater  excellence,  have  not 
beene  content,  at  home,  and  at  rest  to  expect  the  rigors  of 
fortune,  for  feare  she  should  surprise  them  unexperienced 
and  finde  them  novices,  if  she  should  chance  to  enter  fight 
with  them  ;  but  have  rather  gone  to  meet  and  front  her 
before,  and  witting-earnestly  cast  themselves  to  the  triall  of 
the  hardest  difficulties.  Some  have  thereby  voluntarily  for 
saken  great  riches,  onely  to  practise  a  voluntarie  povertie  : 
others  have  willingly  found  out  labour,  and  an  austeritie  of  a 
toylesome  life,  thereby  to  harden  and  enure  themselves  to 
evill,  and  travell :  othersome  have  frankly  deprived  themselves 
of  the  dearest  and  best  parts  of  their  body,  as  of  their  eyes, 
and  members  of  generation,  lest  their  over-pleasing,  and  too- 
G  49 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  too  wanton  service,  might  in  any  sort  mollifie  and  distract 
the  constant  resolution  of  their  minde.  But  to  dye,  which 
is  the  greatest  worke  we  have  to  doe,  exercise  can  nothing 
availe  us  thereunto.  A  man  may,  by  custome  and  experience, 
fortifie  himselfe  against  griefe,  sorrow,  shame,  want,  and  such 
like  accidents  :  But  concerning  death,  we  can  but  once  feele 
and  trie  the  same.  We  are  all  novices,  and  new  to  learne 
when  we  come  unto  it.  There  have,  in  former  times,  beene 
found  men  so  good  husbands  and  thrifty  of  time,  that  even 
in  death  they  have  assayed  to  taste  and  favor  it ;  and  bent 
their  minde  to  observe  and  see,  what  manner  of  thing  that 
passage  of  death  was  ;  but  none  did  ever  yet  come  backe 
againe  to  tell  us  tidings  of  it. 

LUCR.  iii.  973.  — nemo  expergitus  extat 

Frigida  quern  semel  est  vital  pausa  sequuta. 

No  man  doth  ever-after  wake, 

Whom  once  his  lifes  cold  rest  doth  take. 

Canius  lulius,  a  noble  Romane,  a  man  of  singular  vertue 
and  constancie,  having  beene  condemned  to  death  by  that 
lewdly-mischievous  monster  of  men,  Caligula  :  besides  many 
marvelous  evident  assurances  he  gave  of  his  matchlesse  resolu 
tion,  when  he  was  even  in  the  nicke  to  endure  the  last  stroke 
of  the  executioner  ;  a  Philosopher,  being  his  friend,  inter 
rupted  him  with  this  question,  saying  :  Canius,  in  what 
state  is  your  soule  now  ;  what  doth  she ;  what  thoughts 
possesse  you  now  ?  I  thought  (answered  he)  to  keepe  me 
ready  and  prepared  with  all  my  force,  to  see  whether  in  this 
instant  of  death,  so  short  and  so  neere  at  hand,  I  might  per 
ceive  some  dislodging  or  distraction  of  the  soule,  and  whether 
it  will  shew  some  feeling  of  her  sudden  departure  ;  that  (if 
I  apprehend  or  learne  any  thing  of  her)  I  may  afterward,  if 
I  can,  returne,  and  give  advertisement  thereof  unto  my 
friends.  Loe-here  a  Philosopher,  not  only  untill  death,  but 
even  in  death  it  selfe  :  what  assurance  was  it,  and  what 
fiercenes  of  courage,  to  will  that  his  owne  death  should  serve 
him  as  a  lesson,  and  have  leasure  to  thinke  else  where  in  a 
matter  of  such  consequence  ; 

LUCAN.  viii.  —  jus  hoc  animi  morientis  habebat. 

636-  This  power  of  minde  had  he, 

When  it  from  him  did  flee. 
50 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Me  seemeth  neverthelesse,  that  in  some  sort  there  is  a  CHAPTER 
meane  to  familiarize  our  selves  with  it,  and  to  assay  it.  We  VI 
may  have  some  experience  of  it,  if  not  whole  and  perfect,  at  or  p* 
least  such  as  may  not  altogether  be  unprofitable,  and  which 
may  yeelde  us  better  fortified  and  more  assured.  If  we  can 
not  attaine  unto  it,  we  may  at  least  approch  it,  and  discerne 
the  same :  And  if  we  cannot  enter  her  fort,  yet  shal  we  see 
and  frequent  the  approches  unto  it.  It  is  not  without 
reason  we  are  taught  to  take  notice  of  our  sleepe,  for  the 
resemblance  it  hath  with  death.  How  easily  we  passe  from 
waking  to  sleeping ;  with  how  little  interest  we  lose  the 
knowledge  of  light,  and  of  our  selves.  The  facultie  of  sleepe 
might  haply  seeme  unprofitable,  and  against  nature,  sithence 
it  depriveth  us  of  all  actions,  and  barreth  us  of  all  sense, 
were  it  not  that  nature  doth  thereby  instruct  us,  that  she 
hath  equally  made  us,  as  well  to  live,  as  to  die  ;  and  by  life 
presenteth  the  eternal  state  unto  us,  which  she  after  the  same 
reserveth  for  us,  so  to  accustome  us  thereunto,  and  remove 
the  feare  of  it  from  us.  But  such  as  by  some  violent  acci 
dent  are  falne  into  a  faintnes  of  heart,  and  have  lost  all 
senses,  they,  in  mine  opinion,  have  well-nigh  beene,  where 
they  might  behold  her  true  and  naturall  visage  :  For,  touch 
ing  the  instant  or  moment  of  the  passage,  it  is  not  to  be 
feared,  it  should  bring  any  travell  or  displeasure  with  it,  for 
asmuch  as  we  can  have,  nor  sense,  nor  feeling  without  lea- 
sure.  Our  sufferances  have  need  of  time,  which  is  so  short, 
and  plunged  in  death,  that  necessarily  it  must  be  insensible. 
It  is  the  approches  that  lead  unto  it  we  should  feare  ;  and 
those  may  fall  within  the  compasse  of  mans  experience. 
Many  things  seeme  greater  by  imagination,  than  by  effect. 
I  have  passed  over  a  good  part  of  my  age  in  sound  and  per 
fect  health.  I  say,  not  only  sound,  but  blithe  and  wantonly- 
lustfull.  That  state  full  of  lust,  of  prime  and  mirth,  made 
me  deeme  the  consideration  of  sicknesses  so  yrkesome  and 
horrible,  that  when  I  came  to  the  experience  of  them,  I  have 
found  their  fits  but  weake,  and  their  assaults  but  faint,  in 
respect  of  my  apprehended  feare.  Lo  here  what  I  daily  prove. 
Let  me  be  under  a  roofe,  in  a  good  chamber,  warme-clad,  and 
well  at  ease  in  some  tempestuous  and  stormy  night.  I  am 
exceedingly  perplexed,  and  much  grieved  for  such  as  are 

51 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  abroad,  and  have  no  shelter  :    But  let  me  be  in  the  storme 
VI          my  selfe,  I  doe  not  so  much  as  desire  to  be  else-where.    Only 
Of  Exercise  j.Q  ^e  COntinually  pent  up  in  a  chamber,  seemed  intolerable 
or  Practice    .  T1  J  *  j  11?    j.     T  \    ^  i 

to  me.     I  have  now  enured  my  seize  to  live  a  whole  weeke, 

yea  a  moneth  in  my  chamber  full  of  care,  trouble,  alteration 
and  weaknesse  ;  and  have  found,  that  in  the  time  of  my  best 
health  I  moaned  such  as  were  sicke,  much  more  than  I  can 
well  moane  my  selfe  when  I  am  ill  at  ease :  and  that  the 
power  of  my  apprehension  did  well-nigh  halfe  endeare  the 
essence  and  truth  of  the  thing  it  selfe.  I  am  in  good  hope 
the  like  will  happen  to  me  of  death  :  and  that  it  is  not  worth 
the  labour  I  take  for  so  many  preparations  as  I  prepare 
against  her ;  and  so  many  helpes  as  I  call  to  sustaine,  and 
assemble  to  endure  the  shocke  and  violence  of  it.  But  hab 
or  nab  we  can  never  take  too  much  advantage  of  it.  During 
our  second  or  third  troubles  (I  doe  not  well  remember  which) 
I  fortuned  one  day,  for  recreation  sake,  to  goe  forth  and 
take  the  ayre,  about  a  league  from  my  house,  who  am 
seated  even  in  the  bowels  of  all  troubles  of  our  civill  warres 
of  France,  supposing  to  be  most  safe,  so  neere  mine  owne 
home  and  petreite,  that  I  had  no  need  of  better  attendance 
or  equipage.  I  was  mounted  upon  a  very  easie-going  nag, 
but  not  very  sure.  At  my  returning  home  againe,  a  sudden 
occasion  being  offered  me,  to  make  use  of  this  nag  in  a 
peece  of  service,  whereto  he  was  neither  trained  nor  accus 
tomed,  one  of  my  men  (a  strong  sturdy  fellow)  mounted 
upon  a  young  strong-headed  horse,  and  that  had  a  desperate 
hard  mouth,  fresh,  lusty  and  in  breath  ;  to  shew  his  courage, 
and  to  out-goe  his  fellowes,  fortuned  with  might  and  maine 
to  set  spurres  unto  him,  and  giving  him  the  bridle,  to  come 
right  into  the  path  where  I  was,  and  as  a  Colossus  with  his 
weight  riding  over  me  and  my  nag,  that  were  both  very 
little,  he  overthrew  us  both,  and  made  us  fall  with  our 
heeles  upward :  so  that  the  nag  lay  along  astonied  in  one 
place,  and  I  in  a  trance  groveling  on  the  ground  ten  or 
twelfe  paces  wide  of  him  ;  my  face  all  torne  and  brused, 
my  sword  which  I  had  in  my  hand  a  good  way  from  me, 
my  girdle  broken,  with  no  more  motion  or  sense  in  me  than 
a  stocke.  It  is  the  only  swowning  that  ever  I  felt  yet. 
Those  that  were  with  me,  after  they  had  assayed  all  possible 
52 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

meanes  to  bring  me  to  my  selfe  againe,  supposing  me  dead,  CHAPTER 
tooke  me  in  their  armes,  and  with  much  adoe  were  carying 
me  home  to  my  house,  which  was  about  halfe  a  french 
league  thence  :  upon  the  way,  and  after  I  had  for  two 
houres  space,  by  all,  beene  supposed  dead  and  past  all  re- 
coverie,  I  began  to  stir  and  breathe  :  for,  so  great  abound- 
ance  of  bloud  was  falne  into  my  stomake,  that  to  discharge 
it,  nature  was  forced  to  rowze  up  her  spirits.  I  was  imme 
diately  set  upon  my  feet,  and  bending  forward,  I  presently 
cast  up,  in  quantitie  as  much  clottie  pure  bloud,  as  a  bucket 
will  hold,  and  by  the  way  was  constrained  to  doe  the  like 
divers  times  before  I  could  get  home,  whereby  I  began  to 
recover  a  little  life,  but  it  was  by  little  and  little,  and  so 
long  adoing,  that  my  chiefe  senses  were  much  more  enclin- 
ing  to  death  than  to  life. 

Perche  dubbiosa  ancor  del  suo  ritorne 
Non  s'assicura  attonita  la  mente. 

For  yet  the  minde  doubtfull  it's  returne 
Is  not  assured,  but  astonished. 

The  remembrance  whereof  (which  yet  I  beare  deepely  im 
printed  in  my  minde)  representing  me  her  visage  and  Idea  so 
lively  and  so  naturally,  doth  in  some  sort  reconcile  me  unto 
her.  And  when  I  began  to  see,  it  was  with  so  dim,  so  weake 
and  so  troubled  a  sight,  that  I  could  not  discerne  anything 
of  the  light. 

— come  quel  c'hor'  apre,  hor  chiude 

Gli  occhii,  mezzo  tral  sonno  el  esser  desto. 

As  he  that  sometimes  opens,  sometimes  shuts 
His  eyes,  betweene  sleepe  and  awake. 

Touching  the  function  of  the  soule,  they  started  up  and 
came  in  the  same  progresse  as  those  of  the  body.  I  perceived 
my  selfe  all  bloudy ;  for  my  doublet  was  all  sullied  with  the 
bloud  I  had  cast.  The  first  conceit  I  apprehended,  was,  that 
I  had  received  some  shot  in  my  head  ;  and  in  truth,  at  the 
same  instant,  there  were  divers  that  shot  round  about  us. 
Me  thought,  my  selfe  had  no  other  hold  of  me,  but  of  my  lips- 
ends.  I  closed  mine  eyes,  to  helpe  (as  me  seemed)  to  send  it 
forth, and  tooke  a  kinde  of  pleasure  to  linger  and  languishingly 

53 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  let  my  selfe  goe  from  my  selfe.     It  was  an  imagination 
VI  swimming  superficially  in  my  minde,  as  weake  and  as  tender 

^r  Practice6  aS  a11  the  reSt  ''   but  in  tFUth'   nOt  °^  exemPted  from  dis~ 
pleasure,  but  rather  commixt  with  that  pleasant  sweetnesse, 

which  they  feele  that  suffer  themselves  to  fall  into  a  soft- 
slumbring  and  sense-entrancing  sleepe.  I  beleeve  it  is  the 
same  state,  they  find  themselves  in,  whom  in  the  agony  of 
death  we  see  to  droop  and  faint  thorow  weaknesse :  and  am 
of  opinion,  we  plaine  and  moane  them  without  cause,  esteem 
ing  that  either  they  are  agitated  with  grievous  pangs,  or  that 
their  soule  is  pressed  with  painfull  cogitations.  It  was  ever  my 
conceit,  against  the  opinion  of  many,  yea  and  against  that  of 
Stephanus  la  Boetie,  that  those  whom  we  see,  so  overwhelmed, 
and  faintly-drooping  at  the  approches  of  their  end,  or  utterly 
cast  downe  with  the  lingring  tediousnesse  of  their  deseases, 
or  by  accident  of  some  apoplexie,  or  falling-evill, 

LUCR.  iii.  490.  — (vi  morbi  scepe  coactus 

Ante  oculos  aliquis  nostros  utfulminis  ictu, 
Concidit,  et  spumas  agit,  ingemit,  et /remit  artus, 
Desipit,  extentat  nervos,  torquetur,  anhelat, 
Inconstanter  et  injactando  membra  fatigat.) 

(Some  man  by  force  of  sicknesse  driv'n  doth  fall, 
As  if  by  thunder  stroke,  before  our  eyes  ; 
He  forties,  he  grones,  he  trembles  over  all, 
He  raves,  he  stretches,  he's  vext,  panting  lyes, 
He  tyr's  his  limmes  by  tossing, 
Now  this  now  that  way  crossing.) 

or  hurt  in  the  head,  whom  we  heare  throb  and  rattle,  and 
send  forth  grones  and  gaspes,  although  we  gather  some 
tokens  from  them,  whereby  it  seemeth,  they  have  yet  some 
knowledge  left  and  certaine  motions  we  see  them  make  with 
their  body :  I  say,  I  have  ever  thought,  they  had  their  soule 
and  body  buried  and  asleepe. 

OVID.  Trist.  i.  Vivat  et  est  vitce  nescius  ipse  SUCK. 

EL  Jii-  I2-  He  lives  yet  knowes  not  he, 

That  he  alive  should  be. 

And  I  could  not  beleeve,  that  at  so  great  an  astonishment 
of  members,  and  deffailance  of  senses,  the  soule  could  main- 
taine  any  force  within,  to  know  herselfe ;  and  therefore  had 
no  manner  of  discourse  tormenting  them,  which  might  make 

54 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

them  judge  and  feele  the  misery  of  their  condition,  and  that  CHAPTER 
consequently  they  were  not  greatly  to  be  moaned.  As  for  VI 
my  selfe,  I  imagine  no  state  so  intolerable  nor  condition  so  Qr  p™*^* 
horrible,  as  to  have  a  feelingly-afflicted  soule,  void  of  meanes 
to  disburthen  and  declare  her  selfe :  As  I  would  say  of  those 
we  send  to  execution,  having  first  caused  their  tongue  to  be 
cut  out,  were  it  not  that  in  this  manner  of  death,  the  most 
dumbe  seemes  unto  me  the  fittest,  namely,  if  it  be  accom 
panied  with  a  resolute  and  grave  countenance.  And  as  those 
miserable  prisoners  which  light  in  the  hands  of  those  hard- 
harted  and  villenous  Souldiers  of  these  times,  of  whom  they 
are  tormented  with  all  maner  of  cruell  entreatie,  by  com 
pulsion  to  drawe  them  unto  some  excessive  and  impossible 
ransome,  keeping  them  al  that  while  in  so  hard  a  condition 
and  place,  that  they  have  no  way  left  them  to  utter  their 
thoughts  and  expresse  their  miserie.  The  Poets  have  fained, 
there  were  some  Gods,  that  favoured  the  release  of  such  as 
sufferd  so  languishing  deaths. 

— hunc  ego  Diti  VIRG.  JEn.  iv. 

Sacrum  jussa  fero ,  teque  isto  corpore  soluo.  7°3>  I"8- 

This  to  death  sacred,  I,  as  was  my  charge, 
Doe  beare,  and  from  this  body  thee  enlarge. 

And  the  faltering  speeches  and  uncertaine  answers,  that  by 
continuall  ringing  in  their  eares  and  incessant  urging  them, 
are  somtimes  by  force  wrested  from  them  or  by  the  motions 
which  seeme  to  have  some  simpathy  with  that  whereof  they 
are  examined,  is  notwithstanding  no  witnes  that  they  live  at 
least  a  perfect  sound  life.  We  do  also  in  yawning,  before 
sleep  fully  seize  upon  us,  apprehend  as  it  were  in  a  slumber, 
what  is  done  about  us,  and  with  a  troubled  and  uncertaine 
hearing,  follow  the  voyces,  which  seeme  to  sound  but  on  the 
outward  limits  of  our  soule ;  and  frame  answers  according  to 
the  last  words  we  heard,  which  taste  more  of  chance  than  of 
sense :  which  thing  now  I  have  proved  by  experience,  I  make 
no  doubt,  but  hitherto,  I  have  well  judged  of  it.  For,  first 
lying  as  in  a  trance,  I  laboured  even  with  my  nailes  to  open 
my  doublet  (for  I  was  unarmed)  and  well  I  wot,  that  in  my 
imagination  I  felt  nothing  did  hurt  me.  For,  there  are 
severall  motions  in  us,  which  proceed  not  of  our  free  wil. 

55 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  Semianimesque  micant  digiti^ferrumque  retractant. 

VI  The  halfe-dead  fingers  stirre,  and  feele, 

Of  Exercise  (Though  it  they  cannot  stirre)  for  steele. 

or  Practice 

VIRG.  jEn.  x.       Those  that  fall,  doe  commonly  by  a  naturall  impulsion 

396.  cast  their  araies  abroad  before  their  falling,  which  sheweth, 

that  our  members  have  certaine  offices,  which  they  lend  one 

to  another,  and  possesse  certaine  agitations,  apart  from  our 

discourse  : 

LUCR.  iii.  Falciferos  memorant  currus  abscindere  membra, 

Ut  tremere  in  terra  videatur  ab  artubus,  id  quod 
Decidit  abscissum,  cum  mens  tamen  atque  hominis  vis 
Mobilitate  mali  non  quit  sentire  dolorem. 

They  say,  sith-bearing  chariots  limbes  bereave, 

So  as  on  earth,  that  which  cut-off  they  leave, 

Doth  seeme  to  quake  ;  when  yet  mans  force  and  minde 

Doth  not  the  paine,  through  so  quicke  motion,  finde. 

My  stomacke  was  surcharged  with  clotted  bloud,  my  hands 
of  themselves  were  still  running  to  it,  as  often  they  are 
wont  (yea  against  the  knowledge  of  our  will)  where  we  feele 
it  to  itch.  There  are  many  creatures,  yea  and  some  men,  in 
whom  after  they  are  dead,  we  may  see  their  muskles  to  close 
and  stirre.  All  men  know  by  experience,  there  be  some  parts 
of  our  bodies,  which  often  without  any  consent  of  ours  doe 
stirre,  stand  and  lye  downe  againe.  Now  these  passions, 
which  but  exteriourly  touch  us,  cannot  properly  be  termed 
ours  ;  For,  to  make  them  ours,  a  man  must  wholy  be  engaged 
unto  them :  And  the  paines  that  our  feet  or  hands  feele 
whilst  we  sleepe,  are  not  ours.  When  I  came  neere  my  house, 
where  the  tidings  of  my  fall  was  already  come,  and  those  of 
my  houshold  met  me,  with  such  outcries  as  are  used  in  like 
times,  I  did  not  only  answer  some  words,  to  what  I  was 
demanded,  but  some  tell  me,  I  had  the  memory  to  command 
my  men  to  give  my  wife  a  horse,  whom  I  perceived  to  be 
over-tired,  and  labouring  in  the  way,  which  is  very  hilly, 
foule,  and  rugged.  It  seemeth  this  consideration  proceeded 
from  a  vigilant  soule  :  yet  was  I  cleane  distracted  from  it, 
they  were  but  vaine  conceits,  and  as  in  a  cloud,  only  moved 
by  the  sense  of  the  eyes  and  eares :  They  came  not  from  my 
selfe.  All  which  notwithstanding,  I  knew  neither  whence  I 
came,  nor  whither  I  went,  nor  could  I  understand  or  consider 

56 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

what  was  spoken  unto  me.  They  were  but  light  effects,  that  CHAPTER 
my  senses  produced  of  themselves,  as  it  were  of  custome.  VI 
Whatsoever  the  soule  did  assist  it  with,  was  but  a  dreame,  Of  Exercise 
being  lightly  touched,  and  only  sprinkled  by  the  soft  impres-  ' 
sion  of  the  senses.  In  the  meane  time  my  state  was  verily 
most  pleasant  and  easefull.  I  felt  no  manner  of  care  or 
affliction,  neither  for  my  selfe  nor  others.  It  was  a  slumber 
ing,  languishing  and  extreme  weaknesse,  without  any  paine 
at  all.  1  saw  mine  owne  house  and  knew  it  not ;  when  I  was 
laid  in  my  bed,  I  felt  great  ease  in  my  rest.  For  I  had  beene 
vilely  hurred  and  haled  by  those  poore  men,  which  had  taken 
the  paines  to  carry  me  upon  their  armes  a  long  and  weary- 
some  way,  and  to  say  truth,  they  had  all  beene  wearied  twice 
or  thrice  over,  and  were  faine  to  shift  severall  times.  Many 
remedies  were  presently  offered  me,  but  I  tooke  none,  sup 
posing  verily  I  had  beene  deadly  hurt  in  the  head.  To  say 
truth,  it  had  beene  a  very  happy  death  :  For,  the  weaknesse 
of  my  discourse  hinderd  me  from  judging  of  it,  and  the 
feeblenesse  of  my  body  from  feeling  the  same.  Me  thought 
I  was  yeelding  up  the  ghost  so  gently,  and  after  so  easie  and 
indolent  a  manner,  that  I  feele  no  other  action  lesse  burthen- 
some  than  that  was.  But  when  I  began  to  come  to  life 
againe  and  recover  my  former  strength, 

Vt  tandem  sensus  convaluere  mei,  OVID.  Trist. 

At  last  when  all  the  sprites  I  beare,  L  EL  Ui'  I4< 

Recall'd  and  recollected  were, 

which  was  within  two  or  three  houres  after,  I  presently  felt 
my  selfe  full  of  aches  and  paines  all  my  body  over ;  for,  each 
part  thereof  was  with  the  violence  of  the  fall  much  brused 
and  tainted  ;  and  for  two  or  three  nights  after  I  found  my 
self  so  ill,  that  I  verily  supposed  I  shold  have  had  another 
fit  of  death  :  But  that  a  more  lively,  and  sensible  one  :  (and 
to  speak  plain e)  I  feele  my  bruses  yet,  and  feare  me  shall  do 
while  I  live :  I  will  not  forget  to  tell  you,  that  the  last  thing 
I  could  rightly  fall  into  againe,  was  the  remembrance  of 
this  accident,  and  I  made  my  men  many  times  to  repeat 
me  over  and  over  againe,  whither  I  was  going,  whence 
I  came,  and  at  what  houre  that  chance  befell  me,  before  I 
could  throughly  conceive  it.  Concerning  the  manner  of  mv 
H  57  * 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  falling,  they  in  favour  of  him  who  had  beene  the  cause  of  it, 
concealed  the  truth  from  me,  and  told  me  other  flim  flam 
^a^es-  ^u^  a  wn^e  after,  and  the  morrow  next  when  my 
memorie  began  to  come  to  it  selfe  againe,  and  represent  the 
state  unto  me,  wherein  I  was  at  the  instant,  when  I  perceived 
the  horse  riding  over  me  (for  being  at  my  heeles,  I  chanced 
to  espy  him,  and  helde  my  selfe  for  dead  ;  yet  was  the  conceit 
so  sudden,  that  feare  had  no  leasure  to  enter  my  thoughts) 
me  seemed  it  was  a  flashing  or  lightning,  that  smote  my  soule 
with  shaking,  and  that  I  came  from  another  world.  This 
discourse  of  so  slight  an  accident,  is  but  vaine  and  frivolous, 
were  not  the  instructions  I  have  drawne  from  thence  for  my 
use :  For  truly,  for  a  man  to  acquaint  himselfe  with  death,  I 
iinde  no  better  way  than  to  approch  unto  it.  Now  as  Plinie 
saith,  every  man  is  a  good  discipline  unto  himselfe,  alwayes 
provided  he  be  able  to  prie  into  himselfe.  This  is  not  my 
doctrine,  it  is  but  my  study ;  And  not  another  mans  lesson, 
but  mine  owne  ;  Yet  ought  no  man  to  blame  me  if  I  impart 
the  same.  What  serves  my  turne,  may  haply  serve  another 
mans ;  otherwise  I  marre  nothing ;  what  I  make  use  of,  is 
mine  owne ;  And  if  I  play  the  foole,  it  is  at  mine  owne 
cost,  and  without  any  other  bodies  interest.  For  it  is  but  a 
kind  of  folly,  that  dyes  in  me,  and  hath  no  traine.  We  have 
notice  but  of  two  or  three  former  ancients,  that  have  trodden 
this  path ;  yet  can  we  not  say,  whether  altogether  like  unto 
this  of  mine,  for  we  know  but  their  names.  No  man  since 
hath  followed  their  steps :  it  is  a  thorny  and  crabbed  enter 
prise,  and  more  than  it  makes  shew  of,  to  follow  so  strange 
and  vagabond  a  path,  as  that  of  our  spirit :  to  penetrate  the 
shady,  and  enter  the  thicke-covered  depths  of  these  internall 
winding  crankes ;  To  chuse  so  many,  and  settle  so  severall 
aires  of  his  agitations  :  And  tis  a  new  extraordinary  ammus- 
ing,  that  distracts  us  from  the  common  occupation  of  the 
world,  yea  and  from  the  most  recommended :  Many  yeares 
are  past  since  I  have  no  other  aime,  whereto  my  thoughts 
bend,  but  my  selfe,  and  that  I  controule  and  study  nothing 
but  my  selfe.  And  if  I  study  any  thing  else,  it  is  immediatly 
to  place  it  upon,  or  to  say  better,  in  my  selfe.  And  me 
thinkes  I  erre  not,  as  commonly  men  doe  in  other  sciences, 
without  all  comparison  lesse  profitable.  I  impart  what  I 
58 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

have  learn't  by  this,  although  I  greatly  content  not  my  selfe  CHAPTER 

with  the  progresse  I  have  made  therein.    There  is  no  descrip-  VI 

tion  so  hard,  nor  so  profitable,  as  is  the  description  of  a  mans 

owne  life ;  Yet  must  a  man  handsomely  trimme-up,  yea  and 

dispose  and  range  himselfe  to  appeare  on  the  Theatre  of  this 

world.     Now  I  continually  trick e  up  my  selfe ;  for  I  unces- 

santly  describe  my  selfe.    Custome  hath  made  a  mans  speech 

of  himselfe  vicious.     And  obstinately  forbids  it  in  hatred  of 

boasting,  which   ever  seemeth   closely  to  follow   ones  selfe 

witnesses,  whereas  a  man  should  wipe  a  childes  nose,  that  is 

now  called  to  un-nose  himselfe. 

In  vicium  ducit  culpcefuga.  HOR.  Art.  Poet. 

Some  shunning  of  some  sinne, 
Doe  draw  some  further  in. 

I  finde  more  evill  than  good  by  this  remedy  :  But  suppose 
it  were  true,  that  for  a  man  to  entertaine  the  company  with 
talking  of  himselfe,  were  necessarily  presumption :  I  ought 
not  following  my  generall  intent,  to  refuse  an  action  that 
publisheth  this  crazed  quality,  since  I  have  it  in  my  selfe : 
and  I  should  not  conceale  this  fault,  which  I  have  not  only 
in  use,  but  in  profession.  Neverthelesse  to  speake  my  opinion 
of  it,  this  custome  to  condemne  wine  is  much  to  blame,  be 
cause  many  are  therewith  made  drunke.  Only  good  things 
may  be  abused.  And  I  beleeve  this  rule  hath  only  regard  to 
popular  defects :  They  are  snaffles  wherewith  neither  Saints, 
nor  Philosophers,  nor  Divines,  whom  we  heare  so  gloriously 
to  speake  of  themselves,  will  in  any  sort  be  bridled.  No 
more  doe  I,  though  I  be  no  more  the  one  than  other.  If  they 
write  purposely  or  directly  of  it,  yet  when  occasion  doth  con 
veniently  leade  them  unto  it,  faine  they  not,  headlong  to  cast 
themselves  into  the  lists  ?  Whereof  doth  Socrates  treat  more 
at  large,  than  of  himselfe  ?  To  what  doth  he  more  often 
direct  his  Disciples  discourses,  than  to  speake  of  themselves, 
not  for  their  bookes  lesson,  but  of  the  essence  and  moving  of 
their  soule  ?  We  religiously  shrive  our  selves  to  God  and  our 
Confessor,  as  our  neighbours  to  all  the  people.  But  will  some 
answer  me,  we  report  but  accusation  ;  wee  then  report  all : 
For,  even  our  vertue  it  selfe  is  faulty  and  repentable ;  My 
art  and  profession,  is  to  live.  Who  forbids  me  to  speake  of 

59 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  it,  according  to  my  sense,  experience,  and  custome ;  Let  him 
VI  appoint  the  Architect  to  speake  of  buildings,  not  according 

or  Practic^  ^°  nmise^e?  but  ms  neighbours,  according  to  anothers  skill, 
and  not  his  owne.  If  it  be  a  glory,  for  a  man  to  publish 
his  owne  worth  himselfe,  why  doth  not  Cicero  prefer  the 
eloquence  of  Hortensius,  and  Hortensius  that  of  Cicero  ? 
Some  may  perad venture  suppose  that  by  deeds  and  effects,  and 
not  simply  by  words,  I  witnesse  of  my  selfe.  I  principally 
set  forth  my  cogitations;  a  shapelesse  subject,  and  which 
cannot  fall  within  the  compasse  of  a  worke-manlike  produc 
tion  ;  with  much  adoe  can  I  set  it  downe  in  this  ayrie  body 
of  the  voice.  Wiser  men,  and  more  learned  and  devout,  have 
lived  avoiding  all  apparent  effects.  Effects  would  speake 
more  of  fortune,  than  of  me.  They  witnesse  their  part,  and 
not  mine;  unlesse  it  be  conjecturally  and  uncertainly  :  Par 
cels  of  a  particular  shew  :  I  wholy  set  forth  and  expose  my 
selfe :  It  is  a  Sceletos ;  where  at  first  sight  appeare  all  the 
vaines,  muskles,  gristles,  sinnewes,  and  tendons,  each  severall 
part  in  his  due  place.  The  effect  of  the  cough  produceth 
one  part,  that  of  palenesse  or  panting  of  the  heart  another, 
and  that  doubtfully.  I  write  not  my  gests,  but  my  selfe 
and  my  essence.  I  am  of  opinion  that  a  man  must  be 
very  wise  to  esteeme  himselfe,  and  equally  consciencious  to 

f've  testimony  of  it :  be  it  low,  be  it  high  indifferently.  If 
did  absolutely  seeme  good  and  wise  unto  my  selfe,  I  would 
boldly  declare  it.  To  speake  lesse  of  himselfe  than  he  pos- 
sesseth,  is  folly  and  not  modesty.  To  pay  himselfe  for  lesse 
than  he  is  worth,  is  basenesse  and  pusilanimity,  saith  Aris 
totle.  No  vertue  aids  it  selfe  with  false-hood ;  and  truth  is 
never  a  matter  of  errour.  And  yet  for  a  man  to  say  more  of 
him  selfe,  than  he  can  well  prove,  is  not  ever  presumption, 
though  often  sottishnesse.  For  a  man  to  over-weene,  and 
please  himselfe  exceedingly  with  what  he  is,  and  fall  into  in 
discreet  love  with  himselfe,  is  in  my  conceit,  the  substance  of 
this  vice.  The  best  remedy  to  cure  him,  is  to  doe  cleane  con 
trary  to  that  which  those  appoint,  who  in  forbidding  men 
to  speake  of  themselves,  doe  consequently  also  inhibit  more 
to  thinke  of  themselves.  Pride  consisteth  in  conceit :  The 
tongue  can  have  no  great  share  in  it.  For  one  to  ammuse  on 
himselfe,  is  in  their  imagination  to  please  himselfe :  And  for 
60 


or  Practice 


THE    SECOND    BO  ORE 

a  man  to  frequent  and  practise  himselfe,  is  at  an  over-deare  CHAPTER 
rate  to  please  himselfe.     But  this  excesse  doth  only  breed  in  VI 

them,  that  but  superficially  feele  and  search  themselves,  that 
are  scene  to  follow  their  affaires,  which  call  idlenesse  and  fond- 
nesse,  for  a  man  to  entertaine,  to  applaud  and  to  endeare 
himselfe,  and  frame  Chimeraes,  or  build  Castles  in  the  ayre  ; 
deeming  themselves  as  a  third  person  and  strangers  to  them 
selves.  If  any  be  besotted  with  his  owne  knowledge,  looking 
upon  himselfe,  let  him  cast  his  eyes  towards  former  ages,  his 
pride  shall  be  abated,  his  ambition  shall  be  quailed  ;  for  there 
shall  he  finde  many  thousands  of  spirits,  that  will  cleane  sup- 
presse  and  tread  him  under.  If  he  fortune  to  enter  into  any 
selfe-presumption  of  his  owne  worth,  let  him  but  call  to  re 
membrance  the  lives  of  Scipio  and  Epaminondas ;  so  many 
armies,  and  so  many  Nations,  which  leave  him  so  far  behind 
them.  No  particular  quality  shall  make  him  proud,  that 
therewith  shall  reckon  so  many  imperfect  and  weake  qualities 
that  are  in  him,  and  at  last  the  nullity  of  humane  condition. 
Forsomuch  as  Socrates  had  truly  only  nibled  on  the  precept 
of  his  God,  to  know  himselfe,  and  by  that  study  had  learned 
to  contemne  himselfe,  he  alone  was  esteemed  worthy  of 
the  name  of  Wise.  Whosoever  shall  so  know  him 
selfe,  let  him  boldly  make  himselfe  knowne  by 
his  owne  mouth. 


THE    SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  recompences  or  rewards  of  Honour. 


HOSE  which  write  the  life  of  Augustus 
Caesar,  note  this  in  his  military  discipline, 
that  he  was  exceeding  liberall  and  lavish 
in  his  gifts  to  such  as  were  of  any  desert ; 
but  as  sparing  and  strait-handed  in  meere 
recompences  of  honour.  Yet  is  it  that 
himselfe  had  beene  liberally  gratified  by 
his  Unkle  with  militarie  rewards,  before 
to  warres.  It  hath  beene  a  witty  invention, 
in  most  parts  of  the  worlds  Common-wealths, 

61 


ever  he  went 
and  received 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  establish  and  ordaine  certaine  vaine  and  worthies  markes, 
VII  therewith  to  honor  and  recompence  vertue :  As  are  the 
-  wreathes  of  Lawrell,  the  Chaplets  of  Oakland  the  Garlands 

wardsofHon-  °^  Myrtle,  the  forme  of  a  certaine  peculiar  garment ;  the 
our  privilege  to  ride  in  Coach  thorow  the  City  ;  or  by  night  to 
have  a  Torch  carried  before  one  :  Some  particular  place  to 
sit-in  in  common  assemblies  ;  the  prerogatives  of  certaine 
surnames  and  titles,  and  proper  additions  in  armes,  and  such 
like  things  ;  the  use  whereof  hath  beene  diversly  received 
according  to  the  opinions  of  Nations,  which  continueth  to 
this  day.  We  have  for  our  part,  together  with  divers  of  our 
neighbour-Nation,  the  orders  of  Knight-hood,  which  only 
were  established  to  this  purpose.  Verily  it  is  a  most  laud 
able  use,  and  profitable  custome,  to  finde  meanes  to  reward 
the  worth,  and  acknowledge  the  valour  of  rare  and  excellent 
men,  to  satisfie  and  content  them  with  such  payments,  as  in 
no  sort  charge  the  common- wealth,  and  put  the  Prince  to  no 
cost  at  all.  And  that  which  was  ever  knowne  by  ancient 
experience,  and  at  other  times  we  have  plainely  perceived 
amongst  our  selves,  that  men  of  qualitie,  were  ever  more 
jealous  of  such  recompences,  than  of  others,  wherein  was 
both  gaine  and  profit  :  which  was  not  without  reason  and 
great  apparence.  If  to  the  prize,  which  ought  simply  to  be 
of  honour,  there  be  other  commodities  and  riches  joyned, 
this  kinde  of  commixing,  in  stead  of  encreasing  the  estimation 
thereof,  doth  empaire,  dissipate,  and  abridge  it.  The  order 
of  the  Knights  of  Saint  Michael  in  France,  which  of  so  long 
continuance  hath  beene  in  credit  amongst  us,  had  no  greater 
commoditie  than  that  it  had  no  manner  of  communication 
with  any  other  advantage  or  profit,  which  hath  heretofore 
beene  the  cause,  that  there  was  no  charge  or  state  of  what 
quality  soever,  whereto  the  nobilitie  pretended  with  so  much 
desire,  or  aspired  with  more  affection,  as  it  did  to  obtaine 
that  order ;  nor  calling,  that  was  followed  with  more  respect 
or  greatnesse.  Vertue  embracing  with  more  ambition,  and 
more  willingly  aspiring  after  a  recompence,  that  is  meerly 
and  simply  her  owne,  and  which  is  rather  glorious,  than 
profitable.  For,  to  say  truth,  other  gifts  have  no  use  so 
worthy ;  inasmuch,  as  they  are  imployed  to  all  manner  of 
occasions.  With  riches  a  man  doth  reward  the  service  of  a 
62 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

groome,  the  diligence    of  a   messenger,   the    hopping  of  a  CHAPTER 
dancer,  the  tricks  of  a  vaulter,  the  breath  of  a  Lawyer,  and         VII 

the   basest  offices  a  man   may  receive  :  yea,  with  the  same  recom- 

,,  T«  •     J         j          /    .  .,    i          pences  or  re- 

paultry  pelfe  mony,  vice  is  payed    and    smne  requited,  as  wards  of  Hon- 

flatterey,  murther,  treason,  Maquorelage,  and  what  not  ?  It  our 
is  then  no  marvell,  if  vertue  doth  lesse  willingly  desire  this 
kinde  of  common  trash,  mony,  than  that  which  is  onely 
proper  and  peculiar  to  her  selfe,  and  is  altogether  noble  and 
generous.  Augustus  had  therefore  reason,  to  be  much  more 
niggardly  and  sparing  of  this  last,  than  of  the  former,  for 
asmuch  as  honour  is  a  privilege  which  drawes  his  principal 
essence  from  rarenesse :  And  so  doth  vertue  itselfe. 

Cui  mains  est  nemo,  quis  bonus  esse  potest  ?  MART.  xii. 

To  him  who  good  can  seeme,  Ef*g- lxxxii-  2- 

Who  doth  none  bad  esteeme  ? 

We  shall  not  see  a  man  highly  regarded,  or  extraordinarily 
commended,  that  is  curiously  carefull  to  have  his  children 
well  nurtured,  because  it  is  a  common  action,  how  just  and 
worthy  praise  soever  it  be  :  no  more  than  one  great  tree, 
where  the  forrest  is  full  of  such.  I  doe  not  thinke  that  any 
Spartane  Citizen  did  boastingly  glorifie  himselfe  for  his  valor, 
because  it  was  a  popular  vertue  in  that  Nation  :  And  as 
little  for  his  fidelity,  and  contempt  of  riches.  There  is  no 
recompence  fals  unto  vertue,  how  great  soever  it  be,  if  it 
once  have  past  into  custome  :  And  I  wot  not  whether  we 
might  call  it  great,  being  common.  Since  then  the  rewards 
of  honour,  have  no  other  prize  and  estimation  than  that  few 
enjoy  it,  there  is  no  way  to  disannull  them,  but  to  make  a 
largesse  of  them.  Were  there  now  more  men  found  deserving 
the  same  than  in  former  ages,  yet  should  not  the  reputation 
of  it  be  corrupted.  And  it  may  easily  happen  that  more 
deserve  it :  For,  there  is  no  vertue,  doth  so  easily  spread  it 
selfe  as  military  valiancie.  There  is  another,  true,  perfect, 
and  Philosophicall,  whereof  I  speake  not  (I  use  this  word 
according  to  our  custome)  farre  greater  and  more  full  than 
this,  which  is  a  force  and  assurance  of  the  soule,  equally  con 
temning  all  manner  of  contrarie  accidents,  upright,  uniforme, 
and  constant,  whereof  ours  is  but  an  easie  and  glimmering 
raie.  Custome,  institution,  example  and  fashion,  may  effect 

63 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  what  ever  they  list  in  the  establishing  of  that  I  speake  of, 
VH          and  easily  make  it  vulgare,  as  may  plamely  bee  scene  by  the 
Of  the  recom-  experjence  our  civill  warres  give  us  of  it.     And  whosoever 
pences  or  re-       r,  ,  .  ,11  i     n     i      n 

wards  of  Hon-  could  now  joyne  us  together,  and  eagerly  flesh  all  our  people 

our  to  a  common  enterprise,  we  should  make  our  ancient  military 
name  and  chivalrous  credit  to  flourish  againe.  It  is  most 
certaine  that  the  recompence  of  our  order  did  not  in  former 
times  only  concerne  prowis,  and  respect  valour  ;  it  had  a 
further  aime.  It  was  never  the  reward  or  payment  of  a 
valiant  souldier ;  but  of  a  famous  Captaine.  The  skill  to 
obey  could  not  deserve  so  honorable  an  hire  :  for,  cast  we 
backe  our  eyes  to  antiquity,  we  shall  perceive,  that  for  the 
worthy  obtaining  thereof,  there  was  required  more  universall 
warre-like  expertnesse,  and  which  might  imbrace  the  greatest 
part,  and  most  parts  of  a  military  man ;  Neque  enim  eadem 
militares  et  imperatorice  artes  sunt  •  c  For  the  same  arts  and 
4  parts  belong  not  to  a  generall  and  common  Souldier ' ;  and 
who  besides  that,  should  also  bee  of  a  fit  and  accommodable 
condition  for  such  a  dignitie.  But  I  say,  that  if  more  men 
should  now  ad  ayes  be  found  worthy  of  it,  than  have  beene 
heretofore,  yet  should  not  our  Princes  be  more  liberall  of  it : 
and  it  had  beene  much  better,  not  to  bestow  it  upon  all  them 
to  whom  it  was  due,  than  for  ever  to  lose,  (as  of  late  we  have 
done)  the  use  of  so  profitable  an  invention.  No  man  of 
courage  vouchsafeth  to  advantage  himselfe  of  that  which  is 
common  unto  many.  And  those  which  in  our  dayes,  have 
least  merited  that  honourable  recompence,  seeme,  in  all 
apparence,  most  to  disdaine  it,  by  that  meanes  to  place 
themselves  in  the  ranke  of  those  to  whom  the  wrong  is 
offered  by  unworthy  bestowing  and  vilifying  of  that  badge, 
which  particularly  was  due  unto  them.  Now  by  defacing 
and  abolishing  this  to  suppose,  suddenly  to  be  able  to  bring 
into  credit,  and  renue  a  semblable  custome,  is  no  convenient 
enterprise,  in  so  licentious,  so  corrupted,  and  so  declining  an 
age,  as  is  this  wherein  we  now  live.  And  it  will  come  to 
passe  that  the  last  shall  even  from  her  birth  incur  the  incom- 
modities,  which  have  lately  ruined  and  overthrowne  the  other. 
The  rules  of  this  new  orders-dispensation  had  need  to  be 
otherwise  wrested  and  constrained,  for  to  give  it  authority  : 
and  this  tumultuous  season  is  not  capable  of  a  short  and 
64 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

ordered  bridle.     Besides,  before  a  man  is  able  to  give  credit  CHAPTER 
unto  it,  it  is  requisite  a  man  lose  the  memory  of  the  first,          VII 
and   of  the  contempt   whereinto  it  is  fallen.      This   place  ™™s  r^°™; 
might  admit  some  discourse  upon  the  consideration  of  valour,  wards  ofHon- 
and  difference  betweene  this  vertue  and  others  :  But  Plutarch          our 
having  often  spoken  of  this  matter,  it  were  in  vaine  here  for 
mee  to  repeat  what  he  sayes  of  it.     This  is  worthy  to  be 
considered,  that  our  nation  giveth  the  chiefe  preheminence 
of  all  vertue  unto  valiancie,  as  the  Etymology  of  the  word 
sheweth,   which    commeth    of  valour,   or  worth  :    and    that 
according  to  our  received  custome,  when  after  the  phrase  of 
our  court  and  nobility  we  speake  of  a  worthy  man,  or  of  an 
honest  man,  we  thereby  inferre  no  other  thing  than  a  valiant 
man ;   after  the  usuall  Roman   fashion.     For,   the  generall 
denomination  of  vertue  doth  amongst  them  take  her  Ety 
mology,  of  force  or  might.     The  only  proper  and  essentiall 
forme  of  our  nobility  in  France,  is  military  vocation.      It 
is    very    likely,    that   the    first   vertue    that   ever   appeared 
amongst  men,  and  which  to  some  hath  given  preheminence 
over  others,   hath  beene  this   by  which  the   strongest   and 
more  couragious  have  become  masters  over  the  weakest,  and 
purchased  a  particular  ranke  and  reputation  to  themselves : 
Whereby  this  honour  and  dignity  of  speech  is  left  unto  it : 
or  else   these    nations   being   very  warlike,  have   given  the 

Erice  unto  that  of  vertues,  which  was  the  worthiest  and  more 
imiliar  unto  them.     Even  as  our  passion,  and  this  heart- 
panting,   and    mind-vexing    carefull    diligence,  and  diligent 
carefulnesse,  which  we  continually  apprehend  about  womens 
chastity,  causeth  ;  also  that  a  good  woman,  an  honest  woman, 
a  woman  of  honour  and  vertue,  doth  in  effect  and  substance, 
signifie    no    other   thing   unto    us,    than  a    chaste   wife    or 
woman  ;  as  if  to  bind  them  to  this  duty,  we  did  neglect 
all  others,  and  gave  them  free  liberty  to  commit  any 
other  fault,  to  covenant  with  them,  never  to 
quit  or  forsake  this  one. 


65 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE    EIGHTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  affection  of  fathers  to  their  children. 
To  the  Lady  of  Estissac. 


ADAME,  if  strangenesse  doe  not  save,  or 
novelty  shield  mee,  which  are  wont  to 
give  things  reputation,  I  shall  never,  with 
honesty,  quit  my  selfe  of  this  enterprise  : 
yet  is  it  so  fantasticall,  and  beares  a  shew 
so  different  from  common  custome,  that 
that  may  haply  purchase  it  free  passage. 
It  is  a  melancholy  humor,  and  consequently 
a  hatefull  enemy  to  my  naturall  complexion,  bred  by  the 
anxietie,  and  produced  by  the  anguish  of  carking  care,  where- 
into  some  yeares  since  I  cast  my  selfe,  that  first  put  this 
humorous  conceipt  of  writing  into  my  head.  And  finding 
my  selfe  afterward  wholy  unprovided  of  subject,  and  void  of 
other  matter,  I  have  presented  my  selfe  unto  my  selfe  for  a 
subject  to  write,  and  argument  to  descant  upon.  It  is  the 
only  booke  in  the  world  of  this  kinde,  and  of  a  wilde  extra 
vagant  designe.  Moreover,  there  is  nothing  in  it  worthy 
the  marking  but  this  fantasticalnesse.  For,  to  so  vaine  a 
ground  and  base  a  subject,  the  worlds  best  workman,  could 
never  have  given  a  fashion  deserving  to  be  accompted  of. 
Now  (worthy  Lady)  sithence  I  must  pourtray  my  selfe  to  the 
life,  I  should  have  forgotten  a  part  of  importance,  if  there- 
withall  I  had  not  represented  the  honour  I  have  ever  yeelded 
to  your  deserts,  which  I  have  especially  beene  willing  to 
declare  in  the  forefront  of  this  Chapter ;  Forasmuch  as 
amongst  your  other  good  parts,  and  commendable  qualities, 
that  of  loving  amity,  which  you  have  shewen  to  your  children, 
holdeth  one  of  the  first  rankes.  Whosoever  shall  understand 
and  know  the  age,  wherein  your  late  husband  the  Lord  of 
Estissac  left  you  a  Widdow,  the  great  and  honorable  matches 
have  beene  offered  you  (as  worthy  and  as  many  as  to  any 
other  Lady  in  France  of  your  condition)  the  constant  resolu 
tion,  and  resolute  constancie,  wherewith  so  many  yeares 
you  have  sustained,  and  even  in  spight,  or  athwart  so 
66 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

manifold  thorny  difficulties  ;  the  charge  and  conduct  of  their  CHAPTER 
affaires,  which  have  tossed,  turmoyled  and  removed  you  in  VIII 
all  corners  of  France,  and  still  hold  you  besieged  ;  the  happy  fa^  of  fate™ 
and  successefull  forvvardnes  you,  which  only  through  your  to  their  chil_ 
wisdome  or  good  fortune,  have  given  them,  he  will  easily  say  dren 
with  mee,  that  in  our  age  we  have  no  patterne  of  motherly 
affection  more  exemplare,  than  yours.  I  praise  God  (Madam) 
it  hath  beene  so  well  employed  :  For,  the  good  hopes,  which 
the  young  Lord  of  Estissac,  your  sonne  giveth  of  himselfe, 
fore-shew  an  undoubted  assurance,  that  when  he  shall  come 
to  yeares  of  discretion,  you  shall  reape  the  obedience  of  a 
noble,  and  finde  the  acknowledgement  of  a  good  childe.  But 
because,  by  reason  of  his  child-hood,  he  could  not  take 
notice  of  the  exceeding  kindnesse  and  many-fold  offices  he 
hath  received  from  you,  my  meaning  is,  that  if  ever  these 
my  compositions  shall  haply  one  day  come  into  his  hands 
(when  peradventure  I  shall  neither  have  mouth  nor  speech 
to  declare  it  unto  him)  he  receive  this  testimonie  in  all 
veritie  from  me  ;  which  shall  also  more  lively  be  testified 
unto  him  by  the  good  effects,  (whereof,  if  so  it  please  God,  he 
shall  have  a  sensible  feeling)  that  there  is  no  Gentleman  in 
France,  more  endebted  to  his  mother,  than  he  ;  and  that 
hereafter  he  cannot  yeeld  a  more  certaine  proofe  of  his  good- 
nes,  and  testimonie  of  his  vertue,  than  in  acknowledging  and 
confessing  you  for  such.  If  there  be  any  truly-naturall  law, 
that  is  to  say,  any  instinct,  universally  and  perpetually 
imprinted,  both  in  beasts  and  us,  (which  is  not  without  con- 
troversie)  I  may,  according  to  mine  opinion,  say,  that  next 
to  the  care,  which  each  living  creature  hath  to  his  preserva 
tion,  and  to  flie  what  doth  hurt  him ;  the  affection  which 
the  engenderer  beareth  his  off-spring,  holds  the  second  place 
in  this  ranke.  And  forasmuch  as  nature  seemeth  to  have 
recommended  the  same  unto  us,  ayming  to  extend,  encrease, 
and  advance,  the  successive  parts  or  parcels  of  this  her  frame. 
It  is  no  wonder  if  back-againe  it  is  not  so  great  from  children 
unto  fathers.  This  other  Aristotelian  consideration  remem- 
bred  :  That  hee  who  doth  benefit  another,  loveth  him  better 
than  hee  is  beloved  of  him  againe  :  And  hee  to  whom  a  debt 
is  owing,  loveth  better,  than  hee  that  oweth  :  And  every 
workman  loveth  his  worke  better,  than  hee  should  bee 

67 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  beloved  of  it  againe,  if  it  had  sense  or  feeling.     Forasmuch 

VIII         as  We  love  to  be  ;  and  being  consisteth  in  moving  and  action. 

f  the  affec-  rj^|ierefore   is    every    man,    in    some    sort    or    other    in    his 

to^heir1  chii-  owne  workmanship.  Whosoever  doth  a  good  deed,  exerciseth 
dren  a  faire  and  honest  action  :  Whosoever  receiveth,  exerciseth 
only  a  profitable  action.  And  profit  is  nothing  so  much  to 
be  esteemed  or  loved  as  honesty.  Honesty  is  firme  and 
permanent,  affording  him  that  did  it,  a  constant  gratification. 
Profit  is  very  slipperie,  and  easily  lost,  nor  is  the  memorie  of 
it  so  sweet,  or  so  fresh.  Such  things  are  dearest  unto  us, 
that  have  cost  us  most :  And  to  give,  is  of  more  cost  than 
to  take.  Since  it  hath  pleased  God  to  endow  us  with  some 
capacitie  of  discourse,  that  as  beasts  we  should  not  servily 
be  subjected  to  common  lawes,  but  rather  with  judgement 
and  voluntary  liberty  apply  our  selves  unto  them ;  we 
ought  somewhat  to  yeeld  unto  the  simple  auctoritie  of 
Nature  :  but  not  suffer  her  tyrannically  to  carry  us  away  : 
only  reason  ought  to  have  the  conduct  of  our  inclinations. 
As  for  me,  my  tast  is  strangely  distasted  to  it's  propen- 
sions,  which  in  us  are  produced  without  the  ordinance  and 
direction  of  our  judgement.  As  upon  this  subject  I  speak 
of,  I  cannot  receive  this  passion,  wherewith  some  embrace 
children  scarsly  borne,  having  neither  motion  in  the  soule, 
nor  forme  well  to  be  distinguished  in  the  body,  whereby 
they  might  make  themselves  lovely  or  amiable.  And  I 
could  never  well  endure  to  have  them  brought  up  or  nursed 
neere  about  me.  A  true  and  well  ordred  affection  ought 
to  be  borne  and  augmented,  with  the  knowledge  they  give 
us  of  themselves  ;  and  then,  if  they  deserve  it  (naturall  in 
clination  marching  hand  in  hand  with  reason)  to  cherish 
and  make  much  of  them,  with  a  perfect  fatherly  love  and 
loving  friendship,  and  conformably  to  judge  of  them  if 
they  be  otherwise,  alwayes  yeelding  our  selves  unto  reason, 
notwithstanding  natural  power.  For  the  most  part,  it 
goeth  cleane  contrary,  and  commonly  we  feele  our  selves 
more  moved  with  the  sports,  idlenesse,  wantonnesse,  and 
infant-trifles  of  our  children,  than  afterward  we  do  with  all 
their  actions,  when  they  bee  men  :  As  if  we  had  loved  them 
for  our  pastimes,  as  we  do  apes,  monkies,  or  perokitoes, 
and  not  as  man.  And  some  that  liberally  furnish  them 
68 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

with  sporting  babies  while  they  be  children,  will  miserably  CHAPTER 
pinch  it  in  the  least  expence  for  necessaries  when  they  grow  VIII 
men.  Nay,  it  seemeth  that  the  jelousie  we  have  to  see  Jion  of  father* 
them  appeare  into,  and  injoy  the  world,  when  we  are  ready  t0  their  chil- 
to  leave  them,  makes  us  more  sparing  and  close-handed  dren 
toward  them.  It  vexeth  and  grieveth  us  when  we  see  them 
following  us  at  our  heeles,  supposing  they  solicite  us  to  be 
gone  hence  :  And  if  we  were  to  feare  that  since  the  order 
of  things  beareth,  that  they  cannot  indeed,  neither  be,  nor 
live,  but  by  our  being  and  life,  we  should  not  meddle  to  be 
fathers.  As  for  mee,  I  deeme  it  a  kind  of  cruelty  and  in 
justice,  not  to  receive  them  into  the  share  and  society  of  our 
goods,  and  to  admit  them  as  Partners  in  the  understanding 
of  our  domestical  affaires  (if  they  be  once  capable  of  it)  and 
not  to  cut  off  and  shut-up  our  commodities  to  provide  for 
theirs,  since  we  have  engendred  them  to  that  purpose,  fit 
is  meere  injustice  to  see  an  old,  crazed,  sinnow-shronken,  and 
nigh  dead  father  sitting  alone  in  a  Chimny-corner,  to  enjoy 
so  many  goods  as  would  suffice  for  the  preferment  and  enter 
tainment  of  many  children,  and  in  the  meane  while,  for  want 
of  meanes,  to  suffer  them  to  lose  their  best  dayes  and  yeares, 
without  thrusting  them  into  publike  service  and  knowledge 
of  men  ;  whereby  they  are  often  cast  into  dispaire,  to  seeke, 
by  some  way  how  unlawfull  soever  to  provide  for  their 
necessaries^  And  in  my  dayes,  I  have  scene  divers  yong-men, 
of  good  houses  so  given  to  stealing  and  filching,  that  no 
correction  could  divert  them  from  it.  I  know  one  very  well 
alied,  to  whom,  at  the  instance  of  a  brother  of  his  (a  most 
honest,  gallant,  and  vertuous  Gentleman)  I  spake  to  that 
purpose,  who  boldly  answered  and  confessed  unto  me,  that 
only  by  the  rigor  and  covetise  of  his  father  he  had  beene 
forced  and  driven  to  fall  into  such  lewdnesse  and  wickednesse. 
And  even  at  that  time  he  came  from  stealing  certaine  jewels 
from  a  Lady,  in  whose  bed-chamber  he  fortuned  to  come  with 
certaine  other  Gentlemen  when  she  was  rising,  and  had 
almost  beene  taken.  He  made  me  remember  a  tale  I  had 
heard  of  another  Gentleman,  from  his  youth  so  fashioned  and 
inclined  to  this  goodly  trade  of  pilfering,  that  comming 
afterward  to  be  heire  and  Lord  of  his  owne  goods,  resolved 
to  give  over  that  manner  of  life,  could  notwithstanding  (if 

69 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  he  chanced  to  come  neere  a  shop,  where  he  saw  any  thing  he 
VIII         stood  in   need  of)  not  chuse   but  steale  the  same,  though 

Uf  the  affec-  afterwarj  }le  would  ever  send  mony  and  pay  for  it.     And  I 

tion  of  fathers  ,  •,.  .  -,  .      .,     ,J   .        A    J.  ,1     . 

to  their  chil-  nave  seene  diverse  so  inured  to  that  vice,  that  amongst  their 
dren  companions,  they  would  ordinarily  steale  such  things,  as  they 
would  restore  againe.  I  am  a  Gascoine,  and  there  is  no  vice 
wherein  I  have  lesse  skill :  I  hate  it  somewhat  more  by  com 
plexion,  than  I  accuse  it  by  discourse.  I  doe  not  so  much 
as  desire  another  mans  goods. 

And  although  my  Countrey-men  be  indeed  somewhat 
more  taxed  with  this  fault,  than  other  Provinces  of  France, 
yet  have  we  seene  of  late  dayes,  and  that  sundry  times,  men 
well  borne  and  of  good  parentage  in  other  parts  of  France, 
in  the  hands  of  justice,  and  lawfully  convicted  of  many  most 
horrible  robberies.  I  am  of  opinion  that  in  regard  of  these 
debauches  and  lewd  actions,  fathers  may,  in  some  sort,  be 
blamed,  and  that  it  is  only  long  of  them.  And  if  any  shall 
answer  mee,  as  did  once  a  Gentleman  of  good  worth  and 
understanding,  that  he  thriftily  endevoured  to  hoard  up 
riches,  to  no  other  purpose,  nor  to  have  any  use  and  com 
modity  of  them,  than  to  be  honoured,  respected  and  suingly 
sought  unto  by  his  friends  and  kinsfolkes,  and  that  age 
having  bereaved  him  of  all  other  forces,  it  was  the  onely 
remedy  he  had  left  to  maintaine  himselfe  in  authority  with 
his  houshold,  and  keepe  him  from  falling  into  contempt  and 
disdaine  of  all  the  world.  And  truly  according  to  Aristotle, 
not  only  old-age,  but  each  imbecillity,  is  the  promoter,  and 
motive  of  covetousnesse.  That  is  something,  but  it  is  a 
remedy  for  an  evill,  whereof  the  birth  should  have  beene 
hindered,  and  breeding  avoyded.  That  father  may  truly  be 
said  miserable,  that  holdeth  the  affection  of  his  children  tied 
unto  him  by  no  other  meanes  than  by  the  need  they  have  of 
his  helpe,  or  want  of  his  assistance,  if  that  may  be  termed 
affection  :  A  man  should  yeeld  himselfe  respectable  by  vertue 
and  sufficiency,  and  amiable  by  his  goodnesse,  and  gentlenesse 
of  manners.  \  The  very  cinders  of  so  rich  a  matter,  have  their 
value  :  so  have  the  bones  and  reliques  of  honourable  men, 
whom  we  hold  in  respect  and  reverence.  No  age  can  be  so 
crazed  and  drooping  in  a  man  that  hath  lived  honourably, 
but  must  needs  prove  venerable,  and  especially  unto  his 
70 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

children,  whose    mindes    ought  so   to   be    directed   by  the  CHAPTER 
parents,  that  reason  and  wisdome,  not  necessity  and  need,         vm 
nor  rudenesse  and  compulsion,  may  make  them  know  and  .  .       ?„  th^ 
performe  their  dutie.  to  their  chLU 

—  et  errat  longe,  mea  quidem  sententia,  dren 


Qui  imperium  credat  esse  gravius  aut  stabilius,  ^R: 

Vi  quod  fit,  quam  illud  quod  amicitia  adjungitur. 

In  mine  opinion  he  doth  much  mistake, 

Who,  that  command  more  grave,  more  firme  doth  take, 

Which  force  doth  get,  than  that  which  friendships  make. 

I  utterly  condemne  all  manner  of  violence  in  the  education 
of  a  young  spirit,  brought  up  to  honour  and  liberty.  There 
is  a  kind  of  slavishnesse  in  churlish-rigor,  and  servility  in 
compulsion  ;  and  I  hold,  that  that  which  cannot  be  com 
passed  by  reason,  wisdome  and  discretion,  can  never  be 
attained  by  force  and  constraint.  So  was  I  brought  up  : 
they  tell  mee,  that  in  all  my  youth,  I  never  felt  rod  but 
twice,  and  that  very  lightly.  And  what  education  I  have 
had  my  selfe,  the  same  have  I  given  my  children.  But  such 
is  my  ill  hap,  that  they  dye  all  very  yong  :  yet  hath  Leonora 
my  only  daughter  escaped  this  misfortune,  and  attained  to 
the  age  of  six  yeares,  and  somewhat  more  :  for  the  conduct 
of  whose  youth,  and  punishment  of  her  childish  faults  (the 
indulgence  of  her  mother  applying  it  selfe  very  mildely 
unto  it)  was  never  other  meanes  used  but  gentle  words. 
And  were  my  desire  frustrate,  there  are  diverse  other  causes 
to  take  hold  of,  without  reproving  my  discipline,  which  I 
know  to  be  j  ust  and  naturall.  I  would  also  have  beene  much 
more  religious  in  that  towards  male-children,  not  borne  to 
serve  as  women,  and  of  a  freer  condition.  I  should  have 
loved  to  have  stored  their  minde  with  ingenuity  and  liberty. 
I  have  scene  no  other  effects  in  rods,  but  to  make  childrens 
mindes  more  remisse,  or  more  maliciously  head-strong. 
Desire  we  to  be  loved  of  our  children  ?  Will  we  remove  all 
occasions  from  them  to  wish  our  death  ?  (although  no  occa 
sion  of  so  horrible  and  unnaturall  wishes,  can  either  be  just 
or  excusable)  nullum  scelus  rationem  habet,  6  no  ill  deed  hath 
'  a  good  reason.  ' 

Let  us  reasonably  accommodate  their  life,  with  such  things 
as  are  in  our  power.  And  therefore  should  not  we  marry  so 

71 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  young,  that  our  age  do  in  a  manner  confound  it  selfe  with 
VIII         theirs.     For,   this  inconvenience  doth  unavoidably  cast  us 

?,  f"ec"  into  many   difficulties,  and  encombrances.     This  I  speake, 
tion  of  fathers    ,  .  a          J,          ,  .,.,        ',  .  ,    .       „        .  „     -,.          ...  V   -, 

to  their  chil-  cnleny  unto  nobility,  which  is  of  an  idle  disposition,  or  loiter- 

dren  ing  condition,  and  which  (as  we  say)  liveth  only  by  her  lands 
or  rents  :  for  else,  where  life  standeth  upon  gaine ;  plurality 
and  company  of  children  is  an  easefull  furtherance  of  hus 
bandry.  They  are  as  many  new  implements  to  thrive,  and 
instruments  to  grow  rich.  I  was  married  at  thirty  yeares  of 
age,  and  commend  the  opinion  of  thirty-five,  which  is  said 
to  be  Aristotles.  Plato  would  have  no  man  married  before 
thirty,  and  hath  good  reason  to  scofte  at  them  that  will  defer 
it  till  after  fifty-five,  and  then  marry  ;  and  condemneth  their 
breed  as  unworthy  of  life  and  sustenance.  Thales  appointed 
the  best  limits,  who  by  his  mother,  being  instantly  urged  to 
marry  whilest  he  was  young,  answered  that  it  was  not  yet 
time ;  and  when  he  came  to  be  old,  he  said,  it  was  no  more 
time.  A  man  must  refuse  opportunity  to  every  importunate 
action.  The  ancient  Gaules  deemed  it  a  shamefull  reproach, 
to  have  the  acquaintance  of  a  woman  before  the  age  of 
twenty  yeares ;  and  did  especially  recommend  unto  men  that 
sought  to  be  trained  up  in  warres,  the  carefull  preservation 
of  their  maiden-head,  untill  they  were  of  good  yeares,  forso- 
much  as  by  losing  it  in  youth,  courages  are  therby  much 
weakned  and  greatly  em  paired,  and  by  copulation  with 
women,  diverted  from  all  vertuous  action. 

Ma  hor  cogiunto  a  gio  vinetta  sposa, 
Lieto  homai  de'  figli'  era  invilito 
Ne  gli  affetti  di  padre  et  di  marito. 

But  now  conjoyn'd  to  a  fresh-springing1  spouse, 
Joy'd  in  his  children,  he  was  thought-abased, 
In  passions  twixt  a  Sire^  and  husband  placed. 

Muleasses  King  of  Thunes,  he  whom  the  Emperour  Charles 
the  fifth  restored  unto  his  owne  state  againe,  was  wont  to 
upbraid  his  fathers  memorie,  for  so  dissolutely-frequenting  of 
women,  terming  him  a  sloven,  effeminate,  and  a  lustfull 
engenderer  of  children.  The  Greeke  story  doth  note  lecus 
the  Tarentine,  Chryso,  Astylus,  Diopomus  and  others,  who 
to  keep  their  bodies  tough  and  strong  for  the  service  of  the 
Olympicke  courses,  wrestlings  and  such  bodily  exercises,  they 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

did,  as  long  as  they  were  possessed  with  that  care,  heede-  CHAPTER 
fully   abstaine    from    all   venerian    acts,   and    touching    of        VI11 

women.     In  a  certaine  country  of  the  Spanish  Indies,  no  ;?    *  /-  ^ec" 

m       ,  ,  .»J  T     n,        T     r          „     , .  tion  of  fathers 

man  was  suffered  to  take  a  wire,  before  he  were  rortie  yeares  t0  their  chil- 

old,  and  women  might  marry  at  ten  yeares  of  age.  There  dren 
is  no  reason,  neither  is  it  convenient,  that  a  Gentleman  of 
five  and  thirtie  yeares,  should  give  place  to  his  sonne,  that 
is  but  twenty:  For  then  is  the  father  as  seemely,  and 
may  aswell  appeare,  and  set  himselfe  forward,  in  all 
manner  of  voyages  of  warres,  aswell  by  land  as  sea,  and 
doe  his  Prince  as  good  service,  in  court,  or  elsewhere, 
as  his  sonne :  He  hath  need  of  all  his  parts,  and  ought 
truly  to  impart  them,  but  so,  that  he  forget  not  himselfe 
for  others :  and  to  such  may  justly  that  answer  serve, 
which  fathers  have  commonly  in  their  mouthes :  '  I  will 
'  not  put  off  my  clothes  before  I  be  ready  to  goe  to  bed/ 
But  a  father  over-burthend  with  yeares,  and  crazed  through 
sicknesse,  and  by  reason  of  weaknesse  and  want  of  health, 
barred  from  the  common  societie  of  men,  doth  both  wrong 
himselfe,  injure  his,  idely  and  to  no  use  to  hoord  up,  and 
keepe  close  a  great  heape  of  riches,  and  deale  of  pelfe.  He 
is  in  state  good  enough,  if  he  be  wise  to  have  a  desire  to  put 
off  his  clothes  to  goe  to  bed.  I  will  not  say  to  his  shirt,  but 
to  a  good  warme  night-gowne.  f  As  for  other  pompe  ancT 
trash  whereof  hee  hath  no  longer  use  or  need  ;  hee  ought 
willingly  to  distribute  and  bestow  them  amongst  those,  to 
whom  by  naturall  decree  they  ought  to  belong.  It  is  reason 
he  should  have  the  use,  and  bequeath  the  fruition  of  them, 
since  nature  doth  also  deprive  him  of  them,  otherwise  with 
out  doubt  there  is  both  envy  and  malice  stirring./  The 
worthiest  action,  that  ever  the  Emperour  Charles  tne  fifth 
performed  was  this,  in  imitation  of  some  ancients  of  his 
quality,  that  he  had  the  discretion  to  know,  that  reason 
commanded  us,  to  strip  or  shift  our  selves  when  our  cloathes 
trouble  and  are  too  heavy  for  us,  and  that  it  is  high  time  to 
goe  to  bed,  when  our  legs  faile  us.  He  resigned  his  meanes, 
his  greatnesse  and  Kingdome  to  his  Sonne,  at  what  time  he 
found  his  former  und anted  resolution  to  decay,  and  force  to 
conduct  his  affaires,  to  droope  in  himselfe,  together  with  the 
glory  he  had  thereby  acquired. 

K  73 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER      HOR.  i.  Ep.      Solue  senescentem  mature  sanus  equum,  ne 
VIII  i.  8.  Peccet  ad  extremum  ridendus,  et  ilia  ducat. 

Of  the   affec-  If  you  be  wig(^  the  horse  growne-old  betimes  cast-off, 

tion  of  fathers  Lest  he  at  lagt  fall  la        foulter,  and  breed  a  skoffe. 

to  their  chil 
dren  This  fault,  for  a  man  not  to  be  able  to  know  himselfe  be 
times,  and  not  to  feele  the  impuissance  and  extreme  altera 
tion,  that  age  doth  naturally  bring,  both  to  the  body  and 
the  minde  (which  in  mine  opinion  is  equall,  if  the  minde 
have  but  one  halfe)  hath  lost  the  reputation  of  the  most 
part  of  the  greatest  men  in  the  world.  I  have  in  my  dayes 
both  scene  and  familiarly  knowen  some  men  of  great 
authority,  whom  a  man  might  easily  discerne,  to  be  strangely 
fallen  from  tnat  ancient  sufficiency,  which  I  know  by  the 
reputation  they  had  thereby  attained  unto  in  their  best  yeares. 
I  could  willingly  for  their  honors  sake  have  wisht  them  at 
home  about  their  owne  businesse,  discharged  from  all  negotia 
tions  of  the  commonwealth  and  employments  of  war,  that 
were  no  longer  fit  for  them.  I  have  sometimes  beene  familiar 
in  a  Gentlemans  house,  who  was  both  an  old  man  and  a 
widdower,  yet  lusty  of  his  age.  This  man  had  many  daughters 
marriageable,  and  a  sonne  growne  to  mans  state,  and  ready 
to  appeare  in  the  world ;  a  thing  that  drew-on,  and  was  the 
cause  of  great  charges,  and  many  visitations,  wherein  he  tooke 
but  little  pleasure,  not  only  for  the  continuall  care  hee  had 
to  save,  but  more  by  reason  of  his  age,  hee  had  betaken  him 
selfe  to  a  manner  of  life  farre  different  from  ours.  I  chanced 
one  day  to  tell  him  somewhat  boldly  (as  my  custome  is)  that 
it  would  better  beseeme  him  to  give  us  place,  and  resigne  his 
chiefe  house  to  his  sonne  (for  he  had  no  other  mannor-house 
conveniently  well  furnished)  and  quietly  retire  himselfe  to 
some  farme  of  his,  where  no  man  might  trouble  him,  or  dis- 
turbe  his  rest,  since  he  could  not  otherwise  avoid  our  impor- 
tunitie,  seeing  the  condition  of  his  children ;  who  afterward 
followed  my  counsell,  and  found  great  ease  by  it.  It  is  not 
to  be  said,  that  they  have  any  thing  given  them  by  such  a 
way  of  obligation,  which  a  man  may  not  recall  againe :  I, 
that  am  ready  to  play  such  a  part,  would  give  over  unto 
them  the  full  possession  of  my  house,  and  enjoying  of  my 
goods,  but  with  such  libertie  and  limited  condition,  as  if  they 
should  give  me  occasion,  I  might  repent  my  selfe  of  my  gift, 
74 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

and  revoke  my  deed.  I  would  leave  the  use  and  fruition  of  CHAPTER 
all  unto  them,  the  rather  because  it  were  no  longer  fit  for  VHI 
me  to  weald  the  same.  And  touching  the  disposing  of  all  ^J^  affe< 
matters  in  grosse,  I  would  reserve  what  I  pleased  unto  my  to  t^e^r  chil. 
selfe.  Having  ever  judged,  that  it  must  be  a  great  content-  dren 
ment  to  an  aged  father,  him  selfe  to  direct  his  children  in 
the  government  of  his  houshold  affaires,  and  to  be  able 
whilst  himselfe  liveth,  to  checke  and  controule  the  demeanors, 
storing  them  with  instruction  and  advised  counsell,  according 
to  the  experience  he  hath  had  of  them,  and  himselfe  to 
addresse  the  ancient  honour  and  order  of  his  house  in  the 
hands  of  his  successours,  and  that  way  warrant  himselfe  of 
the  hopes  hee  may  conceive  of  their  future  conduct  and  after 
successe.  And  to  this  effect,  I  would  not  shun  their  com 
pany.  I  would  not  be  far  from  them,  but  as  much  as  the 
condition  of  my  age  would  permit,  enjoy  and  be  a  partner  of 
their  sports,  mirths,  and  feasts.  If  I  did  not  continually 
live  amongst  them  (as  I  could  not  wel  without  offending 
their  meetings  and  hindering  their  recreation,  by  reason  of 
the  peevish  frowardnesse  of  my  age,  and  the  trouble  of  my 
infirmities,  and  also  without  forcing  their  rules,  and  resisting 
the  forme  of  life,  I  should  then  follow)  I  would  at  least  live 
neere  them,  in  some  corner  of  my  house,  not  the  best  and 
fairest  in  shew,  but  the  most  easefull  and  commodious.  And 
not  as  some  yeares  since,  I  saw  a  Deane  of  S.  Hillarie  of 
Poictiers,  reduced  by  reason  and  the  incommoditie  of  his 
melancholy  to  such  a  continuall  solitarinesse,  that  when  I 
entered  into  his  chamber  he  had  never  removed  one  step  out 
of  it  in  two  and  twenty  yeares  before  :  yet  had  all  his  faculties 
free  and  easie,  onely  a  rheume  excepted  that  fell  into  his 
stomacke.  Scarse  once  a  weeke  would  he  suffer  any  body  to 
come  and  see  him.  Hee  would  ever  be  shut  up  in  his  chamber 
all  alone,  where  no  man  should  come,  except  a  boy,  who 
once  a  day  brought  him  meat,  and  who  might  not  tarry 
there,  but  as  soone  as  he  was  in,  must  goe  out  againe.  All 
his  exercise  was  sometimes  to  walke  up  and  downe  his 
chamber,  and  now  and  then  reade  on  some  booke  (for  he  had 
some  understanding  of  letters)  but  obstinately  resolved  to 
live  and  dye  in  that  course,  as  he  did  shortly  after.  I  would 
endevour  by  a  kinde  of  civill  demeanour  and  milde  conversa- 

75 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  tion,  to  breede  and  settle  in  my  children  a  true-harty-loving 
VIII  friendship,  and  unfained  good  will  towards  me.  A  thing 
tionoffathers  eas%  obtained  amongst  well-borne  mindes ;  For,  if  they 
to  their  chil-  prove,  or  be  such  surly-furious  beasts,  or  given  to  churlish 
dren  disobedience,  as  our  age  bringeth  forth  thousands,  they  must 
as  beasts  be  hated,  as  churls  neglected,  and  as  degenerate 
avoided.  I  hate  this  custome,  to  forbid  children  to  call  their 
fathers  father,  and  to  teach  them  another  strange  name,  as 
of  more  reverence  :  As  if  nature  had  not  sufficiently  provided 
for  our  authoritie.  We  call  God-ialmighty  by  the  name  of 
father,  and  disdaine  our  children  should  call  us  so.  I  have 
reformed  this  fault  in  mine  owne  houshold.  It  is  also  folly 
and  injustice  to  deprive  children,  especially  being  of  com 
petent  age,  of  their  fathers  familiaritie,  and  ever  to  shew 
them  a  surly,  austere,  grim,  and  disdainefull  countenance, 
hoping  thereby  to  keepe  them  in  awfull  feare  and  duteous 
obedience.  ^For,  it  is  a  very  unprofitable  proceeding, 
and  which  maketh  fathers  yrkesome  unto  children ;  and 
which  is  worse,  ridiculous.  They  have  youth  and  strength 
in  their  hands,  and  consequently,  the  breath  and  favour  of 
the  world ;  and  doe  with  mockerie  and  contempt  receive 
these  churlish  fierce,  and  tyrannicall  countenances,  from  a 
man  that  hath  no  lusty  bloud  left  him,  neither  in  his  heart, 
nor  in  his  vaines ;  meere  bug-beares,  and  scar-crowes,  to 
scare  birdes  with  alL]  If  it  lay  in  my  power  to  make  my  selfe 
feared,  I  had  rather  make  my  selfe  beloved.  There  are  so 
many  sorts  of  defects  in  age,  and  so  much  impuissance  :  It  is 
so  subject  to  contempt,  that  the  best  purchase  it  can  make, 
is  the  good  will,  love  and  affection  of  hers.  Commandement 
and  feare  are  no  longer  her  weapons.  I  have  knowen  one 
whose  youth  had  beene  very  imperious  and  rough,  but 
when  he  came  to  mans  age,  although  hee  live  in  as  good 
plight  and  health  as  may  be,  yet  he  chafeth,  he  scoldeth,  he 
brawleth,  he  fighteth,  he  sweareth,  and  biteth,  as  the  most 
boistrous  and  tempestuous  master  of  France,  he  frets  and 
consumes  himselfe  with  carke  and  care  and  vigilancy  (al 
which  is  but  a  jugling  and  ground  for  his  familiar  to  play 
upon,  and  cozen  him  the  more)  as  for  his  goods,  his  garners, 
his  cellers,  his  coffers,  yea  his  purse,  whilst  himselfe  keepes 
the  keyes  of  them  close  in  his  bosome,  and  under  his  boulster, 
76 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

as  charily  as  he  doth  his  eyes,  other  enjoy  and  command  the  CHAPTER 
better  part  of  them ;  whilst  he  pleaseth  and  flattereth  him- 
selfe  with  the  niggardly  sparing  of  his  table,  all  goth  *< 
wracke,  and  is  lavishly  wasted  in  divers  corners  of  his  house,  to 
in  play,  in  riotous  spending,  and  in  soothingly  entertaining  dren 
the  accompts  or  tales  of  his  vaine  chafing,  foresight  and 
providing.  Every  man  watcheth  and  keepeth  sentinell 
against  him,  if  any  silly  or  heedlesse  servant  doe  by  fortune 
apply  himselfe  unto  it,  he  is  presently  made  to  suspect  him : 
A  quality  on  which  age  doth  immediately  bite  of  it  selfe. 
How  many  times  hath  he  vaunted  and  applauding  himselfe 
told  me  of  the  strict  orders  of  his  house,  of  his  good  hus 
bandry,  of  the  awe  he  kept  his  houshold  in,  and  of  the 
exact  obedience,  and  regardfull  reverence  he  received  of  all  his 
family,  and  how  cleare-sighted  he  was  in  his  owne  businesse : 

Ille  solus  nescit  omnia.  TER.  Adel.  act. 

Of  all  things  none  but  he,  iv>  sc<  iL  9' 

Most  ignorant  must  be. 

I  know  no  man  that  could  produce  more  parts,  both 
naturall  and  artificiall,  fit  to  preserve  his  masterie,  and  to 
maintaine  his  absolutenesse,  than  he  doth  ;  yet  is  hee  cleane 
falne  from  them  like  a  childe.  Therefore  have  I  made 
choice  of  him,  amongst  many  such  conditions  that  I  know, 
as  most  exemplare.  It  were  a  matter  beseeming  a  scholasti- 
call  question,  whether  it  be  better  so,  or  otherwise.  In  his 
presence  all  things  give  place  unto  him.  This  vaine  course 
is  ever  left  unto  his  authority,  that  he  is  never  gaine-said. 
He  is  had  in  awe,  he  is  feared,  he  is  beleeved,  he  is  respected 
his  belly-full.  Doth  he  discharge  any  boy  or  servant  ?  he 
presently  trusseth  up  his  packe,  then  is  he  gone ;  but  whither? 
onely  out  of  his  sight,  not  out  of  his  house.  The  steps  of 
age  are  so  slow,  the  senses  so  troubled,  the  minde  so  distracted, 
that  he  shall  live  and  doe  his  office,  a  whole  yeare  in  one 
same  house,  and  never  be  perceived.  And  when  fit  time  or 
occasion  serveth,  Letters  are  produced  from  farre  places, 
humbly  suing,  and  pittifully  complayning,  with  promises  to 
doe  better,  and  to  amend,  by  which  he  is  brought  into 
favour  and  office  againe.  Doth  the  master  make  any  bar- 
gaine,  or  dispatch  that  pleaseth  not  ?  it  is  immediatly 

77 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  smothered  and  suppressed,  soone  after  forging  causes,  and 
VIII  devising  colourable  excuses,  to  excuse  the  want  of  execution 
?f  thfef  ?j[e£~  °r  answer.  No  forraine  Letters  being  first  presented  unto 
to  their  chil-  n^m'  ne  see^h  but  such  as  are  fit  for  his  knowledge.  If  per- 
dren  adventure  they  come  unto  his  hands,  as  he  that  trusteth  some 
one  of  his  men  to  reade  them  unto  him,  he  will  presently 
devise  what  he  thinketh  good,  whereby  they  often  invent, 
that  such  a  one  seemeth  to  aske  him  forgivenesse,  that 
wrongeth  him  by  his  Letter.  To  conclude,  he  never  lookes 
into  his  owne  businesse,  but  by  a  disposed,  designed  and  as 
much  as  may  be  pleasing  image,  so  contrived  by  such  as  are 
about  him,  because  they  will  not  stirre  up  his  choler,  move 
his  impatience,  and  exasperate  his  frowardnesse.  I  have 
seene  under  different  formes,  many  long  and  constant,  and  of 
like  effect  ceconomies.  It  is  ever  proper  unto  women,  to  be 
readily  bent  to  contradict  and  crosse  their  husbands.  They 
will  with  might  and  maine  hand  over  head,  take  hold  of  any 
colour  to  thwart  and  withstand  them  :  the  first  excuse  they 
meet  with,  serves  them  as  a  plenary  justification.  I  have 
seene  some,  that  would  in  grosse  steale  from  their  husbands, 
to  the  end  (as  they  told  their  Confessors)  they  might  give 
the  greater  almes.  Trust  you  to  such  religious  dispensations. 
They  thinke  no  liberty  to  have,  or  managing  to  possesse 
sufficient  authority,  if  it  come  from  their  husbands  consent : 
They  must  necessarily  usurpe  it,  either  by  wily  craft  or 
maine  force,  and  ever  injuriously,  thereby  to  give  it  more 
grace  and  authoritie.  As  in  my  Discourse,  when  it  is  against 
a  poore  old  man,  and  for  children,  then  take  they  hold  of  this 
Title,  and  therewith  gloriously  serve  their  turne  and  passion, 
and  as  in  a  common  servitude,  easily  usurpe  and  monopolize 
against  his  government  and  domination.  If  they  be  men- 
children,  tall,  of  good  spirit  and  forward,  then  they  presently 
suborne,  either  by  threats,  force  or  favour,  both  Steward, 
Bailiffe,  Clarke,  Receiver,  and  all  the  Fathers  Officers,  and 
Servant.  Such  as  have  neither  wife  nor  children,  doe  more 
hardly  fall  into  this  mischiefe  :  but  yet  more  cruelly  and 
unworthily.  Old  Cato  was  wont  to  say,  6  So  many  servants, 
4  so  many  enemies."1  Note  whether  according  to  the  distance, 
that  was  bet  ween  e  the  purity  of  his  age,  and  the  corruption 
of  our  times,  he  did  not  fore-warne  us,  that  Wives,  Children, 
78 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

and  Servants  are  to  us  so  many  enemies.     Well  fits  it  de-  CHAPTER 
crepitude  to  store  us  with  the  sweet  benefit  of  ignorance  and         VIII 
unperceiving  facility  wherewith  we  are  deceived.  .     ™*  affec- 

If  we  did  yeeld  unto  it,  what  would  become  of  us  ?  Doe  £ 
we  not  see  that  even  then,  if  we  have  any  suits  in  law,  or  dren 
matters  to  be  decided  before  Judges,  both  Lawyers  and 
Judges,  will  commonly  take  part  with,  and  favour  our  chil- 
drens  causes  against  us,  as  men  interessed  in  the  same  ?  And 
if  I  chance  not  to  spy,  or  plainely  perceive  how  I  am  cheated, 
cozoned  and  beguiled,  I  must  of  necessitie  discover  in  the 
end,  how  I  am  subject  and  maybe  cheated,  beguiled,  and 
cozoned.  And  shall  the  tongue  of  man  ever  bee  able  to 
expresse  the  unvaluable  worth  of  a  friend,  in  comparison  of 
these  civill  bonds  ?  The  lively  image  and  Idea  whereof,  I 
perceive  to  be  amongst  beasts  so  unspotted.  Oh  with  what 
religion  doe  I  respect  and  observe  the  same  !  If  others 
deceive  me,  yet  do  I  not  deceive  my  selfe,  to  esteeme  my  selfe 
capable,  and  of  power  to  looke  unto  my  selfe,  nor  to  trouble 
my  braines  to  yeeld  my  selfe  unto  it.  I  doe  beware  and 
keepe  my  selfe  from  such  treasons,  and  cunny-catching  in 
mine  owne  bosome,  not  by  an  unquiet,  and  tumultuary 
curiosity,  but  rather  by  a  diversion  and  resolution.  When  I 
heare  the  state  of  any  one  reported  or  discoursed  of,  I  ammuse 
not  my  selfe  on  him,  but  presently  cast  mine  eyes  on  my 
selfe,  and  all  my  wits  together,  to  see  in  what  state  I  am, 
and  how  it  goeth  with  me.  Whatsoever  concerneth  him, 
the  same  hath  relation  to  me.  His  fortunes  forewarne  me, 
and  summon  up  my  spirits  that  way.  There  is  no  day 
nor  houre,  but  we  speake  that  of  others,  we  might  pro 
perly  speake  of  our  selves,  could  we  as  well  enfold,  as  we 
can  unfold  our  consideration.  And  many  Authours  doe  in 
this  manner  wound  the  protection  of  their  cause,  by  over- 
rashly  running  against  that  which  they  take  hold-of, 
thirling  such  darts  at  their  enemies,  that  might  with 
much  more  advantage  be  cast  at  them.  The  Lord  of 
Monluc,  late  one  of  the  Lord  Marshals  of  France,  having  lost 
his  sonne,  who  died  in  the  Hand  of  Madera  a  worthy,  forward 
and  gallant  young  gentleman,  and  truely  of  good  hope ; 
amongst  other  his  griefes  and  regrets,  did  greatly  move  me 
to  condole,  the  infinite  displeasure  and  hearts-sorrow  that  he 

79 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  felt,  inasmuch  as  he  had  never  communicated  and  opened 
VIH         himselfe  unto  him  ;  for,  with  his  austere  humour  and  con- 
Of  the  affec-  tmua}}  endevoring  to  hold  a  grimme-stern-fatherly  gravity 
tion  of  fathers  1-1111^1  r>     ,1  i 

to  their  chil-  over  nim?  "e  nac*  ^os^  ™e  meanes,  perfectly  to  hnde  and 
dren  throughly  to  know  his  sonne,  and  so  to  manifest  unto  him 
the  extreme  affection  he  bare  him,  and  the  worthy  judgement 
he  made  of  his  vertue.  Alas  (was  he  wont  to  say)  the  poore 
lad  saw  never  any  thing  in  me,  but  a  severe-surly-counte 
nance,  full  of  disdaine,  and  haply  was  possessed  with  this 
conceit,  that  I  could  neither  love  nor  esteeme  him  according 
to  his  merits.  Ay-me,  to  whom  did  I  reserve,  to  discover 
that  singular  and  loving  affection,  which  in  my  soule  I  bare 
unto  him  ?  Was  it  not  he  that  should  have  had  all  the 
pleasure  and  acknowledgement  thereof  ?  I  have  forced  and 
tormented  my  selfe  to  maintaine  this  vaine  maske,  and  have 
utterly  lost  the  pleasure  of  his  conversation,  and  therwithal 
his  good  will,  which  surely  was  but  faintly  cold  towards  me, 
forsomuch  as  he  never  received  but  rude  entertainement  of 
mee,  and  never  felt  but  a  tyrannicall  proceeding  in  me  to 
wards  him.  I  am  of  opinion,  his  complaint  was  reasonable 
and  well  grounded.  For,  as  I  know  by  certaine  experience, 
there  is  no  comfort  so  sweet  in  the  losse  of  friends,  as  that 
our  owne  knowledge  or  conscience  tels  us,  we  never  omitted 
to  tell  them  everything,  and  expostulate  all  matters  unto 
them,  and  to  have  had  a  perfect  and  free  communication 
with  them.  Tell  me  my  good  friend,  am  I  the  better  or  the 
worse  by  having  a  taste  of  it  ?  Surely  I  am  much  the  better. 
His  griefe  doth  both  comfort  and  honour  mee.  Is  it  not 
a  religious  and  pleasing  office  of  my  life,  for  ever  to  make 
the  obsequies  thereof?  Can  there  be  any  pleasure  worth 
this  privation  ?  I  doe  unfold  and  open  my  self  as  much  as 
I  can  to  mine  owne  people,  and  willingly  declare  the  state 
of  my  will  and  judgment  toward  them,  as  commonly  I  doe 
towards  all  men  :  I  make  haste  to  produce  and  present  my 
selfe,  for  I  would  have  no  man  mistake  me,  in  what  part 
soever.  Amongst  other  particular  customes,  which  our 
ancient  Gaules  had,  (as  Caesar  affirmeth)  this  was  one,  that 
children  never  came  before  their  fathers,  nor  were  in  any 
publike  assembly  scene  in  their  company,  but  when  they 
began  to  beare  armes  ;  as  if  they  would  infer,  that  then  was 
80 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

the  time,  fathers  should  admit  them  to  their  acquaintance  CHAPTER 
and   familiarity.      I    have    also    observed  another  kinde  of        VIII 

indiscretion  in  some  fathers  of  our  times,  who  during  their  9*  th®  ^ec~ 

,.,.  TT  i      •    j        j,  •   *        -  tion  of  fathers 

owne  life,  would  never  be  induced  to  acquaint  or  impart  unto  to  their  chil. 

their  children,  that  share  or  portion,  which  by  the  Law  of  dren 
Nature,  they  were  to  have  in  their  fortunes  :  Nay,  some 
there  are,  who  after  their  death  bequeath  and  commit  the 
same  auctority,  over  them  and  their  goods,  unto  their  wives, 
with  full  power  and  law  to  dispose  of  them  at  their  pleasure. 
And  my  selfe  have  knowen  a  Gentleman,  a  chiefe  officer  of 
our  crowne,  that  by  right  and  hope  of  succession  (had  he 
lived  unto  it)  was  to  inherit  above  fifty  thousand  crownes  a 
yeere  good  land,  who  at  the  age  of  more  then  fifty  yeeres  fell 
into  such  necessity  and  want,  and  was  run  so  farre  in  debt, 
that  he  had  nothing  left  him,  and  as  it  is  supposed  died  for 
very  need  ;  whilest  his  mother  in  her  extreme  decrepitude, 
enjoyed  all  his  lands  and  possessed  all  his  goods,  by  vertue 
of  his  fathers  will  and  testament,  who  had  lived  very  neere 
foure-score  years.  A  thing  (in  my  conceit)  no  way  to  be 
commended,  but  rather  blamed.  Therefore  doe  I  thinke, 
that  a  man  but  little  advantaged  or  bettered  in  estate,  who 
is  able  to  live  of  himselfe,  and  is  out  of  debt,  especially  if  he 
have  children,  and  goeth  about  to  marry  a  wife,  that  must 
have  a  great  joynter  out  of  his  lands,  assuredly  there  is  no 
other  debt,  that  brings  more  ruine  unto  houses  then  that. 
My  predecessors  have  commonly  followed  this  counsell,  and 
so  have  I,  and  all  have  found  good  by  it.  But  those  that 
disswade  us  from  marrying  of  rich  wives,  lest  they  might 
proove  over  disdainefull  and  peevish,  or  lesse  tractable  and 
loving,  are  also  deceived  to  make  us  neglect  and  for-goe  a 
reall  commoditie,  for  so  frivolous  a  conjecture.  To  an  un 
reasonable  woman,  it  is  all  one  cost  to  her,  whether  they 
passe  under  one  reason,  or  under  another.  They  love  to  be 
where  they  are  most  wronged.  Injustice  doth  allure  them  ; 
as  the  honour  of  their  vertuous  actions  enticeth  the  good. 
And  by  how  much  richer  they  are,  so  much  more  milde  and 
gentle  are  they  :  as  more  willingly  and  gloriously  chaste,  by 
how  much  fairer  they  are.  Some  colour  of  reason  there  is, 
men  should  leave  the  administration  of  their  goods  and 
affaires  unto  mothers,  whilest  their  children  are  not  of 
L  81 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  competent  age,  or  fit  according  to  the  lawes  to  manage  the 
VIH         charge  of  them  :  And  ill  hath  their  father  brought  them  up, 

lff  ?i i    c~  if  he  cannot  hope,  these  comming;  to  yeares  of  discretion, 
tion  of  fathers    .  .  J   ,        ™   . 

to  their  chil-  they  shal  have  no  more  wit,  reason,  and  sufhciencie,  than 

dren  his  wife,  considering  the  weaknesse  of  their  sexe.  Yet  truly 
were  it  as  much  against  nature,  so  to  order  things,  that 
mothers  must  wholy  depend  of  their  childrens  discretion. 
They  ought  largely  and  competently  to  be  provided,  where 
with  to  maintaine  their  estate,  according  to  the  quality  of 
their  house  and  age  :  because  need  and  want  is  much  more 
unseemely  and  hard  to  be  indured  in  women,  than  in  men  : 
And  children,  rather  than  mothers  ought  to  be  charged  there 
with.  In  generall,  my  opinion  is,  that  the  best  distribution 
of  goods,  is  when  we  die,  to  distribute  them  according  to  the 
custome  of  the  Country.  The  Lawes  have  better  thought 
upon  them  than  we  :  And  better  it  is  to  let  them  erre  in 
their  election,  than  for  us  rashly  to  hazard  to  faile  in  ours. 
They  are  not  properly  our  owne,  since  without  us,  and  by  a 
civil  prescription,  they  are  appointed  to  certaine  successours. 
And  albeit  we  have  some  further  liberty,  I  thinke  it  should 
be  a  great  and  most  apparant  cause  to  induce  us  to  take 
from  one,  and  barre  him  from  that,  which  Fortune  hath 
allotted  him,  and  the  common  Lawes  and  Justice  hath  called 
him  unto  :  And  that  against  reason  wee  abuse  this  liberty, 
by  suting  the  same  unto  our  private  humours  and  frivolous 
fantasies.  My  fortune  hath  beene  good,  inasmuch  as  yet  it 
never  presented  mee  with  any  occasions,  that  might  tempt  or 
divert  my  affections  from  the  common  and  lawful  ordinance. 
I  see  some,  towards  whom  it  is  but  labour  lost,  carefully  to 
endevour  to  doe  any  good  offices.  A  word  ill  taken  defaceth 
the  merit  of  ten  yeeres.  Happy  he,  that  at  this  last  passage 
is  ready  to  sooth  and  applaud  their  will.  The  next  action 
transporteth  him  ;  not  the  best  and  most  frequent  offices, 
but  the  freshest  and  present  worke  the  deed.  They  are 
people  that  play  with  their  wils  and  testaments,  as  with 
apples  and  rods,  to  gratifie  or  chastize  every  action  of  those 
who  pretend  any  interest  thereunto.  It  is  a  matter  of  over- 
long  pursute,  and  of  exceeding  consequence,  at  every  instance 
to  be  thus  dilated,  and  wherein  the  wiser  sort  establish 
themselves  once  for  all,  chiefely  respecting  reason,  and 
82 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

publike  observance.      We  somewhat  over-much  take  these  CHAPTER 
masculine  substitutions  to  hart,  and   propose  a  ridiculous         VIII 

eternity  unto  our  names.     We  also  over-weight  such  vaine  f?f  th®  ^ec" 
e  ,         •/.  i  •  i     •    /•  •  •,         •  T,        •    i  i  tion  of  fathers 

future  conjectures,  which  infant-spirits  give- us.      It  might  to  their  chij. 

peradventure  have  beene  deemed  injustice,  to  displace  me  dren 
from  out  my  rancke,  because  I  was  the  dullest,  the  slowest, 
the  unwillingest,  and  most  leaden-pated  to  learne  my  lesson 
or  any  good,  that  ever  was,  not  onely  of  all  my  brethren, 
but  of  all  the  children  in  my  Countrie  ;  were  the  lesson 
concerning  any  exercise  of  the  minde  or  body.  It  is  follie 
to  trie  anie  extraordinarie  conclusions  upon  the  trust  of 
their  divinations,  wherein  we  are  so  often  deceived.  If 
this  rule  may  be  contradicted,  and  the  destinies  corrected, 
in  the  choice  they  have  made  of  our  heires,  with  so  much 
more  apparence,  may  it  be  done  in  consideration  of  some 
remarkable  and  enormous  corporall  deformitie ;  a  con 
stant  and  incorrigible  vice ;  and  according  to  us  great 
esteemers  of  beautie,  a  matter  of  important  prejudice. 
The  pleasant  dialogue  of  Plato  the  law-giver,  with  his 
citizens,  will  much  honor  this  passage.  'Why  then ' 
(say  they)  perceiving  their  end  to  approch,  '  shall  we 
4  not  dispose  of  that  which  is  our  owne,  to  whom  and 
4  according  as  we  please  ?  Oh  Gods  what  cruelty  is  this  ? 
6  That  it  shall  not  be  lawfull  for  us,  to  give  or  bequeath  more 
4  or  lesse  according  to  our  fantasies,  to  such  as  have  served 
4  us,  and  taken  paines  with  us  in  our  sicknesses,  in  our  age, 
4  and  in  our  busines?1  To  whom  the  Law-giver  answereth 
4  in  this  manner ;  'My  friends1  (saith  he)  'who  doubtlesse  shall 
'  shortly  die,  it  is  a  hard  matter  for  you,  both  to  know  your 
4  selves,  and  what  is  yours,  according  to  the  Delphike  in- 
'  scription  :  As  for  me,  who  am  the  maker  of  your  lawes,  I 
'  am  of  opinion  that  neither  your  selves  are  your  owne,  nor 
'  that  which  you  enjoy.  And  both  you  and  your  goods,  past 
'  and  to  come,  belong  to  your  familie ;  and  moreover  both 
4  your  families  and  your  goods  are  the  common  wealths : 
4  Wherfore,  lest  any  flatterer,  either  in  your  age,  or  in  time 
4  of  sicknes,  or  any  other  passion,  should  unadvisedly  induce 
4  you  to  make  any  unlawfull  convayance  or  unjust  will  and 
4  testament,  I  will  looke  to  you  and  keepe  you  from  it.  But 
4  having  an  especiall  respect  both  to  the  universall  interest 

83 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER'  of  your  Citie,  and  particular  state  of  your  houses,  I  will 
VIII         «  establish  lawes,  and  by  reason  make  you  perceive  and  con- 
Of  the  affec-  <  fesge  ^^  a  partjcuiar  commoditie  ought  to   yeeld   to  a 
turn  of  fathers  ,        ,  v,        -,         £,         ^  ,,          , ,  &  ,J 

to  their  chil-     publike    benetit.      follow    that    course    meerely,    whereto 

dren  '  humane  necessitie  doth  call  you.  To  me  it  belongeth,  who 
'  have  no  more  regard  to  one  thing,  than  to  another,  and  who 
6  as  much  as  I  can,  take  care  for  the  general,  to  have  a  regard- 
'full  respect  of  that  which  you  leave  behind  you/  But  to 
returne  to  my  former  discourse,  me  thinkes,  we  seldome  see 
that  woman  borne,  to  whom  the  superioritie  or  majestic  over 
men  is  due,  except  the  motherly  and  naturall ;  unlesse  it  be 
for  the  chastisement  of  such,  as  by  some  fond-febricitant 
humor  have  voluntarily  submitted  themselves  unto  them  : 
But  that  doth  nothing  concerne  old  women,  of  whom  we 
speake  here.  It  is  the  apparance  of  this  consideration,  hath 
made  us  to  frame,  and  willingly  to  establish  this  law  (never 
scene  elsewhere)  that  barreth  women  from  the  succession  of 
this  crowne,  and  there  are  few  principalities  in  the  world, 
where  it  is  not  alleaged,  aswel  as  here,  by  a  likely  and 
apparant  reason,  which  authoriseth  the  same.  But  fortune 
hath  given  more  credit  unto  it  in  some  places,  than  in  other 
some.  It  is  dangerous  to  leave  the  dispensation  of  our 
succession  unto  their  judgement,  according  to  the  choyse 
they  shall  make  of  their  children,  which  is  most  commonly 
unjust  and  fantastical!.  For,  the  same  unrulie  appetite,  and 
distasted  relish,  or  strange  longings,  which  they  have  when 
they  are  great  with  child,  the  same  have  they  at  al  times  in 
their  minds.  They  are  commonly  scene  to  affect  the  weakest, 
the  simplest  and  most  abject,  or  such  (if  they  have  any)  that 
had  more  need  to  sucke.  For,  wanting  reasonable  discourse 
to  chuse,  and  embrace  what  they  ought,  they  rather  suffer 
themselves  to  be  directed,  where  natures  impressions  are  most 
single,  as  other  creatures,  which  take  no  longer  knowledge  of 
their  young  ones,  than  they  are  sucking.  Moreover,  experi 
ence  doth  manifestly  shew  unto  us,  that  the  same  naturall 
affection,  to  which  we  ascribe  so  much  authoritie,  hath  but 
a  weake  foundation.  For  a  very  small  gaine,  we  daily  take 
mothers  owne  children  from  them  and  induce  them  to  take 
charge  of  ours :  Doe  we  not  often  procure  them  to  bequeath 
their  children  to  some  fond,  h'lthie,  sluttish,  and  unhealthie 
84 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

nurce,  to  whom  we  would  be  very  loth  to  commit  ours,  or  to  CHAPTER 
some  brutish  Goat,  not  onely  forbidding  them  to  nurce  and         VIH 

feed  their  owne  children  (what  danger  soever  may  betide  ?       ,?,.  jfec" 
4-u       \   i     4.      i  u  *4.k  4.1,          j   4-u       tion  of  fathers 

them)  but  also  to  have  any  care  of  them,  to  the  end  they  to  their  chil. 

may  the  more  diligently  follow,  and  carefully  attend  the  dren 
service  of  ours  ?  Whereby  wee  soone  see  through  custome  a 
certaine  kinde  of  bastard-affection  to  be  engendred  in  them, 
more  vehement  than  the  naturall,  and  to  be  much  more 
tender  and  carefull  for  the  welfare  and  preservation  of  other 
mens  children,  than  for  their  owne.  And  the  reason  why  I 
have  made  mention  of  Goats,  is,  because  it  is  an  ordinarie 
thing  round  about  me  where  I  dwell,  to  see  the  countrie 
women,  when  they  have  not  milke  enough  to  feed  their 
infants  with  their  owne  breasts,  to  call  for  Goats  to  helpe 
them.  And  my  selfe  have  now  two  lackies  wayting  upon 
me,  who  except  it  were  eight  daies  never  suck't  other  milke 
than  Goats ;  They  are  presently  to  come  at  call,  and  give 
young  infants  sucke,  and  become  so  well  acquainted  with 
their  voice,  that  when  they  heare  them  crie,  they  runne 
forthwith  unto  them.  And  if  by  chance  they  have  any  other 
child  put  to  their  teats,  than  their  nurseling,  they  refuse  and 
reject  him,  and  so  doth  the  childe  a  strange  Goat.  My  selfe 
saw  that  one  not  long  since,  from  whom  the  father  tooke  a 
Goat,  which  he  had  sucked  two  or  three  daies,  because  he 
had  but  borrowed  it  of  one  of  his  neighbours,  who  could 
never  be  induced  to  sucke  any  other,  whereby  he  shortly 
died ;  and  as  I  verily  thinke,  of  meere  hunger.  Beasts  as 
well  as  we  doe  soone  alter,  and  easily  bastardize  their  naturall 
affection.  I  beleeve,  that  in  that,  which  Herodotus  reporteth 
of  a  certaine  province  of  Libia,  there  often  followeth  great 
error  and  mistaking.  He  saith,  that  men  doe  indifferently 
use,  and  as  it  were  in  common  frequent  women  :  And  that 
the  childe  as  soone  as  he  is  able  to  goe,  comming  to  any 
solemne  meetings  and  great  assemblies,  led  by  a  naturall 
instinct,  tindeth  out  his  owne  father :  where  being  turned 
loose  in  the  middest  of  the  multitude,  looke  what  man  the 
childe  doth  first  addresse  his  steps  unto,  and  then  goe  to 
him,  the  same  is  ever  afterward  reputed  to  be  his  right 
father.  Now  if  we  shall  duly  consider  this  simple  occasion 
of  loving  our  children,  because  we  have  begotten  them,  for 

85 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which  we  call  them  our  other   selves.     It  seemes  there  is 
VIII         another  production   comming  from  us,  and  which  is  of  no 
Ut  the  attec-  }esse   recommendation    and    consequence.       For    what    we 
tion  of  fathers  11,1          •     i      ,1      e     •,       i  K*   • 

to  their  chil-  engender  by  the  mmde,  the  fruits  of  our  courage,  sufficiencie, 

dren  or  spirit,  are  brought  forth  by  a  far  more  noble  part,  than 
the  corporall,  and  are  more  our  owne.  We  are  both  father 
and  mother  together  in  this  generation :  such  fruits  cost  us 
much  dearer,  and  bring  us  more  honour,  and  chiefly  if  they 
have  any  good  or  rare  thing  in  them.  For  the  value  of  our 
other  children,  is  much  more  theirs,  than  ours.  The  share 
we  have  in  them  is  but  little ;  but  of  these  all  the  beautie, 
all  the  grace,  and  all  the  worth  is  ours.  And  therefore  doe 
they  represent,  and  resemble  us  much  more  lively  than  others. 
Plato  addeth  moreover,  that  these  are  immortall  issues,  and 
immortalize  their  fathers  ;  yea  and  deifie  them,  as  Licurgus, 
Solon,  and  Minos.  All  histories  being  full  of  examples  of 
this  mutuall  friendship  of  fathers  toward  their  children,  I 
have  not  thought  it  amisse  to  set  downe  some  choice  one  of 
this  kinde.  Heliodorus  that  good  Bishop  of  Tricea,  loved 
rather  to  lose  the  dignity,  profit  and  devotion  of  so  venerable 
a  Prelateship,  than  to  for-goe  his  daughter,  a  young  woman 
to  this  day  commended  for  hir  beautie,  but  haply  somewhat 
more  curiously  and  wantonly  pranked-up  than  beseemed  the 
daughter  of  a  churchman  and  a  Bishop,  and  of  over-amorous 
behaviour.  There  was  one  Labienus  in  Rome,  a  man  of 
great  worth  and  authority,  and  amongst  other  commendable 
qualities,  most  excellent  in  all  maner  of  learning,  who  (as  I 
thinke)  was  the  sonne  of  that  great  Labienus,  chiefe  of  all 
the  captaines  that  followed  and  were  under  Caesar  in  the 
warres  against  the  Gaules,  and  who  afterward  taking  great 
Pompeys  part,  behaved  himselfe  so  valiantly  and  so  con 
stantly,  that  he  never  forsooke  him  untill  Caesar  defeated 
him  in  Spaine.  This  Labienus  of  whom  I  spake,  had  many 
that  envied  his  vertues ;  But  above  all  (as  it  is  likely) 
courtiers,  and  such  as  in  his  time  were  favored  of  the  Em 
perors,  who  hated  his  franknesse,  his  fatherly  humors,  and 
distaste  he  bare  still  against  tyrannic,  wherewith  it  may  be 
supposed  he  had  stuffed  his  bookes  and  compositions.  His 
adversaries  vehemently  pursued  him  before  the  Magistrate 
of  Rome,  and  prevailed  so  far,  that  many  of  his  works  which 
86 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

he  had   published  were  condemned  to  be  burned.     He  was  CHAPTER 
the  first  on  whom  this  new  example  of  punishment  was  put         VIII 

in  practice,  which  after  continued  long  in  Rome,  and  was   .    *"?„  affec" 

,.  .  ,    v5  ,.  T  tion  of  lathers 

executed  on  divers  others,  to  punish  learning,  studies,  and  to  their  chij_ 

writings  with  death  and  consuming  fire.  There  were  neither  dren 
meanes  enough,  or  matter  sufficient  of  crueltie,  unlesse  we 
had  entermingled  amongst  them  things,  which  nature  hath 
exempted  from  all  sense  and  sufferance,  as  reputation,  and 
the  inventions  of  our  minde :  and  except  we  communicated 
corporall  mischiefes  unto  disciplines  and  monuments  of  the 
Muses.  Which  losse  Labienus  could  not  endure,  nor  brooke 
to  survive  those  his  deare,  and  highly-esteemed  issues :  And 
therefore  caused  himselfe  to  be  carried,  and  shut  up  alive 
within  his  auncestors  monument,  where,  with  a  dreadlesse 
resolution,  he  at  once  provided,  both  to  kill  himselfe  and  be 
buried  together.  It  is  hard  to  shew  any  more  vehement 
fatherly  affection,  than  that.  Cassius  Severus,  a  most  elo 
quent  man,  and  his  familiar  friend,  seeing  his  Bookes  burnt, 
exclamed,  that  by  the  same  sentence  hee  should  therewithal! 
be  condemned  to  be  burned  alive,  for  hee  still  bare  and  kept 
in  minde,  what  they  contained  in  them.  A  like  accident 
happened  to  Geruntius  Cordus,  who  was  accused  to  have 
commended  Brutus  and  Cassius  in  his  Bookes.  That  base, 
servile,  and  corrupted  Senate,  and  worthie  of  a  farre  worse 
master  than  Tiberius,  adjudged  his  writings  to  be  consumed 
by  fire.  And  he  was  pleased  to  accompany  them  in  their 
death  ;  for,  he  pined  away  by  abstaining  from  all  manner  of 
meat.  That  notable  man,  Lucane,  being  adjudged  by  that 
lewd  varlet  Nero  to  death  ;  at  the  latter  end  of  his  life,  when 
al  his  bloud  was  well-nigh  spent  from  out  the  veines  of  his 
arme,  which  by  his  Physitian  he  had  caused  to  be  opened,  to 
hasten  his  death,  and  that  a  chilling  cold  began  to  seize  the 
uttermost  parts  of  his  limbes,  and  approch  his  vital  spirits, 
the  last  thing  he  had  in  memory,  was  some  of  his  owne  verses, 
written  in  his  booke  of  the  Pharsalian  warres,  which  with  a 
distinct  voice  hee  repeated,  and  so  yeelded  up  the  ghost, 
having  those  last  words  in  his  mouth.  What  was  that  but 
a  kinde,  tender,  and  fatherly  farwell  which  he  tooke  of  his 
children  ?  representing  the  last  adiewes,  and  parting  imbrace- 
ments,  which  at  our  death  we  give  unto  our  dearest  issues  ? 

87 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  And  an  effect  of  that  naturall  inclination,  which  in  that  last 
VIII         extremity  puts  us  in  minde  of  those  things,  which  in  our  life- 

ff  f,        time  we    have   held  dearest  and  most  precious  ?     Shall  we 
tion  of  fathers  .  , ,     .  -^    .  /      i  •         u»     r-j\  j    •  ^ 

to  their  chil-  imagine  that  Epicurus,  who  (as  himselfe  said)  dying  tormented 

dren  with  the  extreme  paine  of  the  chollik,  had  all  his  comfort  in 
the  beauty  of  the  doctrine  which  he  left  behinde  him  in  the 
world,  would  have  received  as  much  contentment  of  a  number 
of  well-borne,  and  better-bred  children  (if  he  had  had  any)  as  he 
did  of  the  production  of  his  rich  compositions  ?  And  if  it 
had  beene  in  his  choise,  to  leave  behind  him,  either  a  counter 
feit,  deformed,  or  ill-borne  childe,  or  a  foolish,  triviall,  and 
idle  booke,  not  onely  he,  but  all  men  in  the  world  besides  of 
like  learning  and  sufficiency,  would  much  rather  have  chosen 
to  incurre  the  former  than  the  later  mischiefe.  It  might 
peradventure  be  deemed  impiety,  in  Saint  Augustine  (for 
example-sake)  if  on  the  one  part  one  should  propose  unto 
him,  to  bury  all  his  bookes,  whence  our  religion  receiveth  so 
much  good,  or  to  interre  his  children  (if  in  case  he  had  any) 
that  he  would  not  rather  chuse  to  bury  his  children,  or  the 
issue  of  his  loynes,  than  the  fruits  of  his  minde.  And  I  wot 
not  well,  whether  my  selfe  should  not  much  rather  desire  to 
beget  and  produce  a  perfectly-well-shaped,  and  excellently- 
qualited  infant,  by  the  acquaintance  of  the  Muses,  than  by 
the  copulation  of  my  wife.  Whatsoever  I  give  to  this,  let 
the  world  allow  of  it  as  it  please,  I  give  it  as  purely  and 
irrevocable,  as  any  man  can  give  to  his  corporal  children. 
That  little  good  which  I  have  done  him,  is  no  longer  in  my 
disposition.  He  may  know  many  things,  that  my  selfe 
know  no  longer,  and  hold  of  me  what  I  could  not  hold  my 
selfe :  and  which  (if  need  should  require)  I  must  borrow  of 
him  as  of  a  stranger.  If  I  be  wiser  than  he,  he  is  richer  than 
I.  There  are  few  men  given  unto  Poesie,  that  would  not 
esteeme  it  for  a  greater  honour,  to  be  the  fathers  of  Virgils 
u^Eneidos,  than  of  the  goodliest  boy  in  Rome,  and  that  would 
not  rather  endure  the  losse  of  the  one  than  the  perishing  of 
the  other.  For,  according  to  Aristotle, '  Of  all  workemen,  the 
4  Poet  is  principally  the  most  amorous  of  his  productions  and 
'  conceited  of  his  Labours.1  It  is  not  easie  to  be  beleeved,  that 
Epaminondas,  who  wanted  to  leave  some  daughters  behind 
him,  which  unto  all  posterity,  should  one  day  highly  honour 
88 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

their  father  (they  were  the  two  famous  victories,  which  he  CHAPTER 
had  gained  of  the  Lacedemonians)  would  ever  have  given  his  VIII 
free  consent,  to  change  them,  with  the  best-borne,  mos*  ^on 
gorgeous,  and  goodliest  damsels  of  all  Greece  :  or  that  Alex-  to  ^^  chil. 
ander,  and  Caesar,  did  ever  wish  to  be  deprived  of  the  great-  dren 
nesse  of  their  glorious  deeds  of  warre,  for  the  commodity  to 
have  children  and  heires  of  their  owne  bodies,  how  absolutely- 
perfect,  and  well-accomplished  so  ever  they  might  be.  Nay, 
I  make  a  great  question,  whether  Phidias  or  any  other  excel 
lent  Statuary,  would  as  highly  esteeme,  and  dearely  love  the 
preservation,  and  successefull  continuance  of  his  naturall 
children,  as  he  would  an  exquisite  and  match-lesse-wrought 
Image,  that  with  long  study,  and  diligent  care  he  had  per 
fected  according  unto  art.  And  as  concerning  those  vicious 
and  furious  passions,  which  sometimes  have  inflamed  some 
fathers  to  the  love  of  their  daughters,  or  mothers  towards 
their  sonnes  ;  the  very  same,  and  more  partially -earnest  is 
also  found  in  this  other  kinde  of  child e-bearing  and  aliance. 
Witnesse  that  which  is  reported  of  Pigmalion,  who  having 
curiously  framed  a  goodly  statue,  of  a  most  singularly- 
beauteous  woman,  was  so  strange-fondly,  and  passionately 
surprised  with  the  lustfull  love  of  his  owne  workmanship, 
that  the  Gods  through  his  raging  importunity  were  faine  in 
favour  of  him  to  give  it  life. 

Tentatum  mollescit  ebur,  positoque  rigore  OVID.  Metam. 

Subsidit  digitis.  x-  283- 

As  he  assaid  it,  th'  yvorie  softned  much, 

And  (hardnesse  left)  did  yeeld  to  fingers  touch. 


M  89 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE    NINTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  Parthians  Armes. 

T  is  a  vitious,  fond  fashion  of  the  Nobility  and 
Gentry  of  our  age,  and  full  of  nice-tender- 
nesse,  never  to  betake  themselves  to  armes, 
except  upon  some  urgent  and  extreme 
necessitie ;  and  to  quit  them  as  soone  as 
they  perceive  the  least  hope  or  apparance, 
that  the  danger  is  past :  Whence  ensue 
many  disorders,  and  inconveniences  :  For, 
every  one  running  and  calling  for  his  armes  when  the  alarum 
is  given,  some  have  not  yet  buckled  their  cuirace,  when  their 
fellowes  are  already  defeated.  Indeed  our  forefathers  would 
have  their  Caske,  Lance,  Gantlets,  and  Shields  carried,  but 
so  long  as  the  service  lasted,  themselves  would  never  leave-off 
their  other  peeces.  Our  troopes  are  now  all  confounded  and 
disordered,  by  reason  of  bag  and  baggage,  of  carriages,  of 
lackies,  and  foot-boies,  which  because  of  their  masters  armes 
they  carry,  can  never  leave  them.  Titus  Livius,  speaking  of 
Liv.  dec.i.  10.  the  French,  saith,  Intolerantissima  laboris  corpora  vix  arma 
Jiumeris  gerebant.  6  Their  bodies  most  impatient  of  labour 
'  could  hardly  beare  armour  on  their  backes.1  Divers  Nations, 
as  they  did  in  former  times,  so  yet  at  this  day,  are  scene  to 
goe  to  the  warres,  without  any  thing  about  them,  or  if  they 
had,  it  was  of  no  defence ;  but  were  all  naked  and  bare. 

VIRG.  sEn.  vii.  Tegmina  queis  capitum  raptus  de  subere  cortex. 

'  42'  Whose  caske  to  cover  all  their  head, 

Was  made  of  barke  from  Corke-tree  flea'd. 

Alexander  the  most  daring  and  hazardous  Captain  that 
ever  was,  did  very  seldome  arme  himselfe :  And  those  which 
amongst  us  neglect  them,  doe  not  thereby  much  empaire 
their  reputation.  If  any  man  chance  to  be  slaine  for  want 
of  an  armour,  there  are  as  many  more  that  miscary  with  the 
over-heavy  burthen  of  their  armes,  and  by  them  are  engaged, 
and  by  a  counterbuffe  are  brused,  or  otherwise  defeated. 
For  in  truth  to  see  the  unweildy  weight  of  our  and  their 

90 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

thicknesse,  it  seemeth  we  but  endevour  to  defend  our  selves,  CHAPTER 
and  we  are  rather  charged  than  covered  by  them.     We  have          IX 

enough  to  doe,  to  endure  the  burthen  of  them,  and  are  so  25  th6A  1>ar" 
.  fo  ,  . ,.  ^    ,  ,    ,     ,  thians  Armes 

engived  and  shackled  in  them,  as  it  we  were  to  fight  but 

with  the  shocke  or  brunt  of  our  armes  :  And  as  if  we  were  as 
much  bound  to  defend  them,  as  they  to  shield  us.  Cornelius 
Tacitus  doth  pleasantly  quip  and  jest  at  the  men  of  war  of 
our  ancient  Gaules,  so  armed,  only  to  maintaine  themselves, 
as  they  that  have  no  meane,  either  to  offend  or  to  be  offended, 
or  to  raise  themselves  being  overthrowne.  Lucullus  seeing 
certaine  Median  men  at  armes,  which  were  in  the  front  of 
Tigranes  Army,  heavily  and  unweildily  armed,  as  in  an  iron 
prison,  apprehended  thereby  an  opinion,  that  he  might  easily 
defeat  them,  and  began  to  charge  them  first,  and  got  the 
victory.  And  now  that  our  Muskettiers,  are  in  such  credit, 
I  thinke  we  shall  have  some  invention  found  to  immure  us 
up,  that  so  we  may  be  warranted  from  them,  and  to  traine 
us  to  the  warres  in  Skonces  and  Bastions,  as  those  which  our 
fathers  caused  to  be  carried  by  Elephants.  A  humour  farre 
different  from  that  of  Scipio  the  younger,  who  sharply  re- 
prooved  his  souldiers,  because  they  had  scattered  certaine 
Calthrops  under  the  water  alongst  a  dike,  by  which  those  of 
the  Towne  that  he  besieged  might  sally  out  upon  him,  say 
ing  ;  that  those  which  assailed,  should  resolve  to  enterprise 
and  not  to  feare :  And  had  some  reason  to  feare,  that  this 
provision  might  secure  and  lull  their  vigilancy  asleepe  to 
guard  themselves.  Moreover  he  said  to  a  young  man,  that 
shewed  him  a  faire  shield  he  had ;  Indeed  good  youth,  it 
is  a  faire  one,  but  a  Roman  souldier  ought  to  have  more 
confidence  in  his  right  hand,  than  in  his  left.  It  is  onely 
custome  that  makes  the  burthen  of  our  armes  intolerable 
unto  us. 

L'  usbergo  in  dosso  haveano,  e  I'  elmo  in  testa,  ARIOSTO,  Orl. 

Duo  di  quelli  guerrier  de  t  quali  io  canto.  can>  X1U  s*an- 

Ne  notte  o  d\  dopo  cti  entraro  in  questa  3°- 

Stanza,  gV  havean  mai  messi  da  canto  ; 

Che  facile  a  portar  come  la  vesta 

Era  lor,  perche  in  vso  I'  havean  tanto. 

Cuirasse  on  backe  did  those  two  warriors  beare, 
And  caske  on  head,  of  whom  I  make  report, 
Nor  day,  nor  night,  after  thev  entred  there, 

91 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Had  they  them  laid  aside  from  their  support : 

jX  They  could  with  ease  them  as  a  garment  weare, 

Of    the    Par-  ^or  ^onS  time  had  they  usde  them  in  such  sort. 

thians  Armes  The  Emperour  Caracalla  in  leading  of  his  Army  was  ever 
wont  to  march  afoot  armed  at  all  assaies.  The  Roman  foot 
men  caried  not  their  morions,  sword  and  target  only,  as  for 
other  armes  (saith  Cicero)  they  were  so  accustomed  to  weare 
them  continually,  that  they  hindered  them  no  more  than  their 
limbs;  Arma  enim,  membra  militis  esse  dicunt :  'for  they  say 
'  armor  and  weapon,  are  a  souldiers  limbs.'  But  therewithal 
such  victuals  as  they  should  need  for  a  fortnight  and  a 
certaine  number  of  stakes,  to  make  their  rampards  or  pali- 
sadoes  with  ;  so  much  as  weighed  threescore  pound  weight. 
And  Marius  his  souldiers  thus  loden,  marching  in  battal- 
array,  were  taught  to  march  five  leagues  in  five  houres,  yea 
six  if  need  required.  Their  military  discipline  was  much 
more  laboursome  than  ours :  So  did  it  produce  far  different 
effects.  Scipio  the  yonger  reforming  his  army  in  Spaine, 
appointed  his  souldiers  to  eat  no  meat  but  standing,  and 
nothing  sodden  or  rosted.  It  is  worth  the  remembrance  how 
a  Lacedemonian  souldier  being  in  an  expedition  of  warre, 
was  much  noted  and  blamed,  because  hee  was  once  seene  to 
seeke  for  shelter  under  a  house :  They  were  so  hardened  to 
endure  all  manner  of  labour  and  toyle,  that  it  was  counted  a 
reprochfull  infamy  for  a  souldier  to  be  seene  under  any  other 
roofe  than  that  of  heavens-vault,  in  what  weather  soever : 
Were  we  to  doe  so,  we  should  never  lead  our  men  far. 
Marcellinus  a  man  well  trained  in  the  Roman  wars,  doth 
curiously  observe  the  manner  which  the  Parthians  used  to 
arme  themselves,  and  noteth  it  so  much  the  more,  by  how 
much  it  was  far  different  from  the  Romans.  They  had 
(saith  he)  certaine  armes  so  curiously  enter-wrought  as  they 
seemed  to  be  made  like  feathers,  which  nothing  hindered 
the  stirring  of  their  bodies,  and  yet  so  strong,  that  our  darts 
hitting  them,  did  rather  rebound,  or  glance  by,  than  hurt 
them  (they  be  the  scales  our  ancestors  were  so  much  wont  to 
use).  In  another  place,  they  had  (saith  he)  their  horses 
stiffe  and  strong,  covered  with  thicke  hides  and  themselves 
armed  from  head  to  foot,  with  massie  iron  plates  so  artifici 
ally  contrived,  that  where  the  joynts  are,  there  thev  furthered 
92 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

the  motion,  and  helped  the  stirring.     A  man  would  have  CHAPTER 
said,  they  had  been  men  made  of  yron  :  For  they  had  peeces          IX 

so  handsomly  fitted  and  so  lively  representing  the  forme  and  9?  the    Par" 
/..,•'/.  ,1,1  1,1  thians  Armes 

parts  or  the  lace  ;  that  there  was  no  way  to  wound  them, 

but  at  certaine  little  holes  before  their  eyes,  which  served  to 
give  them  some  light,  and  by  certaine  chinckes  about  their 
nostrils,  by  which  they  hardly  drew  breath. 

Flexilis  inductis  hamatur  lamina  membris,  CLAUD,  in 

Horribilis  visu,  credas  simulacra  moveri  ^uff-  "•  35^. 

Ferrea,  cognatoque  viros  spirare  rnetallo. 
Par  Vestitus  equis,  f errata  f route  minantur, 
Ferratosque  movent  securi  vulneris  armos. 

The  bending1  plate  is  hook't  on  limbes  ore-spread, 
Fearefull  to  sight,,  steele  images  seem'd  lead, 
And  men  to  breathe  in  mettall  with  them  bred, 
Like  furniture  for  horse,  with  steeled  head, 
They  threat,  and  safe  from  wound, 
With  barr'd  limbs  tread  the  ground. 

Loe-heere   a  description,  much  resembling  the    equipage 

of  a  compleat  French-man    at   armes,  with   all    his   bards. 

Plutarke  reporteth  that  Demetrius  caused  two  Armours  to 

be  made,  each  one  weighing  six  score  pounds,  the  one 

for  himselfe,  the  other  for  Alcinus,  the  chiefe  man  of 

war,  that  was  next  to  him,  whereas  all  common 

Armours  weighed  but  threescore. 


THE    TENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Eookes. 

MAKE  no  doubt  but  it  shall  often  befall 
me  to  speake  of  things,  which  are  better, 
and  with  more  truth  handled  by  such  as 
are  their  crafts-masters.  Here  is  simply 
an  Essay  of  my  natural]  faculties,  and  no 
whit  of  those  I  have  acquired.  And  he 
that  shall  tax  me  with  ignorance,  shall 
have  no  great  victory  at  my  hands  ;  for 
hardly  could  I  give  others  reason  for  my  discourses,  that 
give  none  unto  my  selfe,  and  am  not  well  satisfied  with  them. 

93 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  He  that  shall  make  search  after  knowledge,  let  him  seeke 
X  it  where  it  is  :  there  is  nothing  I  professe  lesse.     These  are 

Bookes  kuj.  mv  fantasjeS)  by  which  I  endevour  not  to  make  things 
knowen,  but  my  selfe.  They  may  haply  one  day  be  knowen 
unto  me,  or  have  bin  at  other  times,  according  as  fortune 
hath  brought  me  where  they  were  declared  or  manifested. 
But  I  remember  them  no  more.  And  if  I  be  a  man  of  some 
reading,  yet  I  am  a  man  of  no  remembring,  I  conceive  no 
certainty,  except  it  bee  to  give  notice,  how  farre  the  know 
ledge  I  have  of  it,  doth  now  reach.  Let  no  man  busie 
himselfe  about  the  matters,  but  on  the  fashion  I  give  them. 
Let  that  which  I  borrow  be  survaied,  and  then  tell  me 
whether  I  have  made  good  choice  of  ornaments,  to  beautifie 
and  set  foorth  the  invention,  which  ever  comes  from  mee. 
For,  I  make  others  to  relate  (not  after  mine  owne  fantasie, 
but  as  it  best  falleth  out)  what  I  cannot  so  well  expresse, 
either  through  unskill  of  language,  or  want  of  judgement. 
I  number  not  my  borrowings,  but  I  weigh  them.  And  if  I 
would  have  made  their  number  to  prevaile,  I  would  have  had 
twice  as  many.  They  are  all,  or  almost  all  of  so  famous  and 
ancient  names,  that  me  thinks  they  sufficiently  name  them 
selves  without  mee.  If  in  reasons,  comparisons  and  argu 
ments,  I  transplant  any  into  my  soile,  or  confound  them 
with  mine  owne,  I  purposely  conceale  the  Author,  thereby 
to  bridle  the  rashnesse  of  these  hastie  censures,  that  are  so 
head  long  cast  upon  all  manner  of  compositions,  namely 
young  writings,  of  men  yet  living  ;  and  in  vulgare,  that 
admit  all  the  world  to  talke  of  them,  and  which  seemeth  to 
convince  the  conception  and  publike  designe  alike.  I  will 
have  them  to  give  Plutarch  a  bob  upon  mine  owne  lips,  and 
vex  themselves,  in  wronging  Seneca  in  mee.  My  weakenesse 
must  be  hidden  under  such  great  credits.  I  will  love  him 
that  shal  trace,  or  unfeather  me  ;  I  meane  through  cleare- 
nesse  of  judgement,  and  by  the  onely  distinction  of  the 
force  and  beautie  of  my  Discourses.  For  my  selfe,  who  for 
want  of  memorie,  am  ever  to  seeke,  how  to  trie  and  refine 
them,  by  the  knowledge  of  their  country,  knowe  perfectly, 
by  measuring  mine  owne  strength,  that  my  soyle  is  no  way 
capable,  of  some  over-pretious  flowers,  that  therm  I  find 
set,  and  that  all  the  fruits  of  my  encrease  could  not  make 
94 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

it  amends.      This  am  I  bound  to  answer-for,  if  I   hinder  CHAPTER 
my  selfe,  if  there  be  either  vanitie,  or  fault  in  my  Discourses,  x 

that  I  perceive  not  or  am  not  able  to  discerne,  if  they  be 
shewed  me.  For,  many  faults  doe  often  escape  our  eyes  ; 
but  the  infirmitie  of  judgement  consisteth  in  not  being  able 
to  perceive  them,  when  another  discovereth  them  unto  us. 
Knowledge  and  truth  may  be  in  us  without  judgement,  and 
we  may  have  judgement  without  them  :  Yea,  the  acknow 
ledgement  of  ignorance,  is  one  of  the  best  and  surest  testi 
monies  of  judgement  that  I  can  finde.  I  have  no  other 
Sergeant  of  band  to  marshall  my  rapsodies,  than  fortune. 
And  looke  how  my  humours  or  conceites  present  them-selves, 
so  I  shuffle  them  up.  Sometimes  they  prease  out  thicke  and 
three-fold,  and  other  times  they  come  out  languishing  one  by 
one.  I  will  have  my  naturall  and  ordinarie  pace  scene  as 
loose,  and  as  shuffling  as  it  is.  As  I  am,  so  I  goe  on  plod 
ding.  And  besides,  these  are  matters,  that  a  man  may  not 
be  ignorant  of,  and  rashly  and  casually  to  speake  of  them. 
I  would  wish  to  have  a  more  perfect  understanding  of  things, 
but  I  will  not  purchase  it  so  deare,  as  it  cost.  My  inten 
tion  is  to  passe  the  remainder  of  my  life  quietly,  and  not 
laboriously,  in  rest,  and  not  in  care.  There  is  nothing  I  will 
trouble  or  vex  my  selve  about,  no  not  for  Science  it  selfe, 
what  esteeme  soever  it  be-of.  I  doe  not  search  and  tosse 
over  Books,  but  for  an  honester  recreation  to  please,  and 
pastime  to  delight  my  selfe  :  or  if  I  studie,  I  onely  en  devour 
to  find  out  the  knowledge  that  teacheth  or  handleth  the 
knowledge  of  my  selfe,  and  which  may  instruct  me  how  to 
die  well,  and  how  to  live  well. 

Has  meus  ad  metas  sudet  oportet  equus.  PROP.  iv.  El. 

My  horse  must  sweating  runne, 
That  this  goale  may  be  wonne. 

If  in  reading  I  fortune  to  meet  with  any  difficult  points, 
I  fret  not  my  selfe  about  them,  but  after  I  have  given  them 
a  charge  or  two,  I  leave  them  as  I  found  them.  Should  I 
earnestly  plod  upon  them  I  should  loose  both  time  and  my 
selfe ;  for  I  have  a  skipping  wit.  What  I  see  not  at  the 
first  view,  I  shall  lesse  see  it,  if  I  opinionate  my  selfe  upon  it. 
I  doe  nothing  without  blithnesse  ;  and  an  over  obstinate 

95 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  continuation  and  plodding  contention,  doth  dazle,  dul  and 
X  weary  the  same  :    My  sight  is  thereby  confounded  and  di- 

Bookes  mashed.  I  must  therefore  withdraw-it,  and  at  fittes  goe  to 
it  againe.  Even  as  to  judge  well  of  the  lustre  of  scarlet  we 
are  taught  to  cast  our  eyes  over  it,  in  running  it  over  by 
divers  glances,  sodaine  glimpses,  and  reiterated  reprisings. 
If  one  booke  seeme  tedious  unto  me,  I  take  another,  which  I 
follow  not  with  any  earnestnesse,  except  it  be  at  such  houres 
as  I  am  idle,  or  that  I  am  weary  with  doing  nothing.  I  am 
not  greatly  affected  to  new  books,  because  ancient  Authors 
are  in  my  judgement  more  full  and  pithy  :  nor  am  I  much 
addicted  to  Greeke  books,  forasmuch  as  my  understanding 
can  well  rid  his  worke  with  a  childish  and  apprentise  in 
telligence.  Amongst  moderne  bookes  meerly  pleasant,  I 
esteeme  Bocace  his  Decameron,  Rabelais,  and  the  kisses  of 
lohn  the  second  (if  they  may  be  placed  under  this  title) 
worth  the  paines-taking  to  read  them.  As  for  Amadis  and 
such  like  trash  of  writings,  they  had  never  the  credit  so 
much  as  to  allure  my  youth  to  delight  in  them.  This  I  will 
say  more,  either  boldly  or  rashly,  that  this  old  and  heavie- 
pased  minde  of  mine,  will  no  more  be  pleased  with  Aristotle, 
or  tickled  with  good  Ovid  :  his  facility,  and  quaint  inven 
tions,  which  heretofore  have  so  ravished  me,  they  can  now  a 
dayes  scarcely  entertaine  me.  I  speake  my  minde  freely  of 
all  things,  yea  of  such  as  peradventure  exceed  my  sufficiencie, 
and  that  no  way  I  hold  to  be  of  my  jurisdiction.  What  my 
conceit  is  of  them,  is  also  to  manifest  the  proportion  of  my 
insight,  and  not  the  measure  of  things.  If  at  any  time  I 
finde  my  selfe  distasted  of  Platoes  Axiochus,  as  of  a  forceles 
worke,  due  regard  had  to  such  an  Author,  my  judgement 
doth  nothing  beleeve  it  selfe  :  It  is  not  so  fond-hardy,  or 
selfe-conceited,  as  it  durst  dare  to  oppose  it  selfe  against  the 
authority  of  so  many  other  famous  ancient  judgements, 
which  he  reputeth  his  regents  and  masters,  and  with  whom 
hee  had  rather  erre.  He  chafeth  with,  and  condemneth  him- 
selfe,  either  to  rely  on  the  superh'ciall  sense,  being  unable  to 
pierce  into  the  centre,  or  to  view  the  thing  by  some  false 
lustre.  He  is  pleased  only  to  warrant  himselfe  from  trouble 
and  unrulinesse  :  As  for  weaknesse  he  acknowledgeth  and 
ingeniously  avoweth  the  same.  He  thjnkes  to  give  a  just 
96 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

interpretation  to  the  apparences  which  his  conception  presents  CHAPTER 
unto  him,  but  they   are  shallow   and  imperfect.     Most  of  X 

J£sopes  fables  have  divers  senses,  and  severall  interpretations:  Of  Bookes 
Those  which  Mythologize  them,  chuse  some  kinde  of  colour 
well-suting  with  the  fable  ;  but  for  the  most  part,  it  is  no 
other  than  the  first  and  superficiall  glosse  :  There  are  others 
more  quicke,  more  sinnowie,  more  essentiall  and  more  inter- 
nail,  into  which  they  could  never  penetrate;  and  thus  thinke 
I  with  them.  But  to  follow  my  course ;  I  have  ever 
deemed  that  in  Poesie,  Virgil,  Lucretius,  Catullus,  and 
Horace,  doe  doubtles  by  far  hold  the  first  ranke :  and 
especially  Virgil  in  his  Georgiks^  which  I  esteeme  to  be  the 
most  accomplished  peece  of  worke  of  Poesie  :  In  comparison 
of  which  one  may  easily  discerne,  that  there  are  some 
passages  in  the  jSZneidos,  to  which  the  Author  (had  he  lived) 
would  no  doubt  have  given  some  review  or  correction  :  The 
fifth  booke  whereof  is  (in  my  mind)  the  most  absolutely 
perfect.  I  also  love  Lucan,  and  willingly  read  him,  not  so 
much  for  his  stile,  as  for  his  owne  worth,  and  truth  of  his 
opinion  and  judgement.  As  for  good  Terence,  I  allow  the 
quaintnesse  and  grace  of  his  Latine  tongue,  and  judge  him 
wonderfull  conceited  and  apt,  lively  to  represent  the  motions 
and  passions  of  the  minde,  and  the  condition  of  our  manners: 
our  actions  make  me  often  remember  him.  I  can  never 
reade  him  so  often,  but  still  I  discover  some  new  grace  and 
beautie  in  him.  Those  that  lived  about  Virgils  time,  com 
plained  that  some  would  compare  Lucretius  unto  him.  I 
am  of  opinion,  that  verily  it  is  an  unequall  comparison  ;  yet 
can  I  hardly  assure  my  selfe  in  this  opinion  whensoever  I 
finde  my  selfe  entangled  in  some  notable  passage  of  Lucretius. 
If  they  were  moved  at  this  comparison,  what  would  they  say 
now  of  the  fond,  hardy  and  barbarous  stupiditie  of  those 
which  now  adayes  compare  Ariosto  unto  him  ?  Nay  what 
would  Ariosto  say  of  it  himselfe  ? 

0  sceclum  insipiens  et  infacetum,  CATUL.  Epi?. 

O  age  that  hath  no  wit, 
And  small  conceit  in  it. 

I  thinke  our  ancestors  had  also  more  reason  to  cry  out 
against  those  that  blushed  not  to  equall  Plautus  unto  Terence 
N  97 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  (who  makes  more  shew  to  be  a  Gentleman)  than  Lucretius 
X  unto  Virgil.     This  one  thing  doth  greatly  advantage  the 

Of  Bookes  estimation  and  preferring  of  Terence,  that  the  father  of  the 
Roman  eloquence,  of  men  of  his  quality  doth  so  often  make 
mention  of  him ;  and  the  censure,  which  the  chiefe  Judge  of 
the  Roman  Poets  giveth  of  his  companion.  It  hath  often 
come  unto  my  minde,  how  such  as  in  our  dayes  give  them 
selves  to  composing  of  comedies  (as  the  Italians  who  are  very 
happy  in  them)  employ  three  or  foure  arguments  of  Terence 
and  Plautus  to  make  up  one  of  theirs.  In  one  onely  comedy 
they  will  huddle  up  five  or  six  of  Bocaces  tales.  That  which 
makes  them  so  to  charge  themselves  with  matter,  is  the  dis 
trust  they  have  of  their  owne  sufficiency,  and  that  they  are 
not  able  to  undergoe  so  heavie  a  burthen  with  their  owne 
strength.  They  are  forced  to  finde  a  body  on  which  they  may 
rely  and  leane  themselves  :  and  wanting  matter  of  their  owne 
wherewith  to  please  us,  they  will  have  the  story  or  tale  to 
busie  and  ammuse  us :  where  as  in  my  Authors  it  is  cleane 
contrary:  The  elegancies,  the  perfections  and  ornaments  of 
his  manner  of  speech,  make  us  neglect  and  lose  the  longing 
for  his  subject.  His  quaintnesse  and  grace  doe  still  retaine 
us  to  him.  He  is  every  where  pleasantly  conceited, 

HOR.  ii.  Epist.  Liquidus  puroque  simillimus  amni, 

So  clearely-neate,  so  neately-cleare, 
As  he  a  fine-pure  River  were. 

and  doth  so  replenish  our  minde  with  his  graces,  that  we  for 
get  those  of  the  fable.  The  same  consideration  drawes  me 
somewhat  further.  I  perceive  that  good  and  ancient  Poets 
have  shunned  the  affectation  and  enquest,  not  only  of  fantasti- 
call,  new  fangled,Spagniolized,  and  Petrarchisticall  elevations, 
but  also  of  more  sweet  and  sparing  inventions,  which  are  the 
ornament  of  all  the  Poeticall  workes  of  succeeding  ages.  Yet 
is  there  no  competent  Judge,  that  findeth  them  wanting  in 
those  Ancient  ones,  and  that  doth  not  much  more  admire 
that  smoothly  equall  neatnesse,  continued  sweetnesse,  and 
flourishing  comelinesse  of  Catullus  his  Epigrams,  than  all  the 
sharpe  quips,  and  witty  girds,  wherewith  Martiall  doth  whet 
and  embellish  the  conclusions  of  his.  It  is  the  same  reason  I 
MART.  Pr<zf.  spake  of  erewhile,  as  Martiall  of  himselfe.  Minus  illi  ing'enio 
labor  andum  fait.  In  cuius  locum  materia  successerat.  '  He 
98 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

4  needed  the  lesse  worke  with  his  wit,  in  place  whereof  matter  CHAPTER 
'  came  in  supply ' ;  The  former  without  being  moved  or  X 
pricked  cause  themselves  to  be  heard  lowd  enough :  they  have 
matter  to  laugh  at  every  where,  and  need  not  tickle  them 
selves  ;  where  as  these  must  have  foraine  helpe  :  according  as 
they  have  lesse  spirit,  they  must  have  more  body.  They 
leape  on  horse-backe:  because  they  are  not  sufficiently  strong 
in  their  legs  to  march  on  foot.  Even  as  in  our  dances,  those 
base  conditioned  men  that  keepe  dancing-schooles,  because 
they  are  unfit  to  represent  the  port  and  decencie  of  our 
nobilitie,  endevour  to  get  commendation  by  dangerous  lofty 
trickes,  and  other  strange  tumbler-like  friskes  and  motions. 
And  some  Ladies  make  a  better  shew  of  their  counte 
nances  in  those  dances,  wherein  are  divers  changes,  cuttings, 
turnings,  and  agitations  of  the  body,  than  in  some  dances 
of  state  and  gravity,  where  they  need  but  simply  to  tread 
a  naturall  measure,  represent  an  unaffected  cariage,  and 
their  ordinary  grace ;  And  as  I  have  also  seene  some 
excellent  Lourdans,  or  Clownes  attired  in  their  ordinary 
worky-day  clothes,  and  with  a  common  homely  countenance, 
affoord  us  all  the  pleasure  that  may  be  had  from  their  art : 
Prentises  and  learners  that  are  not  of  so  high  a  forme,  to 
besmeare  their  faces,  to  disguise  themselves,  and  in  motions 
to  counterfeit  strange  visages,  and  antickes,  to  enduce  us  to 
laughter.  This  my  conception  is  no  where  better  discerned, 
than  in  the  comparison  betweene  Virgils  ^Eneidos,  and 
Orlando  Furioso.  The  first  is  seene  to  soare  aloft  with 
full-spread  wings,  and  with  so  high  and  strong  a  pitch,  ever 
following  his  point ;  the  other  faintly  to  hover  and  flutter 
from  tale  to  tale,  and  as  it  were  skipping  from  bough  to 
bough,  alwayes  distrusting  his  owne  wings,  except  it  be  for 
some  short  flight,  and  for  feare  his  strength  and  breath 
should  faile  him,  to  sit  downe  at  every  fields-end. 

Excursusque  breves  tentat.  VIRG.  sEn.  iv. 

Out-lopes  sometimes  he  doth  assay,  J94- 

But  very  short,  and  as  he  may. 

Loe  here  then,  concerning  this  kinde  of  subjects,  what 
Authors  please  me  best :  As  for  my  other  lesson,  which  some 
what  more  mixeth  profit  with  pleasure,  whereby  I  learne  to 
range  my  opinions,  and  addresse  my  conditions ;  the  Bookes 

99 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  that  serve  me  thereunto,  are  Plutarke  (since  he  spake  French,) 
x  and   Seneca  ;  Both  have    this  excellent  commodity  for  my 

)0  es  humour,  that  the  knowledge  I  seeke  in  them,  is  there  so 
scatteringly  and  loosely  handled,  that  whosoever  readeth 
them  is  not  tied  to  plod  long  upon  them,  whereof  I  am  un- 
capable.  And  so  are  Plutarkes  little  workes,  and  Senecaes 
Epistles,  which  are  the  best  and  most  profitable  parts  of 
their  writings.  It  is  no  great  matter  to  draw  mee  to  them, 
and  I  leave  them  where  I  list.  For,  they  succeed  not,  and 
depend  not  one  of  another.  Both  jumpe  and  suit  together, 
in  most  true  and  profitable  opinions  :  And  fortune  brought 
them  both  into  the  world  in  one  age.  Both  were  Tutors  unto 
two  Roman  Emperours:  Both  were  strangers,  and  came  from 
farre  Countries;  both  rich  and  mighty  in  the  common-wealth, 
and  in  credit  with  their  masters.  Their  instruction  is  the 
prime  and  creame  of  Philosophy,  and  presented  with  a  plaine, 
unaffected,  and  pertinent  fashion.  Plutarke  is  more  uniforme 
and  constant;  Seneca  more  waving  and  diverse.  This  doth 
labour,  force,  and  extend  himselfe,  to  arrne  and  strengthen 
vertue  against  weaknesse,  feare,  and  vitious  desires  ;  the  other 
seemeth  nothing  so  much  to  feare  their  force  or  attempt,  and 
in  a  manner  scorneth  to  hasten  or  change  his  pace  about 
them,  and  to  put  himselfe  upon  Ins  guard.  Plutarkes  opinions 
arePlatonicall,  gentle  and  accommodable  unto  civill  societie: 
Senecaes  Stoicall  and  Epicurian,  further  from  common  use, 
but  in  my  conceit,  more  proper,  particular,  and  more  solid.  It 
appeareth  in  Seneca,  that  he  somewhat  inclineth  and  yeeldeth 
to  the  tyrannic  of  the  Emperors  which  were  in  his  daies  ;  for, 
I  verily  beleeve,  it  is  with  a  forced  judgement,  hecondemneth 
the  cause  of  those  noblie-minded  murtherers  of  Caesar : 
Plutarke  is  every  where  free  and  open-hearted  ;  Seneca,  full- 
fraught  with  points  and  sallies,  Plutarke  stuft  with  matters. 
The  former  doth  move  and  enflame  you  more  ;  the  latter, 
content,  please,  and  pay  you  better :  This  doth  guide  you, 
the  other  drive  you  on.  As  for  Cicero,  of  all  his  works, 
those  that  treat  of  Philosophic  (namely  morall)  are  they 
which  best  serve  my  turne,  and  square  with  my  intent.  But 
boldly  to  confesse  the  trueth,  (For,  Since  the  bars  of  impu- 
dencie  were  broken  downe,  all  curbing  is  taken  away)  his 
manner  of  writing  semeth  verie  tedious  unto  me,  as  doth  all 
100 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

such-like  stuffe.  For,  his  prefaces,  definitions,  divisions,  and  CHAPTER 
Etymologies,  consume  the  greatest  part  of  his  Works  ;  what 
soever  quick,  wittie,  and  pithie  conceit  is  in  him,  is  sur 
charged,  and  confounded  by  those  his  long  and  far-fetcht 
preambles.  If  I  bestow  but  one  houre  in  reading  him,  which 
is  much  for  me  ;  and  let  me  call  to  minde  what  substance,  or 
juice  I  have  drawne  from  him,  for  the  most  part,  I  find 
nothing  but  wind  and  ostentation  in  him :  for  he  is  not  yet 
come  to  the  arguments,  which  make  for  his  purpose,  and 
reasons  that  properly  concerne  the  knot  or  pith  I  seek-after. 
These  Logicall  and  Aristotelian  ordinances  are  not  availfull 
for  me,  who  onely  endevour  to  become  more  wise  and  suffi 
cient,  and  not  more  wittie  or  eloquent.  I  would  have  one 
begin  with  the  last  point :  I  understand  sufficiently  what 
death  and  voluptuousnesse  are  :  let  not  a  man  busie  him- 
selfe  to  anatomize  them.  At  the  first  reading  of  a  Booke, 
I  seeke  for  good  and  solid  reasons,  that  may  instruct  me  how 
to  sustaine  their  assaults.  It  is  neither  grammatical!  sub- 
tilties,  nor  logicall  quiddities,  nor  the  wittie  contexture  of 
choice  words,  or  arguments,  and  syllogismes,  that  will  serve 
my  turne.  I  like  those  discourses  that  give  the  first  charge 
to  the  strongest  part  of  the  doubt ;  his  are  but  flourishes, 
and  languish  every  where.  They  are  good  for  Schooles,  at 
the  barre,  or  for  Orators  and  Preachers,  where  we  may  slum 
ber  :  and  though  we  wake  a  quarter  of  an  houre  after,  we 
may  find  and  trace  him  soone  enough.  Such  a  manner  of 
speech  is  fit  for  those  ludges,  that  a  man  would  corrupt  by 
hooke  or  crooke,  by  right  or  wrong,  or  for  children  and  the 
common  people,  unto  whom  a  man  must  tell  all,  and  see  what 
the  event  will  be.  I  would  not  have  a  man  go  about,  and 
labour  by  circumlocutions,  to  induce  and  win  me  to  atten 
tion,  and  that  (as  our  Herolds  or  Criers  do)  they  shall  ring 
out  their  words.  Now  heare  me,  now  listen,  or  ho-yes. 
The  Romanes  in  their  Religion  were  wont  to  say,  Hoc  age  ; 
which  in  ours  we  say,  Sursum  corda.  These  are  so  many 
lost  words  for  me.  I  come  readie  prepared  from  my  house. 
I  need  no  allurement  nor  sawce  ;  my  stomacke  is  good  enough 
to  digest  raw  meat :  And  whereas  with  these  preparatives 
and  flourishes,  or  preambles,  they  thinke  to  sharpen  my 
taste,  or  stir  my  stomacke,  they  cloy  and  make  it  wallowish. 

101 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Shall  the  priviledge  of  times  excuse  me  from  this  sacrilegious 
X  boldnesse,  to  deeme  Platoes  Dialogismes  to  be  as  langui*hing, 

Of  Bookes  ^y  over-filling  and  stuffing  his  matter  ?  And  to  bewaile  the 
time  that  a  man,  who  had  so  many  thousands  of  things  to 
utter,  spends  about  so  many,  so  long,  so  vaine,  and  idle  inter- 
loqutions,  and  preparatives  ?  My  ignorance  shall  better 
excuse  me,  in  that  I  see  nothing  in  the  beautie  of  his  lan 
guage.  I  generally  enquire  after  Bookes,  that  use  sciences, 
and  not  after  such  as  institute  them.  The  two  first,  and 
Plinie,  with  others  of  their  ranke,  have  no  Hoc  age  in  them, 
they  will  have  to  doe  with  men,  that  have  forewarned  them 
selves  ;  or  if  they  have,  it  is  a  materiall  and  substantial!  Hoc 
age,  and  that  hath  his  bodie  a  part :  I  likewise  love  to  read 
the  Epistles  and  ad  Atticum,  not  onely  because  they  containe 
a  most  ample  instruction  of  the  Historic,  and  affaires  of  his 
times,  but  much  more  because  in  them  I  descrie  his  private 
humours.  For,  (as  I  have  said  elsewhere)  I  am  wonderfull 
curious,  to  discover  and  know,  the  minde,  the  soule,  the 
genuine  disposition,  and  naturall  judgement  of  my  Authors. 
A  man  ought  to  judge  their  sufficiencie,  and  not  their  cus- 
tomes,  nor  them  by  the  shew  of  their  writings,  which  they 
set  forth  on  this  worlds  Theatre.  I  have  sorrowed  a  thou 
sand  times,  that  ever  we  lost  the  booke,  that  Brutus  writ  of 
Vertue.  Oh  it  is  a  goodly  thing  to  learne  the  Theorike  of 
such  as  understand  the  practice  well.  But  forsomuch  as  the 
Sermon  is  one  thing,  and  the  Preacher  an  other  :  I  love  as 
much  to  see  Brutus  in  Plutarke,  as  in  himselfe  :  I  would 
rather  make  choice  to  know  certainly,  what  talke  he  had  in 
his  Tent  with  some  cf  his  familiar  friends,  the  night  fore 
going  the  battel,  than  the  speech  he  made  the  morrow  after  to 
his  Armie  :  and  what  he  did  in  his  chamber  or  closet,  than 
what  in  the  Senate  or  market  place.  As  for  Cicero,  I  am 
of  the  common  judgement,  that  besides  learning,  there  was 
no  exquisite  excellencie  in  him  :  He  was  a  good  Citizen,  of 
an  honest-gentle  nature,  as  are  commonly  fat  and  burly  men; 
for  so  was  he  :  But  to  speake  truely  of  him,  full  of  ambitious 
vanitie  and  remisse  nicenesse.  And  I  know  not  well  how  to 
excuse  him,  in  that  hee  deemed  his  Poesie  worthy  to  be 
published.  It  is  no  great  imperfection,  to  make  bad  verses, 
but  it  is  an  imperfection  in  him,  that  he  never  perceived  how 
102 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

unworthy  they  were  of  the  glorie  of  his  name.     Concerning  CHAPTER 
his  eloquence,   it  is  beyond    all   comparison,   and    I   verily  x 

beleeve,  that  none  shall  ever  equall  it.  Cicero  the  younger, 
who  resembled  his  father  in  nothing,  but  in  name,  com 
manding  in  Asia,  chanced  one  day  to  have  many  strangers  at 
his  board,  and  amongst  others,  one  Caestius  sitting  at  the 
lower  end,  as  the  manner  is  to  thrust  in  at  great  mens 
tables  :  Cicero  inquired  of  one  of  his  men  what  he  was,  who 
told  him  his  name,  but  he  dreaming  on  other  matters,  and 
having  forgotten  what  answere  his  man  made  him,  asked 
him  his  name  twice  or  thrice  more  :  the  servant,  because  he 
would  not  be  troubled  to  tell  him  one  thing  so  often,  and 
by  some  circumstance  make  him  to  know  him  better,  It  is, 
said  he,  the  same  Caestius,  of  whom  some  have  told  you, 
that  in  respect  of  his  owne,  maketh  no  accompt  of  your 
fathers  eloquence  :  Cicero  being  suddainly  mooved,  com- 
maunded  the  said  poore  Caestius  to  be  presently  taken  from 
the  table,  and  well  whipt  in  his  presence  :  Lo-heere  an 
uncivill  and  barbarous  host.  Even  amongst  those,  which  (all 
things  considered)  have  deemed  his  eloquence  matchlesse  and 
incomparable  others  there  have  been,  who  have  not  spared  to 
note  some  faults  in  it :  As  great  Brutus  said,  that  it  was  an 
eloquence,  broken,  halting,  and  disjoynted,  fractam  et  elum- 
bem :  '  Incoherent  and  sinnowlesse.'  Those  Orators  that 
lived  about  his  age,  reproved  also  in  him  the  curious  care  he 
had  of  a  certaine  long  cadence,  at  the  end  of  his  clauses,  and 
noted  these  words,  JEsse  videatur,  which  he  so  often  useth. 
As  for  me,  I  rather  like  a  cadence  that  falleth  shorter,  cut 
like  lambikes  :  yet  doth  he  sometimes  confound  his  numbers  ; 
but  it  is  seldome :  I  have  especially  observed  this  one  place. 
Ego  vero  me  minus  diu  senem  esse  mallem,  quam  esse  senem,  Cic.DeSenect. 
antequam  essem.  '  But  I  had  rather,  not  be  an  old  man  so 
'  long  as  I  might  be,  than  to  be  old  before  I  should  be." 
Historians  are  my  right  hand  ;  for  they  are  pleasant  and 
easie  :  and  therewithal!,  the  man  with  whom  I  desire  gene 
rally  to  be  acquainted,  may  more  lively  and  perfectly  be  dis 
covered  in  them,  than  in  any  other  composition  :  the  varietie 
and  truth  of  his  inward  conditions,  in  grosse  and  by  retale  : 
the  diversitie  of  the  meanes  of  his  collection  and  composing, 
and  of  the  accidents  that  threaten  him.  Now,  those  that 

103 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  write  of  in  ens  lives,  forasmuch  as  they  ammuse  and  busie 
X  themselves  more  about  counsels  than  events,  more  about  that 

which  commeth  from  within,  than  that  which  appeareth  out 
ward  ;  they  are  fittest  for  me:  And  that  "s  the  reason  why 
Plutarke  above  all  in  that  kind,  doth  best  please  me.  Indeed 
I  am  not  a  little  grieved  that  we  have  not  a  dozen  of  Laertii, 
or  that  he  is  not  more  knowne,  or  better  understood  :  for,  I 
am  no  lesse  curious  to  know  the  fortunes  and  lives  of  these 
great  masters  of  the  world,  than  to  understand  the  diversitie 
of  their  decrees  and  conceits.  In  this  kind  of  studie  of 
Historie,  a  man  must,  without  distinction,  tosse  and  turne 
over  all  sorts  of  Authors,  both  old  and  new,  both  French  and 
others,  if  he  will  learne  the  things  they  so  diversly  treat  - 
of.  But  me  thinks  that  Caesar  above  all  doth  singularly 
deserve  to  be  studied,  not  onely  for  the  understanding  of  the 
Historie,  as  of  himselfe ;  so  much  perfection  and  excellencie 
is  there  in  him  more  than  in  others,  although  Salust  be 
reckoned  one  of  the  number.  Verily  I  read  that  Author 
with  a  little  more  reverence  and  respect,  than  commonly  men 
reade  profane  and  humane  Workes  :  sometimes  considering 
him  by  his  actions,  and  wonders  of  his  greatnesse,  and  other 
times  waighing  the  puritie  and  inimitable  polishing  and  ele- 
gancie  of  his  tongue,  which  (as  Cicero  saith)  hath  not  onely 
exceeded  all  Historians,  but  haply  Cicero  himselfe:  with  such 
sinceritie  in  his  judgement.  Speaking  of  his  enemies,  that 
except  the  false  colours,  wherewith  he  goeth  about  to  cloake 
his  bad  cause,  and  the  corruption  and  filthinesse  of  his  pesti 
lent  ambition,  I  am  perswaded  there  is  nothing  in  him  to  be 
found  fault- with :  and  that  he  hath  been  over-sparing  to 
speak  of  himselfe  :  for,  so  many  notable  and  great  things 
could  never  be  executed  by  him,  unlesse  he  had  put  more  of 
his  owne  unto  them,  than  he  setteth  downe.  I  love  those 
Historians  that  are  either  verie  simple,  or  most  excellent. 
The  simple  who  have  nothing  of  their  owne  to  adde  unto  the 
storie,  and  have  but  the  care  and  diligence  to  collect  whatso 
ever  come  unto  their  knowledge,  and  sincerely  and  faithfully 
to  register  all  things,  without  choice  or  culling,  by  the  naked 
truth  leave  our  judgement  more  entire,  and  better  satisfied. 

Such  amongst  others  (for  example  sake)  plaine  and  well- 
meaning  Froisard,  who  in  his  enterprize,  hath  marched  with 

104 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

so  free  and  genuine  a  puritie,  that  having  committed  some  CHAPTER 
over-sight,    he    is    neither    ashamed    to   acknowledge,    nor  x 

afraid  to  correct  the  same,  wheresoever  he  hath  either  notice 
or  warning  of  it :  and  who  representeth  unto  us  the  diver- 
sitie  of  the  newes  then  currant,  and  the  different  reports, 
that  were  made  unto  him.  The  subject  of  an  historic  should 
be  naked,  bare,  and  formelesse  ;  each  man  according  to  his 
capacitie  or  understanding  may  reap  commoditie  out  of  it. 
The  curious  and  most  excellent  have  the  sufficiencie  to  cull 
and  chuse  that,  which  is  worthie  to  be  knowne,  and  may 
select  of  two  relations,  that  which  is  most  likely  :  of  the 
condition  of  Princes,  and  of  their  humors,  therby  they  con 
clude  their  counsels,  and  attribute  convenient  words  unto 
them  :  they  have  reason  to  assume  authoritie  unto  them,  to 
direct  and  shapen  our  beliefe  unto  theirs.  But  truly  that 
belongs  not  to  many.  Such  as  are  betweene  both  (which 
is  the  most  common  fashion)  it  is  they  that  spoile  all ;  they 
will  needs  chew  our  meat  for  us,  and  take  upon  them  a 
law  to  judge,  and  by  consequence  to  square  and  encline  the 
storie  according  to  their  fantasie ;  for,  where  the  judgement 
bendeth  one  way,  a  man  cannot  chuse  but  wrest  and  turne  his 
narration  that  way.  They  undertake  to  chuse  things  worthy 
to  bee  knowne,  and  now  and  then  conceal  either  a  word  or  a 
secret  action  from  us,  which  would  much  better  instruct  us  : 
omitting  such  things  as  they  understand  not,  as  incredible  : 
and  haply  such  matters,  as  they  know  not  how  to  declare, 
either  in  good  Latin,  or  tolerable  French.  Let  them  boldly 
enstall  their  eloquence,  and  discourse :  Let  them  censure  at 
their  pleasure,  but  let  them  also  give  us  leave  to  judge  after 
them  :  And  let  them  neither  alter  nor  dispence  by  their 
abridgements  and  choice,  any  thing  belonging  to  the  sub 
stance  of  the  matter  ;  but  let  them  rather  send  it  pure  and 
entire  with  all  her  dimensions  unto  us.  Most  commonly  (as 
chiefly  in  our  age)  this  charge  of  writing  histories  is  com 
mitted  unto  base,  ignorant,  and  mechanicall  kind  of  people, 
only  for  this  consideration  that  they  can  speak  well;  as  if  we 
sought  to  learne  the  Grammer  of  them  ;  and  they  have  some 
reason,  being  only  hyred  to  that  end,  and  publishing  nothing 
but  their  tittle-tattle  to  aime  at  nothing  else  so  much.  Thus 
with  store  of  choice  and  quaint  words,  and  wyre-drawne 
O  105 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  phrases  they  huddle  up,  and  make  a  hodge-pot  of  a  laboured 
X  contexture  of  the  reports,  which  they  gather  in  the  market- 

tfookes  p]aces?  or  such  other  assemblies.  The  only  good  histories 
are  those  that  are  written  by  such  as  commanded,  or  were 
imploied  themselves  in  weighty  affaires,  or  that  were  partners 
in  the  conduct  of  them,  or  that  at  least  have  had  the  fortune 
to  manage  others  of  like  qualitie.  Such  in  a  manner  are 
all  the  Grsecians  and  Romans.  For,  many  eye-witnesses 
having  written  of  one  same  subject  (as  it  hapned  in  those 
times,  when  Greatnesse  and  Knowledge  did  commonly  meet) 
if  any  fault  or  over-sight  have  past  them,  it  must  be  deemed 
exceeding  light,  and  upon  some  doubtfull  accident.  What 
may  a  man  expect  at  a  Phisitions  hand,  that  discourseth 
of  warre,  or  of  a  bare  Scholler,  treating  of  Princes  secret 
designes  ?  If  we  shall  but  note  the  religion,  which  the 
Romans  had  in  that,  we  need  no  other  example  :  Asinius 
Polio  found  some  mistaking  or  oversight  in  Caesars  Com 
mentaries,  whereinto  he  was  falne,  only  because  he  could  not 
possiblie  oversee  all  things  with  his  owne  eyes,  that  hapned 
in  his  Armie,  but  was  faine  to  relie  on  the  reports  of  par 
ticular  men,  who  often  related  untruths  unto  him  ;  or  else 
because  he  had  not  been  curiously  advertised,  and  distinctly 
enformed  by  his  Lieutenants  and  Captaines,  of  such  matters 
as  they  in  his  absence  had  managed  or  effected.  Whereby 
may  be  seen,  that  nothing  is  so  hard,  or  so  uncertaine  to  be 
found-out,  as  the  certaintie  of  a  Truth,  sithence  no  man  can 
put  any  assured  confidence  concerning  the  truth  of  a  battel, 
neither  in  the  knowledge  of  him,  that  was  Generall,  or 
commanded  over  it,  nor  in  the  soldiers  that  fought,  of  any 
thing,  that  hath  hapned  amongst  them  ;  except  after  the 
manner  of  a  strict  point  of  law,  the  severall  witnesses  are 
brought  and  examined  face  to  face,  and  that  all  matters  be 
nicely  and  thorowly  sifted  by  the  objects  and  trials  of  the 
successe  of  every  accident.  Verily  the  knowledge  we  have  of 
our  own  affaires  is  much  more  barren  and  feeble.  But  this 
hath  sufficiently  been  handled  by  Bodine,  and  agreeing  with 
my  conception.  Somewhat  to  aid  the  weaknesse  of  my 
memorie,  and  to  assist  her  great  defects  ;  for  it  hath  often 
been  my  chance  to  light  upon  bookes,  which  I  supposed  to  be 
new,  and  never  to  have  read,  which  I  had  not  understanding 
106 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

diligently  read  and   run-over  many  yeares  before,  and  all  CHAPTER 
bescribled  with  my  notes  :  I  have  a  while  since  accustomed  X 

my  selfe,  to  note  at  the  end  of  my  booke  (I  meane  such  as 
I  purpose  to  read  but  once)  the  time  I  made  an  end  to  read 
it,  and  to  set  downe  what  censure  or  judgement  I  gave  of  it; 
that  so,  it  may  at  least,  at  another  time  represent  unto  my 
mind,  the  aire  and  generall  Idea,  I  had  conceived  of  the 
Author  in  reading  him.  I  will  here  set  downe  the  Copie  of 
some  of  mine  annotations,  and  especially  what  I  noted  upon 
my  Guicciardine  about  ten  yeares  since  :  (For  what  language 
soever  my  bookes  speake  unto  me,  I  speake  unto  them  in 
mine  owne.)  He  is  a  diligent  Historiographer,  and  from 
whom  in  my  conceit,  a  man  may  as  exactly  learne  the  truth 
of  such  affaires  as  passed  in  his  time,  as  of  any  other  writer 
whatsoever  :  and  the  rather  because  himselfe  hath  been  an 
Actor  of  most  part  of  them,  and  in  verie  honourable  place. 
There  is  no  signe  or  apparance,  that  ever  he  disguised  or 
coloured  any  matter,  either  through  hatred,  malice,  favour, 
or  vanitie  ;  whereof  the  free  and  impartiall  judgements  he 
giveth  of  great  men,  and  namely  of  those  by  whom  he  had 
been  advanced  or  imployed  in  his  important  charges,  as  of 
Pope  Clement  the  seaventh,  beareth  undoubted  testimonie. 
Concerning  the  parts  wherewith  he  most  goeth  about  to 
prevaile  which  are  his  digressions  and  discourses,  many  of 
them  are  verie  excellent,  and  enriched  with  faire  ornaments, 
but  he  hath  too  much  pleased  himselfe  in  them  :  for,  en- 
devouring  to  omit  nothing  that  might  be  spoken,  having  so 
full  and  large  a  subject,  and  almost  infinite,  he  proveth 
somewhat  languishing,  and  giveth  a  tast  of  a  kind  of 
scholasticall  tedious  babling.  Moreover,  I  have  noted  this, 
that  of  so  severall  and  divers  armes,  successes,  and  effects  he 
judgeth  of;  of  so  many  and  variable  motives,  alterations, 
and  counsels,  that  he  relateth,  he  never  referreth  any  one 
unto  vertue,  religion,  or  conscience :  as  if  they  were  all 
extinguished  and  banished  the  world  :  and  of  all  actions,  how 
glorious  soever  in  apparance  they  be  of  themselves,  he  doth 
ever  impute  the  cause  of  them,  to  some  vicious  and  blame- 
worthie  occasion,  or  to  some  comrnoditie  and  profit.  It  is 
impossible  to  imagine,  that  amongst  so  infinite  a  number 
of  actions,  whereof  he  judgeth,  some  one  have  not  been 

107 


MONTAIGNES    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  produced  and  compassed  by  way  of  reason.     No  corruption 
X  could  ever  possesse  men  so  universally,  but  that  some  one 

Of  Bookes  must  of  necessity  escape  the  contagion  ;  which  makes  me  to 
feare,  he  hath  had  some  distaste  or  blame  in  his  passion,  and 
it  hath  haply  fortuned,  that  he  hath  judged  or  esteemed  of 
others  according  to  himselfe.  In  my  Philip  de  Comines, 
there  is  this  :  In  him  you  shall  find  a  pleasing-sweet,  and 
gently-gliding  speech,  fraught  with  a  purely-sincere  sim- 
plicitie,  his  narration  pure  and  unaffected,  and  wherein  the 
Authours  unspotted-good  meaning  doth  evidently  appeare, 
void  of  all  manner  of  vanitie  or  ostentation  speaking  of 
himselfe,  and  free  from  all  affection  or  envie  speaking  of 
others  :  his  discourses  and  perswasions,  accompanied  more 
with  a  well-meaning  zeale,  and  meere  veritie,  than  with  any 
laboured  and  exquisit  sufficiencie,  and  all-through,  with 
gravitie  and  authoritie,  representing  a  man  well-borne,  and 
brought  up  in  high  negotiations.  Upon  the  memories  and 
historic  of  Monsieur  du  Bellay  :  It  is  ever  a  well-pleasing 
thing,  to  see  matters  writen  by  those,  that  have  assaid  how, 
and  in  what  manner  they  ought  to  be  directed  and  managed : 
yet  can  it  not  be  denied,  but  that  in  both  these  Lords,  there 
will  manifestly  appeare  a  great  declination  from  a  free 
libertie  of  writing,  which  clearely  shineth  in  ancient  writers 
of  their  kind  :  as  in  the  Lord  of  lonuille,  familiar  unto  Saint 
Lewis,  Eginard,  Chancellor  unto  Charlemaine  ;  and  of  more 
fresh  memorie  in  Philip  de  Comines.  This  is  rather  a 
declamation  or  pleading  for  king  Francis  against  the 
Emperour  Charles  the  fifth,  than  an  Historic.  I  will  not 
beleeve,  they  have  altered  or  changed  any  thing  concerning 
the  generalise  of  matters,  but  rather  to  wrest  and  turne  the 
judgement  of  the  events,  many  times  against  reason,  to  our 
advantage,  and  to  omit  whatsoever  they  supposed,  to  be 
doubtfull  or  ticklish  in  their  masters  life  :  they  have  made 
profession  of  it,  witnesse  the  recoylings  of  the  Lords  of 
Momorancy  and  Byron,  which  therein  are  forgotten  ;  and 
which  is  more,  you  shall  not  so  much  as  find  the  name  of  the 
Ladie  of  Estampes  mentioned  at  all.  A  man  may  some 
times  colour,  and  haply  hide  secret  actions,  but  absolutely  to 
conceal  that  which  all  the  world  knoweth,  and  especially  such 
things  as  have  drawne-on  publike  effects,  and  of  such  conse- 
108 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

quence,  it  is  an  inexcusable  defect,  or  as  1  may  say  unpardon-  CHAPTER 

able  oversight.     To  conclude,   whosoever  desireth   to  have 

perfect   information   and    knowledge    of   king    Francis    the 

first,  and  of  the  things  hapned  in  his  time,  let  him  addresse 

himselfe  elsewhere,  if  he  will  give  any  credit  unto  me.     The 

profit  he  may  reap  here,  is  by  the  particular  destruction  of 

the  battels  and   exploits  of  warre,   wherein  these    Gentle 

men    were   present  ;    some    privie   conferences,  speeches,  or 

secret   actions  of  some   Princes,  that  then  lived,  and   the 

practices    managed,    or   negotiations    directed    by   the 

Lord  of  Langeay,  in  whom  doubtlesse  are  verie 

many  things,  well-worthie  to  be  knowne,  and 

diverse  discourses  not  vulgare. 


THE    ELEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Crueltie. 

|E  thinks  vertue  is  another  manner  of  thing, 
and  much  more  noble  than  the  inclina 
tions  unto  goodnesse,  which  in  us  are 
ingendered.  Mindes  well  borne,  and 
directed  by  themselves,  follow  one  same 
path,  and  in  their  actions  represent  the 
same  visage,  that  the  vertuous  doe.  But 
vertue  importeth,  and  soundeth  somewhat 
I  wot  not  what  greater  and  more  active,  than  by  an  happy 
complexion,  gently  and  peaceably,  to  suffer  it  selfe  to  be  led 
or  drawne,  to  follow  reason.  He  that  through  a  naturall 
facilitie,  and  genuine  mildnesse,  should  neglect  or  contemne 
injuries  received,  should  no  doubt  performe  a  rare  action, 
and  worthy  commendation  :  But  he  who  being  toucht  and 
stung  to  the  quicke,  with  any  wrong  or  offence  received, 
should  arme  himselfe  with  reason  against  this  furiously-blind 
desire  of  revenge,  and  in  the  end  after  a  great  conflict,  yeeld 
himselfe  master  over-it,  should  doubtlesse  doe  much  more. 
The  first  should  doe  well,  the  other  vertuously  :  the  one 
action  might  be  termed  goodnesse,  the  other  vertue.  For, 
It  seemeth,  that  the  verie  name  of  vertue  presupposeth 

109 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  difficultie,  and  inferreth  resistance,  and  cannot  well  exercise 
XI  .  it  selfe  without  an  enemie.  It  is  peradventure  the  reason 
Crueltie  w^y  we  ca^  QQJ  good,  mightie,  liberall,  and  just,  but  we 
terme  him  not  vertuous.  His  workes  are  all  voluntarie, 
unforced,  and  without  compulsion.  Of  Philosophers,  not 
onely  Stoicks,  but  also  Epicurians  (which  endearing  I 
borrow  of  the  common-received  opinion,  which  is  false)  what 
soever  the  nimble  saying  or  wittie  quipping  of  Arcesilaus 
implieth,  who  answered  the  man  that  upbraided  him,  how 
divers  men  went  from  his  schoole  to  the  Epicurian,  but  none 
came  from  thence  to  him  :  I  easily  beleeve-it  (said  he)  for, 
Of  cocks  are  many  capons  made,  but  no  man  could  ever 
yet  make  a  cocke  of  a  capon.  For  truly,  in  constancie, 
and  rigor  of  opinions,  and  strictnesse  of  precepts,  the 
Epicurian  Sect  doth  in  no  sort  yeeld  to  the  Stoicke.  And  a 
Stoike  acknowledging  a  better  faith,  than  those  disputers, 
who  to  contend  with  Epicurus,  and  make  sport  with  him, 
make  him  to  infer  and  say  what  he  never  meant,  wresting 
and  wyre-drawing  his  words  to  a  contrarie  sense,  arguing  and 
silogizing  by  the  Grammarians  privilege,  another  meaning, 
by  the  manner  of  his  speech,  and  another  opinion,  than  that 
they  know  he  had,  either  in  his  minde,  or  manners,  saith, 
that  he  left  to  be  an  Epicurian,  for  this  one  consideration 
amongst  others,  that  he  findeth  their  pitch  to  be  over-high 
and  inaccessible :  Et  ij  qui  (f)L\tj8vvoL  vocantur,  sunt 
(j)i\oKa\oL  et  <f)L\o$iKaioi,  omnesque  virtutes  et  colunt  et 
retinent.  '  And  those  that  are  called  lovers  of  pleasure,  are 
'  lovers  of  honestie  and  justice,  and  doe  both  reverence  and 
c  retaine  all  sorts  of  vertue.1  Of  Stoicke  and  Epicurian 
Philosophers,  I  say,  there  are  divers,  who  have  judged,  that 
it  was  not  sufficient  to  have  the  minde  well  placed,  well 
ordered,  and  well  disposed  unto  vertue  ;  it  was  not  enough 
to  have  our  resolutions  and  discourse  beyond  all  the  affronts 
and  checks  of  fortune  ;  but  that  moreover,  it  was  verie 
requisite,  to  seeke  for  occasions,  whereby  a  man  might  come 
to  the  triall  of  it :  They  will  diligently  quest  and  seek  out 
for  paine,  smart,  necessitie,  want,  and  contempt,  that  so  they 
may  combat  them,  and  keep  their  minde  in  breath  :  Multum 
sibi  adjicit  virtus  lacessitce.  'Vertue  provoked  addes  much 
'  to  it  selfe.'  It  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  Epaminondas 
110 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

(who  was  of  a  third  sect)  by  a  verie  lawfull  way  refuseth  CHAPTER 
some  riches,  fortune  had  put  into  his  hands,  to  the  end  (as  XI 

he  saith)  he  might  have  cause  to  strive  and  resist  povertie,    ( 
in  which  want  and  extremitie  he  ever  continued  after. 

Socrates  did  in  my  minde  more  undantedly  enure  himselfe 
to  this  humor,  maintaining  for  his  exercise  the  peevish  fro- 
wardnesse  of  his  wife,  than  which  no  essay  can  be  more  vex- 
full,  and  is  a  continuall  fighting  at  the  sharpe.  Metellus  of 
all  the  Romane  Senators  (he  onely  having  undertaken  with 
the  power  of  vertue,  to  endure  the  violence  of  Saturninus 
Tribune  of  the  people  in  Rome,  who  by  maine  force  went 
about  to  have  a  most  unjust  law  passe  in  favor  of  the  Com- 
munaltie :  by  which  opposition,  having  incurred  all  the 
capital  paines,  that  Saturninus  had  imposed  on  such  as 
should  refuse  it)  intertained  those  that  led  him  to  the  place 
of  execution,  with  such  speeches  :  That  to  doe  evill  was  a 
thing  verie  easie,  and  too  demissely  base,  and  to  doe  well 
where  was  no  danger,  was  a  common  thing ;  but  to  doe  well, 
where  was  both  peril!  and  opposition,  was  the  peculiar  office 
of  a  man  of  vertue.  These  words  of  Metellus  doe  clearely 
represent  unto  us,  what  I  would  have  verified ;  which  is,  that 
vertue  rejecteth  facilitie  to  be  her  companion  :  And  that  an 
easefull,  pleasant,  and  declining  way,  by  which  the  regular 
steps  of  a  good  inclination  of  nature,  are  directed,  is  not  the 
way  of  true  vertue.  She  requireth  a  craggie,  rough,  and 
thornie  way  ;  She  would  either  have  strange  difficulties  to 
wrestle  withall  (as  that  of  Metellus)  by  whose  nieanes  fortune 
her  selfe  is  pleased  to  breake  the  roughnesse  of  his  course  ; 
or  inward  encombrances,  as  the  disordinate  appetites  and 
imperfections  of  our  condition  bring  unto  her.  Hitherto  I 
have  come  at  good  ease  ;  but  at  the  end  of  this  discourse, 
one  thing  commeth  into  my  minde,  which  is,  that  the  soule 
of  Socrates,  which  is  absolute  the  perfectest  that  ever  came 
to  my  knowledge,  would,  according  to  my  accompt,  prove  a 
soule  deserving  but  little  commendation  :  For,  I  can  perceive 
no  manner  of  violence  or  vicious  concupisence  in  him  :  I  can 
imagine  no  manner  of  difficultie  or  compulsion  in  the  whole 
course  of  his  vertue.  I  know  his  reason  so  powerfull,  and  so 
absolute  mistresse  over  him,  that  she  can  never  give  him  way 
to  any  vicious  desire,  and  will  not  suffer  it  so  much  as  to 

111 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  breed  in  him.  To  a  vertue  so  exquisit,  and  so  high-raised  as 
XI  his  is,  I  can  perswade  nothing.  Me  thinkes  I  see  it  march 

3  with  a  victorious  and  triumphant  pace,  in  pornpe,  and  at 
ease,  without  let  or  disturbance.  If  vertue  cannot  shine  but 
by  resisting  contrarie  appetites,  shall  we  then  say,  it  cannot 
passe  without  the  assistance  of  vice,  and  oweth  him  this, 
that  by  his  meanes  it  attaineth  to  honour  and  credit  ?  What 
should  also  betide  of  that  glorious  and  generous  Epicurian 
voluptuousnesse,  that  makes  accompt,  effeminately  to  pamper 
vertue  in  her  lap,  and  there  wantonly  to  entertaine  it, 
allowing  it  for  her  recreation,  shame,  reproch,  agues,  povertie, 
death,  and  tortures  ?  If  I  presuppose,  that  perfect  vertue 
is  knowne  by  combating  sorrow,  and  patiently  under-going 
paine,  by  tolerating  the  fits  and  agonies  of  the  gout,  without 
stirring  out  of  his  place  ;  if  for  a  necessarie  object,  I  appoint 
her  sharpnesse  and  difficultie  ;  what  shall  become  of  that 
vertue,  which  hath  attained  so  high  a  degree,  as  it  doth  not 
onely  despise  all  manner  of  paine,  but  rather  rejoyceth  at-it, 
and  when  a  strong  fit  of  the  collike  shall  assaile-it,  to  cause 
it  selfe  to  be  tickled  ;  as  that  is  which  the  Epicurians  have 
established,  and  whereof  divers  amongst  them  have  by  their 
actions  left  most  certaine  proofes  unto  us  ?  As  also  others 
have,  whom  in  effect  I  finde  to  have  exceeded  the  verie  rules 
of  their  discipline  :  witnesse  Cato  the  yonger  ;  when  I  see 
him  die,  tearing  and  mangling  his  entrails  ;  I  cannot  simply 
content  my  selfe  to  beleeve,  that  at  that  time,  he  had  his 
soule  wholy  exempted  from  all  trouble,  or  free  from  vexation: 
I  cannot  imagine,  he  did  onely  maintaine  himselfe  in  this 
march  or  course,  which  the  rules  of  the  Stoike  sect  had 
ordained  unto  him,  setled,  without  some  alteration  or 
motion,  and  impassibilitie.  There  was,  in  my  conceit,  in  this 
mans  vertue  overmuch  cheerefulnesse,  and  youthfulnesse  to 
stay  there.  I  verily  beleeve,  he  felt  a  kind  of  pleasure  and 
sensualitie  in  so  noble  an  action,  and  that  therein  he  more 
pleased  himselfe,  than  in  any  other,  he  ever  performed  in  his 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  life.  Sic  abijt  e  vita,  ut  causam  moriendi  nactum  se  esse 
gander et.  '  So  departed  he  his  life,  that  he  rejoyced  to  have 
6  found  an  occasion  of  death.'  I  doe  so  constantly  beleeve-it, 
that  I  make  a  doubt,  whether  he  would  have  had  the 
occasion  of  so  noble  an  exploit  taken  from  him.  And  if  the 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

goodnesse  which  induced  him  to  embrace  publike  commo-  CHAPTER 

dities    more    than    his    owne,  did    not  bridle  me,  I  should          XI 

easily  fall  into  this  opinion,  that  he  thought  himselfe  greatly    ( 

beholding    unto    fortune,  to  have  put   his  vertue    unto    so 

noble  a  triall,  and  to  have  favoured  that  robber,  to  tread 

the  ancient  libertie  of  his  Countrie  under  foot.     In  which 

action  me  thinks   I   read   a   kinde   of  unspeakable  joy  in 

his  minde,  and  a  motion  of  extraordinarie  pleasure,  joyned 

to  a  manlike  voluptuousnesse,  at  what  time  it  beheld  the 

worthinesse,  and   considered   the  generositie  and    haughti- 

nesse  of  his  enterprise, 

Deliberata  morte  ferocior.  HOR.  i.  Od. 

Then  most  in  fiercenesse  did  he  passe,  ™ V11-  29' 

When  he  of  death  resolved  was. 

not  urged  or  set-on  by  any  hope  of  glorie,  as  the  popular 
and  effeminate  judgements  have  judged  :  For,  that  considera 
tion  is  over  base,  to  touch  so  generous,  so  haughtie,  and  so 
constant  a  heart ;  but  for  the  beautie  of  the  thing  it  selfe  in 
it  selfe,  which  he,  who  managed  all  the  springs,  and  directed 
all  the  wards  thereof,  saw  much  more  clearer,  and  in  it^s  per 
fection,  than  we  can  doe.  Philosophie  hath  done  me  a 
pleasure  to  judge,  that  so  honorable  an  action,  had  been  un- 
decently  placed  in  any  other  life,  than  in  Catoes ;  and  that 
onely  unto  his  it  appertained  to  make  such  an  end.  There 
fore  did  he  with  reason  perswade  both  his  sonne,  and  the 
Senators  that  accompanied  him,  to  provide  otherwise  for 
themselves.  Catoni  quum  incredibilem  natura  tribmsset 
gravitatem,  eamque  ipse  perpetua  constantia  roboravisset, 
semperque  in  proposito  consilio  permansisset :  moriendum 
potius  quam  tyranni  vultus  aspiciendus  erat.  c  Whereas 
4  nature  had  affoorded  Cato  an  incredible  gravitie,  and  he 
'  had  strengthned  it  by  continuall  constancie,  and  ever  had 
'  stood  firme  in  his  purposed  desseignes,  rather  to  die  than 
'  behold  the  Tyrants  face.'  Each  death  should  be  such  as 
the  life  hath  been.  By  dying  we  become  no  other  than  we 
were.  I  ever  interpret  a  mans  death  by  his  life.  And  if  a 
man  shall  tell  me  of  any  one  undanted  in  apparance,  joyned 
unto  a  weake  life  ;  I  imagine  it  to  proceed  of  some  weake 
cause,  and  sutable  to  his  life.  The  ease  therefore  of  his 
P 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  death,  and  the  facilitie  he  had  acquired  by  the  vigor  of  his 

XI  minde,  shall  we  say,  it  ought  to  abate  something  of  the 

Crueltie    lugtre  of  hig  vertue  ?     And  wbich  of  tnose>  that  have  their 

spirits  touched,  be  it  never  so  little,  with  the  true  tincture 
of  Philosophic,  can  content  himselfe  to  imagine  Socrates, 
onely,  free  from  feare  and  passion,  in  the  accident  of  his 
imprisonment,  of  his  fetters,  and  of  his  condemnation  ?  And 
who  doth  not  perceive  in  him,  not  onely  constancie  and 
resolution  (which  were  ever  his  ordinarie  qualities)  but  also 
a  kinde  of  I  wot  not  what  new  contentment,  and  carelesse 
rejoycing  in  his  last  behaviour,  and  discourses  ?  By  the 
startling  at  the  pleasure,  which  he  feeleth  in  clawing  of  his 
legges,  after  his  fetters  were  taken-off ;  cloth  he  not  mani 
festly  declare  an  equall  glee  and  joy  in  his  soule,  for  being 
rid  of  his  former  incommodities,  and  entring  into  the  know 
ledge  of  things  to  come  ?  Cato  shall  pardon  me  (if  he  please) 
his  death  is  more  tragicall,  and  further  extended,  whereas 
this  in  a  certaine  manner  is  more  faire  and  glorious. 
Aristippus  answered  those,  that  bewailed  the  same  ;  When  I 
die,  I  pray  the  Gods  send  me  such  a  death.  A  man  shall 
plainly  perceive  in  the  minds  of  these  two  men,  and  of  such 
as  imitate  them  (for  I  make  a  question  whether  ever  they 
could  be  matched)  so  perfect  an  habitude  unto  vertue,  that 
it  was  even  converted  into  their  complexion.  It  is  no  longer 
a  painfull  vertue,  nor  by  the  ordinances  of  reason,  for  the 
maintaining  of  which,  their  minde  must  be  strengthned  :  It 
is  the  verie  essence  of  their  soule  ;  it  is  her  naturall  and 
ordinarie  habit.  They  have  made  it  such,  by  a  long  exercise 
and  observing  the  rules  and  precepts  of  Philosophie,  having 
lighted  upon  a  faire  and  rich  nature.  Those  vicious  passions, 
which  breed  in  us,  finde  no  entrance  in  them.  The  vigor 
and  constancie  of  their  soules,  doth  suppresse  and  extinguish 
all  manner  of  concupiscences,  so  soone  as  they  but  begin  to 
move.  Now  that  it  be  not  more  glorious,  by  an  undaunted 
and  divine  resolution,  to  hinder  the  growth  of  temptations, 
and  for  a  man  to  frame  himselfe  to  vertue,  so  that  the  verie 
seeds  of  vice  be  cleane  rooted  out ;  than  by  mayne  force  to 
hinder  their  progresse  ;  and  having  suffred  himselfe  to  be 
surprised  by  the  first  assaults  of  passions,  to  arme  and  bandie 
himselfe,  to  stay  their  course  and  to  suppresse  them  :  And 
114 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

that  this  second  effect  be  not  also  much  fairer,  than  to  be  CHAPTER 
simply  stored  with  a  facile  and  gentle  nature,  and  of  it  selfe  XI 

distasted  and  in  dislike  with  licentiousnesse  and  vice,  I  am  ( 
perswaded  there  is  no  doubt.  For,  this  third  and  last 
manner,  seemeth  in  some  sort,  to  make  a  man  innocent,  but 
not  vertuous,  free  from  doing  ill,  but  not  sufficiently  apt  to 
doe  well.  Seeing  this  condition  is  so  neere  unto  imperfec 
tion  and  weaknesse,  that  I  know  not  well  how  to  cleare  their 
confines  and  distinctions.  The  verie  names  of  Goodnesse 
and  innocentie,  are  for  this  respect  in  some  sort  names  of  con 
tempt.  I  see  that  many  vertues,  as  chastitie,  sobrietie,  and 
temperance,  may  come  unto  us  by  meanes  of  corporall  defects 
and  imbecilitie.  Constancie  in  dangers  (if  it  may  be  termed 
constancie)  contempt  of  death,  patiencie  in  misfortunes,  may 
happen,  and  are  often  seen  in  men,  for  want  of  Good  judge 
ment  in  such  accidents,  and  that  they  are  not  apprehended 
for  such  as  they  are  indeed.  Lacke  of  apprehension  and 
stupiditie  doe  sometimes  counterfeit  vertuous  effects.  As  I 
have  often  seen  come  to  passe,  that  some  men  are  commended, 
for  things  they  rather  deserve  to  be  blamed.  An  Italian 
gentleman  did  once  hold  this  position  in  my  presence,  to  the 
prejudice  and  disadvantage  of  his  nation  ;  That  the  subtiltie 
of  the  Italians,  and  the  vivacitie  of  their  conceptions  was  so 
great,  that  they  foresaw  such  dangers  and  accidents  as  might 
betide  them  so  far-off,  that  it  was  not  to  be  deemed  strange, 
if  in  times  of  warre,  they  were  often  seene  to  provide  for 
their  safetie,  yea,  before  they  had  perceived  the  danger  : 
That  we  and  the  Spaniards,  who  were  not  so  warie  and 
subtill,  went  further  ;  and  that  before  we  could  be  frighted 
with  any  perill,  we  must  be  induced  to  see  it  with  our  eyes, 
and  feel  it  with  our  hands,  and  that  even  then  we  had  no 
more  hold  :  But  that  the  Germanes  and  Switzers,  more 
shallow  and  leaden-headed,  had  scarce  the  sense  and  wit  to 
re-advise  themselves,  at  what  time  they  were  even  over 
whelmed  with  miserie,  and  the  axe  readie  to  fall  on  their 
heads.  It  was  peradventure  but  in  jest,  that  he  spake-it,  yet 
is  it  most  true,  that  in  the  art  of  warre-fare,  new  trained 
Souldiers,  and  such  as  are  but  novices  in  the  trade,  doe  often 
headlong,  and  hand  over  head  cast  themselves  into  dangers, 
with  more  inconsideration,  than  afterward  when  they  have 

115 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  seene  and  endured  the  first  shocke,  and  are  better  trained  in 

XI  the  schoole  of  perils. 

Of  Crueltie 

— hand  ignarus,  quantum  nova  gloria  in  armis, 
Et  prcedulce  decus  primo  certamine  possit. 

Not  ignorant,  how  much  in  armes  new  praise, 
And  sweetest  honour,  in  first  conflict  weighes. 

Lo  here  the  reason  why  when  we  judge  of  a  particular 
action,  we  must  first  consider  many  circumstances,  and 
throughly  observe  the  man,  that  hath  produced  the  same 
before  we  name  and  censure  it.  But  to  speake  a  word  of  my 
selfe :  I  have  sometimes  noted  my  friends  to  terme  that 
wisdome  in  me,  which  was  but  meere  fortune ;  and  to  deeme 
that  advantage  of  courage  and  patience,  that  was  advantage 
of  judgement  and  opinion:  and  to  attribute  one  title  for 
another  unto  me,  sometimes  to  my  profit,  and  now  and  then 
to  my  losse.  As  for  the  rest,  I  am  so  far  from  attaining 
unto  that  chiefe  and  most  perfect  degree  of  excellencie, 
where  a  habitude  is  made  of  vertue,  that  even  of  the  second, 
I  have  made  no  great  triall.  I  have  not  greatly  strived  to 
bridle  the  desires,  wherewith  I  have  found  my  selfe  urged 
and  pressed.  My  vertue,  is  a  vertue,  or  to  say  better  inno- 
cencie,  accidentall  and  casuall.  Had  I  been  borne  with  a 
lesse  regular  complexion,  I  imagine  my  state  had  been  verie 
pittifull,  and  it  would  have  gon  hard  with  me :  for,  I  could 
never  perceive  any  great  constancie  in  my  soule,  to  resist 
and  undergoe  passions,  had  they  been  any  thing  violent.  I 
cannot  foster  quarels,  or  endure  cotentions  in  my  house. 
So  am  I  not  greatly  beholding  unto  my  selfe,  in  that  I  am 
exempted  from  many  vices : 

HOR.  i.  Sat.  — **  vitijs  mediocribus,  et  mea  panels 

vi.  65.  Mendosa  est  natura,  alioqui  recta  velut  si 

Egregio  inspersos  reprehendas  cor  pore  ncevos. 

If  in  a  few  more  fault's  my  nature  faile, 
Right  otherwise  :  as  if  that  you  would  raile 
On  prettie  moles  well  placed, 
On  bodie  seemely  graced. 

I  am  more  endebted  to  my  fortune,  than  to  my  reason  for 
it :  Shee  hath  made  me  to  be  borne  of  a  race  famous  for 
integritie  and  honestie,  and  of  a  verie  good  father.  I  wot 

116 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

not  well  whether  any  part  of  his  humours  have  descended  CHAPTER 
into  me,  or  whether  the  domestike  examples,  and  good  in-          XI 
stitution  of  my  infancie  have  insensibly  set  their  helping    ( 
hand  unto  it ;  or  whether  I  were  otherwise  so  borne : 

Sen  Libra,  sen  me  Scorpius  aspicit  H9.R>  "•  Od' 

Formidolosus ,  pars  violentior  xv"-  T  7- 

Natalis  horce,  seu  tyrannus 

Hesperice  Capricornus  undce. 

Whether  the  chiefe  part  of  my  birth-houre  were 
Ascendent  Libra,  or  Scorpius  full  of  feare, 
Or  in  my  Horoscope  were  Capricorne, 
Whose  tyrannic  neere  westerne  Seas  is  borne. 

But  so  it  is,  that  naturally  of  my  selfe,  I  abhorre  and 
detest  all  manner  of  vices.  The  answer  of  Antisthenes  to 
one,  that  demanded  of  him,  which  was  the  best  thing  to  be 
learned  :  '  To  unlearne  evill,"*  seemed  to  be  fixed  on  this  image, 
or  to  have  an  ayme  at  this.  I  abhorre  them  (I  say)  with  so 
naturall,  and  so  innated  an  opinion,  that  the  very  same  in 
stinct  and  impression,  which  I  suckt  from  my  nurse,  I  have 
so  kept,  that  no  occasions  could  ever  make  me  alter  the 
same :  No,  not  mine  owne  discourses,  which  because  they 
have  been  somewhat  lavish  in  noting  or  taxing  something  of 
the  common  course,  could  easily  induce  me  to  some  actions, 
which  this  my  naturall  inclination  makes  me  to  hate.  I  will 
tell  you  a  wonder,  I  will  tell  it  you  indeed  :  I  thereby  find 
in  many  things,  more  stay  and  order  in  my  manners,  than  in 
my  opinion :  and  my  concupiscence  lesse  debauched,  than 
my  reason.  Aristippus  established  certaine  opinions  so 
bold,  in  favour  of  voluptuousnesse  and  riches,  that  he  made 
all  Philosophic  to  mutinie  against  him.  But  concerning  his 
manners,  Dionysius  the  tyrant,  having  presented  him  with 
three  faire  young  Wenches,  that  he  might  chuse  the  fairest ; 
he  answered  he  would  chuse  them  all  three,  and  that  Paris 
had  verie  ill  successe,  forsomuch  as  he  had  preferred  one 
above  her  fellowes.  But  they  being  brought  to  his  owne 
house,  he  sent  them  backe  againe,  without  tasting  them. 
His  servant  one  day  carrying  store  of  money  after  him,  and 
being  so  over-charged  with  the  weight  of  it,  that  he  com 
plained,  his  Master  commanded  him,  to  cast  so  much  therof 
away,  as  troubled  him.  And  Epicurus,  whose  positions  are 

117 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  irreligious  and  delicate,  demeaned  himselfe  in  his  life  verie 
XI  .  laboriously,  and  devoutly.  He  wrote  to  a  friend  of  his,  that 
Crueltie  ^e  }jveci  but  with  browne  bread  and  water,  and  entreated 
him  to  send  him  a  piece  of  cheese,  against  the  time  he  was 
to  make  a  solemne  feast.  May  it  be  true,  that  to  be  per 
fectly  good,  we  must  be  so  by  an  hidden,  naturall,  and 
universall  proprietie,  without  law,  reason,  and  example  ? 
The  disorders  and  excesses,  wherein  I  have  found  my  selfe 
engaged,  are  not  (God  be  thanked)  of  the  worst.  I  have 
rejected  and  condemned  them  in  my  selfe,  according  to  their 
worth;  for,  my  judgement  was  never  found  to  be  infected 
by  them.  And  on  the  other  side,  I  accuse  them  more 
rigorously  in  my  selfe,  than  in  another.  But  that  is  all :  as 
for  the  rest,  I  applie  but  little  resistance  unto  them,  and 
suffer  my  selfe  over-easily  to  encline  to  the  other  side  of  the 
Ballance,  except  it  be  to  order  and  empeach  them  from 
being  commixt  with  others,  which  (if  a  man  take  not  good 
heed  unto  himselfe)  for  the  most  part  entertaine  and  enter- 
chaine  themselves  the  one  with  the  other.  As  for  mine,  I 
have  as  much  as  it  hath  laine  in  my  power,  abridged  them, 
and  kept  them  as  single,  and  as  alone  as  I  could : 

luv.  Sat.  viii.  —nee  ultra 

1 64.  Error  em  foveo.  — 

Nor  doe  I  cherish  any  more, 
The  error  which  I  bred  before. 

For,  as  touching  the  Stoikes  opinion,  who  say,  that  when 
the  wise  man  worketh,  he  worketh  with  all  his  vertues  to 
gether  ;  howbeit,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  action,  there 
be  one  more  apparant  than  other  (to  which  purpose  the 
similitude  of  mans  bodie  might,  in  some  sort,  serve  their 
turne  ;  for,  the  action  of  choler  cannot  exercise  it  selfe,  except 
all  the  humours  set-to  their  helping-hand,  although  choler 
be  predominant)  if  thence  they  will  draw  alike  consequence, 
that  when  the  offender  trespasseth,  he  doth  it  with  all  the 
vices  together.  I  doe  not  so  easily  beleeve  them,  or  else  I 
understand  them  not ;  for,  in  effect,  I  feel  the  contrarie. 
They  are  sharpe-wittie  subtilties,  and  without  substance, 
about  which  Philosophic  doth  often  busie  it  selfe.  Some 
vices  I  shun  ;  but  othersome  I  eschew  as  much  as  any  Saint 

118 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

can  doe.  The  Peripatetikes  doe  also  disavow  this  connexitie,  CHAPTER 
and  indissoluble  knitting  together.  And  Aristotle  is  of  XI 
opinion,  That  a  wise  and  just  man  may  be  both  intemperate  { 
and  incontinent.  Socrates  avowed  unto  them,  who  in  his 
Phisiognomie  perceived  some  inclination  unto  vice,  that 
indeed  it  was  his  naturall  propension,  but  that  by  discipline 
he  had  corrected  the  same.  And  the  familiar  friends  of  the 
Philosopher  Stilpo  were  wont  to  say,  that  being  borne  sub 
ject  unto  wine  and  women,  he  had,  by  studie,  brought  him- 
selfe  to  abstaine  from  both.  On  the  otherside,  what  good.  I 
have,  I  have  it  by  the  lot  of  my  birth  :  I  have  it  neither  by 
law  nor  prescription,  nor  by  any  apprentiship.  The  inno- 
cencie  that  is  in  me,  is  a  kinde  of  simple-plaine  innocencie, 
without  vigor  or  art.  Amongst  all  other  vices,  there  is  none 
I  hate  more,  than  crueltie,  both  by  nature  and  judgement, 
as  the  extremest  of  all  vices.  But  it  is  with  such  an  yearn 
ing  and  faint-hartednesse,  that  if  I  see  but  a  chickins  necke 
puld  off,  or  a  pigge  stickt,  I  cannot  chuce  but  grieve,  and  I 
cannot  well  endure  a  seelie  dew-bedabled  hare  to  groane, 
when  she  is  seized  upon  by  the  houndes ;  although  hunting 
be  a  violent  sport.  Those  that  are  to  withstand  voluptuous- 
nesse,  doe  willingly  use  this  argument,  to  shew,  it  is  altogether 
vicious  and  unreasonable  :  That  where  she  is  in  her  greatest 
prime  and  chiefe  strength,  she  doth  so  over-sway  us,  that 
reason  can  have  no  accesse  unto  us,  and  for  a  further  triall, 
alleage  the  experience  wee  feel  and  have  of  it,  in  our  acquaint 
ance  or  copulation  with  women. 

— cum  iam  preesagit  gaudia  corpus  LUCR.  iv.  1097. 

Atque  in  eo  est  Venus,  ut  muliebria  conserat  arva. 

When  now  the  bodie  doth  light-joyes  fore-know, 
And  Venus  set  the  womans  fields  to  sow. 

Where  they  thinke  pleasure  doth  so  far  transport  us 
beyond  our  selves,  that  our  Discourse,  then  altogether  over 
whelmed,  and  our  reason  wholie  ravished  in  the  gulfe  of 
sensualitie,  cannot  by  any  meanes  discharge  her  function.  I 
know  it  may  be  otherwise  :  And  if  a  man  but  please,  he  may 
sometimes,  even  upon  the  verie  instant,  cast  his  mind  on 
other  conceits.  But  she  must  be  strained  to  a  higher  key, 
and  needfully  pursued  :  I  know  a  man  may  gourmandize  the 

119 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  earnest  and  thought-confounding  violence  of  that  pleasure: 
XI  for  I  may  with  some  experience  speake  of  it ;  and  I  have  not 
Crueltie  founc[  Venus  to  be  so  imperious  a  Goddesse,  as  many,  and 
more  reformed  than  my  selfe  witnesse  her  to  be.  I  thinke  it 
not  a  wonder,  as  doth  the  Queene  of  Navarre,  in  one  of  the 
Tales  of  her  Heptameron  (which  respecting  the  subject  it 
treateth-of,  is  a  verie  prettie  booke)  nor  doe  I  deeme  it 
a  matter  of  extreame  difficultie,  for  a  man  to  weare-out  a 
whole  night,  in  all  opportunitie  and  libertie,  in  companie  of 
a  faire  Mistresse,  long  time  before  sued-unto,  and  by  him 
desired ;  religiously  keeping  his  word,  if  he  have  engaged 
himselfe,  to  be  contented  with  simple  kisses  and  plaine 
touching.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  the  example  of  the  sport 
in  hunting  would  more  fit  the  same :  wherein  as  there  is 
lesse  pleasure,  so  there  is  more  distraction  and  surprising, 
whereby  our  reason  being  amazed,  looseth  the  leasure  to  pre 
pare  her  selfe  against  it :  when  as  after  a  long  questing  and 
beating  for  some  game,  the  beast  doth  suddainly  start,  or 
rowze  up  before  us,  and  haply  in  such  a  place,  where  we  least 
expected  the  same.  That  suddaine  motion,  and  riding,  and 
the  earnestnesse  of  showting,  jubeting  and  hallowing,  still 
ringing  in  our  eares,  would  make  it  verie  hard  for  those,  who 
love  that  kind  of  close  or  chamber-hunting,  at  that  verie 
instant,  to  withdraw  their  thoughts  else-where.  And  Poets 
make  Diana  victoriously  to  triumph  both  over  the  fire 
brand  and  arrowes  of  Cupid. 

HOR.  Epod.  Quis  non  malarum  quas  amor  curas  habet 

ii.  37.  Haec  inter  obliviacitur  ? 

While  this  is  doing,  who  doth  not  forget 

The  wicked  cares  wherewith  Loves  heart  doth  fret  ? 

But  to  returne  to  my  former  discourse,  I  have  a  verie 
feeling  and  tender  compassion  of  other  mens  afflictions,  and 
should  more  easily  weep  for  companie  sake,  if  possiblie  for 
any  occasion  whatsoever,  I  could  shed  teares.  There  is 
nothing  sooner  moveth  teares  in  me,  than  to  see  others 
weepe,  not  onely  fainedly,  but  howsoever,  whether  truly  or 
forcedly.  I  do  not  greatly  waile  for  the  dead,  but  rather 
envie  them.  Yet  doe  I  much  waile  and  moane  the  dying. 
The  Canibales  and  savage  people  do  not  so  much  offend  me 

120 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

with   roasting  and   eating  of  dead  bodies,  as  those  which  CHAPTER 
torment  and  persecute  the  living.     Let  any  man  be  exe-  XI 

cuted  by  law,  how  deservedly  soever,  I  cannot  endure  to 
behold  the  execution  with  an  unrelenting  eye.  Some  one 
going  about  to  witnesse  the  clemencie  of  lulius  Caesar ;  He 
was  (saith  he)  tractable  and  milde  in  matters  of  revenge. 
Having  compelled  the  Pirates  to  yeeld  themselves  unto  him, 
who  had  before  taken  him  prisoner,  and  put  him  to  ransome, 
forasmuch  as  he  had  threatned  to  have  them  all  crucified,  he 
condemned  them  to  that  kind  of  death,  but  it  was  after  he 
had  caused  them  to  be  strangled.  Philomon  his  secretarie, 
who  would  have  poysoned  him,  had  no  sharper  punishment 
of  him,  than  an  ordinarie  death.  Without  mentioning  the 
Latin  Author,  who  for  a  testimonie  of  clemencie  dareth  to 
alleage,  the  onely  killing  of  those,  by  whom  a  man  hath 
been  offended,  it  may  easily  be  ghessed,  that  he  is  tainted 
with  vile  and  horrible  examples  of  crueltie,  such  as  Romane 
Tyrants  brought  into  fashion.  As  for  me,  even  in  matters 
of  justice,  Whatsoever  is  beyond  a  simple  death,  I  deeme  it 
to  be  meere  crueltie :  And  especially  amongst  us,  who  ought 
to  have  a  regardfull  respect,  that  their  soules  should  be  sent 
to  heaven,  which  cannot  be,  having  first  by  intolerable 
tortures  agitated,  and  as  it  were  brought  them  to  dispaire. 
A  Souldier,  not  long  since,  being  a  prisoner,  and  perceiving 
from  a  loft  a  Tower,  where  he  was  kept,  that  store  of  people 
flocked  together  on  a  greene,  and  Carpenters  were  busie  at 
worke  to  erect  a  skaffold,  supposing  the  same  to  be  for  him, 
as  one  desperat,  resolved  to  kill  himselfe,  and  searching  up 
and  downe  for  some  thing  to  make  himselfe  away,  found 
nothing  but  an  old  rustic  cart-naile,  which  fortune  presented 
him  with  ;  he  tooke  it,  and  therewithal!,  with  all  the  strength 
he  had,  strooke  and  wounded  himselfe  twice  in  the  throat, 
but  seeing  it  would  not  rid  him  of  life,  he  then  thrust  it 
into  his  bellie  up  to  the  head,  where  he  left  it  fast-sticking. 
Shortly  after,  one  of  his  keepers  comming-in  unto  him,  and 
yet  living,  finding  him  in  that  miserable  plight,  but  weltring 
in  his  goare-blood,  and  readie  to  gaspe  his  last,  told  the 
Magistrates  of  it,  which,  to  prevent  time  before  he  should 
die,  hastned  to  pronounce  sentence  against  him  :  which  when 
he  heard,  and  that  he  was  onely  condemned  to  have  his 
Q  121 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  head  cut-off,  he  seemed  to  take  heart  of  grace  againe,  and 
XI  to  be  sorie  for  what  he  had  done,  and  tooke  some  comfort- 
Of  Crueltie  a^e  jrm^S9  which  before  he  had  refused,  greatly  thanking 
the  Judges  for  his  unhoped  gentle  condemnation :  And  told 
them,  that  for  feare  of  a  more  sharp ly-cruell,  and  intolerable 
death  by  law,  he  had  resolved  to  prevent-it  by  some  violent 
manner  of  death,  having  by  the  preparations  he  had  seen  the 
Carpenters  make,  and  by  gathering  of  people  together,  con 
ceived  an  opinion,  that  they  would  torture  him  with  some 
horrible  torment,  and  seemed  to  be  delivered  from  death 
onely  by  the  change  of  it.  Were  I  worthie  to  give  counsell, 
I  would  have  these  examples  of  rigor,  by  which  superior 
powers  goe  about  to  keep  the  common  people  in  awe,  to  be 
onely  exercised  on  the  bodies  of  criminall  malefactors :  For, 
to  see  them  deprived  of  Christian  buriall,  to  see  them  haled, 
disbowelled,  parboyled,  and  quartered,  might  haply  touch 
the  common  sort  as  much,  as  the  paines,  they  make  the 
living  to  endure :  howbeit  in  effect  it  be  little  or  nothing, 

LUKE  xii.  4.  as  saith  God,  Qul  corpus  occidunt,  et  postea  non  habent  quod 
faciant.  4  Those  that  kill  the  bodie,  but  have  afterwards  no 
'  more  to  doe' :  And  Poets  make  the  horror  of  this  picture 
greatly  to  prevaile,  yea,  and  above  death. 

pic.  Tusc.  Qu.  Heu  reliquias  semiassi  Regis,  denudatis  ossibus, 

i-  Per  terram  sanie  delibutas  fcede  divexarier. 

O  that  the  reliques  of  an  halfe-burn't  King,,  bones  bared, 
On  earth  besmear'd  with  filth,  should  be  so  fouly  marred. 

It  was  my  fortune  to  be  at  Rome,  upon  a  day  that  one 
Catena,  a  notorious  high-way  theefe,  was  executed :  at  his 
strangling  no  man  of  the  companie  seemed  to  be  mooved 
to  any  ruth  ;  but  when  he  came  to  be  quartered,  the  Exe 
cutioner  gave  no  blow  that  was  not  accompanied  with  a 
piteous  voyce,  and  hartie  exclamation,  as  if  every  man  had 
had  a  feeling  sympathie,  or  lent  his  senses  to  the  poore 
mangled  wretch.  Such  inhumane  outrages  and  barbarous 
excesses  should  be  exercised  against  the  rinde,  and  not  prac 
tised  against  the  quicke.  In  a  case  somewhat  like  unto  this, 
did  Artaxerxes  asswage  and  mitigate  the  sharpnesse  of  the 
ancient  lawes  of  Persia,  appointing  that  the  Lords,  which 
had  trespassed  in  their  estate,  whereas  they  were  wont  to  be 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

whipped,  they  should  be  stripped  naked,  and  their  clothes  CHAPTER 
whipped  for  them  :  and  where  they  were  accustomed  to  have  XI 
their  haire  pulled-off,  they  should  onely  have  their  hat  taken  Of  Cruelt 
off.  The  ^Egyptians  so  devout  and  religious,  thought  they 
did  sufficiently  satisfie  divine  Justice,  in  sacrificing  painted 
and  counterfeit  hogges  unto  it :  An  over-hardy  invention,  to 
go  about  with  pictures  and  shadowes  to  appease  God,  a  sub 
stance  so  essentiall  and  divine.  I  live  in  an  age,  wherein  we 
abound  with  incredible  examples  of  this  vice,  through  the 
licentiousnesse  of  our  civill  and  intestine  warres :  And  read 
all  ancient  stories,  be  they  never  so  tragicall,  you  shall  find 
none  to  equall  those,  we  daily  see  practised.  But  that  hath 
nothing  made  me  acquainted  with  it.  I  could  hardly  be 
perswaded,  before  I  had  seene  it,  that  the  world  could  have 
afforded  so  marble-hearted  and  savage-minded  men,  that  for 
the  onely  pleasure  of  murther  would  commit-it ;  then  cut, 
mangle,  and  hacke  other  members  in  pieces :  to  rouze  and 
sharpen  their  wits,  to  invent  unused  tortures  and  unheard-of 
torments ;  to  devise  new  and  unknowne  deaths  and  that  in 
cold  blood,  without  any  former  enmitie  or  quarrell,  or  with 
out  any  gaine  or  profit ;  and  onely  to  this  end,  that  they 
may  enjoy  the  pleasing  spectacle  of  the  languishing  gestures, 
pitifull  motions,  horror-moving  yellings,  deep  fetcht  groanes, 
and  lamentable  voyces  of  a  dying  and  drooping  man.  For, 
that  is  the  extremest  point  whereunto  the  crueltie  of  man 
may  attaine.  Vt  homo  hominem,  non  iratus,  non  timens,  SEN.  Clem, 
tantum  spectaturus  occidat.  '  That  one  man  should  kill  "•  c-  4- 
'  another,  neither  being  angrie,  nor  afeard,  but  onely  to 
'  looke  on.1  As  for  me,  I  could  never  so  much  as  endure, 
without  remorse  and  griefe,  to  see  a  poore,  sillie,  and  inno 
cent  beast  pursued  and  killed,  which  is  harmelesse  and  void 
of  defence,  and  of  whom  we  receive  no  offence  at  all.  And 
as  it  commonly  hapneth,  that  when  the  Stag  begins  to  be 
embost,  and  finds  his  strength  to  faile-him,  having  no  other 
remedie  left  him,  doth  yeeld  and  bequeath  himselfe  unto  us 
that  pursue  him,  with  teares  suing  to  us  for  mercie, 

— questuque  cruentus  VIRG.  JEn.  vii. 

Atque  imploranti  similis :  521- 

With  blood  from  throat,  and  teares  from  eyes, 
It  seemes  that  he  for  pittie  cryes, 

123 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  was  ever  a  grievous  spectacle  unto  me.     I  seldom  take  any 
XI  beast  alive,  but  I  give  him   his  libertie.     Pythagoras   was 

Crueltie    won^  ^o  OL1y  fishes  of  fishers,  and  birds  of  fowlers  to  set  them 
free  again e. 

OVID.  Metam.  — primoque  a  c&de  ferarum 

xv.  1 06.  Incaluisse  puto  maculatum  sanguine  ferrum. 

And  first  our  blades  in  blood  embrude  I  deeme 
With  slaughter  of  poore  beasts  did  reeking  steeme. 

Such  as  by  nature  shew  themselves  bloodie-minded  towards 
harmlesse  beasts,  witnesse  a  naturall  propension  unto  crueltie. 
After  the  ancient  Romanes  had  once  enured  themselves  with 
out  horror  to  behold  the  slaughter  of  wild  beasts  in  their 
shewes,  they  came  to  the  murther  of  men  and  Gladiators. 
Nature  (I  feare  me)  hath  of  her  owne  selfe  added  unto  man 
a  certaine  instinct  to  humanitie.  No  man  taketh  delight 
to  see  wild  beasts  sport  and  wantonly  to  make  much  one  of 
another :  Yet  all  are  pleased  to  see  them  tugge,  mangle,  and 
enterteare  one  an  other.  And  lest  any  bodie  should  jeast  at 
this  simphathie,  which  I  have  with  them,  Divinitie  it  selfe 
willeth  us  to  shew  them  some  favour :  And  considering,  that 
one  selfe-same  master  (I  meane  that  incomprehensible  worlds- 
framer)  hath  placed  all  creatures  in  this  his  wondrous  palace 
for  his  service,  and  that  they,  as  well  as  we,  are  of  his  hous- 
hold  :  I  say,  it  hath  some  reason  to  injoyne  us,  to  shew  some 
respect  and  affection  towards  them.  Pythagoras  borrowed 
Metempsychosis  of  the  ^Egyptians,  but  since,  it  hath  been 
received  of  divers  Nations,  and  especially  of  our  Druides  : 

158.  Morte  carent  animce,  semperque  priore  relictd 

Sede,  novis  domibus  vivunt,  habitdmque  receptce. 

Our  death-lesse  soules^  their  former  seats  refrained_, 
In  harbors  new  live  and  lodge  entertained. 

The  Religion  of  our  ancient  Gaules,  inferred,  that  soules 
being  eternall,  ceased  not  to  remove  and  change  place,  from 
one  bodie  to  another:  to  which  fantasie  was  also  entermixed 
some  consideration  of  divine  justice.  For,  according  to  the 
soules  behaviors,  during  the  time  she  had  been  with  Alex 
ander,  they  sayd,  that  God  appointed  it  another  bodie  to 
dwell-in,  either  more  or  lesse  painfull,  and  sutable  to  her 
condition. 

124 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

— muta  ferarum  CHAPTER 
Cogit  vincla  pati,  truculentos  ingerit  ursis,  XI 

Pradonesque  lupis ,  fallaces  vulpibus  addit.  Of  Crueltie 

Atque  ubi  per  varios  annos  per  millefiguras  CLAUD  in 

Egit  letheo  purgatos  flumine  tandem  ™^-  i.  482. 
Rursus  ad  humance  revocat  primordia  forma. 

Dumbe  bauds  of  beasts  he  makes  mens  soules  endure, 

Blood-thirstie  soules  he  doth  to  Beares  enure,  491. 

Craftie  to  Foxes,  to  Woolves  bent  to  rapes  ; 

Thus  when  for  many  yeares,  through  many  shapes, 

He  hath  them  driv'n  in  Lethe  lake  at  last, 

Them  purg'd  he  turn's  to  mans  forme  whence  they  past. 

If  the  soule  had  been  valiant,  they  placed  it  in  the  bodie 
of  a  Lion ;  if  voluptuous,  in  a  Swine ;  if  faint-harted,  in  a 
Stagge,  or  a  Hare  ;  if  malicious  in  a  Foxe,  and  so  of  the  rest, 
untill  that  being  purified  by  this  punishment,  it  reassumed 
and  tooke  the  bodie  of  some  other  man  againe. 

Ipse  ego,  nam  memini,  Troiani  tempore  belli  OVID.  Metam. 

Panthoides  Euphorbus  eram.  xv.  160. 

When  Troy  was  won,  I,  as  1  call  to  mind, 
Euphorbus  was,  and  Panthus  sonne  by  kind. 

Ase  touching  that  alliance  betweene  us  and  beasts,  I  make 
no  great  accompt  of  it,  nor  do  I  greatly  admit  it ;  neither  of 
that  which  divers  Nations,  and  namely  of  the  most  ancient 
and  noble,  who  have  not  onely  received  beasts  into  their 
societie  and  companie,  but  allowed  them  a  place  farre  above 
themselves;  sometimes  deeming  them  to  be  familiars  and 
favored  of  their  Gods,  and  holding  them  in  a  certaine 
awfull  respect  and  reverence  more  than  humane,  and  others 
acknowledging  no  other  God  nor  no  other  Divinity  than 
they.  Beluoe  a  barbaric  propter  beneficium  consecrate?.  Cic.  Nat. 
'  Beasts  by  the  Barbarians  were  made  sacred  for  some  Deor-  *• 
'benefit/ 

— crocodilon  adorut  luv.  Sat.  xv. 

Pars  hfBC,  ilia  pavet  saturam  serpentibus  Ibin,  2. 

Effigies  sacri  hie  nitet  aurea  Cercopitheci. 

This  Country  doth  the  Crocodile  adore, 

That  feares  the  Storke  glutted  with  Serpents  gore, 

The  sacred  Babion  here, 

In  gold  shape  doth  appeare. 

125 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  — hie  piscem  fluminis ,  illic 

XI  Oppida  tota  canem  venerantur. 

Of  Crueltie  A  fish  here  whole  Townes  reverence  most, 

Ivv.Sat.  xv.  7.  A  dog  they  honour  in  that  coast. 

And  the  very  same  interpretation  that  Plutarke  giveth 
unto  this  error,  which  is  very  well  taken,  is  also  honourable 
for  them.  For,  he  saith,  that  (for  example  sake)  it  was 
neither  the  Cat  nor  the  Oxe  that  the  ^Egyptians  adored, 
but  that  in  those  beasts,  they  worshipped  some  image  of 
divine  faculties.  In  this  patience  and  utility,  and  in  that, 
vivacity,  or  (as  our  neighbours  the  Borgonians  with  all 
Germany)  the  impatience  to  see  themselves  shut  up  :  Where 
by  they  represented  the  liberty  which  they  loved  and  adored 
beyond  all  other  divine  faculty,  and  so  of  others.  But  when 
amongst  the  most  moderate  opinions,  I  meet  with  some  dis 
courses  that  goe  about  and  labour  to  shew  the  neere  resem 
blance  betweene  us  and  beasts,  and  what  share  they  have  in 
our  greatest  Privileges,  and  with  how  much  likely-hood  they 
are  compared  unto  us,  truly  1  abate  much  of  our  presumption, 
and  am  easily  removed  from  that  imaginary  soveraigntie 
that  some  give  and  ascribe  unto  us  above  all  other  creatures. 
If  all  that  were  to  be  contradicted,  yet  is  there  a  kinde  of 
respect,  and  a  generall  duty  of  humanity,  which  tieth  us  not 
only  unto  brute  beasts  that  have  life  and  sense,  but  even 
unto  trees  and  plants.  Unto  men  we  owe  lustice,  and  to 
all  other  creatures  that  are  capable  of  it,  grace  and  benignity. 
There  is  a  kinde  of  enter-changeable  commerce  and  mutuall 
bond  betweene  them  and  us.  I  am  not  ashamed  nor  afraid 
to  declare  the  tendernesse  of  my  childish  Nature,  which  is 
such,  that  I  cannot  well  reject  my  Dog,  if  he  chance  (although 
out  of  season)  to  fawne  upon  me,  or  beg  of  me  to  play  with 
him.  The  Turkes  have  almes,  and  certaine  Hospitals 
appointed  for  brute  beasts.  The  Romans  had  a  publike 
care  to  breed  and  nourish  Geese,  by  whose  vigilancy  their 
Capitoll  had  beene  saved.  The  Athenians  did  precizely 
ordaine  that  all  manner  of  Mules  which  had  served  or  beene 
imploied  about  the  building  of  their  Temple  called  Heca- 
tompedon  should  bee  free,  and  suffered  to  feed  wheresover 
they  pleased,  without  any  let  or  impeachment.  The  Agri- 
gen  tines  had  an  ordinary  custome,  seriously  and  solemnly  to 

126 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

bury  all  such  beasts  as  they  had  held  deare ;  as  horses  of  CHAPTER 
rare   worth  and   merit,  speciall   dogs,   choice  or   profitable          XI 
birds,  or  such  as  had  but  served  to  make  their  children  sport. 
And  the  sumptuous  magnificence  which  in  all  other  things 
was  ordinary  and  peculiar  unto  them,  appeared  also  almost 
notably  in  the  stately  sumptuousnesse  and  costly  number  of 
monuments  erected  to  that  end,  which  many  ages  after  have 
endured   and    been   maintained    in   pride    and    state.     The 
^Egyptians  were  wont  to  bury  their  Wolves,   their  Dogs, 
their  Cats,  their  Beares,  and  Crocodiles  in  holy  places,  em 
balming  their  carcasses,  and  at  their  deaths  to  weare  mourn 
ing  weeds  for  them.     Cymon  caused  a  stately  honourable 
tombe  to  be  erected  for  the  Mares,  wherewith  he  had  three 
times  gained  the  prize  at  running  in  the  Olimpike  games. 
Ancient  Xantippus  caused  his  Dog  to  be  enterred  upon  a 
hill  by  the  Sea  shore,  which  ever  since  hath  beene  named  by 
him.      And    Plutarch    (as    himselfe    saith)    made   it  a 
matter  of  conscience,  in   hope   of  a  small  gaine, 
to  sell  or  send  an  Oxe  to  the  shambles  that 
had  served  him  a  long  time. 


THE  TWELFTH   CHAPTER 

An  Apologia  of  Raymond  Sebond. 


NOWLEDGE  is  without  all  contradiction, 
a  most  profitable  and  chiefe  ornament : 
Those  who  despise  it  declare  evidently 
their  sottishnesse  :  Yet  doe  not  I  value  it 
at  so  excessive  a  rate  as  some  have  done  ; 
namely  Herillus  the  Philosopher,  who 
grounded  his  chiefe  felicity  upon  it,  and 
held  that  it  lay  in  her  power  to  make  us 
content  and  wise :  which  I  cannot  beleeve,  nor  that  which 
others  have  said,  that  Knowledge  is  the  mother  of  all  vertue, 
and  that  all  vice  proceedeth  of  ignorance.  Which  if  it  be, 
it  is  subject  to  a  large  interpretation.  My  house  hath  long 
since  ever  stood  open  to  men  of  understanding,  and  is  very 
well  knowne  to  many  of  them  :  for  my  father,  who  com- 

127 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  manded  the  same  fifty  yeeres  and  upward,  set  on  fire  by  that 
XH  .  new  kinde  of  earnestnesse  wherewith  King  Francis  the  first 

ofnRAPmand  im^race(^  Letters,  and  raised  them  unto  credit,  did  with 
Sebond  great  diligence  and  much  cost  endevour  to  purchase  the 
acquaintance  of  learned  men  :  receiving  and  entertaining 
them  as  .holy  persons,  and  who  had  some  particular  inspira 
tion  of  divine  wisdome  ;  collecting  their  sentences  and  dis 
courses  as  if  they  had  beene  Oracles  ;  and  with  so  much 
more  reverence  and  religious  regard  by  how  much  lesse 
authority  hee  had  to  judge  of  them  :  for  hee  had  no  know 
ledge  of  Letters  no  more  than  his  predecessors  before  him. 
As  for  me,  I  love  them  indeed,  but  yet  I  worship  them  not. 
Amongst  others,  Peter  Bunel  (a  man  in  his  time,  by  reason 
of  his  learning  of  high  esteeme)  having  sojourned  a  few  daies 
at  Montagne  with  my  father,  and  others  of  his  coat,  being- 
ready  to  depart  thence,  presented  him  with  a  booke  entituled 
Theologia  naturalis;  sive  liber  creaturarum  magistri  Raimondi 
de  Sebonda.  And  for  so  much  as  the  Italian  and  Spanish 
tongues  were  very  familiar  unto  him,  and  that  the  booke 
was  written  in  a  kinde  of  latinized  Spanish,  whereof  divers 
words  had  Latine  terminations  ;  he  hoped  that  with  little 
aid  he  might  reape  no  small  profit  by  it,  and  commended  the 
same  very  much  unto  him,  as  a  booke  most  profitable,  and 
fitting  the  dayes  in  which  he  gave  it  him.  It  was  even  at 
what  time  the  new  fangles  of  Luther  began  to  creepe  in 
favour,  and  in  many  places  to  shake  the  foundation  of  our 
ancient  beleefe.  Wherein  he  seemed  to  be  well  advised,  as 
he  who  by  discourse  of  reason  fore-saw,  that  this  budding 
disease  would  easily  turne  to  an  execrable  Atheisme  :  For 
the  vulgar  wanting  the  faculty  to  judge  of  things  by  them 
selves,  suffering  it  selfe  to  be  carried  away  by  fortune,  and 
led  on  by  outward  apparances,  if  once  it  be  possessed  with 
the  boldnesse  to  despise,  and  malapertnesse  to  impugne  the 
opinions  which  tofore  it  held  in  awfull  reverence  (as  are  those 
wherein  consisteth  their  salvation)  and  that  some  articles  of 
their  religion  be  made  doubtfull  and  questionable,  they  will 
soone  and  easily  admit  an  equall  uncertainty  in  all  other 
parts  of  their  beleefe,  as  they  that  had  no  other  grounded 
authoritie  or  foundation,  but  such  as  are  now  shaken  and 
weakned,  and  immediatly  reject  (as  a  tyrannical!  yoke)  all 
128 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

impressions    they    had    in    former    times    received   by    the  CHAPTER 

authoritie  of  Lawes,  or  reverence  of  ancient  custome.  XII 

An  Apologie 

Nam  cupide  conculcatur  nimis  ante  metu  turn.  of  Raymond 

That  which  we  fear'd  before  too  much,  Sebond 

We  gladly  scorne  when  tis  not  such.  LUCR.  v.  1150. 

Undertaking  thence  forward  to  allow  of  nothing,  except 
they  have  first  given  their  voice  and  particular  consent  to 
the  same.  My  father,  a  few  daies  before  his  death,  lighting 
by  chance  upon  this  booke,  which  before  he  had  neglected, 
amongst  other  writings  commanded  mee  to  translate  the 
same  into  French.  It  is  easie  to  translate  such  Authors, 
where  nothing  but  the  matter  is  to  be  represented  ;  but  hard 
and  dangerous  to  undertake  such  as  have  added  much  to  the 
grace  and  elegancy  of  the  language,  namely  to  reduce  them 
into  a  weaker  and  poorer  tongue.  It  was  a  strange  taske, 
and  new  occupation  for  me  :  but  by  fortune  being  then  at 
leisure,  and  unable  to  gainsay  the  commandement  of  the 
best  father  that  ever  was  ;  I  came  ere  long  (as  well  as  I 
could)  to  an  end  of  it :  wherein  he  tooke  singular  delight, 
and  commanded  the  same  to  be  printed,  which  accordingly 
was  after  his  decease  performed.  I  found  the  conceits  of  the 
author  to  be  excellent,  the  contexture  of  his  worke  well 
followed,  and  his  project  full  of  pietie.  Now  forasmuch  as 
divers  ammuse  themselves  to  reade  it,  and  especially  Ladies, 
to  whom  we  owe  most  service,  it  hath  often  beene  my  hap 
to  help  them,  when  they  were  reading  it,  to  discharge  the 
booke  of  two  principall  objections,  which  are  brought  against 
the  same.  His  drift  is  bold,  and  his  scope  adventurous ;  for 
he  undertaketh  by  humane  and  naturall  reasons,  to  estab 
lish  and  verifie  all  the  articles  of  Christian  religion  against 
Atheists.  Wherein  (to  say  truth)  I  find  him  so  resolute  and 
so  happy,  as  I  deeme  it  a  thing  impossible  to  doe  better  in 
that  argument,  and  thinke  that  none  equalleth  him.  Which 
booke  seeming  to  me  both  over-rich  and  exquisite,  being 
written  by  an  author,  whose  name  is  so  little  knowne,  and  of 
whom,  all  we  know,  is,  that  he  was  a  Spaniard,  who  about 
two  hundred  yeeres  since  professed  Physicke  in  Tholouse  :  I 
demanded  once  of  Adrianus  Turnebus  (a  man  who  knew  all 
things)  what  such  a  booke  might  be,  who  answered,  that  he 
R  129 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  deemed  the  same  to  be  some  Quintessence  extracted  from  out 
Saint  Thomas  Aquinas :  For,  in  good  truth,  onely  such  a  spirit 
frau?ht  with  so  infinite  erudition,  and  so  full  of  admirable 
Sebond.       subtilitie,  was  capable  of  such  and  so  rare  imaginations.     So 
it  is,  that  whosoever  be  the  author  or  deviser  of  it  (the  title 
whereof  ought  not  without  further  reason  to  be  taken  from 
Sebond)  he  was  a  very  sufficient-worthie  man,  and  endowed 
with  sundry  other  excellent  qualities.     The  first  thing  he  is 
The  first  Ob-     reproved  for  in  his  Booke,  is,  that  Christians  wrong  them- 
jection.  selves  much,  in  that  they  ground  their  beleefe  upon  humane 

reasons,  which  is  conceived  but  by  faith,  and  by  a  particular 
inspiration  of  God.  Which  objection  seemeth  to  containe 
some  zeale  of  pietie  ;  by  reason  whereof  we  ought  with  so 
much  more  mildnes  and  regard,  endevour  to  satisfie  them 
that  propose  it.  It  were  a  charge,  more  befitting  a  man 
conversant,  and  sutable  to  one  acquainted  with  the  holy 
Scriptures,  than  me,  who  am  altogether  ignorant  in  them. 
Neverthelesse  I  thinke,  that  even  as  to  a  matter  so  divine 
and  high  and  so  much  exceeding  al  humane  understanding, 
as  is  this  Verity,  wherwith  it  hath  pleased  the  goodnesse  of 
God  to  enlighten  us,  it  is  most  requisit,  that  he  affoord 
and  lend  us  his  helpe  ;  And  that,  with  an  extraordinary  and 
privileged  favour,  that  so  we  may  the  better  conceive  and 
entertaine  the  same  :  For,  I  suppose  that  meanes  meerely 
humane  can  no  way  be  capable  of  it ;  which  if  they  were,  so 
many  rare  and  excellent  mindes,  and  so  plenteously  stored 
with  naturall  faculties,  as  have  beene  in  times  past,  would 
never  by  their  discourse,  have  mist  the  attayning  of  this 
knowledge.  It  is  faith  onely,  which  lively  and  assuredly 
embraceth  the  high  mysteries  of  our  Religion.  And  no  man 
can  doubt,  but  that  it  is  a  most  excellent  and  commendable 
enterprise,  properly  to  accommodate  and  fit  to  the  service  of 
our  faith,  the  natural  helpes  and  humane  implements  which 
God  hath  bestowed  upon  us.  And  no  question  is  to  be 
made,  but  that  it  is  the  most  honourable  employment  we 
can  put  them  unto  ;  and  that  there  is  no  occupation  or 
intent  more  worthy  a  good  Christian,  than  by  all  meanes, 
studies  and  imaginations,  carefully  to  endevour,  how  to 
embellish,  amplifie  and  extend  the  truth  of  his  beleefe  and 
religion.  It  is  not  enough  for  us  to  serve  God  in  spirit  and 
130 


. 

Raymond 
Sebond 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

soule,  we  owe  him  besides,  and  wee  yeeld  unto  him  a  corpo-  CHAPTER 

rail  worshipping  ;  we  applie  our  limbs,  our  motions,  and  all 

externall  things,  to  honour  him.    The  like  ought  to  be  done, 

and  we  should  accompany  our  faith  with  all  the  reason  we 

possesse  :   Yet  alwayes  with  this  proviso,  that  we  thinke  it 

doth  not  depend  of  us,  and  that  all  our  strength  and  argu 

ments  can  never  attaine  to  so  supernaturall  and  divine  a 

knowledge  :  Except  it  seize  upon  us,  and  as  it  were  enter 

into  us  by  an  extraordinarie  infusion  :   And  unlesse  it  also 

enter  into  us,  not  onely  by  discourse,  but  also  by  humane 

meanes,  she  is  not  in  her  dignitie,  nor  in  her  glorie.     And 

verily  I  feare  therfore,  that  except  this  way,  we  should  not 

enjoy  it.     Had  we  fast-hold  on  God,  by  the  interposition  of 

a  lively  faith  ;  had  we  hold-fast  on  God  by  himselfe,  and  not 

by  us;  had  we  a  divine  foundation,  then  should  not  humane 

and  worldly  occasions  have  the  power  so  to  shake  and  totter 

us,  as   they  have.     Our  hold  would  not  then  yeeld  to  so 

weake  a  batterie  :  The  love  of  noveltie  ;  the  constraint  of 

Princes  ;    the  good    successe  of  one  partie  ;    the   rash   and 

casuall  changing    of  our   opinions,   should    not    then    have 

the  power  to  shake  and  alter  our  beleefe.     We  should  not 

suffer  the  same  to  be  troubled  at  the  wil  and  pleasure  of  a 

new  argument,  and  at  the  perswasion,  no,  not  of  all  the  rhe- 

torike  that  ever  was  :  we  should  withstand  these  boistrous 

billowes  with  an  inflexible  and  unmoveable  constancie: 

Illisosfluctus  rupes,  ut  vasta  refundit, 
Et  varias  circumlatrantes  dissipat  undas, 
—  Mole  sua. 

As  huge  rocks  doe  regorge  th'  invective  waves, 
And  dissipate  the  billowes  brawling  braves, 
Which  these  gainst  those  still  bellow  out, 
Those  being  big  arid  standing  stout. 

If  this  raie  of  Divinitie  did  in  any  sort  touch  us,  it 
would  everie  where  appeare  :  Not  only  our  words,  but  our 
actions,  would  beare  some  shew  and  lustre  of  it.  Whatso 
ever  should  proceed  from  us,  might  be  scene  inlightned  with 
this  noble  and  matchlesse  brightnes.  We  should  blush  for 
shame,  that  in  humane  sects,  there  was  never  any  so  factious, 
what  difficultie  or  strangenesse  soever  his  doctrine  main 
tained,  but  would  in  some  sort  conforme  his  behaviors  and 

131 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  square  his  life  unto  it :  Whereas  so  divine  and  heavenly  an 
XII          institution  never  markes  Christians  but  by  the  tongue.     And 
An  Apologie  wjn  yOU  Sk3e  wliether  it  be  so  ?     Compare  but  our  manners 
^  11     unto  a  Turke,  or  a  Pagan,  and  we  must  needs  yeeld  unto 

them  :  Whereas  in  respect  of  our  religions  superioritie,  we 
ought  by  much,  yea  by  an  incomparable  distance,  out-shine 
them  in  excellencie  :  And  well  might  a  man  say,  '  Are  they 
4  so  just,  so  charitable,  and  so  good  ?  Then  must  they  be 
'  Christians/  All  other  outward  shewes  and  exterior  appar- 
ences  are  common  to  all  religions  :  As  hope,  affiance,  events, 
ceremonies,  penitence  and  martyrdome.  The  peculiar  badge 
of  our  truth  should  be  vertue  ;  As  it  is  the  heavenliest  and 
most  difficult  marke,  and  worthiest  production  of  Verity  it 
self.  And  therefore  was  our  good  Saint  Lewis  in  the  right, 
when  that  Tartarian  King,  who  was  become  a  Christian, 
intended  to  come  to  Lions,  to  kisse  the  Popes  feet,  and 
there  to  view  the  sanctitie  he  hoped  to  find  in  our  lives 
and  manners,  instantly  to  divert  him  from  it,  fearing  lest 
our  dissolute  manners,  and  licentious  kind  of  life,  might 
scandalize  him,  and  so  alter  his  opinion  fore-conceived  of 
so  sacred  a  religion.  Howbeit  the  contrary  happened  to 
another,  who  for  the  same  effect  being  come  to  Rome,  and 
there  viewing  the  disolutenesse  of  the  Prelates  and  people 
of  those  dayes,  was  so  much  the  more  confirmed  in  our 
religion  ;  considering  with  himselfe  what  force  and  divinity 
it  must  of  consequence  have,  since  it  was  able,  amidst  so 
many  corruptions  and  so  viciously-poluted  hands,  to  main 
tain  e  her  dignitie  and  splendor.  Had  we  but  one  onely 
graine  of  faith,  wee  should  then  be  able  to  remove  moun- 
taines  from  out  their  place,  saith  the  holy  Writ.  Our  actions 
being  guided,  and  accompanied  with  divinitie,  should  not 
then  be  meerely  humane,  but  even  as  our  beliefe,  containe 
some  wonder-causing  thing.  Brevis  est  institutio  vitce  honestce 
beatceque,  si  credas.  6  The  institution  of  an  honest  and 
'  blessed  life  is  but  short,  if  a  man  beleeve.'  Some  make 
the  world  beleeve,  that  they  beleeve  things  they  never  doe. 
Others  (and  they  are  the  greater  number)  perswade  them 
selves  they  doe  so,  as  unable  to  conceive  what  it  is  to  beleeve. 
We  thinke  it  strange  if  in  warres,  which  at  this  time  doe  so 
oppresse  our  state,  we  see  the  events  to  float  so  strangely, 
132 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

and  with  so  common  and  ordinarie  a  manner  to  change  and  CHAPTER 
alter  :  The  reason  is,  we  adde  nothing  unto  it  but  our  owne. 
Justice,  which  is  on  the  one  side,  is  used  but  for  a  cloake 
and  ornament ;  she  is  indeed  alleadged,  but  nor  received, 
nor  harboured,  nor  wedded.     She  is  as  in  the  mouth  of  a 
Lawyer,  and  not  as  she  ought  in  the  heart  and  affection  of 
the  partie.     God  oweth  his  extraordinarie  assistance  unto 
faith  and  religion,  and  not  to  our  passions.     Men  are  but 
directors  unto  it  and  use  religion  for  a  shew  :  It  ought  to  be 
cleane  contrarie.     Doe  but  marke  if  we  doe  not  handle  it  as 
it  were  a  peece  of  waxe,  from  out  so  right  and  so  firme  a 
rule,  to  drawe  so  many  contrary  shapes.     When  was  this 
better  scene  than  nowadaies  in  France  ?    Those  which  have 
taken  it  on  the  left,  and  those  who  have  taken  it  on  the 
right  hand  ;  Such  as  speake  the  false,  and  such  who  speake 
the  truth  of  it,  do  so  alike  employ  and  fit  the  same  to  their 
violent  and  ambitious  enterprises,  proceede  unto  it  with  so 
conformable  a  proceeding  in  riotousnesse  and  injustice,  they 
make  the  diversitie  they  pretend  in  their  opinions  doubtful!, 
and  hard  to  be  beleeved,  in  a  thing  from   which   depends 
the  conduct  and  law  of  our   life.      Can  a  man   see  from 
one   same   Schoole   and   Discipline,   more   united  and   like 
customes  and  fashions  to  proceed  ?     View  but  the  horrible 
impudencie  wherewith  we  tosse  divine  reasons   to  and  fro, 
and  how   irreligiously  wee  have    both    rejected    and   taken 
them  againe,  according  as  fortune  hath   in   these   publike 
stormes  transported  us  from  place  to  place.     This  solemne 
proposition  ;  4  Whether  it  be  lawfull  for  a  subject,  for  the 
'  defence  of  religion,  to  rebell  and  take  armes  against  his 
'  Prince ' :  Call  but  to  minde,  in  what  mouthes  but  a  twelve- 
moneth   agoe  the   affirmative  of  the  same  was  the   chiefe 
pillar  of  the  one  part ;  the  negative  was  the  maine-under- 
prop  of  the  other  :  And  listen  now  from  whence  commeth 
the  voyce  and  instruction  of  one  and  other :   and  whether 
armes  clatter  and  clang  lesse  for  this,  than  for  that  cause. 
And  we  burne  those  men,  which  say,  that  truth  must  be 
made  to  abide  the  yoke  of  our  need  :  And  how  much  worse 
doth  France,  than  speake  it  ?     Let  us  confesse  the  truth  :  he 
that  from  out  this  lawfull  army  should  cull  out,  first  those 
who  follow  it  for  meere  zeale  of  a  religious  affection,  then 

133 


MONTAIGNE S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  such   as    only  regard  the  defence    and  protection    of  their 

XII          countries  lawes,  or  service  of  their  Prince  ;  whether  hee  could 

An  Apologia  ever  erect  a  compleat  company  of  armed  men.     How  conies 

{i  to  Passe>  that  so  few  are  found>  who   have  sti11  held  one 
same  wil  and  progresse  in  our  publike  revolutions,  and  that 

we  see  them  now  and  then  but  faintly,  and  sometimes,  as 
fast  as  they  can  headlong  to  runne  into  the  action  ?  And 
the  same  men,  now  by  their  violence  and  rashnesse,  and  now 
through  their  slownes,  demissnes,  and  heavines  to  spoile, 
and  as  it  were  overthrow  our  affaires,  but  that  they  are 
thrust  into  them  by  casuall  motives,  and  particular  con 
sideration,  according  to  the  diversities  wherewith  they  are 
moved  ?  I  plainly  perceive,  we  lend  nothing  unto  devotion 
but  the  offices  that  flatter  our  passions.  There  is  no 
hostilitie  so  excellent,  as  that  which  is  absolutely  Christian. 
Our  zeale  worketh  wonders,  when  ever  it  secondeth  our 
inclination  toward  hatred,  crueltie,  ambition,  avarice,  de 
traction,  or  rebellion.  Towards  goodnes,  benignitie,  or  tem 
perance,  it  goeth  but  slowly,  and  against  the  haire,  except 
miraculously,  some  rare  complexion  leade  him  unto  it,  it 
neither  runnes  nor  flieth  to  it.  Our  religion  was  ordained 
to  root  out  vices,  but  it  shrowdeth,  fostreth  and  provoketh 
them.  As  commonly  wee  say,  '  We  must  not  make  a  foole 
'  of  God.1  Did  wee  beleeve  in  him,  I  say  not  through  faith, 
but  with  a  simple  beleefe,  yea  (I  speake  it  to  our  confusion) 
did  we  but  beleeve  and  know  him,  as  wee  doe  another  storie, 
or  as  one  of  our  companions,  we  should  then  love  him  above 
all  other  things,  by  reason  of  the  infinite  goodnes,  and  un 
speakable  beauty  that  is,  and  shines  in  him  :  Had  he  but 
the  same  place  in  our  affections,  that  riches,  pleasures,  glory 
and  our  friends  have :  The  best  of  us  doth  not  so  much 
feare  to  wrong  him,  as  he  doth  to  injurie  his  neighbour,  his 
kinsman,  or  his  master.  Is  there  so  simple  a  minde,  who 
on  the  one  side  having  before  him  the  object  of  one  of  our 
vicious  pleasures,  and  on  the  other  to  his  full  view,  perfect 
knowledge  and  assured  perswasion,  the  state  of  an  immortall 
glorie,  that  would  enter  into  contention  of  one  for  the  other  ? 
And  if  we  often  refuse  it  through  meere  contempt :  for 
what  draweth  us  to  blaspheming,  unlesse  it  be  at  all  ad 
ventures,  the  desire  it  selfe  of  the  offence  ?  The  Philosopher 
134 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Antisthenes,  when  he  was  initiated  in  the  mysteries  of  Orpheus,  CHAPTER 

the  priest  saying  unto  him,  that  such  as  vowed  themselves          XII 

to   that  religion,   should    after  death    receive   eternall    and  ^ Raymond 

perfect  felicities,  replied,  If  thou  beleeve  it,  why  dost  thou       Sebond 

not  die  thy  self?     Diogenes  more  roughly  (as  his  manner 

was)  and  further  from  our  purpose,  answered  the  priest,  who 

perswaded  him   to  be  one  of  his  order,  that  so  he  might 

come  unto,  and  attaine  the  happinesse  of  the  other  world  : 

Wilt  thou  have  me  beleeve,  that  those  famous  men  Agesilaus 

and  Epaminondas,  shall  be  miserable,  and  that  thou,  who 

art  but  an  asse,  and  dost  nothing  of  any  worth,  shalt  be 

happy,  because  thou  art  a  Priest  ?     Did  we  but  receive  these 

large  promises  of  everlasting  blessednes  with  like  authoritie, 

as  we  do  a  philosophicall  discourse,  we  should  not  then  have 

death  in  that  horror  as  we  have : 

Nonjam  se  moriens  dissolvi  conquereretur,  LUCR.  iii.  630. 

Sed  magis  ire  for  as,  vestemque  relinquere  ut  anguis 
Gauderet  pralonga  senex  aut  cornua  cervus. 

He  would  not  now  complaine  to  be  dissolved  dying, 
But  rather  more  rejoice,  that  now  he  is  forth-flying, 
Or  as  a  Snake  his  coat  out-worne, 
Or  as  old  Harts,  doth  cast  his  home. 

I  will  be  dissolved  should  we  say,  and  be  with  lesus 
Christ.  The  forcible  power  of  Platoes  discourse,  of  the  im 
mortality  of  the  soule,  provoked  divers  of  his  Schollers  unto 
death,  that  so  they  might  more  speedily  enjoy  the  hopes  he 
told  them  of.  All  which  is  a  most  evident  token,  that  we 
receive  our  religion,  but  according  to  our  fashion,  and  by 
our  owne  hands,  and  no  otherwise  than  other  religions  are 
received.  We  are  placed  in  the  country,  where  it  was  in 
use ;  where  we  regard  her  antiquity,  or  the  authority  of 
those  who  have  maintained  her ;  where  we  feare  the  menaces 
wherewith  she  threatneth  all  mis-beleevers,  or  follow  her 
promises.  The  considerations  ought  to  be  applied  and 
employed  to  our  beleefe,  but  as  Subsidiaries:  they  be 
humane  bonds.  Another  Country,  other  Testimonies,  equall 
promises :  alike  menaces,  might  semblably  imprint  a  cleane 
contrary  religion  in  us :  we  are  Christians  by  the  same  title, 
as  we  are  either  Perigordins  or  Germans.  And  as  Plato 
saith :  '  There  are  few  so  confirmed  in  Atheisme,  but  some 

135 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  great  danger  will  bring  unto  the  knowledge  of  Gods  divine 

XH          '  power.'     The  part  doth  not   touch    or   concerne   a   good 

AnApologie  Christian .    It  is  for  mortall  and   worldly  religions,   to  be 

of  Raymond  •       i    i  i  T*n      L   j»  -,1     •      .1     ,    TI 

Sebond       received   by  a  humane  convoy.      What  iaith  is  that  like  to 

be,  which  cowardice  of  heart  doth  plant,  and  weaknesse 
establish  in  us  ?  A  goodly  faith,  that  beleeves  that  which 
it  beleeveth,  onely  because  it  wanteth  the  courage  not  to 
beleeve  the  same.  A  vicious  passion,  as  that  of  inconstancie 
and  astonishment  is,  can  it  possibly  ground  any  regular  pro 
duction  in  our  minds  or  soules  ?  They  establish  (saith  he) 
by  the  reason  of  their  judgement,  that  whatsoever  is  re 
ported  of  hell,  or  of  after-comming  paines,  is  but  a  fiction  ; 
but  the  occasions  to  make  triall  of  it,  offering  it  selfe,  at 
what  time  age  or  sickenes  doth  sommon  them  to  death  : 
the  errour  of  the  same,  through  the  horrour  of  their  future 
condition,  doth  then  replenish  them  with  another  kinde  of 
beleefe.  And  because  such  impressions  make  mens  hearts 
fearefull,  hee  by  his  lawes,  inhibiteth  all  instruction  of  such 
threats,  and  the  perswasion,  that  any  evill  may  come  unto 
man  from  the  Gods,  except  for  his  greater  good,  and  for  a 
medicinable  effect,  whensoever  he  falleth  into  it.  The  re 
port  of  Bion,  that  being  infected  with  the  Atheismes  of 
Theodorus,  he  had  for  a  long  time  made  but  a  mockerie  of 
religious  men ;  but  when  death  did  once  seize  upon  him,  he 
yeelded  unto  the  extremest  superstitions :  As  if  the  Gods 
would  either  be  removed,  or  come  againe,  according  to 
Bions  businesse.  Plato  and  these  examples  conclude,  that 
wee  are  brought  to  beleeve  in  God,  either  by  reason,  or  by 
compulsion.  Atheisnie  being  a  proposition,  as  unnaturall 
and  monstrous  as  it  is  hard  and  uneasie  to  be  established  in 
any  mans  minde,  how  insolent  and  unruly  soever  hee  may 
be-.  Many  have  beene  scene,  to  have  conceived,  either 
through  vanitie  or  fiercenesse,  strange  and  seld-knowne 
opinions,  as  if  they  would  become  reformers  of  the  world, 
by  affecting  a  profession  onely  in  countenance :  who  though 
they  be  sufficiently  foolish,  yet  are  they  not  powerfull 
enough,  to  ground  or  settle  it  in  their  consciences.  Yet 
will  not  such  leave  to  lift-up  their  joyned  hands  to  heaven, 
give  them  but  a  stoccado  on  their  breast :  and  when  feare 
shall  have  supprest,  or  sickenesse  vanquished  this  licentious 
136 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

fervour  of  a  wavering  minde,  then  will  they  suffer  themselves  CHAPTER 
gently  to  be  reclaimed,  and  discreetly  to  be  perswaded,  to  XII 
give  credit  unto  true  beliefe  and  publike  examples.  A  ^R^m^d 
decree  seriously  digested  is  one  thing,  and  these  shallow  Sebond 
and  superficiall  impressions  another,  which  bred  by  the  dis- 
solutenesse  of  a  loose  spirit,  do  rashly  and  uncertainely  float 
up  and  downe  the  fantasie  of  a  man.  Oh  men  most  braine- 
sicke  and  miserable,  that  endevour  to  be  worse  than  they 
can  !  The  errour  of  Paganisme,  and  the  ignorance  of  our 
sacred  truth,  was  the  cause  of  this  great  soules-fall ;  but 
onely  great  in  worldly  greatnes  ;  also  in  this  next  abuse, 
which  is,  that  children  and  old  men,  are  found  to  be  more 
susceptible  or  capable  of  religion,  as  if  it  were  bred  and  had 
her  credit  from  our  imbecillitie.  The  bond  which  should 
binde  our  judgement,  tie  our  will,  enforce  and  joyne  our 
soules  to  our  Creator,  should  be  a  bond  taking  his  doub 
ling  and  forces,  not  from  our  considerations,  reasons  and 
passions,  but  from  a  divine  and  supernaturall  compulsion, 
having  but  one  forme,  one  countenance,  and  one  grace ; 
which  is  the  authoritie  and  grace  of  God.  Now  our  heart 
being  ruled,  and  our  soule  commanded  by  faith,  reason 
willeth,  that  she  drawes  all  our  other  parts  to  the  service  of 
her  intent,  according  to  their  power  and  facultie.  Nor  is  it 
likely,  but  that  this  vast  worlds-frame  must  beare  the  im 
pression  of  some  markes,  therein  imprinted  by  the  hand  of 
this  great-wondrous  Architect,  and  that  even  in  all  things 
therein  created,  there  must  be  some  image,  somewhat  re 
sembling,  and  having  coherencie  with  the  workeman  that 
wrought  and  framed  them.  He  hath  left  imprinted  in 
these  high  and  misterious  works,  the  characters  of  his 
divinitie :  and  onely  our  imbecilitie  is  the  cause,  wee  can 
nor  discover,  nor  read  them.  It  is  that  which  himselfe 
telleth  us,  That  by  his  visible  operations,  hee  doth  manifest 
those  that  are  invisible  to  us.  Sebond  hath  much  travelled 
about  this  worthie  studie,  and  sheweth  us,  That  there  is 
no  parcell  of  this  world,  that  either  belyeth  or  shameth 
his  Maker.  It  were  a  manifest  wronging  of  Gods  good- 
nesse,  if  all  this  universe  did  not  consent  and  simpathize 
with  our  beleefe.  Heaven,  earth,  the  elements,  our  bodies, 
our  soule ;  yea  all  things  else,  conspire  and  agree  unto  it : 
S  137 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  onely  the  meanes  how  to  make  use  of  them  must  be  found 
XI1  .  out :  They  will  instruct  us  sufficiently,  be  we  but  capable  to 
^earne  an^  apt  to  understand.  For,  this  world  is  a  most 
noty  Temple,  into  which  man  is  brought  there  to  behold 
Statues  and  Images,  not  wrought  by  mortall  hand,  but 
such  as  the  secret  thought  of  God  hath  made  sensible,  as 
the  Sunne,  the  Starres,  the  Waters  and  the  Earth,  thereby 
to  represent  the  intelligible  unto  us.  The  invisible  things 
of  God  (saith  Saint  Paul)  doe  evidently  appeare  by  the 
creation  of  the  world,  judgeing  of  his  eternall  Wisedome 
and  Divinity  by  his  workes. 

M ANIL.  iv. 840.  Atque  adeofaciem  cceli  non  invidet  orbi, 

Ipse  Deus,  vultusque  suos  corpusque  recludit, 
Semper  voluendo  :  deque  ipsum  inculcat  et  offert 
Vt  bene  cognosci  possit,  doceatque  videndo 
Qualis  eat  doceatque  suas  attendere  leges. 

God  to  the  world  doth  not  heav'ns  face  envie, 

But  by  still  moving  it  doth  notifie 

His  face  and  essence,  doth  himselfe  applie, 

That  he  may  well  be  knowen,  and  teach  by  seeing, 

How  he  goes,  how  we  should  marke  his  decreeing. 

Now  our  reason  and  humane  discourse,  is  as  the  lumpish 
and  barren  matter  ;  and  the  grace  of  God  is  the  forme  there 
of.  Tis  that,  which  giveth  both  fashion  and  worth  unto  it. 
Even  as  the  vertuous  actions  of  Socrates  and  Cato,  are  but 
frivolous  and  profitable,  because  they  had  not  their  end,  and 
regarded  not  the  love  and  obedience  of  the  true  creator  of 
all  things ;  and  namely,  because  they  were  ignorant  of  the 
true  knowledge  of  God :  So  is  it  of  our  imaginations  and 
discourse ;  they  have  a  kind  of  body,  but  a  shapelesse  masse, 
without  light  or  fashion,  unlesse  faith  and  the  grace  of  God 
be  joyned  thereunto.  Faith,  giving  as  it  were  a  tincture 
and  lustre  unto  Sebonds  arguments,  make  them  the  more 
firme  and  solid :  They  may  well  serve  for  a  direction  and 
guide  to  a  yong  learner,  to  lead  and  set  him  in  the  right 
way  of  this  knowledge.  They  in  some  sort  fashion  and 
make  him  capable  of  the  grace  of  God,  by  meanes  whereof 
our  beliefe  is  afterward  atchieved  and  made  perfect.  I  know 
a  man  of  authority,  brought  up  in  letters,  who  confessed 
I  138 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

unto   me,  that  he  was  reclaimed  from  out  the  errours  of  CHAPTER 
mis-beleeving  by  the  Arguments    of  Sebond.      And  if  it          XI1 
happen,  they   be   dispoyled  of  this  ornament,  and  of  the  ^jgjJS 
helpe  and  approbation  of  faith,  and  taken  but  for  meere       Sebond 
humane  fantazies,  yet  to  combat  those  that  headlong  are 
fallen  into  the  dreadfull  error,  and  horrible  darkenesse  of 
irreligion,    even    then,  shall   they   be   found    as   firme   and 
forcible,  as  any  other  of  that  condition,  that  may  be  opposed 
against  them.     So  that  we  shall  stand  upon  termes  to  say 
unto  our  parties, 

Simelius  quid  habes,  accerse,  vel  imperium  fer.  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

If  you  have  any  better,  send  for  me, 
Or  else  that  I  bid  you,  contented  be. 

Let  them  either  abide  the  force  of  our  proofes,  or  shew  us 
some  others,  upon  some  other  subject,  better  compact  and 
more  full.  I  have  in  a  manner  unawares  halfe  engaged  my 
selfe  in  the  second  objection,  to  which  I  had  purposed  to 
frame  an  answer  for  Sebond.  Some  say  his  Arguments  are 
weake,  and  simple  to  verifie  what  he  would ;  and  undertake  The  second 
to  front  him  easily.  Such  fellowes  must  somwhat  more  Objection, 
roughly  be  handled  :  for  they  are  more  dangerous,  and  more 
malicious  than  the  first.  Man  doth  willingly  apply  other 
mens  sayings  to  the  advantage  of  the  opinions  he  hath  fore 
judged  in  himselfe.  To  an  Atheist  all  writings  make  for  Athe- 
isme.  He  with  his  owne  Venome  infecteth  the  innocent  matter. 
These  have  some  preoccupation  of  judgement  that  makes 
their  taste  wallowish  and  tastlesse,  to  conceive  the  reasons 
of  Sebond.  As  for  the  rest,  they  thinke  to  have  faire  play 
offered  them,  if  they  have  free  liberty  to  combat  our  religion 
with  meere  worldly  weapons ;  which  they  durst  not  charge, 
did  they  behold  her  in  her  Majesty,  full  of  authority  and 
commandement.  The  meanes  I  use  to  suppresse  this  frenzy, 
and  which  seemeth  the  fittest  for  my  purpose,  is  to  crush, 
and  trample  this  humane  pride  and  fiercenesse  under  foot,  to 
make  them  feele  the  emptinesse,  vacuitie,  and  no  worth  of 
man  :  and  violently  to  pull  out  of  their  hands,  the  silly 
weapons  of  their  reason ;  to  make  them  stoope,  and  bite  and 
snarle  at  the  ground,  under  the  authority  and  reverence  of 
Gods  Majesty.  Onely  to  her  belongeth  science  and  wisdome, 

139 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  it  is  she  alone  can  judge  of  her  selfe  ;  and  from  her  we  steale, 

XII          whatsoever  we  repute,  value,  and  count  our  selves  to  be. 
An  Apologie 
of  Raymond  Ov  yap  ea  cppovelv  6  6eos  fie'ya  a'AAoi/  77  avrov. 

Sebond  Of  greater,  better,  wiser  minde  than  he, 

God  can  abide  no  mortall  man  should  be. 

Let  us  suppresse  this  over-weening,  the  first  foundation  of 
Prov.  iii.  14,  the  tyrannic  of  the  wicked  spirit:  Deus  superbis  resistit  : 
iv.  6.  i  Pet.  Jiumilibus  autem  dot  gratiam.  '  God  resisteth  the  proud,  but 
'  giveth  grace  to  the  humble."  Plato  saith,  That  intelligence 
is  in  all  the  Gods,  but  little  or  nothing  at  all  in  men.  Meane- 
while  it  is  a  great  comfort  unto  a  Christian  man,  to  see  our 
mortall  implements,  and  fading  tooles,  so  fitly  sorted  to  our 
holy  and  divine  faith  ;  that  when  they  are  employed  to  the 
mortal  and  fading  subjects  of  their  Nature,  they  are  never 
more  forcibly,  nor  more  joyntlie  appropriated  unto  them. 
Let  us  then  see  whether  man  hath  any  other  stronger  reasons 
in  his  power,  then  Sebondes,  and  whether  it  lie  in  him,  by 
argument  or  discourse,  to  come  to  any  certainty.  For,  Saint 
Augustine,  pleading  against  these  kind  of  men,  because  he 
would  upbraid  them  with  their  injustice,  in  that  they  hold 
the  parts  of  our  beleefe  to  be  false,  and  that  our  reason 
faileth  in  establishing  them.  And  to  shew,  that  many  things 
may  be,  and  have  beene,  whereof  our  discourse  can  never 
ground  the  nature  and  the  causes  ;  He  proposeth  and  setteth 
downe  before  them  certaine  knowen  and  undoubted  experi 
ments,  wherein  man  confesseth  to  see  nothing;  which  he 
doth  as  all  things  else,  with  a  curious  and  ingenious  search. 
More  must  be  done,  and  they  must  be  taught,  that  to  con 
vince  the  weaknesse  of  their  reason,  we  need  not  goe  far  to 
cull  out  rare  examples :  And  that  it  is  so  defective  and 
blinde,  as  there  is  no  facility  so  cleare,  that  is  cleare  enough 
unto  her ;  that  easie  and  uneasie  is  all  one  to  her ;  that 
all  subjects  equally,  and  Nature  in  generall  disavoweth  her 
jurisdiction,  and  interposition.  What  preacheth  truth  unto 
us,  when  it  biddeth  us  flie  and  shun  worldly  Philosophy  ; 
when  it  so  often  telleth  us,  that  all  our  wisdome  is  but  folly 
before  God ;  that  of  all  vanities,  man  is  the  greatest ;  Irhat 
man,  who  presumeth  of  his  knowledge,  doth  not  yet  know 
what  knowledge  is :  and  that  man,  who  is  nothing/if  he  but 
140 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

thinke  to  be  something,  seduceth  and  deceiveth  himselfe  ?  CHAPTER 
These  sentences  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  doe  so  lively  and  mani-  X11 
festly  expresse,  what  I  would  maintaine,  as  I  should  neede  no  An  Apologie 
other  proofe  against  such  as  with  all  submission  and  obey-  Sebond 
sance  would  yeeld  to  his  authority :  But  these  will  needs  be 
whipt  to  their  owne  cost,  and  cannot  abide  their  reason  to 
be  combated,  but  by  it  selfe.  Let  us  now  but  consider  man 
alone  without  other  help,  armed  but  with  his  owne  weapons, 
and  unprovided  of  the  grace  and  knowledge  of  God,  which 
is  all  his  honour,  all  his  strength,  and  all  the  ground  of  his 
being.  Let  us  see  what  hold-fast,  or  free-hold  he  hath  in 
this  gorgeous,  and  goodly  equipage.  Let  him  with  the 
utmost  power  of  his  discourse  make  me  understand,  upon 
what  foundation,  he  hath  built  those  great  advantages  and 
ods,  he  supposeth  to  have  over  other  creatures.  Who  hath 
perswaded  him,  that  this  admirable  moving  of  heavens  vaults; 
that  the  eternal  light  of  these  lampes  so  fiercely  rowling  over 
his  head ;  that  the  horror-moving  and  continuall  motion  of 
this  infinite  vaste  Ocean,  were  established,  and  continue  so 
many  ages  for  his  commoditie  and  service  ?  Is  it  possible 
to  imagine  any  thing  so  ridiculous,  as  this  miserable  and 
wreched  creature,  which  is  not  so  much  as  master  of  him 
selfe,  exposed  and  subject  to  offences  of  all  things,  and  yet 
dareth  call  himselfe  Master  and  Emperour  of  this  Universe? 
In  whose  power  it  is  not  to  know  the  least  part  of  it,  much 
lesse  to  command  the  same.  And  the  privilege,  which  he 
so  fondly  challengeth,  to  be  the  onely  absolute  creature  in 
this  huge  worlds-frame,  perfectly  able  to  know  the  absolute 
beautie,  and  severall  parts  thereof,  and  that  he  is  only  of 
power  to  yeeld  the  great  Architect  thereof,  due  thankes  for 
it,  and  to  keepe  account  both  of  the  receipts  and  layings  out 
of  the  world.  Who  hath  sealed  him  this  patent  ?  Let  him 
shew  us  his  letters  of  privilege,  for  so  noble  and  so  great  a 
charge.  Have  they  beene  granted  onely  in  favour  of  the 
wise  ?  Then  concerne  they  but  a  few.  Are  the  foolish  and 
wicked  worthy  of  so  extraordinary  a  favour  ?  Who  being 
the  worst  part  of  the  world,  should  they  be  preferred  before 
the  rest  ?  Shall  we  beleeve  him  ;  Quorum  igitur  causa  quis  Cic.  Nat. 
dixerit  effectum  esse  mundum  ?  Eorum  scilicet  animantium  Deo-  »• 
qucc  ratione  utuntur.  Hi  sunt  dij  et  homines,  quibus  pro- 

141 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTERt/k^o  nihil  est  melius.     'For  whose  cause  then  shall  a  man 
XII         '  say,   that    the    world    was    made  ?      In    sooth,    for  those 
An  Apologie  «  creatures  sake,  which  have  the  use  of  reason :  Those  are 
11     *  Gods  and   men,  than  whom  assuredly  nothing  is  better."1 
We  shall  never  sufficiently  baffle    the    impudency    of  this 
conjoyning.     But  silly  wretch,  what  hath  he  in  him  worthy 
such  an  advantage  ?     To  consider  the  incorruptible  life  of 
the  celestiall  bodies,  their  beauty,  greatnesse,  and  agitation, 
continued  with  so  just  and  regular  a  course  : 

LUCR.  v.  — cum  suspicimus  magni  coelestia  mundi 

1214.  Templa  super,  stellisque  micantibus  JEthera  fiocum 

Et  venit  in  mentem  Lunce  Solisque  viarum. 

When  we  of  this  great  world  the  heavenly  temples  see 
Above  us,,  and  the  skies  with  shine-starres  fixt  to  be, 
And  marke  in  our  discourse, 
Of  Sunne  and  Moone  the  course. 

To  consider  the  power  and  domination,  these  bodies  have, 
not  onely  upon  our  lives,  and  condition  of  our  fortune ; 

MANIL.  Facto,  etenim  et  vitas  hominum  suspendit  ab  astris. 

Astron.  iii.  <8.  -r, 

ror  on  the  stars  he  doth  suspend 

Of  men,  the  deeds,  the  lives,  and  end  ; 

but   also    over    our   dispositions   and   inclinations,  our  dis 
courses  and  wils,  which  they  rule,  provoke,  and  move  at  the 
pleasure  of  their  influences,  as  our  reason  finds  and  teacheth 
us. 
lb.  i.  62.  — speculatdque  longe 

Deprendit  tacitis  dominantia  legibus  astra. 
Et  totum  alternd  mundum  ratione  moveri, 
Fatorumque  vices  certis  discernere  signu: 

By  speculation  it  from  far  discern 's, 
How  star's  by  secret  lawes  do  guide  our  sterns, 
And  this  whole  world  is  moov'd  by  entercourse 
And  by  sure  signes  of  fates  to  know  the  course. 

Seeing  that  not  a  man  alone,  nor  a  King  only,  but 
Monarchies  and  Empires,  yea,  and  all  this  world  below  is 
moved  at  the  shaking  of  one  of  the  least  heavenly  motions. 

lb.  iv.  93.  Quantaque  quam  parvi  faciant  discrimina  motus: 

Tantum  est  hoc  regnum  quod  regibus  imperat  ipsis. 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

How  little  motions  make,  how  different  affection  :  CHAPTER 

So  great  this  Kingdome  is,  that  hath  Kings  in  subjec-  XII 

tion.  An  Apologie 

If  our  vertue,  vices,  sufficiency  and   knowledge,  and  the       Sebond 
same  discourse  we  make  of  the  power  of  the  starres,  and  the 
comparison  betweene  them  and  us,  commeth  as  our  reason 
judgeth  by  their  meane  and  through  their  favour. 

—furit  alter  amore,  MANIL. 

Et  pontum  tranare  potest  et  vertere  Troiam,  Astron.  iv.  178. 

Altering  sors  est  scribendis  legibus  apta : 

Ecce  patrem  nati  perimunt,  natosque  parentes, 

Mutuaque  armati  coeunt  in  vulnerafratres, 

Non  nostrum  hoc  bellum  est,  coguntur  tanta  movere, 

Inque  suasferri  pcenas,  lacerandaque  membra:  ng 

Hoc  quoquefatale  est  sic  ipsum  expenderefatum. 

One  with  love  madded,  his  love  to  enjoy, 
Can  crosse  the  seas,  and  overturne  all  Troy  : 
Anothers  lot  is  to  set  lawes  severe. 
Loe  sonnes  kill  fathers,  fathers  sonnes  destroy, 
Brothers  for  mutuall  wounds  their  armes  doe  beare, 
Such  war  is  not  our  owne,  forc't  are  we  to  it, 
Drawne  to  our  owne  paines,  our  owne  limbs  to  teare  ; 
Fates  so  t'observe  'tis  fatall,  we  must  doe  it. 

If  we  hold  that  portion  of  reason,  which  we  have,  from 
the  distribution  of  heaven,  how  can  she  make  us  equall  unto 
it  ?  How  can  she  submit  his  essence  and  conditions  unto 
our  knowledge  ?  Whatsoever  we  behold  in  those  huge 
bodies,  doth  affright  us  :  Quce  molitio,  quce  J "err -amenta,  qui  Cic.  Nat. 
vectes,  quce  machine?,  qui  ministri  tanti  operis  fuerunt  ? Deo-  K 
'  What  workemanship  ?  What  yron-braces  ?  What  maine 
'  beames,  what  engines  ?  What  Masons  and  Carpenters, 
'  were  to  so  great  a  worke?"  Why  doe  we  then  deprive 
them  of  soule,  of  life,  and  of  discourse  ?  Have  we  discovered 
or  knowen  any  unmoveable  or  insensible  stupidity  in  them  ? 
We,  who  have  no  commerce  but  of  obedience  with  them  ? 
Shall  we  say  we  have  scene  the  use  of  a  reasonable  soule,  in 
no  other  creature,  but  in  man  ?  What  ?  Have  we  scene 
any  thing  comparable  to  the  Sunne  ?  Leaveth  he  to  be, 
because  we  have  scene  nothing  semblable  unto  it  ?  And 
doth  he  leave  his  moving,  because  his  equall  is  no  where  to 
be  found  ?  If  that  which  we  have  not  scene,  is  not,  our 

143 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  knowledge  is  wonderfull  abridged.  Quce  sunt  tantce  animi 
XII  angustice  ?  4  What  narrownesse  of  my  heart  is  such  ? '  Be 

An  Apologie  £hey  not  dreames  of  humane  vanity,  to  make  a  celestiall 

Sebond11     earth,  or  world  of  the  Moone  ?     As  Anaxagoras  did  ?     And 

therein    to   plant   worldly  habitations,  and    as    Plato    and 

Plutarch  doe,  erect  their  colonies  for  our  use.     And  to  make 

SEN.  Ira,  ii.     of  our  knowne  earth  a  bright  shining  planet  ?     Inter  ccetera 

cap.  9.  mortalitatis  incommoda,  et  hoc  est  caligo  mentium :  nee  tantum 

necessitous  errandi,  sed  errorum  amor.  4  Among  other  dis- 
6  commodities  of  our  mortality  this  is  one,  there  is  darknesse 
4  in  our  minds,  and  in  us  not  onely  necessity  of  erring,  but 

SEN.  Epist.  4  a  love  of  errors.'  Corruptible  corpus  aggravat  animam,  et 
deprimit  terrena  inhabitatio  sensum  multa  cogitantem.  4  Our 
4  corruptible  body  doth  overlode  our  soule,  and  our  dwelling 
4  on  earth  weighes  downe  our  sense,  that  is  set  to  thinke  of 
4  many  matters.1  Presumption  is  our  naturall  and  originall 
infirmitie.  Of  all  creatures  man  is  the  most  miserable  and 
fraile,  and  therewithall  the  proudest  and  disdainfullest. 
Who  perceiveth  and  seeth  himselfe  placed  here,  amidst 
their  filth  and  mire  of  the  world,  fast  tied  and  nailed  to  the 
worst,  most  senselesse,  and  drooping  part  of  the  world,  in 
the  vilest  corner  of  the  house,  and  farthest  from  heavens 
coape,  with  those  creatures,  that  are  the  worst  of  the  three 
conditions ;  and  yet  dareth  imaginarily  place  himselfe  above 
the  circle  of  the  Moone,  and  reduce  heaven  under  his  feet. 
It  is  through  the  vanity  of  the  same  imagination,  that  he 
dare  equall  himselfe  to  God,  that  he  ascribeth  divine  condi 
tions  unto  himselfe,  that  he  selecteth  and  separateth  him 
selfe  from  out  the  ranke  of  other  creatures ;  to  which  his 
fellow-brethren  and  compeers,  he  cuts  out  and  shareth  their 
parts,  and  allotteth  them  what  portions  of  meanes  or  forces 
he  thinkes  good.  How  knoweth  he  by  the  vertue  of  his 
understanding  the  inward  and  secret  motions  of  beasts  ? 
By  what  comparison  from  them  to  us  doth  he  conclude  the 
brutishnesse,  he  ascribeth  unto  them  ?  When  I  am  playing 
with  my  Cat,  who  knowes  whether  she  have  more  sport  in 
dallying  with  me,  than  I  have  in  gaming  with  her  ?  We 
entertaine  one  another  with  mutuall  apish  trickes.  If  I 
have  my  houre  to  begin  or  to  refuse,  so  hath  she  hers. 
Plato  in  setting  forth  the  golden  age  under  Saturne, 
144 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

amongst  the  chiefe  advantages  that  man  had  then,  reporteth  CHAPTER 
the  communication  he  had  with  beasts,  of  whom  enquiring         XII 

and    taking   instruction,   he    knew   the    true   qualities,  and  An  Apologie 
T  .  m  &  c  e   .1  i  IP  of  Raymond 

dirrerences  or  every  one  or  them  :   by,  and  from  whom   he       Seboud 

got  an  absolute  understanding  and  perfect  wisedome,  where 
by  he  led  a  happier  life  than  we  can  doe.  Can  we  have  a 
better  proofe  to  judge  of  mans  impudency,  touching  beasts? 
This  notable  Author  was  of  opinion,  that  in  the  greatest 
part  of  the  corporall  forme,  which  nature  hath  bestowed  on 
them,  she  hath  onely  respected  the  use  of  the  Prognostica 
tions,  which  in  his  daies  were  thereby  gathered.  That  de 
fect  which  hindreth  the  communication  betweene  them  and 
us,  why  may  it  not  as  well  be  in  us,  as  in  them  ?  It  is  a 
matter  of  divination  to  guesse  in  whom  the  fault  is,  that 
we  understand  not  one  another.  For,  we  understand  them 
no  more  than  they  us.  By  the  same  reason,  may  they  as 
well  esteeme  us  beasts,  as  we  them.  It  is  no  great  marvell 
if  we  understand  them  not :  no  more  doe  we  the  Cornish, 
the  Welch,  or  Irish.  Yet  have  some  boasted  that  they 
understood  them,  as  Apollonius  Thyaneus,  Melampus, 
Tiresias,  Thales  and  others.  And  if  it  be  (as  Cosmo- 
graphers  report)  that  there  are  Nations,  who  receive  and 
admit  a  Dogge  to  be  their  King,  it  must  necessarily  follow, 
that  they  give  a  certaine  interpretation  to  his  voice  and 
moving.  We  must  note  the  parity  that  is  betweene  us. 
We  have  some  meane  understanding  of  their  senses,  so  have 
beasts  of  ours,  about  the  same  measure.  They  flatter  and 
faune  upon  us,  they  threat,  and  entreat  us,  so  doe  we  them. 
Touching  other  matters,  we  manifestly  perceive,  that  there 
is  a  full  and  perfect  communication  amongst  them,  and  that 
not  onely  those  of  one  same  kinde  understand  one  another, 
but  even  such  as  are  of  different  kindes. 

Et  mutce  pecudes,  et  denique  seclaferarum  LUCR.  v.  1069. 

Dissimiles  fuerunt  voces  variasque  cluere 

Cum  metus  aut  dolor  est,  aut  cum  iam  gaudia  gliscunt. 

Whole  heard's  (though  dumbe)  of  beasts,  both  wild  and 

tame 

Use  divers  voices,  diffrent  sounds  to  frame, 
As  joy,  or  griefe,  or  feare, 
Upspringing  passions  beare. 
T  145 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  By  one  kinde  of  barking  of  a  Dogge,  the  Horse  knoweth 
XI1  he  is  angrie  ;  by  another  voice  of  his,  he  is  nothing  dismaicl. 
Even  in  beasts,  that  have  no  voice  at  all,  by  the  reciprocall 
kindnesse,  which  we  see  in  them,  we  easily  inferre  there  is 
some  other  meane  of  entercommunication  :  their  jestures 
treat,  and  their  motions  discourse. 

LUCR.  v.  1040.  Non  alia  longe  rations  atque  ipsa  videtur 

Protrahere  ad  gestum,  pueros  infantia  linguae. 

No  otherwise,,  then  for  they  cannot  speake, 

Children  are  drawne  by  signes  their  mindes  to  breake. 

And  why  not,  as  well  as  our  dumbe  men  dispute,  argue 
and  tell  histories  by  signes  ?  I  have  scene  some  so  ready 
and  so  excellent  in  it,  that  (in  good  sooth)  they  wanted 
nothing  to  have  their  meaning  perfectly  understood.  Doe 
we  not  daily  see  lovers  with  the  lookes  and  rowling  of  their 
eyes,  plainly  shew  when  they  are  angrie  or  pleased,  and  how 
they  entreat  and  thanke  one  another,  assigne  meetings,  and 
expresse  any  passion  ? 

E'l  silentio  ancor  suole 
Haver  prieghi  et  parole. 

Silence  also  hath  a  way,, 
Words  and  prayers  to  convay. 

What  doe  we  with  our  hands  ?  Doe  we  not  sue  and 
entreat,  promise  and  performe,  call  men  unto  us  and  dis 
charge  them,  bid  them  farwell  and  be  gone,  threaten,  pray, 
beseech,  deny,  refuse,  demand,  admire,  number,  confesse, 
repent,  feare,  bee  ashamed,  doubt,  instruct,  command,  incite, 
encourage,  sweare,  witnesse,  accuse,  condemne,  absolve,  injurie, 
despise,  defie,  despight,  flatter,  applaud,  blesse,  humble, 
mocke,  reconcile,  recommend,  exalt,  shew  gladnesse,  rejoyce, 
complaine,  waile,  sorrow,  discomfort,  dispaire,  cry  out,  for 
bid,  declare  silence  and  astonishment?  And  what  not? 
With  so  great  variation,  and  amplifying,  as  if  they  would 
contend  with  the  tongue.  And  with  our  head,  doe  we  not 
invite  and  call  to  us,  discharge  and  send  away,  avow,  dis 
avow,  belie,  welcome,  honour,  worship,  disdaine,  demand, 
direct,  rejoyce,  affirme,  deny,  complaine,  cherish,  blandish, 
chide,  yeeld,  submit,  brag,  boast,  threaten,  exhort,  warrant, 

146 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

assure,  and  enquire?  What  doe  we  with  our  eye-lids?  and  CHAPTER 
with  our  shoulders  ?  To  conclude,  there  is  no  motion,  nor 
jesture  that  doth  not  speake,  and  speakes  in  a  language  very 
easie,  and  without  any  teaching  to  be  understood :  nay,  Sebond 
which  is  more,  it  is  a  language  common  and  publike  to  all : 
whereby  it  followeth  (seeing  the  varietie,  and  severall  use  it 
hath  from  others)  that  this  must  rather  be  deemed  the  pro 
per  and  peculiar  speech  of  humane  nature.  I  omit  that, 
which  necessitie  in  time  of  need  doth  particularly  instruct 
and  suddenly  teach  such  as  need  it ;  and  the  alphabets  upon 
fingers,  and  grammars  by  jestures;  and  the  sciences  which 
are  onely  exercised  and  expressed  by  them :  and  the  nations 
Plinie  reporteth  to  have  no  other  speech.  An  Ambassador 
of  the  Citie  of  Abdera,  after  he  had  talked  a  long  time 
unto  Agis  King  of  Sparta,  said  thus  unto  him :  O  King, 
what  answer  wilt  thou  that  I  beare  backe  unto  our 
citizens  ?  Thus  (answered  he)  that  I  have  suffered  thee  to 
speake  all  thou  wouldst,  and  as  long  as  thou  pleasedst, 
without  ever  speaking  one  word.  Is  not  this  a  kinde  of 
speaking  silence,  and  easie  to  be  understood  ?  And  as  for 
other  matters ;  what  sufficiency  is  there  in  us,  that  we  must 
not  acknowledge  from  the  industry  and  labours  of  beasts  ? 
Can  there  be  a  more  formall,  and  better  ordered  policie, 
divided  into  so  severall  charges  and  offices,  more  constantly 
entertained,  and  better  maintained,  than  that  of  Bees  ? 
Shall  we  imagine,  their  so  orderly  disposing  of  their  actions, 
and  managing  of  their  vacations,  have  so  proportioned  and 
formall  a  conduct  without  discourse,  reason,  and  forecast? 

His  quidam  signis  atque  hcec  exempla  sequuti,  VIRG.  Georg. 

Esse  apibus  partem  divine  mentis,  et  haustus  iv.  219. 

jEthereos  dixere. 

Some  by  these  signes,  by  these  examples  moved, 
Said  that  in  Bees  there  is  and  may  be  proved 
Some  taste  of  heavenly  kinde, 
Part  of  celestiall  minde. 

The  Swallowes  which  at  the  approach  of  spring  time  we 
see  to  pry,  to  search,  and  ferret  all  the  corners  of  our  houses  ; 
is  it  without  judgement  they  seeke,  or  without  discretion 
they  chuse  from  out  a  thousand  places,  that  which  is  fittest 
for  them,  to  build  their  nests  and  lodging  ?  And  in  that 

147 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  prety  cunning  contexture,  and  admirable  framing  of  their 
XII  houses,  would  birds  rather  fit  themselves  with  a  round,  than 

An  Apologie  a  Square  figure,  with  an  obtuse,  than  a  right  angle,  except 
they  knew  both  the  commodities  and  effects  of  them  ? 
Would  they  (suppose  you)  first  take  water  and  then  clay, 
unlesse  they  guessed  that  the  hardnesse  of  the  one  is  softned 
by  the  moistnesse  of  the  other  ?  Would  they  floore  their 
palace  with  mosse  or  downe,  except  they  foresaw  that  the 
tender  parts  of  their  young  ones  shall  thereby  lie  more  soft 
and  easie  ?  Would  they  shroud  and  shelter  themselves 
from  stormy  weather,  and  build  their  cabbins  toward  the 
East,  unlesse  they  knew  the  different  conditions  of  winds, 
and  considered  that  some  are  more  healthfull  and  safe  for 
them  than  some  others  ?  Why  doth  the  Spider  spin  her 
artificiall  web  thicke  in  one  place  and  thin  in  another? 
And  now  useth  one,  and  then  another  knot,  except  she  had 
an  imaginary  kinde  of  deliberation,  fore-thought,  and  con 
clusion  ?  We  perceive  by  the  greater  part  of  their  workes 
what  excellency  beasts  have  over  us,  and  how  weake  our  art 
and  short  our  cunning  is,  if  we  goe  about  to  imitate  them. 
We  see  notwithstanding,  even  in  our  grosest  workes,  what 
faculties  we  employ  in  them,  and  how  our  minde  employeth 
the  uttermost  of  her  skill  and  forces  in  them  :  why  should 
wee  not  thinke  as  much  of  them  ?  Wherefore  doe  we 
attribute  the  workes,  which  excell  what  ever  we  can  performe, 
either  by  nature  or  by  art,  unto  a  kinde  of  unknowne, 
naturall,  and  servile  inclination  ?  Wherein  unawares  wee  give 
them  a  great  advantage  over  us,  to  infer  that  nature,  led  by 
a  certaine  loving  kindnesse,  leadeth  and  accompanieth  them 
(as  it  were  by  the  hand)  unto  all  the  actions  and  commodi 
ties  of  their  life  ;  and  that  she  forsaketh  and  leaveth  us  to 
the  hazard  of  fortune ;  and  by  art  to  quest  and  finde  out 
those  things  that  are  behovefull  and  necessarie  for  our  pre 
servation  :  and  therewithall  denieth  us  the  meanes  to  attaine 
by  any  institution  and  contention  of  spirit  to  the  naturall 
sufficiency  of  brute  beasts :  So  that  their  brutish  stupidity 
doth  in  all  commodities  exceed,  whatsoever  our  divine  in 
telligence  can  effect.  Verily,  by  this  account  wee  might 
have  just  cause  and  great  reason  to  terme  her  a  most  injust 
and  partiall  stepdame :  But  there  is  no  such  thing,  our 
148 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

policy  is  not   so  deformed  and  disordered.      Nature  hath  CHAPTER 
generally  imbraced  all  her  creatures :  And  there  is  not  any,          XI1 
but  she  hath  amply  stored  with  all  necessary  meanes  for  the  An  Apologie 
p  ,1     •     i     •  i-<        j.i        j    -i        i    •    .          i  •  i_    T   of  Raymond 

preservation  of  their  being,     r  or  the  daily  plaints,  which  I        Sebond 

often  heare  men  make  (when  the  licence  of  their  conceits 
doth  sometimes  raise  them  above  the  clouds,  and  then  head 
long  tumbling  them  downe  even  to  the  Antipodes)  exclaim 
ing  that  jnan  is  the  onely  forsaken  and  out-cast  creature, 
naked  on  the  bare  earth,  fast  bound  and  swathed,  having 
nothing  to  cover  and  arme  himselfe  withall  but  the  spoile  of 
others  ;f  whereas  Nature  hath  clad  and  mantled  all  other 
creatures,  some  with  shels,  some  with  huskes,  with  rindes, 
with  haire,  with  wooll,  with  stings,  with  bristles,  with  hides, 
with  mosse,  with  feathers,  with  stales,  with  fleeces,  and  with 
silke,  according  as  their  quality  might  need,  or  their  con 
dition  require:  And  hath  fenced  and  armed  them  with 
clawes,  with  nailes,  with  talons,  with  hoofes,  with  teeth, 
with  stings,  and  with  homes,  both  to  assaile  others  and  to 
defend  themselves :  And  hath  moreover  instructed  them  in 
every  thing  fit  and  requisite  for  them,  as  to  swim,  to  runne, 
to  creepe,  to  flic,  to  roare,  to  bellow,  and  to  sing :  where  as 
man  only  (Oh  silly  wretched  man)  can  neither  goe,  nor 
speake,  nor  shift,  nor  feed  himselfe,  unlesse  it  be  to  whine 
and  weepe  onely,  except  hee  bee  taught. 

Turn  porro,  puer  ut  scevis  projectus  ab  undis  LUCR.  v.  222. 

Navita,  nudus  humijacet  infans,  indigus  omni 

Vitali  auxilio,  cum  primum  in  luminis  oras 

Nexibus  ex  alvo  matris  natura  profudit, 

Vagituque  locum  lugubri  complet,  ut  cequum  est 

Cui  tantum  in  vita  restet  transire  malorum : 

At  variai  crescunt  pecudes,  armenta,ferceque, 

Nee  crepitncula  ei*>  opus  est,  nee  cuiquam  adhibenda  est 

A  ImcK  nutricis  blanda  atque  infracta  loquela : 

Nee  varias  qucerunt  vestes  pro  tempore  cali : 

Denique  non  armis  opus  est,  non  mcenibus  altis 

Queis  sua  tutentur,  quando  omnibus  omnia  large 

Tellus  ipsa  parit,  naturaque  dtedala  rerum. 

An  infant,  like  a  shipwracke  ship-boy  cast  from  seas, 
Lies  naked  on  the  ground  and  speechlesse,  wanting  all 
The  helpes  of  vitall  spirit,  when  nature  with  small  ease 
Of  throw's,  to  see  first  light,  from  her  wombe  lets  him 
fall, 

149 


CHAPTER 
XII 

An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

Sebond 


LUCK.  v.  104. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

Then,  as  is  meet,  with  mourn'full  cries  he  fils  the  place, 
For  whom  so  many  ils  remaine  in  his  lives  race. 
But  divers  herds  of  tame  and  wild  beasts  foreward  spring, 
Nor  need  they  rattles,  nor  of  Nurces  cockring-kind 
The  flattering  broken  speech  their  lulluby  need  sing. 
Nor  seeke  they  divers  coats,  as  divers  seasons  bind. 
Lastly  no  armour  need  they,  nor  high-reared  wall 
Whereby  to  guard  their  owne,  since  all  things  unto  all 
Worke-masters  nature  doth  produce, 
And  the  earth  largely  to  their  use. 

Such  complaints  are  false :  There  is  a  greater  equality, 
and  more  uniforme  relation  in  the  policy  of  the  world.  Our 
skin  is  as  sufficiently  provided  with  hardnesse  against  the 
inj  uries  of  the  wether,  as  theirs :  Witnesse  divers  Nations, 
which  yet  never  knew  the  use  of  clothes.  Our  ancient 
Gaules  were  but  slightly  apparelled,  no  more  are  the  Irish 
men,  our  neighbours,  in  so  cold  a  climate :  Which  we  may 
better  judge  by  our  selves ;  for,  all  those  parts  of  our  bodie, 
we  are  pleased  to  leave  bare  to  winde  and  wether,  are  by 
experience  found  able  to  endure  it :  If  there  be  any  weake 
part  in  us,  which  in  likely-hood  should  seeme  to  feare  cold, 
it  ought  to  be  the  stomacke,  where  digestion  is  made :  Our 
forefathers  used  to  have  it  bare,  and  our  Ladies  (as  dainty- 
nice  as  they  be)  are  many  times  seene  to  goe  open-breasted, 
as  low  as  their  navill.  The  bandies  and  swathes  about  our 
children  are  no  more  necessary :  And  the  mothers  of  Lace- 
demonia,  brought  up  theirs  in  all  liberty  and  loosenesse  of 
moving  their  limbs  without  swathing  or  binding.  Our 
whining,  our  puling  and  our  weeping  is  common  to  most 
creatures,  and  divers  of  them  are  often  seene  to  waile  and 
grone  a  long  time  after  their  birth,  forsomuch  as  it  is  a 
countenance  fitting  the  weaknesse  wherein  they  feele  them 
selves.  As  for  the  use  of  eating,  and  feeding,  it  is  in  us,  as  in 
them,  naturall  and  without  teaching. 

Sentit  enim  vim  quisque  suam  quam  possit  abuti. 

For  every  one  soone-understanding  is 

Of  his  owne  strength,  which  he  may  use  amisse. 

Who  will  make  question,  that  a  child  having  attained 
the  strength  to  feed  himselfe,  could  not  quest  for  his  meat, 
and  shift  for  his  drinke  ?  The  earth  without  labour  or  tilling 

150 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

doth  sufficiently  produce  and  offer  him  as  much  as  he  shall  CHAPTER 

need.     And  if  not  at  all  times,  no  more  doth   she    unto         XII 

beasts ;  witnesse  the  provision,  wee  see  the  Ants  and  other 

silly  creatures  to  make  against  the  cold  and  barren  seasons       Sebon< 

of  the  yeare.     The  nations,  that  have  lately  bin  discovered, 

so  plenteously  stored  with  all  manner  of  naturall  meat  and 

drinke,  without  care  or  labor,  teach  us,  that  bread  is  not  our 

onely  food  :  And  that  without  toyling,  our  common  mother 

nature,  hath  with  great  plentie  stored  us  with  whatsoever 

should  be  needfull  for  us,  yea,  as  it  is  most  likely,  more 

richly  and  amply,  than  now  adaies  she  doth,  that  we  have 

added  so  much  art  unto  it : 

Et  tellus  nitidas  fruges  vinetaque  Iceta  LUCR.  ii.  1166. 

Sponte  sua  primum  mortalibus  ipsa  creavit, 

Ipsa  dedit  dulces  fcstus ,  et  pabula  Iceta, 

QufB  nunc  vix  nostro  grandescunt  aucta  labore, 

Conterimusque  boves  et  vires  agricolarum. 

The  earth  it  selfe  at  first  of  th'  owne  accord 
Did  men  rich  Vineyards,  and  cleane  fruit  afford. 
It  gave  sweet  of-springs  food  from  sweeter  soyle 
Which  yet  scarse  greater  grow  for  all  our  toyle, 
Yet  tire  therein  we  doe, 
Both  Plough-mens  strength  and  Oxen  too. 

The  gluttonous  excesse,  and  intemperate  lavishnesse  of 
our  appetite  exceeding  all  the  inventions,  we  endevour  to 
finde  out,  wherewith  to  glut  and  cloy  the  same.  As  for 
armes  and  weapons,  we  have  more,  that  be  naturall  unto  us, 
than  the  greatest  part  of  other  beasts :  We  have  more 
severall  motions  of  limbs,  and  naturally,  without  teaching : 
We  reape  more  serviceable  use  of  them,  than  they  do  :  Those 
which  are  trained  up  to  fight  naked,  are  scene  head  long  to 
cast  themselves  into  the  same  hazards  and  dangers,  as  we 
doe.  If  some  beasts  excell  us  in  this  advantage,  we  exceed 
many  others :  And  the  Industrie  to  enable,  the  skill  to 
fortifie,  and  the  wit  to  shelter  and  cover  our  body  by 
artificiall  meanes,  we  have  it  by  a  kind  of  naturall  instinct 
and  teaching.  Which  to  prove ;  the  Elephant  doth  whet 
and  sharpen  his  teeth,  he  useth  in  warre  (for  he  hath  some 
he  onely  useth  for  that  purpose)  which  he  heedfully  spareth, 
and  never  puts  them  to  other  service :  When  Buls  prepare 

151 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  themselves  to  fight,  they  raise,  scatter,  and  with  their  feet, 
XII  cast  the  dust  about  them  :  The  wild  Boare  whets  his  tuskes; 
f  Ra^^d  w^en  ^e  Ichneumon  is  to  grapple  with  the  Crocodile,  he 
11  walloweth  his  body  in  the  mire,  then  lets  the  same  drie  and 
harden  upon  him,  which  he  doth  so  often,  that  at  last  the 
same  becomes  as  hard  and  tough  as  any  well  compact  crust, 
which  serveth  him  in  stead  of  a  Cuirace.  Why  shall  we  not 
say,  that  it  is  as  naturall  for  us  to  arme  our  selves  with 
wood  and  yron  ?  As  for  speech,  sure  it  is,  that  if  it  be  not 
naturall  it  is  not  necessary.  I  beleeve  neverthelesse,  that  if 
a  childe,  bred  in  some  uncouth  solitarinesse,  farre  from  haunt 
of  people  (though  it  were  a  hard  matter  to  make  triall  of  it) 
would  no  doubt  have  some  kind  of  words  to  expresse,  and 
speech  to  utter  his  conceits :  And  it  is  not  to  be  imagined, 
that  nature  hath  refused  us  that  meane,  and  barred  us  that 
helpe,  which  she  hath  bestowed  upon  many  and  divers  other 
creatures :  For,  what  is  that  faculty  we  see  in  them,  when 
they  seeme  to  complaine,  to  rejoyce,  to  call  one  unto  another 
for  helpe,  and  bid  one  another  to  loving  copulation  (as  com 
monly  they  doe)  by  the  use  of  their  voice,  but  a  kind  of 
speech  ?  And  shall  not  they  speake  among  themselves,  that 
speake  and  utter  their  minde  unto  us,  and  we  to  them  ? 
How  many  waies  speake  we  unto  our  Dogges,  and  they  seeme 
to  understand  and  answer  us  ?  With  another  language,  and 
with  other  names  speake  we  unto,  and  call  them,  than  we 
doe  our  Birds,  our  Hogges,  our  Oxen,  our  Horses,  and  such 
like ;  and  according  to  their  different  kindes  we  change  our 
Idiome. 

Cosi  per  entro  loro  schiera  bruna 

S'  ammusa  Z'una  con  T ultra  formiccp, 

Forse  a  stpiar  lor  via,  et  lor  fortuna. 

So  Ants  amidst  their  sable-coloured  band 
One  with  another  mouth  to  mouth  confer, 
Haply  their  way,  or  state  to  understand. 

Me  seemeth  that  Lactantius  doth  not  onely  attribute 
speech  unto  beasts,  but  also  laughing.  And  the  same 
difference  of  tongues,  which  according  to  the  diversity  of 
Countries  is  found  amongst  us,  is  also  found  amongst  beasts 
of  one  same  kinde.  Aristotle  to  that  purpose  alleageth  the 

152 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

divers  calles  or  purres  of  Partriges,  according  to  the  situa-  CHAPTER 

tion  of  their  place  of  breeding  :  XI1 

An  Apologie 

— variaque  volucres  of  Raymond 

Longe  alias  alio  jaciunt  in  tempore  voces,  Sebond 

Et  partim  mutant  cum  tempestatibus  und  LUCR.  v.  1088. 

Raucisonos  cantos. 

And  divers  birds,  send  forth  much  divers  sounds 
At  divers  times,  and  partly  change  the  grounds 
Of  their  hoarce-sounding  song, 
As  seasons  change  along. 

But  it  would  be  knowen,  what  language  such  a  child 
should  speake :  and  what  some  report  by  divination,  hath 
no  great  likely-hood.  And  if  against  this  opinion,  a  man 
would  alleage  unto  me,  that  such  as  are  naturally  deafe, 
speake  not  at  all :  I  answer,  that  it  is  not  onely  because  they 
could  not  receive  the  instruction  of  the  world  by  their  eares, 
but  rather  in  asmuch  as  the  sense  of  hearing,  whereof  they 
are  deprived,  hath  some  affinity  with  that  of  speaking,  both 
which  with  a  naturall  kinde  of  ligament  or  seame,  hold  and 
are  fastned  together:  In  such  sort,  as  what  we  speake,  we 
must  first  speake  it  unto  our  selves,  and  before  we  utter  and 
send  the  same  forth  to  strangers,  we  make  it  inwardly  to 
sound  unto  our  eares.  I  have  said  all  this,  to  maintaine  the 
coherency  and  resemblance,  that  is  in  all  humane  things, 
and  to  bring  us  unto  the  generall  throng.  We  are  neither 
above  nor  under  the  rest :  what  ever  is  under  the  coape  of 
heaven  (saith  the  wise  man)  runneth  one  law,  and  followeth 
one  fortune. 

Indupedita  suis  fatalibus  omnia  vinclis.  Ib.  885. 

All  things  enfolded  are, 

In  fatall  bonds  as  fits  their  share. 

Some  difference  there  is,  there  are  orders  and  degrees ; 
but  all  is  under  the  visage  of  one-same  nature. 

— res  qufeque  suo  ritu  procedit,  et  omnes  Ib.  932. 

Foedere  naturee  certo  discrimina  servant. 

All  things  proceed  in  their  course,  natures  all 
Keepe  difference,  as  in  their  league  doth  fall. 

Man  must  be   forced,  and  marshalled  within  the  lists  of 
U  153 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  this  policie.  Miserable  man  with  all  his  wit  cannot  in  effect 
XII  goe  beyond  it :  he  is  embraced,  and  engaged,  and  as  other 

AnApologie  crea^-ures  of  n|s  ranke  are?  he  is  subjected  in  like  bondes, 
11  anc^  without  any  prerogative  or  essentiall  preexcellencie, 
what  ever  Privilege  he  assume  unto  himselfe,  he  is  of  very 
meane  condition.  That  which  is  given  by  opinion  or  fan- 
tasie  hath  neither  body  nor  taste.  And  if  it  be  so,  that 
he  alone,  above  all  other  Creatures,  hath  this  liberty  of 
imagination,  and  this  licence  of  thoughts,  which  represent 
unto  him,  both  what  is,  and  what  is  not  and  what  him 
pleaseth,  falsehood  and  truth  ;  it  is  an  advantage  bought  at 
a  very  high  rate,  and  whereof  he  hath  litle  reason  to  glorie : 
For  thence  springs  the  chiefest  source  of  all  the  mischiefs 
that  oppresse  him,  as  sinne,  sicknesse,  irresolution,  trouble 
and  despaire.  But  to  come  to  my  purpose,  I  say  therefore, 
there  is  no  likelyhood,  we  should  imagine,  the  beasts  doe 
the  very  same  things  by  a  naturall  inclination  and  forced 
genuitie,  which  we  doe  of  our  owne  freewil  and  Industrie. 
Of  the  very  same  effects  we  must  conclude  alike  faculties ; 
and  by  the  richest  effects  infer  the  noblest  faculties,  and 
consequently  acknowledge,  that  the  same  discourse  and  way, 
we  hold  in  working,  the  very  same,  or  perhaps  some  other 
better,  doe  beasts  hold.  Wherefore  shall  we  imagine  that 
naturall  compulsion  in  them,  that  prove  no  such  effect  our 
selves  ?  Since  it  is  more  honourable  to  be  addressed  to  act, 
and  tyed  to  worke  orderly,  by  and  through  a  naturall  and 
unavoideable  condition,  and  most  approching  to  Divinitie, 
than  regularly  to  worke  and  act,  by,  and  through  a  casuall 
and  rash  libertie ;  and  it  is  safer  to  leave  the  reignes  of  our 
conduct  unto  nature,  than  unto  ourselves.  The  vanitie  of 
our  presumption  maketh  us  rather  to  be  beholding,  and  as 
it  were  endebted  unto  our  owne  strength,  for  our  sufficiency, 
than  unto  her  liberalitie ;  and  enrich  other  creatures  with 
naturall  gifts,  and  yeeld  those  unto  them,  that  so  we  may 
ennoble  and  honour  our  selves  with  gifts  purchased,  as  me 
thinketh,  by  a  very  simple  humour :  For,  I  would  pri/e 
graces,  and  value  gifts,  that  were  altogether  mine  owne,  and 
naturall  unto  me,  as  much  as  I  would  those,  I  had  begged, 
and  with  a  long  prentiship,  shifted  for.  It  lyeth  not  in 
our  power  to  obtaine  a  greater  commendation,  than  to  be 
154 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

favoured  both  of  God  and  Nature.  By  that  reason,  the  CHAPTER 
Fox,  which  the  inhabitants  of  Thrace  use  when  they  will  XII 
attempt  to  march  upon  the  yce  of  some  frozen  river,  and  of^^S 
to  that  end  let  her  go  loose  afore  them,  should  we  see  her  Sebond 
running  alongst  the  river  side,  approach  her  eare  close  to 
the  yce,  to  listen  whether  by  any  farre  or  neere  distance, 
she  may  heare  the  noyse  or  roaring  of  the  water,  running 
under  the  same,  and  according  as  she  perceiveth  the  yce 
thereby  to  be  thicke  or  thinne,  to  goe  either  forward  or 
backward;  might  not  we  lawfully  j udge,  that  the  same  dis 
course  possesseth  her  head,  as  in  like  case  it  would  ours  ? 
And  that  it  is  a  kinde  of  debating  reason  and  consequence, 
drawen  from  naturall  sense  ?  Whatsoever  maketh  a  noyse 
moveth,  whatsoever  moveth,  is  not  frozen,  whatsoever  is 
not  frozen,  is  liquid,  whatsoever  is  liquid,  yeelds  under  any 
weight  ?  For  to  impute  that  only  to  a  quicknesse  of  the 
sense  of  hearing,  without  discourse  or  consequence,  is  but  a 
fond  conceipt,  and  cannot  enter  into  my  imagination.  The 
like  must  be  judged  of  so  many  wiles,  and  inventions,  where 
with  beasts  save  themselves  from  the  snares,  and  scape  the 
baits  we  lay  to  entrap  them.  And  if  we  will  take  hold  of 
any  advantage  tending  to  that  purpose,  that  it  is  in  our 
power  to  seize  upon  them,  to  employ  them  to  our  service, 
and  to  use  them  at  our  pleasure ;  it  is  but  the  same  oddes 
we  have  one  upon  another.  To  which  purpose  we  have  our 
slaves  or  bond-men ;  and  were  not  the  Climacides,  certaine 
women  in  Syria,  which  creeping  on  al  foure,  upon  the  ground, 
served  the  Ladies  in  steed  of  footstoles  or  ladders  to  get  up 
into  their  coachs  ?  Where  the  greater  part  of  free  men  for 
very  slight  causes,  abandon  both  their  life  and  being,  to  the 
power  of  others.  The  wives  and  Concubines  of  the  Thra- 
cians  strive  and  contend,  which  of  them  shalbe  chosen,  to 
bee  slaine  over  her  husbands  or  lovers  tombe.  Have  tyrants 
ever  failed  to  find  many  men  vowed  to  their  devotion  ? 
Where  some  for  an  over-plus,  or  supererogation  have  added 
this  necessity,  that  they  must  necessarily  accompany  them, 
as  well  in  death,  as  in  life.  Whole  hostes  of  men  have  thus 
tyed  themselves  unto  their  Captaines.  The  tenor  of  the 
oath  ministred  unto  the  schollers,  that  entered  and  were 
admitted  the  rude  schoole  of  Roman  Gladiators,  emplied 

155 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  these  promises:    which  was  this.     We  vow  and  sweare,  to 
XII          suffer  our  selves,  to  be  enchained,  beaten,  burned  and  killed 
w^  ^ne  sword,  and  endure  whatsoever  any  lawfull  fenser 
ought  to  endure  for  his  master :  most  religiously  engaging 
both  our  bodie  and  soule  to  the  use  of  his  service : 

TIBUL.  i.  EL  Ure  meum  si  vis  flamma  caput,  et  peteferro 

ix.  21.  Corpus,  et  intorto  verbere  terga  seca. 

Burne   tyrant   (if  thou  wilt)   my  head  with  fire,   with 

sword 
My  body  strike,  my  backe  cut  with  hard-twisted  cord. 

Was  not  this  a  very  strict  covenant  ?  Yet  were  there 
some  yeares  ten  thousand  found,  that  entered  and  lost  them 
selves  in  those  schooles.  When  the  Scithians  buried  their 
King,  they  strangled  over  his  dead  body  first,  the  chiefest 
and  best  beloved  of  his  Concubines,  then  his  Cup-bearer, 
the  Master  of  his  horse,  his  Chamberlaine,  the  Usher  of  his 
Chamber,  and  his  master  Cooke.  And  in  his  anniversary 
killed  fiftie  horse,  mounted  with  fifty  Pages,  whom  before, 
they  had  slaine  with  thrusting  sharpe  stakes  into  their  funda 
ment,  which  going  up  along  their  chine-bone,  came  out  at 
their  throat.  Whom  thus  mounted,  they  set  in  orderly 
rankes  about  the  tombe.  The  men  that  serve  us,  doe  it 
better  cheape,  and  for  a  lesse  curious,  and  favourable  en 
treating,  than  we  use  unto  birds,  unto  horses,  and  unto 
dogges.  What  carke  and  toile,  apply  we  not  our  selves 
unto  for  their  sakes  ?  Me  thinks,  the  vilest  and  basest 
servants  will  never  doe  that  so  willingly  for  their  Masters, 
which  Princes  are  glad  to  doe  for  their  beasts.  Diogenes 
seeing  his  kinsfolks  to  take  care  how  they  might  redeeme 
him  out  of  thraldome  ;  They  are  fooles  (said  he)  for,  it  is  my 
Master,  that  governeth,  keepeth,  feedeth  and  serveth  mee : 
And  such  as  keepe  or  entertaine  beasts,  may  rather  say  they 
serve  them,  than  that  they  are  served  of  them.  And  if  they 
have  that  naturall  greater  magnanimity,  that  never  Lyon 
was  scene  to  subject  himselfe  unto  another  Lyon,  nor  one 
Horse  unto  another  Horse,  for  want  of  heart.  As  wee 
hunt  after  beasts,  so  Tygers  and  Lyons  hunt  after  men,  and 
have  a  like  exercise  one  upon  another:  Hounds  over  the 
Hare;  the  Pike  or  Luce  over  the  Tench;  the  Swallowes 

156 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

over   the    Grasse-hoppers,    and    the    Sparrow-hawkes    over  CHAPTER 

Blacke-birds  and  Larkes.  .XI* 

An  Apologie 

— serpente  ciconia  pullos  of  Raymond 
Nutrit,  et  inventd  per  devia  rura  lacertd,  Sebond 

Et  leporem  aut  capream  famula  lovis,  et  generosa  iuv.  Sat.  xiv. 

In  saltu  venantur  aves.  74. 

The  storke  her  young-ones  feeds  with  serpents  prey, 
And  lyzerts  found  somewhere  out  of  the  way. 
loves  servants-Eagles,  hawkes  of  nobler  kinde, 
In  forrests  hunt,  a  hare  or  kid  to  finde.     ' 

We  share  the  fruits  of  our  prey  with  our  dogges  and 
hawkes,  as  a  meed  of  their  paine  and  reward  of  their  in 
dustry.  As  about  Amphipolis  in  Thrace,  faulkners,  and 
wilde  hawks  divide  their  game  equally  :  And  as  about  the 
Maeotide-fennes,  if  fishers  doe  not  very  honestly  leave  be 
hind  them  an  even  share  of  their  fishings  for  the  Woolves 
that  range  about  those  coasts,  they  presently  run  and  teare 
their  nets.  And,  as  we  have  a  kinde  of  fishing,  rather 
managed  by  sleight,  than  strength,  as  that  of  hooke  and 
line  about  our  Angling-rods,  so  have  beasts  amongst  them 
selves.  Aristotle  reporteth,  that  the  Cuttle-Fish,  casteth  a 
long  gut  out  of  her  throat,  which  like  a  line  she  sendeth 
forth,  and  at  her  pleasure  pulleth  it  in  againe,  according 
as  she  perceiveth  some  little  fish  come  neere  her,  who  being 
close-hidden  in  the  gravell  or  stronde,  letteth  him  nible  or 
bite  the  end  of  it,  and  then  by  little  and  little  drawes  it  in 
unto  her,  untill  the  Fish  be  so  neere,  that  with  a  sodaine 
leape  she  may  catch  it.  Touching  strength,  there  is  no 
Creature  in  the  world,  open  to  so  many  wrongs  and  injuries 
as  man :  He  need  not  a  Whale,  an  Elephant,  nor  a  Croco 
dile,  nor  any  such  other  wilde  beast,  of  which  one  alone  is 
of  power  to  defeat  a  great  number  of  men :  seely  lice  are 
able  to  make  Silla  give  over  his  Dictatorship:  The  heart 
and  life  of  a  mighty  and  triumphant  Emperor,  is  but  the 
break-fast  of  a  seely  little  Worme.  Why  say  we,  that  skill 
to  discerne,  and  knowledge  to  make  choyce  (gotten  by  art, 
and  acquired  by  discourse)  of  things  good  for  this  life,  and 
availfull  against  sicknesse,  and  so  distinguish  of  those  which 
are  hurtfull,  and  to  know  the  vertue  of  Reubarb,  qualitie  of 
Oake  feme,  and  operation  of  Polipodie,  is  only  peculiar  unto 

157 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  man  ?  When  we  see  the  Goats  of  Candia  being  shot  with 
XII         an  arrow,  to  choose  from  out  a  million  of  simples,  the  herb 

An  Apologie  Dittamy  or  Garden  -ginger,  and  therewith  cure  themselves  ; 
of  Raymond  -  & 


T  (1  ,    .      ,  „     T7.          .  ,.    , 

Sebond       an<^  the  Tortoise  having  eaten  of  a  Viper,  immediatly  to  seek 

for  Origon  or  wild  Marjoram,  to  purge  herselfe  :  the  Dragon 
to  run  and  cleare  his  eies  with  fen  el  :  the  Cranes  with  their 
bils  to  minister  glisters  of  sea-water  unto  themselves  ;  the 
Elephants  to  pull  out,  not  only  from  themselves  and  their 
fellowes,  but  also  from  their  masters  (witnesse  that  of  King 
Porus,  whom  Alexander  defeated)  such  javelins  or  darts,  as 
in  fight  have  beene  thirled  or  shot  at  them  ;  so  nimbly  and 
so  cunningly,  as  our  selves  could  never  do  it  so  easily,  and 
with  so  little  paine  :  Why  say  wee  not  likewise  that  that  is 
science,  and  prudence  in  them  ?  For,  if  to  depresse  them, 
some  would  alleadge,  it  is  by  the  onely  instruction  and  in 
stinct  of  Nature,  they  know-it  ;  that  will  not  take  the  name 
of  science,  and  title  of  prudence  from  them  ;  it  is  rather  to 
ascribe  it  unto  them,  than  to  us,  for  the  honour  of  so  assured 
a  schoole-mistris.  Chrysippus,  albeit  in  other  things  as 
disdainfull  a  j  udge  of  the  condition  of  beasts,  as  any  other 
Philosopher,  considering  the  earnest  movings  of  the  dog, 
who  comming  into  a  path,  that  led  three  severall  wayes,  in 
search  or  quest  of  his  Master,  whom  he  had  lost,  or  in  pur 
suit  of  some  prey,  that  hath  escaped  him,  goeth  senting  first 
one  way,  and  then  another,  and  having  assured  himself  of 
two,  because  he  findeth  not  the  tracke  of  what  he  hunteth 
for,  without  more  adoe,  furiously  betakes  himselfe  to  the 
third  ;  he  is  enforced  to  confesse,  that  such  a  dog  must 
necessarily  discourse  thus  with  himselfe,  '  I  have  followed  my 
6  Masters  footing  hitherto,  hee  must  of  necessity  passe  by 
'  one  of  these  three  wayes  ;  it  is  neither  this  nor  that,  then 
'  consequently  hee  is  gone  this  other.1  And  by  this  con 
clusion  or  discourse  assuring  himselfe,  comming  to  the  third 

!mth,  hee  useth  his  sense  no  more,  nor  sounds  it  any  longer, 
)ut  by  the  power  of  reason  suffers  himselfe  violently  to  be 
caried  through  it.  This  meere  logicall  tricke,  and  this  use 
of  divided  and  conjoyned  propositions,  and  of  the  sufficient 
numbring  of  parts  :  Is  it  not  as  good,  that  the  dog  know  it 
by  himselfe,  as  by  Trapezuntius  his  logicke  ?  Yet  are  not 
beasts  altogether  unapt  to  be  instructed  after  our  manner. 
158 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

We  teach  Blacke-birds,  Starlins,  Ravens,  Piots,  and  Parots  to  CHAPTER 
chat ;  and  that  facilitie  we  perceive  in  them,  to  lend  us  their  XII  . 
voyce  so  supple,  and  their  wind  so  tractable,  that  so  wee  may  ^j^mcSl 
frame  and  bring  it  to  a  certaine  number  of  letters  and  silables,  Sebond 
witnesseth,  they  have  a  kind  of  inward  reason,  which  makes 
them  so  docile,  and  willing  to  learne.  I  thinke  every  man  is 
cloied  and  wearied,  with  seeing  so  many  apish  and  mimmike 
trickes,  that  j  uglers  teach  their  Dogges,  as  the  dances,  where 
they  misse  not  one  cadence  of  the  sounds  or  notes  they  heare : 
Marke  but  the  divers  turnings,  and  severall  kinds  of  motions, 
which  by  the  commandement  of  their  bare  words  they  make 
them  performe  :  But  I  wonder  not  a  little  at  the  effect, 
which  is  ordinary  amongst  us  ;  and  that  is,  the  dogs  which 
blind  men  use,  both  in  Citie  and  Country  :  I  have  observed 
how  sodainly  they  will  stop  when  they  come  before  some 
doores,  where  they  are  wont  to  receive  almes ;  how  carefully 
they  will  avoyd  the  shocke  of  Carts  and  Coaches,  even  when 
they  have  roome  enough  to  passe  by  them  selves.  I  have 
scene  some,  going  along  a  Towne-ditch,  leave  a  plaine  and 
even  path,  and  take  a  worse,  that  so  they  might  draw  their 
Master  from  the  ditch.  How  could  a  man  make  the  dog 
cqnceive,  his  charge  was  only  to  looke  to  his  masters  safetie, 
and  for  his  service  to  despise  his  owne  commoditie  and  good  ? 
And  how  should  he  have  the  knowledge,  that  such  a  path 
would  be  broade  inough  for  him,  but  not  for  a  blind  man  ? 
Can  all  this  be  conceived  without  reason  ?  We  must  not  for 
get  what  Plutarke  affirmeth  to  have  scene  a  dog  in  Rome 
doe  before  the  Emperour  Vespasian  the  father,  in  the  Theatre 
of  Marcellus.  This  Dog  served  a  jugler,  who  was  to  play  a 
fiction  of  many  faces,  and  sundry  countenances,  where  he 
also  was  to  act  a  part.  Amongst  other  things,  he  was  for 
a  long  while  to  counterfeit  and  faine  himselfe  dead,  because 
he  had  eaten  of  a  certaine  drugge :  having  swallowed  a 
peece  of  bread,  which  was  supposed  to  be  the  drug,  he 
began  sodainly  to  stagger  and  shake,  as  if  he  had  beene 
giddie,  then  stretching  and  laying  himselfe  along,  as  stiffe 
as  if  hee  were  starke-dead,  suffered  himselfe  to  be  dragged 
and  haled  from  one  place  to  another,  according  to  the 
subject  and  plot  of  the  play,  and  when  he  knew  his  time, 
first  he  began  faire  and  softly  to  stirre,  as  if  he  were  rouzed 

159 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  out  of  a  dead  slumber,  then  lifting  up  his  head,  hee  looked 
^\  '  anc^  stared  so  gastly,  that  all  the  by-standers  were  amazed. 

of" Raymond  The  Oxen'  which  in  the  Kin£'s  gardens  of  Susa  were  taught 
Sebond  to  water  them,  and  to  draw  water  out  of  deepe  Wells,  turned 
certaine  great  wheeles,  to  which  were  fastned  great  buckets 
(as  in  many  places  of  Languedoke  is  commonly  scene)  and 
being  every  one  appoynted  to  draw  just  a  hundred  turnes  a 
day,  they  were  so  accustomed  to  that  number,  as  it  was  im 
possible  by  any  compulsion  to  make  them  draw  one  more, 
which  taske  ended  they  would  suddenly  stop.  We  are 
growne  striplings  before  we  can  tell  a  hundred  ;  and  many 
Nations  have  lately  beene  discovered,  that  never  knew  what 
numbers  meant.  More  discourse  is  required  to  teach  others, 
than  to  be  taught.  And  omitting  what  Democritus  judged 
and  proved,  which  is,  that  beasts  have  instructed  us  in  most 
of  our  Arts  :  As  the  Spider  to  weave  and  sew,  the  Swallow 
to  build,  the  Swan,  and  the  Nightingale  musicke,  and  divers 
beasts,  by  imitating  them,  the  Art  of  Physicke  :  Aristotle  is 
of  opinion,  that  Nightingales  teach  their  young-ones  to  sing, 
wherein  they  employ  both  long  time  and  much  care  :  whence 
it  followeth,  that  those  which  we  keepe  tame  in  Cages  and 
have  not  had  leasure  to  goe  to  their  Parents  schoole,  lose 
much  grace  in  their  singing.  Whereby  we  may  conclude,  they 
are  much  amended  by  discipline  and  study.  And  amongst 
those  that  run  wilde,  their  song  is  not  all  one,  nor  alike. 
Each  one  hath  learnt  either  better  or  worse,  according  to  his 
capacity.  And  so  jealous  are  they  in  their  prentiseship,  that 
to  excell  one  another,  they  will  so  stoutly  contend  for  the 
mastery,  that  many  times,  such  as  are  vanquished  die  ;  their 
wind  and  strength  soner  failing  than  their  voice.  The  young- 
ones  wil  very  sadly  sit  recording  their  lesson,  and  are  often 
scene  labouring  how  to  imitate  certain  song-notes  :  The 
Scholler  listneth  attentively  to  his  Masters  Lesson,  and  care 
fully  yeeldeth  account  of  it ;  now  one  and  then  another 
shall  hold  his  peace  :  Marke  but  how  they  endevour  to  amend 
their  faults,  and  how  the  elder  striveth  to  reprove  the 
youngest.  Arrius  protesteth  to  have  scene  an  Elephant, 
who  on  every  thigh  having  a  Cimball  hanging,  and  one 
fastned  to  his  truncke,  at  the  sound  of  which,  all  other 
Elephants  danced  in  a  round,  now  rising  aloft,  then  lowting 
160 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

full  low  at  certaine  cadences,  even  as  the  instrument  directed  CHAPTER 
them,  and  was  much  delighted  with  the  harmony.  In  the 
great  shewes  of  Rome,  Elephants  were  ordinarily  seene,  taught  tf 
to  move  and  dance  at  the  sound  of  a  voice,  certaine  dances,  ° 
wherein  were  many  strange  shifts,  enter-changes,  caprings, 
and  cadences,  very  hard  to  be  learned.  Some  have  beene 
noted  to  konne  and  practise  their  lessons,  using  much  study 
and  care,  as  being  loath  to  be  chidden  and  beaten  of  their 
masters.  But  the  tale  of  the  Piot  is  very  strange,  which 
Plutarke  confidently  witnesseth  to  have  seene  :  This  lay  was 
in  a  Barbers  shop  of  Rome,  and  was  admirable  in  counter 
feiting  with  her  voice  whatsoever  she  heard  :  It  fortuned 
one  day,  that  certaine  Trumpeters  staied  before  this  shop, 
and  there  sounded  a  good  while  ;  and  being  gone,  all  that 
day,  and  the  next  after,  the  Piot  began  to  be  very  sad, 
silent,  and  melancholy,  whereat  all  men  marvelled,  and  sur 
mized  that  the  noise  or  clang  of  the  Trumpets  had  thus 
affrighted  and  dizzied  her,  and  that  with  her  hearing  she 
had  also  lost  her  voice.  But  at  last  they  found,  she  was 
but  in  a  deepe  study,  and  dumpish  retracting  into  her  selfe, 
exercising  her  minde,  and  preparing  her  voice,  to  represent 
the  sound,  and  expresse  the  noise  of  the  Trumpets  she  had 
heard  :  And  the  first  voice  she  uttered  was  that,  wherein 
she  perfectly  expressed  their  straines,  their  closes,  and 
their  changes  :  having  by  her  new  Prentiship  altogether 
quit,  and  as  it  were,  scorned  what  ever  shee  could  prattle 
before.  I  will  not  omit  to  alleage  another  example  of  a 
Dogge,  which  Plutarke  also  saith  to  have  seene  (as  for  any 
order  or  method,  I  know  very  well  I  doe  but  confound  it, 
which  I  observe  no  more  in  ranging  these  examples,  than  I 
doe  in  all  the  rest  of  my  businesse)  who  being  in  a  ship, 
noted  that  this  Dogge  was  in  great  perplexity  how  to  get 
some  Oyle  out  of  a  deepe  Pitcher,  which  by  reason  of  it's 
narrow  mouth,  he  could  not  reach  with  his  tongue,  got  him 
presently  some  Pibble  stones,  and  put  so  many  into  the 
larre,  that  he  made  the  Oyle  come  up  so  neare  the  brimme, 
as  he  could  easily  reach  and  licke  some.  And  what  is  that 
but  the  effect  of  a  very  subtill  spirit  ?  It  is  reported,  that 
the  Ravens  of  Barbary  will  doe  the  like,  when  the  water 
they  would  drinke  is  too  low.  This  action  doth  somewhat 
X  161 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  resemble  that,  which  luba  a  King  of  that  Nation  relateth  of 
XI1  their  Elephants,  that  when  through  the  wiles  of  those  who 

An  Apologie  cnase  them,  any  one  chanceth  to  fall  into  certaine  deep  pits, 
Sebom?11  which  they  prepare  for  them,  and  to  deceive  them,  they  cover 
over  with  reeds,  shrubs,  and  boughes,  his  fellowes  wile  speedily 
with  all  diligence  bring  great  store  of  stones  and  pieces  of 
timber,  that  so  they  may  helpe  to  recover  him  out  againe. 
But  this  beast  hath  in  many  other  effects,  such  affinity  with 
mans  sufficiency,  that  would  I  particularly  trace  out  what 
experience  hath  taught,  I  should  easily  get  an  affirmation  of 
what  I  so  ordinarily  maintaine,  which  is,  that  there  is  more 
difference  found  betweene  such  and  such  a  man,  than  betweene 
such  a  beast  and  such  a  man.  An  Elephants  keeper  in  a 
private  house  of  Syria,  was  wont  every  meale  to  steale  away 
halfe  of  the  allowance  which  was  allotted  him  ;  it  fortuned 
on  a  day,  his  master  would  needs  feed  him  himselfe,  and 
having  poured  that  just  measure  of  barly,  which  for  his 
allowance  he  had  prescribed  him,  into  his  manger :  the 
Elephant  sternely  eying  his  master,  with  his  truncke  divided 
the  provender  in  two  equall  parts,  and  laid  the  one  aside, 
by  which  he  declared  the  wrong  his  keeper  did  him. 
Another  having  a  keeper,  who  to  encrease  the  measure  of  his 
provender,  was  wont  to  mingle  stones  with  it,  came  one  day 
to  the  pot  which  with  meat  in  it  for  his  keepers  dinner  was 
seething  over  the  fire,  and  filled  it  up  with  ashes.  These  are 
but  particular  effects  :  But  that  which  all  the  world  hath 
scene,  and  all  men  know,  which  is,  that  in  all  the  armies  that 
came  out  of  the  East,  their  chiefest  strength  consisted  in 
their  Elephants  by  whom  they  reaped,  without  comparison, 
farre  greater  effects,  than  now  adaies  we  do  by  our  great 
Ordnance,  which  in  a  manner  holds  their  place  in  a  ranged 
battel  (such  as  have  any  knowledge  in  ancient  Histories  may 
easily  guesse  it  to  be  true). 

luv.  Sat.  xii.  — si  quidem  Tyrio  servire  solebant 

107.  Anibali,  et  nostris  ducibus,  regique  Molosso 

Horum  majores,  et  dorsoferre  cohortes, 
Partem  aliquam  belli,  et  euntem  in  prcelia  turmam. 
Their  elders  usde  great  Hannibal  to  steed 
Our  Leaders,  and  Molossian  Kings  at  need, 
And  on  their  backe  to  beare  strong-guarding  Knights, 
Part  of  the  warre,  and  troupes  addrest  to  fights. 
162 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

A  man  must  needs  rest  assured  of  the  confidence  they  had  CHAPTER 
in  these  beasts,  and  of  their  discourse,  yeelding  the  front  of  XI1 
a  battel  unto  them ;  where  the  least  stay  they  could  have  ^  IU  mo*nd 
made,  by  reason  of  the  hugenesse  and  weight  of  their  bodies,  Sebond 
and  the  least  amazement  that  might  have  made  them  turne 
head  upon  their  owne  men,  had  bin  sufficient  to  lose  all. 
And  few  examples  have  been  noted,  that  ever  it  fortuned 
they  turned  upon  their  owne  troupes,  whereas  we  head-long 
throng  one  upon  another,  and  so  are  put  to  rout :  They  had 
charge  given  them,  not  onely  of  one  simple  moving,  but  of 
many  and  severall  parts  in  the  combat :  As  the  Spaniards 
did  to  their  dogges  in  their  new  conquest  of  the  Indias,  to 
whom  they  gave  wages,  and  imparted  their  booties ;  which 
beasts  shewed  as  much  dexteritie  in  pursuing,  and  judge 
ment  in  staying  their  victorie,  in  charging,  or  retreating, 
and  as  occasion  served  in  distinguishing  their  friends  from 
their  enemies,  as  they  did  earnestnesse  and  eagernes :  we 
rather  admire  and  consider  strange  than  common  things  : 
without  which  I  should  never  so  long  have  ammused  my 
selfe  about  this  tedious  catalogue.  For,  in  my  judgement 
he  that  shall  neerely  checke,  what  we  ordinarily  see  in  those 
beasts  that  live  amongst  us,  shall  in  them  finde  as  wonderful 
effects  as  those,  which  with  so  much  toile  are  collected  in  far 
countries  and  passed  ages.  It  is  one  same  nature,  which  stil 
doth  keep  her  course.  He  that  throughly  should  judge  her 
present  estate,  might  safely  conclude,  both  what  shall  happen, 
and  what  is  past.  I  have  seene  amongst  us,  men  brought 
by  sea  from  distant  countries,  whose  language,  because  we 
could  in  no  wise  understand,  and  that  their  fashions,  their 
countenance,  and  their  clothes  did  altogether  differ  from 
ours ;  who  of  us  did  not  deeme  them  brutish  and  savage  ? 
who  did  not  impute  their  mutenesse  unto  stupiditie  or  beast- 
lines,  and  to  see  them  ignorant  of  the  French  tongue,  of  our 
kissing  the  hands,  of  our  low-lowting  courtesies,  of  our 
behaviour  and  carriage,  by  which,  without  contradiction, 
humane  nature  ought  to  take  her  patterne  ?  Whatsoever 
seemeth  strange  unto  us,  and  we  understand  not,  we  blame 
and  condemne.  The  like  befalleth  us  in  our  judging  of 
beasts.  They  have  diverse  qualities,  which  somewhat  sim- 
bolize  with  ours :  from  which,  we  may  comparatively  draw 

163 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  some  conjecture,  but  of  such  as  are  peculiar  unto  them, 
XII          what    know  wee    what   they  are  ?     Horses,  Dogges,  Oxen, 
An  Apologie  gheepe,  Birds,  and  the  greater  number  of  sensitive  creatures 
Sebond11     ^at  ^ve  amongst  us,  know  our  voyce,  and  by  it  suffer  them 
selves  to  be  directed.     So  did  the  Lamprey  which  Crassus 
had,  and  came  to  him  when  he  called  it ;  so  do  the  Eeles  that 
breed  in  Arethusaes  fountaine.    And  my  selfe  have  seene  some 
fish-ponds,  where,  at  a  certaine  crie  of  those  that  kept  them, 
the  fish  would  presently  come  to  shoare,  where  they  were  wont 
to  be  fed. 

MART.  iv.  — nomen  habent,  et  ad  magistri 

xxx.  6.  Vocem  quisque  sui  venit  citatus. 

They  have  their  proper  names,  and  every  one 
Comes  at  his  masters  voyce,  as  call'd  upon. 

By  which  we  may  judge,  and  conclude,  that  Elephants 
have  some  apprehension  of  religion,  forsomuch  as  after 
diverse  washings  and  purifications,  they  are  seene  to  lift  up 
their  truncke,  as  we  doe  our  armes,  and  at  certaine  houres 
of  the  day,  without  any  instruction,  of  their  owne  accord, 
holding  their  eyes  fixed  towards  the  Sunne-rising,  fall  into  a 
long  meditating  contemplation  :  yet,  because  wee  see  no  such 
apparence  in  other  beasts,  may  wee  rightly  conclude,  that 
they  are  altogether  void  of  religion,  and  may  not  take  that 
in  payment,  which  is  hidden  from  us.  As  we  perceive  some 
thing  in  that  action,  which  the  Philosopher  Cleanthes  well 
observed,  because  it  somewhat  drawes  neere  unto  ours.  He 
saw  (as  himselfe  reporteth)  a  company  of  Emmets  goe  from 
their  nest,  bearing  amongst  them  the  body  of  a  dead  Ant, 
toward  another  Emmets  nest,  from  which  many  other  Ants 
came,  as  it  were  to  meet  them  by  the  way  to  parly  with 
them,  who  after  they  had  continued  together  awhile,  they 
which  came  last,  returned  backe,  to  consult  (as  you  may 
imagine)  with  their  fellow-citizens,  and  because  they  could 
hardly  come  to  any  capitulation ;  they  made  two  or  three 
voyages  to  and  fro :  In  the  end,  the  last  come,  brought  unto 
the  other  a  worme  from  their  habitation,  as  for  a  ransome 
of  the  dead,  which  worme  the  first  company  tooke  upon 
their  backes,  and  carried  it  home,  leaving  the  dead  body 
unto  the  other.  Loe  here  the  interpretation  that  Cleanthes 
gave  it :  Witnessing  thereby,  that  those  creatures  which 

164 


THE    SECOND    BO  ORE 

have  no  voice  at  all,  have  neverthelesse  mutual  commerce,  and  CHAPTER 
enterchangeable  communication,  whereof  if  we  be  not  par-  XII 
takers,  it  is  onely  our  fault ;  and  therfore  doe  we  fondly  to  of1]^^^ 
censure  it.  And  they  yet  produce  divers  other  effects,  farre  Sebond 
surpassing  our  capacity,  and  so  farre  out  of  the  reach  of  our 
imitation,  that  even  our  thoughts  are  unable  to  conceive 
them.  Many  hold  opinion,  that  in  the  last  and  famous  sea- 
fight,  which  Antonie  lost  against  Augustus,  his  Admirall- 
gally  was  in  her  course  staied  by  that  little  fish,  the  Latines 
call  Remora,  and  the  English  a  Sucke-stone,  whose  property 
is,  to  stay  any  ship  he  can  fasten  himselfe  unto.  And  the 
Emperour  Caligula,  sailing  with  a  great  fleet  along  the  coast 
of  Romania,  his  owne  Gaily  was  suddenly  staied  by  such  a 
fish,  which  he  caused  to  be  taken  sticking  fast  to  the  keele, 
moodily  raging,  that  so  little  a  creature  had  the  power  to 
force  both  sea  and  winde,  and  the  violence  of  all  his  oares, 
onely  with  her  bill  sticking  to  his  Gaily  (for  it  is  a  kinde  of 
shell-fish)  and  was  much  more  amazed  when  he  perceived  the 
fish,  being  brought  aboord  his  ship,  to  have  no  longer  that 
powerfull  vertue,  which  it  had,  being  in  the  Sea.  A  certaine 
Citizen  of  Cyzicum,  whilom  purchased  unto  himselfe  the 
reputation  to  be  an  excellent  Mathematitian,  because  he  had 
learn't  the  quality  of  the  Hedge-hogge,  whose  property  is 
to  build  his  hole  or  denne,  open  diverse  waies,  and  toward 
severall  winds,  and  fore-seeing  rising  stormes,  he  presently 
stoppeth  the  holes  that  way ;  which  thing  the  foresaid 
Citizen  needfully  observing,  would  in  the  City  foretell  any 
future  storme,  and  what  wind  should  blow.  The  Cameleon 
taketh  the  colour  of  the  place  wherein  he  is.  The  fish 
called  a  Pourcontrell,  or  Manie-feet,  change th  himselfe  into 
what  colour  he  lists,  as  occasion  offereth  it  selfe ;  that  so  he 
may  hide  himselfe  from  what  he  feareth,  and  catch  what  he 
seeketh  for.  In  the  Cameleon  it  is  a  change  preceding  of 
passion,  but  in  the  Pourcontrell  a  change  in  action  ;  we  our 
selves  doe  often  change  our  colour,  and  alter  our  countenance, 
through  sudden  feare,  choler,  shame,  and  such  like  violent 
passions,  which  are  wont  to  alter  the  hew  of  our  faces :  but 
it  is  by  the  effect  of  sufferance,  as  in  the  Cameleon.  The 
jaundise  hath  power  to  make  us  yelow,  but  it  is  not  in  the 
disposition  of  our  wils.  The  effects  we  perceive  in  other 

165 


MONTAIGNES    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  creatures,  greater  than  ours,  witnesse  some  more  excellent 

XI1     .     faculty  in  them,  which  is  concealed  from  us,  as  it  is  to  be 

AnApologie  suppOsetj   diverse  others  of  their  conditions  and  forces  are, 

of  Raymond       ,""      „  '  ,    i  s^p    i 

Seboud       whereof  no  apparance  or  knowledge  commeth  to  us.     Or  all 

former  praedictions,  the  ancientest  and  most  certaine  were 
such  as  were  drawen  from  the  flight  of  birds :  we  have  no 
thing  equall  unto  it,  nor  so  admirable.  The  rule  of  fluttering, 
and  order  of  shaking  their  wings,  by  which  they  conjecture 
the  consequences  of  things  to  ensue,  must  necessarily  be 
directed  to  so  noble  an  operation  by  some  excellent  and 
supernaturall  meane :  For,  it  is  a  wresting  of  the  letter,  to 
attribute  so  wondrous  effects,  to  any  naturall  decree,  without 
the  knowledge,  consent,  or  discourse  of  him  that  causeth 
and  produceth  them,  and  is  a  most  false  opinion  :  Which  to 
prove,  the  Torpedo  or  Cramp-fish  hath  the  property  to  be- 
numme  and  astonish,  not  onely  the  limbs  of  those  that  touch 
it,  but  also  theirs,  that  with  any  long  pole  or  fishing  line 
touch  any  part  thereof,  shee  doth  transmit  and  convey  a 
kinde  of  heavie  numming  into  the  hands  of  those  that  stirre 
or  handle  the  same :  Moreover,  it  is  averred,  that  if  any 
matter  be  cast  upon  them,  the  astonishment  is  sensibly  felt 
to  gaine  upward  untill  it  come  to  the  hands,  and  even 
through  the  water  it  astonisheth  the  feeling-sence.  Is  not 
this  a  wonderfull  power  ?  Yet  is  it  not  altogether  unprofit 
able  for  the  Cramp-fish,  she  both  knowes  and  makes  use  of 
it :  for  to  catch  prey  she  pursueth,  she  is  scene  to  hide  her- 
selfe  under  the  mud,  that,  other  fishes  swimming  over  her, 
strucken  and  benummed  with  her  exceeding  coldnesse,  may 
fall  into  her  clawes.  The  Cranes,  Swallowes,  and  other 
wandering  birds,  changing  their  abode,  according  to  the 
seasons  of  the  yeare,  shew  evidently  the  knowledge  they 
have  of  their  fore-divining  faculty,  and  often  put  the  same 
in  use.  Hunters  assure  us,  that  to  chuse  the  best  dog,  and 
which  they  purpose  to  keepe  from  out  a  litter  of  other 
young  whelps,  there  is  no  better  meane  than  the  damme 
herselfe :  for,  if  they  be  removed  from  out  their  kennell, 
him  that  she  first  brings  thither  againe,  shall  alwaies  prove 
the  best ;  or  if  one  but  encompasse  her  kennell  with  fire, 
looke  which  of  her  whelps  she  first  seeketh  to  save,  is 
undoubtedly  the  best :  whereby  it  appeareth,  thev  have  a 
166 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

certaine  use  of  Prognosticating,  that  we  have  not;  or  else  CHAPTER 
some  hidden  vertue,  to  judge  of  their  young  ones,  different 
and  more  lively  than  ours.  The  manner  of  all  beasts 
breeding,  engendering,  nourishing,  working,  moving,  living,  Sebond 
and  dying,  being  so  neere  to  ours,  what  ever  we  abridge  from 
their  moving  causes,  and  adde  to  our  condition  above  theirs, 
can  no  way  depart  from  our  reasons  discourse.  For  a 
regiment  of  our  health,  Physitions  propose  the  example  of 
beasts  manner  of  life  and  proceeding  unto  us :  for  this  com 
mon  saying  is  alwaies  in  the  peoples  mouth  : 

Tenez  chauds  les  pieds  et  la  teste,  IOUB.  Err.  Pop. 

Au  demeurant  vivez  en  beste.  pur.  ii.  pag. 

Keepe  warme  ('tis  meete)  thy  head  and  feete  : 
In  all  the  rest,  live  like  a  beast. 

Generation  is  the  chiefest  naturall  action :  we  have  a 
certaine  disposition  of  some  members,  fittest  for  that  pur 
pose  ;  neverthelesse,  they  bid  us  range  our  selves  unto  a 
brutish  situation  and  disposition,  as  most  effectual! : 

— more  fer arum,  LUCR.  iv.  1256. 

Quadrupedumque  magis  ritu,  plerumque  putantur 
Concipere  uxores :  quia  sic  loca  sumere  possunt, 
Pectoribus  positis,  sublatis  semina  lumbis. 

And  reject  those  indiscreet  and  insolent  motions,  which 
women  have  so  luxuriously  found  out,  as  hurtfull :  conform 
ing  them  to  the  example  and  use  of  beasts  of  their  sex,  as 
more  modest  and  considerate. 

Nam  mulier  prohibet  se  concipere,  atque  repugnat,  Ib.  1260. 

Clunibus  ipsa  viri  Venerem  si  Iceta  retractet, 
Atque  exossato  ciet  omni  pectore  fluctus, 
Ejicit  enirn  sulci  recta  regione  viaque 
Vomerem,  atque  loots  avertit  seminis  ictum. 

If  it  be  justice  to  give  every  one  his  due,  beasts  which 
serve,  love,  and  defend  their  benefactors,  pursue  and  outrage 
strangers,  and  such  as  offend  them,  by  so  doing  they  repre 
sent  some  shew  of  our  justice,  as  also  in  reserving  a  high 
kinde  of  equality  in  dispensing  of  what  they  have  to  their 
young-ones.  Touching  friendship,  without  all  comparison, 
they  professe  it  more  lively  and  shew  it  more  constantly, 

167 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  than  men.  Hircanus  a  dog  of  Lysimachus  the  King,  his 
XII  master  being  dead,  without  eating  or  drinking  would  never 

Ap  Apologie  Come  from  off  his  bed,  and  when  the  dead  corps  was  removed 
Sebond11  thence,  he  followed  it,  and  lastly  flung  himselfe  into  the 
fire,  where  his  master  was  burned.  As  did  also  the  dogge 
of  one  called  Pyrrhus,  who  after  he  was  dead,  would  never 
budge  from  his  masters  couch,  and  when  he  was  removed, 
suffered  himselfe  to  be  carried  away  with  him,  and  at  last 
flung  himselfe  into  the  fire  wherein  his  master  was  consumed. 
There  are  certaine  inclinations  of  affection,  which  without 
counsell  of  reason  arise  somtimes  in  us,  proceeding  of  a 
casuall  temerity,  which  some  call  Sympathie :  beasts  as  wel 
as  men  are  capable  of  it.  We  see  horses  take  a  kinde  of 
acquaintance  one  of  another,  so  that  often,  traveling  by  the 
high-way,  or  feeding  together,  we  have  much  ado  to  keep 
them  asunder,  wee  see  them  bend  and  applie  their  affections 
to  some  of  their  fellowes  colours,  as  if  it  were  upon  a  certaine 
visage ;  and  when  they  meet  with  any  such,  with  signes  of 
joy,  and  demonstration  of  good  will,  to  joine  and  accost 
them,  and  to  hate  and  shunne  some  other  formes  and  colours. 
Beasts,  as  well  as  wee,  have  choice  in  their  loves,  and  are 
very  nice  in  chusing  of  their  mates.  They  are  not  altogether 
void  of  our  extreme  and  unappesable  jealousies.  Lustfull 
desires  are  either  naturall,  and  necessary,  as  eating  and 
drinking ;  or  else  naturall  and  not  necessary,  as  the  acquaint 
ance  of  males  and  females :  or  else  neither  necessary  nor 
naturall :  Of  this  last  kinde  are  almost  all  mens  :  For,  they 
are  all  superfluous  and  artificiall.  It  is  wonderfull  to  see 
with  how  little  nature  will  be  satisfied,  and  how  little  she 
hath  left  for  us  to  be  desired.  The  preparations  in  our 
kitchins,  doe  nothing  at  all  concerne  her  lawes.  The  Stoikes 
say,  that  a  man  might  very  well  sustaine  himselfe  with  one 
Olive  a  day.  The  delicacy  of  our  wines,  is  no  part  of  her 
lesson,  no  more  is  the  surcharge  and  relishing,  which  we  adde 
unto  our  letcherous  appetites. 

HOR.  Ser.  i.  — neque  ilia 

Sat.  ii.  30.  Magno  prognatum  deposcit  consule  cunnum. 

These   strange  lustfull  longings,  which  the  ignorance  of 
good,  and   a   false  opinion    have    possest    us    with,    are    in 
168 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

number  so  infinite,  that  in  a  manner  they  expell  all  those  CHAPTER 
which  are  naturall :  even  as  if  there  were  so  many  strangers 
in  a  City,  that  should  either  banish  and  expell  all  the  ^jg^JS 
naturall  inhabitants  thereof,  or  utterly  suppresse  their  Sebond 
ancient  power  and  authority,  and  absolutely  usurping  the 
same,  take  possession  of  it.  Brute  beasts  are  much  more 
regulare  than  we  ;  and  with  more  moderation  containe  them 
selves  within  the  compasse,  which  nature  hath  prescribed 
them  :  yet  not  so  exactly,  but  that  they  have  some  coherency 
with  our  riotous  licenciousnesse.  And  even  as  there  have 
beene  found  certaine  furious  longings  and  unnaturall  desires, 
which  have  provoked  men  unto  the  love  of  beasts,  so  have 
diverse  times  some  of  them  beene  drawne  to  love  us,  and  are 
possessed  with  monstrous  affections  from  one  kind  to  another: 
witnesse  the  Elephant,  that  in  the  love  of  an  herb-wife,  in 
the  city  of  Alexandria,  was  corivall  with  Aristophanes,  the 
Grammarian ;  who  in  all  offices  pertayning  to  an  earnest 
woer  and  passionate  suiter,  yeelded  nothing  unto  him  :  For, 
walking  thorow  the  Fruit-market,  he  would  here  and  there 
snatch  up  some  with  his  truncke,  and  carry  them  unto  her : 
as  neere  as  might  be  he  would  never  loose  the  sight  of  her : 
and  now  and  then  over  her  band  put  his  truncke  into  her 
bosome,  and  feele  her  breasts.  They  also  report  of  a  Dragon, 
that  was  exceedingly  in  love  with  a  yong  maiden ;  and  of  a 
Goose  in  the  City  of  Asope,  which  dearely  loved  a  young  childe: 
also  of  a  Ram  that  belonged  to  the  Musitian  Glausia.  Doe 
we  not  daily  se  Munkies  ragingly  in  love  with  women,  and 
furiously  to  pursue  them  ?  And  certaine  other  beasts,  given 
to  love  the  males  of  their  owne  sex  ?  Oppianus  and  others 
report  some  examples,  to  shew  the  reverence,  and  manifest 
the  awe,  some  beasts  in  their  marriages,  beare  unto  their 
kindred  :  but  experience  makes  us  often  see  the  contrary : 

— nee  habetur  turpe  juvencce  OVID.  Metam. 

Ferre  patrem  tergo:  fit  equo  suafilia  coniux:  x.  325. 

Quasque  creavit,  initpecudus  caper:  ipsaque,  cuius 

Semine  concepta  est,  ex  illo  concipit  ales. 

To  beare  her  Sire  the  Heifer  shameth  not : 

The  Horse  takes  his  owne  Fillies  maiden-head : 

The  Goat  gets  them  with  young  whom  he  begot : 

Birds  breed  by  them,  by  whom  themselves  were  bred. 

Touching  a  subtil  pranke  and  witty  tricke,  is  there  any 
Y  169 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  so  famous  as  that  of  Thales  the  Philosophers  Mule,  which, 
XII  laden  with  salt,  passing  thorow  a  River  chanced  to  stumble, 

An  Apologie  go  ^^  ^ne  sac^s  sne  carried  were  all  wet,  and  perceiving  the 
Se7o™d  salt  (because  the  water  had  melted  it)  to  grow  lighter,  ceased 
not,  assoone  as  she  came  neere  any  water,  together  with  her 
load  to  plunge  herselfe  therein,  untill  her  master,  being 
aware  of  her  craft,  commanded  her  to  be  laden  with  wooll, 
which  being  wet  became  heavier ;  the  Mule  finding  herselfe 
deceived,  used  her  former  policy  no  more.  There  are  many 
of  them,  that  lively  represent  the  visage  of  our  avarice,  who 
with  a  greedy  kinde  of  desire  endevour  to  surprise  whatso 
ever  comes  within  their  reach,  and  though  they  reap  no 
commodity,  nor  have  any  use  of  it,  to  hide  the  same  very 
curiously.  As  for  husbandry,  they  exceede  us,  not  onely  in 
fore-sight  to  spare,  and  gather  together  for  times  to  come, 
but  have  also  many  parts  of  the  skill  belonging  there  unto. 
As  the  Ants,  when  they  perceive  their  corne  to  grow  mustie, 
and  graine  to  be  sowre,  for  feare  it  should  rot  and  putrifie, 
spread  the  same  abroad  before  their  neasts,  that  so  it  may 
aire  and  drie.  But  the  caution  they  use  in  gnawing,  and 
prevention  they  imploy  in  paring  their  graines  of  wheat,  is 
beyond  all  imagination  of  mans  wit :  Because  wheat  doth  not 
alwaies  keepe  drie  nor  wholesome,  but  moisten,  melt  and 
dissolve  into  a  kinde  of  whey,  namely,  when  it  beginneth  to 
bud,  fearing  it  should  turne  to  seed,  and  lose  the  nature  of  a 
storehouse,  for  their  sustenance,  they  part  and  gnaw-off  the 
end  whereat  it  wonts  to  bud.  As  for  warre,  which  is  the 
greatest  and  most  glorious  of  all  humane  actions,  I  would 
faine  know,  if  we  will  use  it  for  an  argument  of  some  pre 
rogative,  or  otherwise  for  a  testimonie  of  our  imbecilitie  and 
imperfection,  as  in  truth,  the  science  we  use  to  defeat  and 
kill  one  another,  to  spoile  and  utterly  to  overthrow  our 
owne  kinde,  it  seemeth,  it  hath  not  much  to  make  it  selfe  to 
be  wished -for  in  beasts,  that  have  it  not. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  — quando  leoni 

xv.  1 60.  Fortior  eripuit  vitam  Ico,  quo  nemore  unquam 

Expiravit  aper  maioris  dentibus  apri  ? 

When  hath  a  greater  Lion  damnifide 

A  Lions  life  ?  in  what  wood  ever  di'de, 

A  boare  by  tusks  and  gore, 

Of  any  greater  boare  ? 

170 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Yet  are  not  they  altogether  exempted  from  it :  witnesse  the  CHAPTER 
furious  encounters  of  Bees,  and  the  hostile  enterprises  of  the          XII 

Princes  and  Leaders  of  the  two  contrary  Armies.  An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

—scepe  duobus  Sebond 

Regibus  incessit  magno  discordia  motu,  VIRG.  Georg. 

Continuoque  animos  vulgi  et  trepidantia  bello  iv.  67. 
Corda  licet  longe  prcesciscere. — 

Oft-times  twixt  two  no  great  Kings  great  dissention 
With  much  adoe  doth  set  them  at  contention  ; 
The  vulgare  mindes  strait  may  you  see  from  farre, 
And  hearts  that  tremble  at  the  thought  of  warre. 

I  never  marke  this  divine  description,  but  mee  thinkes 
I  read  humane  foolishnesse  and  worldly  vanitie  painted  in 
it.  For,  these  motions  of  warre,  which  out  of  their  horror 
and  astonishment  breed  this  tempest  of  cries,  and  clang  of 
sounds  in  us : 

Fulgur  ubi  ad  ccelum  se  tollit,  totaque  circum  LUCR.  ii.  326. 

^Ere  renidescit  tellus,  subterque  virum  vi 
Excitur  pedibus  sonitus,  clamor e  que  monies 
Icti  rejectant  voces  ad  sidera  mundi  : 

Where  lightning  raiseth  it  selfe  to  the  skies, 
The  earth  shines  round  with  armour,  sounds  doe  rise 
By  mens  force  under  feet,  wounded  with  noyse 
The  hilles  to  heav'n  reverberate  their  voyce. 

This  horror-causing  aray  of  so  many  thousands  of  armed 
men,  so  great  furie,  earnest  fervor,  and  undaunted  courage, 
it  would  make  one  laugh  to  see  by  how  many  vaine  occasions 
it  is  raised  and  set  on  fire,  and  by  what  light  meanes  it  is 
againe  suppressed  and  extinct. 

— Paridis  propter  narratur  amorem  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

GrcKcia  Barbarice  diro  collisa  duello.  ii.  6. 

For  Paris  lustfull  love  (as  Stories  tell) 
All  Greece  to  direfull  warre  with  Asia  fell. 

The  hatred  of  one  man,  a  spight,  a  pleasure,  a  familiar 
suspect,  or  a  jealousie  ;  causes,  which  ought  not  to  move  two 
scolding  fish-wives  to  scratch  one  another,  is  the  soule  and 
motive  of  all  this  hurly-burly.  Shall  we  beleeve  them  that 
are  the  principall  authors  and  causes  therof  ?  Let  us  but 
hearken  unto  the  greatest  and  most  victorious  Emperour, 

171 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  the  mightiest  that  ever  was,  how  pleasantly  he  laughs, 
and  wittily  he  plaies,  at  so  many  battells  and  bloody  fights, 

ofRamond  hazarded  both  bJ  sea  and  land,  "at  the  blood  and  lives  of  five 
Sebond  hundred  thousand  soules  which  followed  his  fortune,  and  the 
strength  and  riches  of  two  parts  of  the  wrorld  consumed  and 
drawne  drie  for  the  service  of  his  enterprise  : 

MART.  xi.  Quodfutuit  Glaphyran  Antonius,  hanc  mihi  poenam 

Epig.  xxi.  Fulvia  constituit,  se  quoque  utifutuam 

Fulviam  ego  utfutuam  ?  quid  si  me  Manius  oret 

Pcedicern,  faciam  ?  nonputo,  si  sapiam. 
Autfutue,  aut  pugnemus  ait:  quid  si  mihi  vita 
Charior  est  ipsa  mentula  ?    Signa  canant. 

(I  use  my  Latine  somewhat  boldly,  but  it  is  with  that 
leave  which  you  have  given  mee,)  This  vast  huge  bodie  hath 
so  many  faces  and  severall  motion,  which  seeme  to  threat 
both  heaven  and  earth. 

VIRG.  sEn.  vii.  Quam  multi  Lybico  volvuntur  marmore  fluctus 

717-  SCKVUS  ubi  Orion  hybernis  conditur  undis : 

Vel  cum  sole  novo  densce,  torrentur  aristce, 
Aut  Hermi  campo,  aut  LyticB  flaventibus  arms, 
Scuta  sonant,  pulsuque  pedum  tremit  excita  tellus. 

As  many  waves,  as  rowle  in  Affricke  marble-sounds, 
When  fiere  Oryon  hides  in  Winter  waves  his  head  : 
Or  when  thicke-eares  of  Corne  are  parch't  by  Sunne 

new-spred. 

In  Hermus  fruitfull  fields,  or  Lycaes  yellow  grounds, 
With  noyse  of  shields  and  feet,  the  trembling  earth  so 

sounds. 

This  many-headed,  divers-armed,  and  furiously-raging- 
monster,  is  man  ;  wretched  weake  and  miserable  man  :  whom 
if  you  consider  well,  what  is  he,  but  a  crawling,  and  ever- 
moving  Ants-neast  ? 

lb.  iv.  404.  It  nigrum  campis  agmen : — 

The  sable-coloured  band, 
Marches  along  the  Land. 

A  gust  of  contrarie  winds,  the  croking  of  a  flight  of 
Ravens,  the  false  pase  of  a  Horse,  the  casual  flight  of  an 
Eagle,  a  dreame,  a  sodaine  voyce,  a  false  signe,  a  mornings 
mist,  an  evening  fogge,  are  enough  to  overthrow,  sufficient 
to  overwhelme  and  able  to  pull  him  to  the  ground.  Let 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

the    Sunne    but    shine    hot   upon   his  face,  hee  faints  and  CHAPTER 
swelters  with  heat :  Cast  but  a  little  dust  in  his  eyes,  as  to 
the  Bees  mentioned  by  our  Poet,  all  our  ensignes,  all  our  J 
legions,  yea  great  Pompey  himselfe  in  the  forefront  of  them       Sebond 
is  overthrowne  and  put  to  rout  (For  as  I  remember  it  was 
he  whom  Sertorius  vanquished  in    Spaine,  with  all  those 
goodly  armes).    This  also  served  Eumenes  against  Antigonus, 
and  Surena  against  Crassus  : 

Hi  motus  animorum,  atque  hcec  certamina  tanta,  VIRG.  Gtorg. 

Pulveris  exigui  jactu  compressa  quiescent.  1V>  ""• 

These  stomacke-motions,  these  contentions  great, 
Clam'd  with  a  little  dust,  strait  lose  their  heat. 

Let  us  but  uncouple  some  of  our  ordinarie  flies,  and 
let  loose  a  few  gnats  amongst  them,  they  shall  have  both 
the  force  to  scatter,  and  courage  to  consume  him.  The 
Portugals  not  long  since  beleagring  the  City  of  Tamly,  in 
the  territory  of  Xiatine,  the  inhabitants  thereof,  brought 
great  store  of  Hives,  (whereof  they  have  plentie)  upon  their 
walls  :  And  with  fire  drove  them  so  forcible  upon  their 
enemies,  who  as  unable  to  abide  their  assaults,  and  endure 
their  stingings,  left  their  enterprize.  Thus  by  this  new 
kinde  of  helpe  was  the  liberty  of  the  Towne  gained,  and 
victory  purchased  ;  with  so  happy  successe,  that  in  their 
retreating,  there  was  not  one  townes-man  found  wanting. 
The  soules  of  Emperours  and  Coblers  are  all  cast  in  one  same 
mould.  Considering  the  importance  of  Princes  actions,  and 
their  weight,  wee  perswade  our  selves,  they  are  brought  forth 
by  some  as  weighty  and  important  causes  ;  wee  are  deceived  : 
They  are  moved,  stirred  and  removed  in  their  motions,  by 
the  same  springs  and  wards,  that  wee  are  in  ours.  The  same 
reason  that  makes  us  chide  and  braule,  and  fall  out  with  any 
of  our  neighboures,  causeth  a  warre  to  follow  betweene 
Princes  ;  The  same  reason  that  makes  us  whip  or  beat  a 
lackey,  maketh  a  Prince  (if  hee  apprehend  it)  to  spoyle  and 
waste  a  whole  Province.  They  have  as  easie  a  will  as  we, 
but  they  can  doe  much  more.  Alike  desires  perturbe  both  a 
skinne-worme,  and  an  Elephant.  Touching  trust  and  faith- 
fulnesse  there  is  no  creature  in  the  world  so  trecherous  as 
man.  Our  histories  report  the  earnest  pursuit  and  sharpe 

173 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  chase,  that  some  Dogges  have  made  for  the  death  of  their 
XII          masters.     King  Pirrhus  finding  a  Dog,  that  watched  a  dead 


fUR  ^°  ^^  man?  anc^  understanding  he  had  done  so  three  daies  and 
Sebond  nights  together,  commanded  the  corps  to  be  enterred,  and 
tooke  the  Dog  along  with  him.  It  fortuned  one  day  (as 
Pirrhus  was  survaying  the  General  Musters  of  his  Army)  the 
Dog  perceiving  in  that  multitude,  the  man  who  had  mur- 
thered  his  maister,  loud-barking,  and  with  great  rage  ran 
furiously  upon  him  ;  by  which  signes  he  furthered  and  pro 
cured  his  masters  revenge,  which  by  way  of  justice,  was 
shortly  executed.  Even  so  did  the  Dogge  belonging  to 
Hesiodus,  surnamed  the  wise,  having  convicted  the  children 
of  Canister  of  Naupactus,  of  the  murther  committed  on  his 
Masters  person.  Another  Dogge  being  appointed  to  watch 
a  Temple  in  Athens,  having  perceived  a  sacrilegious  theefe, 
to  carrie  away  the  fairest  jewels  therein,  barked  at  him  so 
long  as  he  was  able,  and  seeing  he  could  not  awaken  the 
Sextons  or  Temple-keepers,  followed  the  theefe,  whither-so- 
ever  he  went  ;  daie-light  being  come,  he  kept  himselfe  a  loof- 
off,  but  never  lost  the  sight  of  him  :  if  he  offered  him  meat, 
he  utterly  refused  it  ;  but  if  any  passenger  chanced  to  come 
by,  on  them  he  fawned,  with  waging  his  taile,  and  tooke  what 
ever  they  offered  him  ;  If  the  theefe  staied  to  rest  himselfe, 
he  also  stayed  in  the  same  place  :  The  newes  of  this  Dogge 
being  come  to  the  Temple-keepers,  they  as  they  went  along, 
enquiring  of  the  Dogs  haire  and  colour,  pursued  his  tracke 
so  long,  that  at  last  they  found  both  the  Dog  and  the  theefe 
in  the  Citie  of  Cromyon,  whom  they  brought  backe  to  Athens, 
where  for  his  offence  he  was  severely  punished.  And  the 
judges  in  acknowledgement  of  the  Dogges  good  office,  at  the 
Cities  charge  appointed  him  for  his  sustenance  a  certaine 
daily  measure  of  Corne,  and  enjoyned  the  Priests  of  -the 
Temple,  carefully  to  looke  unto  him.  Plutarke  affirmeth 
this  storie  to  be  most  true,  and  to  have  hapned  in  his  time. 
Touching  gratitude  and  thankfulnesse,  (for  me  thinks  we 
have  need  to  further  this  word  greatly)  this  onely  example 
shall  suffice,  of  which  Appion  reporteth  to  have  been  a 
spectator  himselfe.  One  day  (saith  he)  that  the  Senate 
of  Rome,  (to  please  and  recreate  the  common  people) 
caused  a  great  number  of  wilde  beasts  to  be  baited,  namely 
174 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

huge  great  Lions,  it  so  fortuned,  that  there  was  one  CHAPTER 
amongst  the  rest,  who  by  reason  of  his  furious  and  stately  XII 
carriage,  of  his  unmatched  strength,  of  his  great  limbs,  ^Raymond 
and  of  his  loud,  and  terror-causing  roaring,  drew  all  by-  Sebond 
standers  eyes  to  gaze  upon  him.  Amongst  other  slaves, 
that  in  sight  of  all  the  people  were  presented  to  encounter 
with  these  beasts,  there  chanced  to  be  one  Androdus  of 
Dacia,  who  belonged  unto  a  Roman  Lord,  who  had  been 
Consull.  This  huge  Lion,  having  eyed  him  afar  off,  first 
made  a  suddaine  stop,  as  strucken  into  a  kind  of  admiration, 
then  with  a  milde  and  gentle  contenance,  as  if  he  would 
willingly  have  taken  acquaintance  of  him,  faire  and  softly 
approached  unto  him  :  Which  done,  and  resting  assured 
he  was  the  man  he  tooke  him  for,  begun  fawningly  to  wagge 
his  taile,  as  dogges  doe  that  fawne  upon  their  new-found 
masters,  and  licke  the  poore  and  miserable  slaves  hands  and 
thighes,  who  through  feare  was  almost  out  of  his  wits  and 
halfe  dead.  Androdus  at  last  taking  hart  of  grace  ;  and 
by  reason  of  the  Lions  mildnesse  having  rouzed  up  his 
spirits,  and  wishly  fixing  his  eies  upon  him,  to  see  whether 
he  could  call  him  to  remembrance  ;  it  was  to  all  behold 
ers  a  singular  pleasure  to  observe  the  love,  the  joy,  and 
blandishments,  each  endevored  to  enter-shew  one  another. 
Whereat  the  people  raising  a  loud  crie,  and  by  their  shout 
ing  and  clapping  of  hands  seeming  to  be  much  pleased ;  the 
Emperour  willed  the  slave  to  be  brought  before  him,  as 
desirous  to  understand  of  him  the  cause  of  so  strange 
and  seeld-seene  an  accident :  Who  related  this  new,  and 
wonderfull  storie  unto  him. 

'  My  Master '  (said  he)  '  being  Proconsull  in  Affrica,  forso- 
much  as  he  caused  me  every  day  to  be  most  cruelly  beaten, 
and  held  me  in  so  rigorous  bondage,  I  was  constrained, 
as  being  wearie  of  my  life,  to  run  away  :  And  safely  to 
scape  from  so  eminent  a  person,  and  who  had  so  great 
authoritie  in  the  Countrie,  I  thought  it  best  to  get  me  into 
the  desart,  and  most  unfrequented  wildernesses  of  that 
region,  with  a  full  resolution,  if  I  could  not  compasse  the 
meanes  to  sustaine  my  selfe,  to  finde  one  way  or  other, 
with  violence  to  make  my  selfe  away.  One  day,  the  Sunne 
about  noone-tide  being  extreamly  hote,  and  the  scorching 

175 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  4  heat  thereof  intolerable,  I  fortuned  to  come  unto  a  wilde- 
XH  '  unhanted  cave,  hidden  amongst  crags,  and  almost  inacces- 

ofnRaP  mond  '  s^^ej  anc^  wnere  I  imagined  no  footing  had  ever  been  ;  there- 
Sebond  *  ^n  ^  n^  m7  se^e  :  I  had  n°t  long  been  there,  but  in  comes 
c  this  Lion,  with  one  of  his  pawes  sore  hurt,  and  bloody- 
4  goared,  wailing  for  the  smart,  and  groaning  for  the  paine 
4  he  felt ;  at  whose  arrivall,  I  was  much  dismaied,  but  he 
'  seeing  me  lie  close-cowring  in  a  corner  of  his  den,  gently 
4  made  his  approaches  unto  me,  holding  forth  his  goared 
4  paw  toward  me,  and  seemed  with  shewing  the  same  humbly 
4  to  sue,  and  suppliantly  to  beg  for  help  at  my  hands.  I, 
6  moved  with  ruth,  taking  it  into  my  hand,  pulled  out  a 
4  great  splint,  which  was  gotten  into  it,  and  shaking-off  all 
'  feare,  first  I  wrung  and  crusht  his  sore,  and  caused  the 
'  filth  and  matter,  which  therein  was  gathered,  to  come  forth ; 
4  than,  as  gently  as  for  my  heart  I  could,  I  cleansed,  wiped, 
4  and  dried  the  same.  He  feeling  some  ease  in  his  griefe, 
4  and  his  paine  to  cease,  still  holding  his  foot  betweene  my 
4  hands,  began  to  sleep  and  take  some  rest.  Thence  forward 
4  he  and  I  lived  together,  the  full  space  of  three  yeares  in  his 
4  den,  with  such  meat  as  he  shifted-for :  For,  what  beasts  he 
4  killed,  or  what  prey  soever  he  tooke,  he  ever  brought  home 
4  the  better  part,  and  shared  it  with  me,  which  for  want  of 
4  fire,  I  rosted  in  the  Sunne,  and  therewith  nourished  my  selfe 
4  all  that  while.  But  at  last  wearied  with  this  kinde  of 
4  brutish  life,  the  Lion  being  one  day  gone  to  purchase  his 
4  wonted  prey,  I  left  the  place,  hoping  to  mend  my  fortunes, 
4  and  having  wandred  up  and  downe  three  dayes,  I  was  at 
4  last  taken  by  certaine  Souldiers,  which  from  Africa  brought 
4  me  into  this  Citie  to  my  Master  againe,  who  immediatly 
4  condemned  me  to  death,  and  to  be  devoured  by  wilde 
4  beasts.  And  as  I  now  perceive,  the  same  Lion  was  also 
4  shortly  after  taken,  who  as  you  see  hath  now  requited  me 
4  of  the  good  turne  I  did  him,  and  the  health  which  by  my 
4  meanes  he  recovered."  Behold  here  the  historic,  Androdus 
reported  unto  the  Emperour,  which  after  he  caused  to  be 
declared  unto  all  the  people,  at  whose  generall  request,  he 
was  forthwith  set  at  libertie,  and  quit  of  his  punishment, 
and  by  the  common  consent  of  all,  had  the  Lion  bestowed 
upon  him.  Appion  saith  further,  that  Androdus  was  daily 
176 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

seen  to  lead  the  Lion  up  and  downe  the  streets  of  Rome,  CHAPTER 
tied  onely  with  a  little  twine,  and  walking  from  taverne  to          XII 
taverne,  received  such  money  as  was  given  him,  who  would  ^j^^ond 
gently  suffer  himselfe  to  be  handled,  touched,  decked,  and       sebond 
strowed  with  flowers,  all  over  and  over,  many  saying  when 
they  met  him  :  Yonder  is  the  Lion  that  is  the  mans  hoste 
and  yonder  is  the  man  that  is  the  Lions  Physitian.     We 
often  mourne  and  weepe  for  the  losse  of  those  beasts  we  love, 
so  doe  they  many  times  for  the  losse  of  us. 

Post  bellator  equus  positis  insignibus  ^Ethon  VIRG.  sEn.  xi. 

It  lacrimans,  guttisque  humectat  grandibus  ora.  %9- 

Next  JEthon  horse  of  warre,  all  ornaments  laid  downe, 
Goes  weeping,  with  great  drops  bedewe's  his  cheeckes 
adowne. 

As  some  of  our  nations  have  wives  in  common,  and  some 
in  severall,  each  man  keeping  himselfe  to  his  owne  ;  so  have 
some  beasts  ;  yet  some  there  are,  that  observe  their  marriages, 
with  as  great  respect  as  we  doe  ours.  Touching  the  mutuall 
societie,  and  reciprocall  confederation,  which  they  devise 
amongst  themselves,  that  so  they  may  be  fast  combined 
together,  and  in  times  of  need  help  one  another,  it  is  appa- 
rant,  that  if  Oxen,  Hogs,  and  other  beasts  being  hurt  by  us, 
chance  to  crie,  all  the  heard  runnes  to  aid  him,  and  in  his 
defence  will  joine  all  together.  The  fish,  called  of  the  Latines 
Scarus,  having  swallowed  the  fishers  hooke,  his  fellowes  will 
presently  flocke  about  him,  and  nible  the  line  in  sunder  ; 
and  if  any  of  them  happen  to  be  taken  in  a  bow-net,  some 
of  his  fellowes  turning  his  head  away,  will  put  his  taile  in  at 
the  neck  of  the  net,  who  with  his  teeth  fast-holding  the  same, 
never  leave  him,  untill  they  have  pulled  him  out.  The 
Barbie  fishes,  if  one  of  them  chance  to  be  engaged,  will  set 
the  line  against  their  backes,  and  with  a  fin  they  have,  toothed 
like  a  sharp  saw,  presently  saw  and  fret  the  same  asunder. 
Concerning  particular  offices,  which  we  for  the  benefit  of  our 
life,  draw  one  from  an  other,  many  like  examples  are  found 
amongst  them.  It  is  assuredly  beleeved,  that  the  Whale 
never  swimmeth,  unlesse  she  have  a  little  fish  going  before 
her,  as  her  vantgard,  it  is  in  shape  like  a  Gudgeon,  and  both 
the  Latines  and  we,  call  it  the  Whales-guide  ;  for,  she  doth 
ever  follow  him,  suffering  her  selfe,  as  easily  to  be  led  and 
Z  177 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  turned  by  him,  as  a  ship  is  directed  and  turned  by  a  sterne  : 
XII  for  requitall  of  which  good  turne,  whereas  all  things  else,  be 
^  beast,  ^sn'  or  vessell?  that  comes  within  the  horrible  Chaos 
°^  ^his  monstrous  mouth,  is  presently  lost  and  devoured,  this 
little  fish  doth  safely  retire  himselfe  therein,  and  there  sleepes 
verie  quietly,  and  as  long  as  he  sleepes,  the  Whale  never  stirs  ; 
but  assoone  as  he  awaketh  and  goeth  his  way,  whereever  he 
takes  his  course  she  alwaies  followeth  him,  and  if  she  fortune 
to  lose  him,  she  wanders  here  and  there,  and  often  striketh 
upon  the  rocks,  as  a  ship  that  hath  nor  mast  nor  rudder. 
This,  Plutarke  witnesseth  to  have  seen  in  the  Hand  of 
Antycira.  There  is  such  a  like  societie  betweene  the  little 
bird  called  a  Wren,  and  the  Crocodill :  For,  the  Wren 
serveth  as  a  sentinell  to  so  great  a  monster  :  And  if  the 
Ichneumon,  which  is  his  mortall  enemie  approach  to  fight 
with  him,  the  little  birdlet,  lest  he  might  surprise  him  whilst 
he  sleepeth,  with  his  singing,  and  pecking  him  with  his  bill, 
awakens  him,  and  gives  him  warning  of  the  danger  he  is  in. 
The  bird  liveth  by  the  scraps,  and  feedeth  upon  the  leavings 
of  that  monster,  who  gently  receiveth  him  into  his  mouth, 
and  suffers  him  to  pecke  his  jawes  and  teeth  for  such 
mamockes  of  flesh  as  sticke  betweene  them  :  and  if  he  pur 
pose  to  close  his  mouth,  he  doth  first  warne  him  to  be  gone, 
faire  and  easie  closing  it  by  little  and  little,  without  any  whit 
crushing  or  hurting  him.  The  shell-fish  called  a  Nacre, 
liveth  even  so  with  the  Pinnotere,  which  is  a  little  creature 
like  unto  a  Crabfish,  and  as  his  porter  or  usher  waits  upon 
him,  attending  the  opening  of  the  Nacre,  which  he  continually 
keepes  gaping,  untill  he  see  some  little  fish  enter  in,  fit  for 
their  turne,  then  he  creepes  into  the  Nacre,  and  leaves  not 
pinching  his  quicke  flesh,  untill  he  makes  him  close  his  shell, 
and  so  they  both  together  fast  in  their  hold,  devour  their 
prey.  In  the  manner  of  the  Tunnies  life,  may  be  discovered 
a  singular  knowledge  of  the  three  parts  of  the  Mathematikes. 
First  for  Astrologie,  it  may  well  be  said  that  man  doth 
learne  it  of  them  :  For,  wheresoever  the  winter  Solstitium 
doth  take  them,  there  do  they  stay  themselves,  and  never 
stir  till  the  next  TEquinoctium,  and  that  is  the  reason  why 
Aristotle  doth  so  willingly  ascribe  that  art  unto  them  : 
Then  for  Geometrie  and  Arithmetike,  they  alwaies  frame 
178 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

their  shole  of  a  Cubike  figure,  every  way  square  :  and  so  CHAPTER 
forme  a  solide,  close  and  wel-ranged  battalion,  encompassed         XII 

round  about  of  six  equall  sides.     Thus  orderly  marshaled,  An  Apologie 
,    ,      ..     .  .          i  -,i        ,1     •     •  i      of  Raymond 

they  take  their  course  and  swim  whither  their  journey  tends,       Sebond 

as  broad  and  wide  behind  as  before  :  So  that  he  that  seeth 
and  telleth  but  one  ranke,  may  easily  number  all  the  troope, 
forsomuch  as  the  number  of  the  depth  is  equall  unto  the 
bredth,  and  the  bredth  unto  the  length.  Touching  magna- 
nimitie  and  haughtie  courage,  it  is  hard  to  set  it  forth  more 
lively,  and  to  produce  a  rarer  patterne,  than  that  of  the  Dog, 
which  from  India  was  sent  unto  Alexander  :  to  whom  was 
first  presented  a  Stag,  then  a  wilde  Boare,  and  then  a  Beare, 
with  each  of  which  he  should  have  foughten,  but  he  seemed 
to  make  no  accompt  of  them,  and  would  not  so  much  as 
remove  out  of  his  place  for  them,  but  when  he  saw  a  Lion, 
he  presently  rouzed  himselfe,  shewing  evidently  he  meant 
onely  so  noble  a  beast  worthie  to  enter  combat  with  him. 
Concerning  repentance  and  acknowledging  of  faults  com 
mitted,  it  is  reported,  that  an  Elephant  having  through  rage 
of  choler  slaine  his  governour,  conceived  such  an  extreme 
inward  griefe,  that  he  would  never  afterward  touch  any  food, 
and  suffered  himself  to  pine  to  death.  Touching  clemencie, 
it  is  reported  of  a  Tiger,  (the  fiercest  and  most  inhumane 
beast  of  all)  who  having  a  Kid  given  her  to  feed  upon, 
endured  the  force  of  gnawing  hunger,  two  daies  together, 
rather  than  she  would  hurt  him  ;  the  third  day  with  maine 
strength  she  brake  the  cage,  wherein  she  was  kept-pent,  and 
went  elsewhere  to  shift  for  feeding ;  as  one  unwilling  to  seize 
upon  the  seelie  Kid  her  familiar  and  guest.  And  concerning 
privileges  of  familiaritie  and  sympathie  caused  by  conversa 
tion,  is  it  not  oft  seen,  how  some  make  Cats,  Dogs,  and  Hares 
so  tame,  so  gentle,  and  so  milde,  that  without  harming  one 
another  they  shall  live  and  continue  together  ?  But  that 
which  experience  teacheth  sea-faring  men,  especially  those 
that  come  into  the  seas  of  Sicilie,  of  the  qualitie  and  con 
dition  of  the  Halcyon  bird,  or  as  some  call  it  Alcedo  or 
Kings-fisher,  exceeds  all  mens  conceit.  In  what  kinde  of 
creature  did  ever  nature  so  much  prefer  both  their  hatching, 
sitting,  brooding,  and  birth  ?  Poets  faine,  that  the  Hand  of 
Delos,  being  before  wandring  and  fleeting  up  and  downe,  was 

179 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  for  the  delivery  of  Latona  made  firme  and  setled.    But  Gods 
XII         decree  hath  been,  that  all  the  watrie  wildernesse  should  be 

o^IU  mcSd  (lu^e^  an<^  made  calme,  without  raine,  wind,  or  tempest, 
Sebond  during  the  time  the  Halcyon  sitteth  and  bringeth  forth  her 
young- ones,  which  is  much  about  the  Winter  Solstitium,  and 
shortest  day  in  the  yeare  :  By  whose  privilege  even  in  the 
hart  and  deadest  time  of  Winter  we  have  seven  calme  daies, 
and  as  many  nights  to  saile  without  any  danger.  Their 
Hens  know  no  other  Cocke  but  their  owne  :  They  never  for 
sake  him  all  the  daies  of  their  life  ;  and  if  the  Cocke  chance 
to  be  weake  and  crazed,  the  Hen  will  take  him  upon  her 
neck,  and  carrie  him  with  her,  wheresoever  she  goeth,  and 
serve  him  even  untill  death.  Mans  wit  could  never  yet 
attaine  to  the  full  knowledge  of  that  admirable  kind  of 
building  or  structure,  which  the  Halcion  useth  in  contriving 
of  her  neast,  no,  nor  devise  what  it  is-of. 

Plutarke,  who  hath  seen  and  handled  many  of  them, 
thinkes  it  to  be  made  of  certaine  fish-bones,  which  she  so 
compacts,  and  conjoyneth  together,  enterlacing  some  long, 
and  some  crosse-waies,  adding  some  foldings  and  roundings 
to  it,  that  in  the  end  she  frameth  a  round  kind  of  vessel, 
readie  to  float  and  swim  upon  the  water :  which  done,  she 
carrieth  the  same  where  the  Sea-waves  beat  most ;  there  the 
Sea  gently  beating  upon  it,  shewes  her  how  to  daube  and 
patch  up  the  parts  not  well  closed,  and  how  to  strengthen 
those  places,  and  fashion  those  ribs,  that  are  not  fast,  but 
stir  with  the  Sea- waves  :  And  on  the  other  side,  that  which 
is  closely  wrought,  the  Sea  beating  on  it,  doth  so  fasten  and 
conjoyne  together,  that  nothing,  no,  not  stone  or  yron,  can 
any  way  loosen,  divide,  or  break  the  same,  except  with  great 
violence ;  and  what  is  most  to  be  wondred  at,  is  the  propor 
tion  and  figure  of  the  concavitie  within ;  for,  it  is  so  com 
posed  and  proportioned,  that  it  can  receive  or  admit  no 
manner  of  thing,  but  the  Bird  that  built  it ;  for,  to  all 
things  else,  it  is  so  impenetrable,  close  and  hard,  that  nothing 
can  possiblie  enter  in :  no,  not  so  much  as  the  Sea-water. 
Loe  here  a  most  plaine  description  of  this  building,  or  con 
struction  taken  from  a  verie  good  Author :  yet  me  thinks, 
it  doth  not  fully  and  sufficiently  resolve  us  of  the  difficultie 
in  this  kinde  of  Architecture.  Now  from  what  vanitie  can 
180 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

it  proceed,  we  should  so  willfully  contemne,  and  disdainfully  CHAPTER 
interpret  those  effects,  which  we  can  neither  imitate  nor  XII 
conceive  ?  But  to  follow  this  equalitie  or  correspondencie  A*1  Apologie 
betweene  us  and  beasts  somewhat  further;  the  privilege  °  Sebond.11 
whereof  our  soule  vants  to  bring  to  her  condition  whatso 
ever  it  conceiveth,  and  to  dispoile  what  of  mortall  and 
corporall  qualities  belongs  unto  it,  to  marshall  those  things, 
which  she  deemed  worthie  her  acquaintance,  to  disrobe  and 
deprive  their  corruptible  conditions,  and  to  make  them  leave 
as  superfluous  and  base  garments,  thicknesse,  length,  depth, 
weight,  colour,  smell,  roughnesse,  smoothnesse,  hardnesse, 
softnesse,  and  all  sensible  accidents  else,  to  fit  and  appro 
priate  them  to  her  immortall  and  spirituall  condition  :  so  that 
Rome  and  Paris,  which  I  have  in  my  soule  ;  Paris  which  I 
imagine;  yea,  I  imagine  and  conceive  the  same  without 
greatnesse  and  place,  without  stone  and  morter,  and  without 
wood  :  Then  say  I  unto  my  selfe,  the  same  privilege  seemeth 
likewise  to  be  in  beasts :  for,  a  Horse  accustomed  to  heare 
the  sound  of  trumpets,  the  noyse  of  shot,  and  the  clattering 
of  armes,  whom  we  see  to  snort,  to  startle,  and  to  neigh  in 
his  sleep,  as  he  lies  along  upon  his  litter,  even  as  he  were  in 
the  hurly-burly;  it  is  most  certaine,  that  in  his  minde  he 
apprehends  the  sound  of  a  Drum  without  any  noyse,  and  an 
armie  without  armes  or  bodie. 

Quippe  videbis  equos  fortes,  cum  membra  jacebunt  LUCR.  iv.  982. 

In  somnis,  sudare  tamen,  spirareque  scepe, 
Et  quasi  de  palma  summas  contendere  vires. 

You  shall  see  warlike  Horses_,  when  in  sleep 
Their  limbs  lie^  yet  sweat,  and  a  snorting  keep, 
And  stretch  their  utmost  strength, 
As  for  a  goale  at  length. 

That  Hare,  which  a  grey-hound  imagineth  in  his  dreame, 
after  whom  as  he  sleepeth  we  see  him  bay,  quest,  yelp,  and 
snort,  stretch  out  his  taile,  shake  his  legs,  and  perfectly 
represent  the  motions  of  his  course;  the  same  is  a  Hare 
without  bones,  without  haire. 

Venantumque  canes  in  molli  scepe  quiete,  Jb.  986. 

lactant  crura  tamen  subito,  vocesque  repente 
Mittunt,  et  crebras  redducunt  naribus  auras, 
Ut  vestigia  si  teneant  inventa  ferarum : 

181 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Experge  factique,  sequuntur  inania  septs 

XII  Cervorum  simulacra,  fugce  quasi  dedita  cernant : 

An  Apolooie  Donee  dlscussis  redeant  erroribus  ad  se. 

of  Raymond  Oft  times  the  hunters  dogs  in  easie  rest 

Seboud  gtjr  their  legs,  suddninly,  open,  and  quest, 

And  send  from  nosthrils  thicke-thicke  snuffing  sent., 
As  if  on  traile  they  were  of  game  full-bent  : 
And  wakened  so,  they  follow  shadowes  vaine 
Of  Deere  in  chase,  as  if  they  fled  amaine  : 
Till,  their  fault  left,  they  turne  to  sense  againe. 

Those  watching-Dogs,  which  in  their  sleep  we  sometimes 
see  to  grumble,  and  then  barking  to  startle  suddainly  out  of 
their  slumber,  as  if  they  perceived  some  stranger  to  arive 
that  stranger  which  their  minde  seemeth  to  see,  is  but  an 
imaginarie  man,  and  not  perceived  ;  without  any  dimension, 
colour,  or  being : 

LUCR.  iv.  993.  — Consueta  domi  catulorum  blanda  propago 

Degere,  stepe  levem  ex  oculis  volucremque  soporem 
Discutere,  et  corpus  de  terra  corripere  instant, 
Proinde  quasi  ignotas  fades  atque  or  a  tuantur. 

The  fawning  kinde  of  whelps,  at  home  that  liv's, 
From  eyes  to  shake  light-swift  sleepe  often  striv's, 
And  from  the  ground  their  starting  bodies  hie, 
As  if  some  unknowne  stranger  they  did  spie. 

Touching  corporall  beautie,  before  I  goe  any  further,  it 
were  necessarie  I  knew  whether  we  are  yet  agreed  about  her 
description.  It  is  very  likely  that  we  know  not  well,  what 
beautie  either  in  nature,  or  in  generall  is,  since  we  give  so 
many,  and  attribute  so  divers  formes  to  humane  beautie,  yea, 
and  to  our  beautie  :  Of  which  if  there  were  any  natural!  or 
lively  description,  we  should  generally  know  it,  as  we  doe 
the  heat  of  fire.  We  imagine  and  faine  her  formes,  as  our 
fantasies  lead  us. 

PROPER.  \\.El.  Turpis  Romano  Belgicus  ore  color. 

A  Dutch-froes  colour  hath  no  grace, 
Seen  in  a  Romane  Ladies  face. 

The  Indians  describe  it  black e  and  swarthy,  with  blab- 
bered-thick  lips,  with  a  broad  and  flat  nose,  the  inward 
gristle  whereof  they  loade  with  great  gold-rings,  hanging 
downe  to  their  mouth,  and  their  neather  lips  with  great 

182 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

circlets  beset  with  precious  stones,  which  cover  all  their  CHAPTER 
chins,  deeming  it  an  especiall  grace  to  shew  their  teeth  to  XII 
the  roots.  In  Peru,  the  greatest  eares  are  ever  esteemed  the 
fairest,  which  with  all  art  and  industrie,  they  are  continually 
stretching  out :  and  a  man  (who  yet  liveth)  sweareth  to  have 
seen  in  a  Province  of  the  East-Indias  the  people  so  carefull 
to  make  them  great,  and  so  to  load  them  with  heavie  jewels, 
that  at  ease  he  could  have  thrust  his  arme  through  one  of 
their  eare-holes.  There  are  other  Nations,  who  endevour  to 
make  their  teeth  as  blacke  as  leat,  and  skorne  to  have  them 
white ;  and  in  other  places  they  die  them  red.  Not  onely 
in  the  province  of  Baske,  but  in  other  places,  women  are 
accounted  fairest  when  their  heads  are  shaven ;  and  which  is 
strange,  in  some  of  the  Northerly  frozen-countries,  as  Plinie 
affirmeth.  Those  of  Mexico,  esteeme  the  littlenesse  of  their 
foreheads,  as  one  of  the  chiefest  beauties,  and  whereas  they 
shave  their  haire  over  all  their  bodie  besides,  by  artificial! 
meanes  they  labour  to  nourish  and  make  it  grow  onely  in 
their  foreheads ;  and  so  love  to  have  great  dugs,  that  they 
strive  to  have  their  children  sucke  over  their  shoulders.  So 
would  we  set  forth  ilfavordnesse.  The  Italians  proportion-it 
big  and  plum  ;  The  Spaniards  spynie  and  lanke,  and  amongst 
us  one  would  have  her  white,  another  browne,  one  soft  and 
delicate,  another  strong  and  lustie  :  some  desire  wantonnesse 
and  blithnesse,  and  othersome  sturdinesse  and  majestic  to  be 
joyned  with  it.  Even  as  the  preheminence  in  beautie,  which 
Plato  ascribeth  unto  the  Sphericall  figure,  the  Epicurians 
refer  the  same  unto  the  Piramidall  or  Square ;  and  say  they 
cannot  swallow  a  God  made  round  like  a  bowle.  But  how 
soever  it  is,  nature  hath  no  more  privileged  us  in  that,  than 
in  other  things,  concerning  her  common  lawes.  And  if  we 
impartially  enter  into  judgement  with  our  selves,  we  shall 
finde,  that  if  there  be  any  creature  or  beast  lesse  favoured  in 
that  than  we,  there  are  others  (and  that  in  great  numbers) 
to  whom  nature  hath  been  more  favourable  than  to  us.  A 
multis  animallbus  decore  vincimur.  '  We  are  excelled  in 
'  comelinesse,  by  many  living  creatures ' :  Yea,  of  terrestriall 
creatures,  that  live  with  us.  For,  concerning  those  of  the 
Sea,  omitting  their  figure,  which  no  proportion  can  containe, 
so  much  doth  it  differ,  both  in  colour,  in  neatnesse,  in 

183 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  smoothnesse,  and  in  disposition,  we  must  give  place  unto 

XH          them :  which  in  all  qualities  we  must  likewise  doe  to  the 

An  Apologie  ayrje  ones.     And  that  prerogative,  which  Poets  yeeld  unto 

of  Raymond     •>  •    i  ,       .    .  i      i  •         4  ju  i,  i 

Sebond       our   uprlght   stature,   looking   towards    heaven   whence    her 

beginning  is, 

OVID.  Metam.  Pronaque  cum  spectent  animalia  ccetera  terram, 

i.  84.  Os  homini  sublime  dedit,  ccelumque  videre 

lussit,  et  erectos  ad  sydera  tollere  vuttus, 

Where  other  creatures  on  earth  looke  and  lie, 

A  loftie  looke  God  gave  man,  bad  him  prie 

On  heav'n,  rais'd  his  high  countenance  to  the  skies, 

is  meerely  poeticall,  for,  there  are  many  little  beasts,  that 
have  their  sight  directly  fixed  towards  heaven :  I  finde  the 
Camels  and  the  Estridges  necke  much  more  raised  and  up 
right,  than  ours.  What  beasts  have  not  their  face  aloft  and 
before,  and  looke  not  directly  opposite,  as  we ;  and  in  their 
naturall  posture  descrie  not  as  much  of  heaven  and  earth,  as 
man  doth  ?  And  what  qualities  of  our  corporall  constitution, 
both  in  Plato  and  Cicero  cannot  fit  and  serve  a  thousand 
beasts  ?  Such  as  most  resemble  man  are  the  vilest  and  filthiest 
of  all  the  rout :  As  for  outward  apparance  and  true  shape  of 
the  visage,  it  is  the  Munkie  or  Ape : 

Cic.  Nat.  Deo.  Simla  quam  similis,  turpissima  bestia,  nobis  ! 

i.  Enni. 

An  Ape,  a  most  il-favored  beast, 

How  like  to  us  in  all  the  rest  ! 

as  for  inward  and  vitall  parts,  it  is  the  Hog.  f  Truely,  when 
I  consider  man  all  naked  (yea,  be  it  in  that  sex,  which 
seemeth  to  have  and  challenge  the  greatest  share  of  eye- 
pleasing  beautie)  and  view  his  defects,  his  naturall  subjec 
tion,  and  manifold  imperfections ;  I  finde  we  have  had  much 
more  reason  to  hide  and  cover  our  nakednesse,  than  any 
creature  else.  We  may  be  excused  for  borrowing  those  which 
nature  had  therein  favored  more  than  us,  with  their  beauties 
to  adorne  us,  and  under  their  spoiles  of  wooll,  of  haire,  of 
feathers,  and  of  silke  to  shroud  us.  \  Let  us  moreover  observe, 
that  man  is  the  onely  creature,  whose  wants  offends  his  owne 
fellowes,  and  he  alone  that  in  naturall  actions  must  withdraw 
and  sequester  himselfe  from  those  of  his  owne  kinde.  Verely 
184 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

it  is  an   effect   worthie   consideration,   that    the   skilfullest  CHAPTER 

masters   of  amorous   dalliances    appoint    for    a    remedie    of 

venerian  passions,  a  free  and  full  survay  of  the  bodie,  which 

one  longeth  and  seeks-after :  and  that  to  coole  the  longing       SeWd 

and  aswage  the  heat  of  friendship,  one  need  but  perfectly 

view  and  throughly  consider  what  he  loveth. 

Ille  quod  obsccenas  in  aperto  corpore  partes  OVID.  Rem. 

Viderat,  in  cursu  quifuit,  hcesit  amor.  Am.  ii.  33. 

The  love  stood  still,  that  ran  in  full  cariere, 
When  bare  it  saw  parts  that  should  not  appeare. 

And  although  this  remedie  may  haply  proceed  from  a 
squeamish  and  cold  humor :  yet  is  it  a  wonderfull  signe  of 
our  imbecillitie,  that  the  use  and  knowledge  should  so  make 
us  to  be  cloyd  one  of  an  other.  It  is  not  bashfulnesse  so 
much,  as  art  and  foresight  makes  our  Ladies  so  circumspect 
and  unwilling  to  let  us  come  into  their  closets  before  they 
are  fully  readie,  and  throughly  painted,  to  come  abroad, 
and  shew  themselves : 

Nee  veneres  nostras  hocfallit  quo  magis  ipsa  LUCR.  iv.  1176. 

Omnia  sumopere  hos  vitce  post  scenia  celant, 
Quos  retinere  volunt  adstrictoque  esse  in  amore. 

Our  Mistresses  know  this,  which  mak's  them  not  disclose 
Parts  to  be  plaid  within,  especially  from  those 
Whom  they  would  servants  hold,  and  in  their  love-bands 
close. 

Whereas  in  other  creatures,  there  is  nothing  but  we  love, 
and  pleaseth  our  senses :  so  that  even  from  their  excrements 
and  ordure,  we  draw  not  only  dainties  to  eat,  but  our  richest 
ornaments  and  perfumes.  This  discourse  of  beautie  toucheth 
only  our  common  order,  and  is  not  so  sacrilegious  as  it  in 
tended  or  dareth  to  comprehend  those  divine,  supernaturall, 
and  extraordinarie  beauties,  which  sometimes  are  seen  to 
shine  amongst  us,  even  as  stars  under  a  corporall  and  terres- 
triall  veile.  Moreover,  that  part  of  natures  favours,  which 
we  impart  unto  beasts,  is  by  our  owne  confession  much 
more  advantageous  unto  them.  We  assume  unto  our  selves 
imaginarie  and  fantasticall  goods,  future  and  absent  goods, 
which  humane  capacitie  can  no  way  warrant  unto  her  selfe ; 
or  some  other,  which  by  the  overweening  of  our  owne  opinion, 

2  A  185 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  we  falsly  ascribe  unto  our  selves ;  as  reason,  honour,  and 
XII          knowledge  ;  and  to  them  as  their  proper  share  we  leave  the 

An  Apologie  essentiall,   the  manageable,  and   palpable  goods,  as    peace, 
of  Raymond  '     .      .  &    .  ,    ,     S,^     TT    *?.,     T'  r,  .   , 

Sebond       res^?  secuntie,  innocencie,  and  health  :  Health  I  say,  which 

is  the  goodliest  and  richest  present,  nature  can  impart  unto 
us.  So  that  even  Stoike  Philosophic  dareth  to  affirme,  that 
if  Heracletus  and  Pherecydes  could  have  changed  their 
wisdome  with  health,  and  by  that  meanes,  the  one  to  have 
rid  himselfe  of  the  dropsie,  and  the  other  of  the  lowsie-evill, 
which  so  sore  tormented  them,  they  would  surely  have  done 
it :  whereby  they  also  yeeld  so  much  more  honor  unto 
wisdome,  by  comparing  and  counterpeizing  the  same  unto 
health,  than  they  do  in  this  other  proposition  of  theirs, 
where  they  say,  that  if  Circes  had  presented  Vlisses  with  two 
kinds  of  drinke,  the  one  to  turne  a  wiseman  into  a  foole,  the 
other  to  change  a  foole  into  a  wiseman,  he  would  rather  have 
accepted  that  of  folly,  than  have  been  pleased,  that  Circes 
should  transforme  his  humane  shape  into  a  beasts.  And 
they  say,  that  wisdome  her  selfe  would  thus  have  spoken 
unto  him :  '  Meddle  not  with  me,  but  leave  me  rather  than 
'  thou  shouldest  place  me  under  the  shape  and  bodie  of  an 
'  Asse,1  What  ?  This  great  and  heavenly  wisdom  ?  Are 
Phylosophers  contented  then,  to  quit  it  for  a  corporall  and 
earthly  veile  ?  Why  then  it  is  not  for  reasons  sake,  nor  by 
discourse,  and  for  the  soule,  we  so  much  excell  beasts :  it  is 
for  the  love  we  beare  unto  our  beautie,  unto  our  faire  hew, 
and  goodly  disposition  of  limbs,  that  we  reject,  and  set  our 
understanding  at  nought,  our  wisdome,  and  what  else  we 
have.  Well,  I  allow  of  this  ingenious  and  voluntarie  con 
fession  :  surely  they  knew  those  parts,  we  so  much  labour  to 
pamper,  to  be  meere  fantazies.  Suppose,  beasts  had  all  the 
vertue,  the  knowledge,  the  wisdome  and  sufficiencie  of  the 
Stoikes,  they  should  still  be  beasts  ;  nor  might  they  ever  be 
compared  unto  a  miserable,  wretched,  and  senselesse  man. 
For,  when  all  is  done,  whatsoever  is  not  as  we  are,  is  not 
of  any  worth.  And  God  to  be  esteemed  of  us,  must  (as 
we  will  shew  anon)  draw  somewhat  neere  it.  Whereby  it 
appeareth,  that  it  is  not  long  of  a  true  discourse,  but  of  a 
foolish-hardinesse,  and  selfe-pres timing  obstinacie,  we  prefer 
our  selves  before  other  creatures,  and  sequester  our  selves 
186 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

from  their   condition  and  societie.    But  to  returne  to  our  CHAPTER 
purpose,  we    have  for    our  part   inconstancie,   irresolution 


uncertaintie,  sorrow,  superstition,  carefulnesse  for  future 
things  (yea  after  our  life)  ambition,  covetousnesse,  jelousie,  Sebond 
envie,  inordinate,  mad  and  untamed  appetites,  warre,  false 
hood,  disloyaltie,  detraction,  and  curiositie.  Surely  we  have 
strangely  overpaid  this  worthie  discourse,  whereof  we  so 
much  glorie,  and  this  readinesse  to  judge,  or  capacitie  to 
know,  if  we  have  purchased  the  same  with  the  price  of  so 
infinit  passions,  to  which  we  are  uncessantly  enthralled.  If 
we  be  not  pleased  (as  Socrates  is)  to  make  this  noble  pre 
rogative  over  beasts,  to  be  of  force,  that  whereas  nature 
hath  prescribed  them  certaine  seasons,  and  bounds  for  their 
naturall  lust  and  voluptuousnesse,  she  hath  given  us  at  all 
howers  and  occasions  the  full  reines  of  them.  Vt  vinum  Cic.  Nat.Deor. 
cegrotis,  quia  prodest  raro,  nocet  scepissime,  melius  est  non  "*• 
adhibere  omnino,  quam,  spe  dubice  salutis  in  apertam  perniciem 
incurrere  :  Sic,  hand  scio,  an  melius  fuerit  humano  generi 
motum  istum  celerem  cogitationis  acumen^  solertiam  quern 
rationem  vocamus,  quoniam  pestifera  sint  multis,  admodum 
paucis  salutaria,  non  dari  omnino,  quam  tarn  munifice  et  tarn 
large  dari.  '  As  it  is  better  not  to  use  wine  at  all  in  sicke 
'  persons,  because  it  seldome  doth  them  good,  but  many 
'  times  much  hurt,  than  in  hope  of  doubtfull  health,  to  run 
'  into  undoubted  danger  ;  so  doe  I  not  know,  whether  it 
4  were  better  that  this  swift  motion  of  the  thought,  this 
'  sharpnesse,  this  conceitednesse,  which  we  call  reason,  should 
'  not  at  all  be  given  to  mankind  (because  it  is  pernicious 
'  unto  many,  and  healthfull  to  verie  few)  than  that  it 
'  should  be  given  so  plentifully  and  so  largely.1  What  good 
or  commoditie  may  we  imagine  this  far-understanding  of  so 
many  things  brought  ever  unto  Varro,  and  to  Aristotle  ? 
Did  it  ever  exempt,  or  could  it  at  any  time  free  them  from 
humane  inconveniences  ?  Were  they  ever  discharged  of  those 
accidents  that  incidently  follow  a  seelie  labouring  man  ? 
Could  they  ever  draw  any  ease  for  the  gout  from  Logike  ? 
And  howbeit  they  knew  the  humour  engendring  the  same<- 
to  lodge  in  the  joints,  have  they  felt  it  the  lesse  ?  Did  they 
at  any  time  make  a  covenant  with  death,  although  they 
knew  full  well  that  some  nations  rejoyce  at  her  comming  ? 

187 


HOR.  Epod. 
viii.  17. 


IUVEN.  Sat. 
xiv.  156. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  as  also  of  Cuckoldship,  because  they  knew  women  to  be  com- 
XI1     .     mon  in  some  Countries  ?    But  contrariwise  having  both  held 
Aj1  Apologie  ^j     ft    ^  ranke  in  knowledge,  the  one  amongst  the  Romanes, 
of  Raymond  .  &  '    .  ft, 

Sebond       the    other    among    the    (jrraecians,  yea,  and    at    such    times 

wherein  sciences  flourished  most,  we  could  never  learne,  they 
had  any  speciall  excellencie  in  their  life.  Wee  see  the 
Grsecian  hath  been  put  to  his  plunges  in  seeking  to  discharge 
himselfe  from  some  notable  imputations  in  his  life.  Was  it 
ever  found  that  sensualitie,  and  health,  are  more  pleasing 
unto  him  that  understands  Astrologie  and  Grammar  ? 

(Illiterate  num  minus  nervi  riyent  ? 

As  stiffe  unlearned  sinnewes  stand, 
As  theirs  that  much  more  understand.) 

or  shame  and  povertie  lesse  importunate  and  vexing  ? 

Scilicet  et  morbis,  et  debilitate  carebis, 

Et  luctum,  et  curam  effugies,  et  tempera  mtcv 

Longa  tibi  posthcec  fato  meliore  dabuntur. 

Thou  shall  be  from  disease  and  weaknesse  free, 
From  moane,  from  care,  long  time  of  life  to  thee 
Shall  by  more  friendly  fate  atfoorded  be. 

I  have  in  my  daies  seen  a  hundred  Artificers,  and  as  many 
labourers,  more  wise  and  more  happie,  than  some  Rectors  in 
the  Universitie,  and  whom  I  would  rather  resemble.  Me 
thinks  Learning  hath  a  place  amongst  things  necessarie  for 
mans  life,  as  glorie,  noblenesse,  dignitie,  or  at  most  as  riches, 
and  such  other  qualities,  which  indeed  stead  the  same ;  but 
a  far-off,  and  more  in  conceipt,  than  by  Nature.  We  have 
not  much  more  need  of  offices,  of  rules,  and  lawes  how  to 
live  in  our  common- wealth,  than  the  Cranes  and  Ants  have 
in  theirs.  Which  notwithstanding,  we  see  how  orderly,  and 
without  instruction  they  maintaine  themselves.  If  man  were 
wise  he  would  value  every  thing  according  to  it's  worth,  and 
as  it  is  either  more  profitable,  or  more  necessarie  for  life. 
He  that  shall  number  us  by  our  actions  and  proceedings, 
shall  doubtlesse  finde  many  more  excellent-ones  amongst  the 
ignorant,  than  among  the  wiser  sort :  I  meane  in  all  kind 
of  vertues.  My  opinion  is,  that  ancient  Rome  brought  forth 
many  men  of  much  more  valour  and  sufficiencie,  both  for 
peace  and  warre,  than  this  late  learned  Rome,  which  with  all 

188 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

her  wisdom  hath  overthrowne  her  erst-flourishing  estate.     If  CHAPTER 
all  the  rest  were  alike,  then  should  honestie  and  innocencie          XII 
at  least  belong  to  the  ancient ;  for  she  was  exceedingly  well  An  Apologie 
i       -,i      *?       T   •••         -r.    .   T      -11     i  j.i  •      j-  of  Raymond 

placed  with  simphcitie.     But  I  will  shorten  this  discourse,       sebon(i 

which  haply  would  draw  me  further  than  I  would  willingly 
follow  :  yet  thus  much  I  will  say  more,  that  onely  humilitie  and 
submission  is  able  to  make  a  perfect  honest  man.  Every  one 
must  not  have  the  knowledge  of  his  dutie  referred  to  his  own 
judgement,  but  ought  rather  to  have  it  prescribed  unto  him, 
and  not  be  allowed  to  chuse  it  at  his  pleasure  and  free-will  : 
otherwise  according  to  the  imbecilitie  of  our  reasons,  and 
infinite  varietie  of  our  opinions,  we  might  peradventure  forge 
and  devise  such  duties  unto  our  selves,  as  would  induce  us 
(as  Epicurus  saith)  to  endevour  to  destroy  and  devoure  one 
another.  The  first  law  that  ever  God  gave  unto  man,  was  a 
Law  of  pure  obedience.  It  was  a  bare  and  simple  commande- 
ment  whereof  man  should  enquire  and  know  no  further  :  for 
asmuch,  as  to  obey  is  the  proper  dutie  of  a  reasonable  soule, 
acknowledging  a  heavenly  and  superiour  benefactor.  From 
obeying  and  yeelding  unto  him  proceed  all  other  vertues  ; 
even  as  all  sinnes  derive  from  selfe-over-weening.  Contrari 
wise,  the  first  temptation  that  ever  seized  on  humane  Nature 
was  disobedience,  by  the  Devils  instigation,  whose  first 
poison,  so  far  insinuated  it  selfe  into  us,  by  reason  of  the 
promises  he  made  us  of  wisdome  and  knowledge,  Eritis  sicut  Genesis,  cap. 
D\j  scientes  bonum  et  malum.  '  You  shall  be  like  Gods,  "*•  5- 
6  knowing  both  good  and  evibV  And  the  Syrens,  to  deceive 
Vlysses,  and  alluring  him  to  fall  into  their  dangerous  and 
confounding  snares,  offer  to  give  him  the  full  fruition  of 
knowledge.  The  opinion  of  wisdome  is  the  plague  of  man. 
That  is  the  occasion  why  ignorance  is  by  our  Religion  re 
commended  unto  us,  as  an  instrument  fitting  beleefe,  and 
obedience.  Cavete,  ne  quis  vos  deciplat  per  Philosophiam  et  Coloss.  cap. 
inanes  seductiones,  secundum  elementa  mundi.  6  Take  heed,  "•  8. 
'  lest  any  man  deceive  you  by  Philosophic  and  vaine  seduce- 
'  ments,  according  to  the  rudiments  of  the  world.1  All  the 
Philosophers  of  all  the  sects  that  ever  were,  do  generally 
agree  in  this  point,  that  the  chiefest  felicitie,  or  summum 
bonum,  consisteth  in  the  peace  and  tranquillitie  of  the  soule 
and  bodie  :  but  where  shall  we  finde  it  ? 

189 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER    HOR.  i.  Epi.   Ad  summum  sapiens  uno  minor  est  love,  dives, 
XII  i-  Antepen.      Liber,  honoratus,  pulcher,  Rex  denique  Regum : 

An  Apologie  Prcecipue  sanus,  nisi  cum  pituita  molesta  est. 

of  Raymond 

Sebond  summe,  who  wise  is  knowne, 

Is  lesse  than  love  alone, 
Rich,,  honorable,  free,  faire,  King  of  Kings, 
Chiefely  in  health,  but  when  fleagme  trouble  brings. 

It  seemeth  verily,  that  Nature  for  the  comfort  of  our 
miserable  and  wretched  condition,  hath  allotted  us  no  other 
portion,  but  presumption.  It  is  therefore  (as  Epictetus 
saith)  that  man  hath  nothing  that  is  properly  his  owne,  but 
the  use  of  his  opinions.  Our  hereditarie  portion  is  nothing 
but  smoke  and  wind.  The  Gods  (as  saith  Philosophic)  have 
health  in  true  essence,  and  sicknesse  in  conceipt.  Man 
cleane  contrarie,  possesseth  goods  in  imagination,  and  evils 
essentially.  We  have  had  reason  to  make  the  powers  of  our 
imagination  to  be  of  force  :  For,  all  our  felicities  are  but  in 
conceipt,  and  as  it  were  in  a  dreame.  Heare  but  this  poore 
and  miserable  creature  vaunt  himselfe.  There  is  nothing 
(saith  Cicero)  so  delightfull  and  pleasant  as  the  knowledge 
of  Letters  ;  of  Letters  I  say,  by  whose  meanes  the  infinitie 
of  things,  the  incomprehensible  greatnesse  of  nature,  the 
heavens,  the  earth,  and  all  the  Seas  of  this  vast  universe,  are 
made  knowne  unto  us.  They  have  taught  us  Religion, 
moderation,  stowtnesse  of  courage,  and  redeemed  our  soule 
out  of  darknesse,  to  make  her  see,  and  distinguish  of  all 
things,  the  high  aswell  as  the  lowe,  the  first  as  the  last,  and 
those  betweene  both.  It  is  they  that  store  and  supplie  us 
with  all  such  things  as  may  make  us  live  happily  and  well, 
and  instruct  us  how  to  passe  our  time  without  sorrow  or 
offence.  Seemeth  not  this  goodly  Orator  to  speake  of  the 
Almighties  and  everliving  Gods  condition  ?  And  touching 
effects,  a  thousand  poore  seelie  women  in  a  countrie  towne 
have  lived,  and  live  a  life  much  more  reposed,  more  peaceable, 
and  more  constant,  than  ever  he  did. 

— Deus  illefuit  Deus,  inclyte  Memmi, 
^      Qui  princeps  vitce  rationem  invenit  earn,  qua; 
Nunc  appellatur  sapientia,  quique  per  artem, 
Fluctibus  e  tantis  vitam  tantisque  tenebris, 
In  'tarn  trunquillo  et  tarn  clara  luce  locavit. 

190 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Good  sir,  it  was  God,  God  it  was,  first  found  CHAPTER 

That  course  of  mans  life,  which  now  is  renown'd  XII 

By  name  of  wisdome  ;  who  by  art  reposde,  An  Apologie 

Our  life  in  so  cleare  light,  calme  so  composde,  of  Raymond 

From  so  great  darknesse,  so  great  waves  opposde.  Sebond 

Observe  what  glorious  and  noble  words  these  be  :  yet 
but  a  sleight  accident  brought  this  wismans  understanding 
to  a  far  worse  condition,  than  that  of  a  simple  sheepherd  : 
notwithstanding  this  divine  Teacher,  and  this  heavenly 
wisdome.  Of  like  impudence  is  the  promise  of  Domocritus 
his  Booke,  '  I  will  now  speake  of  all  things ' :  And  that  fond 
title  which  Aristotle  gives  us  of  mortall  gods,  and  that  rash 
judgement  of  Chrysippus,  that  Dion  was  as  vertuous  as  God: 
And  my  Seneca  saith,  he  acknowledgeth  that  God  hath 
given  him  life,  but  how  to  live  well,  that  he  hath  of  himselfe. 
Like  unfo  this  other  :  In  virtute  vere  gloriamur,  quod  non  GIC.  Nat.  Deo. 
contingeret,  si  id  donum  a  Deo,  non  a  nobis  haberemus.  'We  in- 
'  rightly  vaunt  us  of  vertue,  which  we  should  not  doe,  if  we 
'  had  it  of  God,  not  of  our  selves."*  This  also  is  Senecaes, 
that  the  wise  man  hath  a  fortitude  like  unto  Gods  ;  but 
in  humane  weaknesse,  wherein  he  excelleth  him.  There  is 
nothing  more  common,  than  to  meet  with  such  passages  of 
temeritie :  There  is  not  any  of  us  that  will  be  so  much 
offended  to  see  himselfe  compared  to  God,  as  he  will  deeme 
himselfe  wronged  to  be  depressed  in  the  ranke  of  other 
creatures.  So  much  are  we  more  jealous  of  our  owne  interest, 
than  of  our  Creators.  But  we  must  tread  this  foolish  vanitie 
under  foot,  and  boldly  shake  off,  and  lively  reject  those  fond- 
ridiculous  foundations,  whereon  these  false  opinions  are 
built.  So  long  as  man  shall  be  perswaded  to  have  meanes 
or  power  of  himselfe,  so  long  wil  he  denie,  and  never  acknow 
ledge  what  he  oweth  unto  his  Master  :  he  shall  alwaies  (as 
the  common  saying  is)  make  shift  with  his  owne  :  He  must 
be  stripped  into  his  shirt.  Let  us  consider  some  notable 
example  of  the  effect  of  Philosophic.  Possidonius  having 
long  time  been  grieved  with  a  painfull-lingring  disease, 
which  with  the  smarting-paine  made  him  to  wring  his 
hands,  and  gnash  his  teeth,  thought  to  scorne  griefe,  with 
exclayming  and  crying  out  against  it :  'Doo  what  thou  list  yet 
'  will  I  never  say  that  thou  art  evill  or  paine.1  He  feeleth  the 

191 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  same  passions  that  my  lackey  doth,  but  he  boasteth  himselfe, 
XII  that  at  least  he  conteineth  his  tongue  under  the  lawes  of  his 
f^R-130  °^1j  sect.  Re  succumbere  non  oportebat  verbls  gloriantem :  'It  was 
Sebond  '  n°t  ^or  n^m  to  veeld  in  deeds,  who  had  so  braved  it  in 
'  words.'  Arcesilas  lying  sicke  of  the  gowt,  Carneades  corn- 
mi  ng  to  visit  him,  and  seeing  him  to  frowne,  supposing  he 
had  been  angrie,  was  going  away  againe,  but  he  called  him 
backe,  and  shewing  him  his  feet  and  brest,  said  unto  him, 
There  is  nothing  come  from  thence  hither.  This  hath  some 
what  a  better  garbe  ;  for  he  feeleth  himselfe  grieved  with 
sicknesse,  and  would  faine  be  rid  of  it,  yet  is  not  his  heart 
vanquished  or  weakned  thereby,  the  other  stands  upon  his 
stifnesse  (as  I  feare)  more  verball  than  essentiall.  And 
Dionysius  Heracleotes  being  tormented  with  a  violent  smart 
ing  in  his  eies,  was  at  last  pers waded  to  quit  these  Stoicke 
resolutions. 

Be  it  supposed  that  Learning  and  Knowledge  should 
worke  those  effects  they  speake  of,  that  is,  to  blunt  and  abate 
the  sharpnesse  of  those  accidents  or  mischances,  that  follow 
and  attend  us  ;  doth  she  any  more  than  what  ignorance 
effecteth  much  more  evidently  and  simply  ?  The  Philosopher 
Pyrrho  being  at  Sea,  and  by  reason  of  a  violent  storme  in 
great  danger  to  be  cast  away,  presented  nothing  unto  those 
that  were  with  him  in  the  ship,  to  imitate  but  the  securitie 
of  an  Hog  which  was  aboard,  who  nothing  at  all  dismaied, 
seemed  to  behold  and  out-stare  the  tempest.  Philosophic 
after  all  her  precepts  gives  us  over  to  the  examples  of  a 
Wrestler,  or  of  a  Muletier,  in  whom  we  ordinarily  perceive 
much  lesse  feeling  of  death,  of  paine,  of  griefe,  and  other 
inconveniences,  and  more  undanted  constancie,  than  ever 
Learning  or  Knowledge  could  store  a  man  withall,  unlesse 
he  were  borne,  and  of  himselfe  through  some  naturall 
habitude,  prepared  unto  it.  What  is  the  cause,  the  tender 
members  of  a  childe,  or  limbs  of  a  horse  are  much  more  easie, 
and  with  lesse  paine  cut  and  incised  than  ours,  if  it  be  not 
ignorance  ?  How  many,  onely  through  the  power  of  imagina 
tion,  have  falne  into  dangerous  diseases  ?  We  ordinarily  see 
diverse  that  will  cause  themselves  to  be  let  bloud,  purged, 
and  dieted,  because  they  would  be  cured  of  diseases,  they 
never  felt  but  in  conceit ;  when  essentiall  and  true  maladies 
192 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

faile  us,  then  Science  and  knowledge  lends  us  hers:  This  CHAPTER 
colour  or  complexion  (said  she)  presageth  some  rheumatike 
defluxion  will  ensue  you:  This  soultring-hot  season  menaceth 
you  with  some  febricant  commotion  ;  this  cutting  of  the 
vitall  line  of  your  left  hand  warneth  you  of  some  notable  and 
approaching  indisposition.  And  at  last  she  will  roundly 
addresse  her  selfe  unto  perfect  health  ;  saying,  this  youthly 
vigor  and  suddain  joy  can  not  possible  stay  in  one  place, 
her  bloud  and  strength  must  be  abated,  for  feare  it  turne  you 
to  some  mischiefe.  Compare  but  the  life  of  a  man  subject 
to  these  like  imaginations,  unto  that  of  a  day-labouring 
swaine,  who  folio wes  his  naturall  appetites,  who  measureth 
all  things  onely  by  the  present  sense,  and  hath  neither  learn 
ing  nor  prognostications,  who  feeleth  no  disease  but  when  he 
hath  it :  whereas  the  other  hath  often  the  stone  imaginarily, 
before  he  have  it  in  his  reines  :  As  if  it  were  not  time  enough 
to  endure  the  sicknesse  when  it  shall  come,  he  doth  in  his 
fansie  prevent  the  same,  and  headlong  runneth  to  meet  with 
it.  What  I  speake  of  Phisicke,  the  same  may  generally  be 
applied  and  drawne  to  all  manner  of  learning.  Thence  came 
this  ancient  opinion  of  those  Philosophers,  who  placed  chiefe 
felicitie  in  the  acknowledging  of  our  judgements  weaknesse. 
My  ignorance  affords  me  as  much  cause  of  hope  as  of  feare  : 
and  having  no  other  regiment  for  my  health,  than  that  of 
other  mens  examples,  and  of  the  events,  I  see  elsewhere  in 
like  occasions,  whereof  I  find  some  of  all  sorts  :  And  relie 
upon  the  comparisons,  that  are  most  favourable  unto  me.  I 
embrace  health  with  open  armes,  free,  plaine,  and  full,  and 
prepare  my  appetite  to  enjoy  it,  by  how  much  more,  it  is 
now  lesse  ordinarie  and  more  rare  unto  me :  so  far  is  it  from 
me,  that  I  with  the  bitternesse  of  some  new  and  forced  kind 
of  life,  trouble  her  rest,  and  molest  her  ease.  Beasts  doe 
manifestly  declare  unto  us,  how  many  infirmities  our  mindes 
agitation  bring  us.  That  which  is  told  us  of  those  that 
inhabit  Bresill,  who  die  onely  through  age,  which  some 
impute  to  the  clearenesse  and  calmenesse  of  their  aire,  I 
rather  ascribe  to  the  calmenesse  and  clearenesse  of  their 
minds,  void  and  free  from  all  passions,  cares,  toiling,  and  un 
pleasant  labours,  as  a  people  that  passe  their  life  in  a  wonder- 
full  kind  of  simplicitie  and  ignorance,  without  letters,  or 
2B  193 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  lawes,  and  without  Kings,  or  any  Religion.  Whence  comes 
XH  it  (as  we  daily  see  by  experience)  that  the  rudest  and  grossest 

An  Apologie  clownes,  are  more  tough,  strong,  and  more  desired  in  amorous 
Second*1  executions  :  And  that  the  love  of  a  Muletier  is  often  more 
accepted,  than  that  of  a  perfumed-quaint  courtier  ?  But 
because  in  the  latter,  the  agitation  of  his  minde  doth  so  dis 
tract,  trouble,  and  wearie  the  force  of  his  bodie  ;  as  it  also 
troubleth  and  wearieth  it  selfe,  who  doth  belie,  or  more 
commonly  cast  the  same  downe  even  into  madnesse,  but  her 
owne  promptitude,  her  point,  her  agilitie,  and  to  conclude 
her  proper  force  ?  Whence  proceeds  the  subtilest  follie,  but 
from  the  subtilest  wisdome  ?  As  from  the  extremest  friend 
ships  proceed  the  extremest  enmities,  and  from  the  soundest 
healths,  the  mortallest  diseases  ;  so  from  the  rarest  and 
quickest  agitations  of  our  minds  ensue  the  most  distempered 
and  outragious  frenzies.  There  wants  but  halfe  a  pegs  turne 
to  passe  from  the  one  to  the  other.  In  mad  mens  actions, 
we  see  how  fitlie  follie  suteth  and  meets  with  the  strongest 
operations  of  our  minde.  Who  knowes  not  how  unperceiv- 
able  the  neighbourhood  betweene  follie  with  the  liveliest 
elevations  of  a  free  minde  is  ;  and  the  effects  of  a  supreme 
and  extraordinarie  vertue  ?  Plato  affirmeth,  that  melancholy 
minds  are  more  excellent  and  disciplinable ;  So  are  there 
none  more  inclinable  unto  follie.  Diverse  spirits  are  scene 
to  be  overthrowne  by  their  owne  force,  and  proper  nimble- 

TORQUATO       nesse.     What  a  start  hath  one  of  the  most  judicious,  in- 

TASSO.  genious,  and  most  fitted  unto  the  ayre  of  true  ancient  poesie, 

lately  gotten  by  his  owne  agitation  and  selfe-gladnesse,  above 
all  other  Italian  Poets  that  have  been  of  a  long  time  ?  Hath 
not  he  wherewith  to  be  beholding  unto  this  his  killing 
vivacitie  ?  unto  this  clearenesse,  that  hath  so  blinded  him  ? 
unto  his  exact  and  far-reaching  apprehension  of  reasons 
which  hath  made  him  voide  of  reason  ?  unto  the  curious  and 
laborious  pursute  of  Sciences,  that  have  brought  him  unto 
sottishnesse  ?  unto  this  rare  aptitude  to  the  exercises  of  the 
minde,  which  hath  made  him  without  minde  or  exercise  ?  I 
rather  spited  than  pittied  him,  when  I  saw  him  at  Ferrara, 
in  so  pitteous  a  plight,  that  he  survived  himselfe  ;  misacknow- 
ledging  both  himselfe  and  his  labours,  which  unwitting  to 
him,  and  even  to  his  face,  have  been  published  both  uncor- 
194 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

rected  and  maimed.     Will  you  have  a  man  healthy,  will  you  CHAPTER 
have  him  regular,  and  in  constant  and  safe  condition  ?  over-          XII 
whelme  him  in  the  darke  pit  of  idlenesse,  and  dulnesse.    We  An  Apologie 
must  be  besotted  ere  we  can  become  wise,  and  dazled  before  ° 
we  can  be  led.     And  if  a  man  shall  tell  me,  that  the  com- 
moditie  to  have  the  appetite  cold  to  griefes,  and  wallowish 
to  evils,  drawes  this  incommoditie  after  it,  it  is  also  con 
sequently  the  same  that  makes  us  lesse  sharpe  and  greedie  to 
the  enjoying  of  good,  and  of  pleasures  :  It  is  true,  but  the 
miserie  of  our  condition  beareth,  that  we  have  not  so  much 
to  enjoy,  as  to  shun,  and  that  extreme  voluptuousnesse  doth 
not  so  much  pinch  us,  as  a  light  smart :  Segnius  homines 
bona  quam  mala  sentiunt.     '  Men  have  a  duller  feeling  of  a 
6  good  turne,  than  of  an  ill,  we  have  not  so  sensible  a  feeling 
4  of  perfect  health,  as  we  have  of  the  least  sicknesse.' 

— pun  git 

In  cute  vioc  summa  violatum  plagula  corpus, 
Quando  valere  nihil  quemquam  movet.     Hoc  juvat  unum 
Quod  me  non  torquet  latus  aut  pes ;  ccetera  quisquam 
Vix  queat  aut  sanum  sese,  aut  sentire  valentem. 

A  light  stroke  that  dooth  scarce  the  top-skin  wound, 
Greeves  the  gall'd  bodie,  when  in  health  to  be, 
Doth  scarce  move  any :  onely  ease  is  found, 
That  neither  side  nor  foot  tormenteth  me  : 
Scarce  any  in  the  rest  can  feel  he  's  sound. 

Our  being  in  health,  is  but  the  privation  of  being  ill. 
See  wherefore  the  sect  of  Philosophic,  that  hath  most  pre 
ferred  sensualitie,  hath  also  placed  the  same  but  to  indolencie 
or  unfeeling  of  paine.  To  have  no  infirmitie  at  all  is  the 
chiefest  possession  of  health  that  man  can  hope-for  (as 
Ennius  said :) 

Nimium  boni  est,  cui  nihil  est  mali.  ENNIUS. 

He  hath  but  too  much  good, 
Whom  no  ill  hath  withstood. 

For,  the  same  tickling  and  pricking,  which  a  man  doth 
feel  in  some  pleasures,  and  seemes  beyond  simple  health,  and 
indolencie,  this  active  and  moving  sensualitie,  or  as  I  may 
terme  it,  itching  and  tickling  pleasure  aymes  but  to  be  free 
from  paine,  as  her  chiefest  scope.  The  lust-full  longing  which 
allures  us  to  the  acquaintance  of  women,  seekes  but  to  expell 

195 


U1- 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  that  paine,  which  an  earnest  and  burning  desire  doth  pos- 
XII  sesse-us-with,  and  desireth  but  to  allay  it  thereby  to  come 

^DgP0*0^!  to  rest,  and  be  exempted  from  this  fever  ;  And  so  of  others. 
Sebond  ^  sa^  therefore,  that  if  simplicitie  directeth  us  to  have  no 
evill,  it  also  addresseth  us  according  to  our  condition  to  a 
most  happie  estate.  Yet  ought  it  not  to  be  imagined  so 
dull  and  heavie,  that  it  be  altogether  senselesse.  And 
Grantor  had  great  reason  to  withstand  the  unsensiblenesse 
of  Epicurus,  if  it  were  so  deeply  rooted,  that  the  approching 
and  birth  of  evils  might  gainsay  it.  I  commend  not  that 
unsensiblenesse,  which  is  neither  possible  nor  to  be  desired. 
I  am  well  pleased  not  to  be  sicke,  but  if  I  be,  I  will  know 
that  I  am  so  ;  and  if  I  be  cauterized  or  cut,  I  will  feel  it. 
Verily,  he  that  should  root  out  the  knowledge  of  evill, 
should  therewithall  extirp  the  knowledge  of  voluptuous- 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qn.  nesse,  and  at  last  bring  man  to  nothing.  Istud  nihil  dolere, 
non  sine  magna  mercede  contingit  immanitatis  in  animo, 
stuporis  in  corpore.  '  This  verie  point,  not  to  be  offended 
'  or  grieved  with  any  thing,  befals  not  freely  to  a  man, 
4  without  either  inhumanitie  in  his  minde,  or  senselesnesse 
'  in  his  bodie.1  Sicknesse  is  not  amisse  unto  man,  comming 
in  her  turne  :  Nor  is  he  alwaies  to  shun  paine,  nor  ever  to 
follow  sensualitie.  It  is  a  great  advantage  for  the  honour 
of  ignorance,  that  Science  it  selfe  throwes  us  into  her  armes, 
when  she  findes  her  selfe  busie  to  make  us  strong  against 
the  assaults  of  evils  :  she  is  forced  to  come  to  this  composi 
tion  ;  to  yeeld  us  the  bridle,  and  give  us  leave  to  shrowd 
our  selves  in  her  lap,  and  submit  our  selves  unto  her  favour, 
to  shelter  us  against  the  assaults  and  injuries  of  fortune. 
For,  what  meaneth  she  else,  when  she  perswades  us  to  with 
draw  our  thoughts  from  the  evils  that  possesse  us,  and 
entertaine  them  with  fore-gon  pleasures,  and  stead  us  as  a 
comfort  of  present  evils  with  the  remembrance  of  fore-past 
felicities,  and  call  a  vanished  content  to  our  help,  for  to 
oppose  it  against  that  which  vexeth  us  ?  Levationes  cegri- 
tudinum  in  avocatione  a  cogitanda  molestia,  et  revocatione 
ad  contemplandas  voluptates  point.  '  Eases  of  griefes  he  re- 
'  poseth  either  in  calling  from  the  thought  of  offence,  or 
'  calling  to  the  contemplations  of  some  pleasures.'  Unlesse 
it  be,  that  where  force  failes  her,  she  will  use  policie,  and 
196 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

shew  a  tricke  of  nimblenesse  and  turne  away,  where    the  CHAPTER 
vigor  both  of  her  bodie  and  armes  shall  faile  her.     For,  not 

" 


onely  to  a  strict  Philosopher,  but  simply  to  any  setled  man,     "    poogie 
when  he  by  experience  feeleth  the  burning  alteration  of  a       Seborid" 
hot  fever,  what  currant  paiment  is   it  to  pay  him  with  the 
remembrance  of  the  sweetnesse  of  Greeke  wine  ?    It  would 
rather  empaire  his  bargaine. 

Che  ricordar  si  il  ben  doppia  la  noia. 

For  to  thinke  of  our  joy, 
Redoubles  our  annoy. 

Of  that  condition  is  this  other  counsell,  which  Philosophie 
giveth,  onely  to  keepe  forepast  felicities  in  memorie,  and 
thence  blot  out  such  griefes  as  we  have  felt  :  as  if  the  skill 
to  forget  were  in  our  power  :  and  counsell,  of  which  we  have 
much  lesse. 

Suavis  est  laborum  prceteritorum  memoria.  Cic.  Fin.  ii. 

Of  labours  overpast, 
Remembrance  hath  sweet  taste. 

What  ?  shall  Philosophie,  which  ought  to  put  the 
weapons  into  my  hands,  to  fight  against  fortune  ;  which 
should  harden  my  courage,  to  suppresse  and  lay  at  my  feet 
all  humane  adversities,  will  she  so  faint,  as  to  make  me  like 
a  fearfull  cunnie  creepe  into  some  lurking-hole,  and  like  a 
craven  to  tremble  and  yeeld  ?  For,  memorie  representeth 
unto  us,  not  what  we  chuse,  but  what  pleaseth  her.  Nay, 
there  is  nothing  so  deeply  imprinteth  any  thing  in  our  re 
membrance,  as  the  desire  to  forget  the  same  :  It  is  a  good 
way  to  commend  to  the  keeping,  and  imprint  any  thing  in 
our  minde,  to  solicite  her  to  lose  the  same.  And  that  is 
false.  Est  situm  in  nobis,  ut  et  adversa,  quasi  perpetua  Cic.  Fin.  Bon. 
oblivione  obruamus,  et  secunda  jucunde  et  suaviter  memineri-  *• 
mus.  '  This  is  ingraffed  in  us,  or  at  least  in  our  power,  that 
'  we  both  burie  in  perpetuall  oblivion  things  past  against 
;  us,  and  record  with  pleasure  and  delight  whatsoever  was 
'  for  us." 

And  this  is  true^Memini  etiamquce  nolo;  oblivisci  non  possum  PLU.  in  vita 
quce  volo.    '  I  remember  even  those  things  I  would  not  ;  and  Them. 
4  can  not  forget  what  I  would."    And  whose  counsell  is  this  ? 

197 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  his,  Qui  se  unus  sapientem  profiteri  sit  ausus.     'Who  onely 

XII          '  durst  professe  himselfe  a  wise  man." 
An  Apologie 

of  Raymond  Qui  genus  humanum  ingenio  superavit  et  omnes 

Sebond  Prcestrinxit  Stellas,  exortus  uti  cetherius  Sol. 

LUCR.  iii.  Who  from  all  mankind  bare  for  wit  the  prize, 

1086.    Epicur.  And  dim'd  the  stars,,  as  when  skies  Sunne  doth  rise. 

To  emptie  and  diminish  the  memorie,  is  it  not  the  readie 
and  onely  way  to  ignorance  ? 
SEN.  (Ed.  act.  Iners  malorum  remedium  ignorantia  est. 

"i-  sc-  *•  Of  ills  a  remedie  by  chance. 

And  verie  dull  is  ignorance. 

We  see  diverse  like  precepts,  by  which  we  are  permitted 
to  borrow  frivolous  apparances  from  the  vulgar  sort,  where 
lively  and  strong  reason  is  not  of  force  sufficient:  alwaies 
provided,  they  bring  us  content  and  comfort.  Where  they 
can  not  cure  a  sore,  they  are  pleased  to  stupifie  and  hide  the 
same.  I  am  perswaded  they  will  not  denie  me  this,  that  if 
they  could  possible  adde  any  order  or  constancie  to  a  mans 
life,  that  it  might  thereby  be  still  maintained  in  pleasure 
and  tranquillitie,  by,  or  through  any  weaknesse  or  infirmitie 
of  judgement,  but  they  would  accept  it. 

HOR.  i.  Epist.  — potare,  et  spargere  flores 

v.  14.  Incipiam,  patiarque  vel  inconsultus  haberi. 

I  will  begin  to  strew  flowers,  and  drinke  free, 
Arid  suffer  witlesse,  thriftlesse,  held  to  bee. 

There  should  many  Philosophers  be  found  of  Lycas  his 
opinion :  This  man  in  all  other  things  being  verie  tem 
perate,  and  orderly  in  his  demeanors,  living  quietly  and 
contentedly  with  his  familie,  wanting  of  no  dutie  or  office 
both  toward  his  owne  houshold  and  strangers,  verie  care 
fully  preserving  himselfe  from  all  hurtfull  things :  notwith 
standing  through  some  alteration  of  his  senses  or  spirits, 
he  was  so  possessed  with  this  fantasticall  conceipt  or  obsti 
nate  humour,  that  he  ever  and  continually  thought  to  be 
amongst  the  Theaters,  where  he  still  saw  all  manner  of 
spectacles,  pastimes,  sports,  and  the  best  Comedies  of  the 
world.  But  being  at  last  by  the  skill  of  Physitions  cured  of 
this  maladie,  and  his  offending  humour  purged,  he  could 

198 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

hardly  be  held  from  putting  them  in  suite,  to  the  end  they  CHAPTER 
might  restore  him  to  the  former  pleasures  and  contents  of         XII 
his  imagination.  AJI  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

—  pol  me  occidistis  amici,  Sebond 

Non  servastis,  ait,  cui  sic  extorta  voluptas,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Et  demptus  per  vim  menti  gratissimus  error.  ii.  1  38. 

You  have  not  sav'd  me,  friends,,  but  slaine  me  quite, 

(Quoth  he)  from  whom  so  rest  is  my  delight, 

And  errour  purg'd,  which  best  did  please  my  spright. 

Of  a  raving  like  unto  that  of  Thrasilaus,  sonne  unto 
Pythodorus,  who  verily  beleeved,  that  all  the  ships  that  went 
out  from  the  haven  of  Pyraeum,  yea  and  all  such  as  came 
into  it,  did  only  travell  about  his  businesse,  rejoycing  when 
any  of  them  had  made  a  fortunate  voyage,  and  welcommed 
them  with  great  gladnesse  :  His  brother  Crito,  having  caused 
him  to  be  cured,  and  restored  to  his  better  senses,  he  much 
bewailed  and  grieved  the  condition  wherein  he  had  formerly 
lived  in  such  joy,  and  so  void  of  all  care  and  griefe.  It  is 
that,  which  that  ancient  Greeke  verse  saith  ;  That  not  to  be 
so  advised  brings  many  commodities  with  it  : 


Ei>  T<B  (ppovelv  yap  fj.rj8fv  fjdio-Tos  /3tos.  SOPH.  Ala. 

The  sweetest  life  I  wis,  flaS- 

In  knowing  nothing  is. 

And  as  Ecclesiastes  witnesseth  :  '  In  much  wisdome,  much  Ecclesiastes. 
'  sorrow  '  :  And  who  getteth  knowledge,  purchaseth  sorrow 
and  griefe.    Even  that,  to  which  Philosophy  doth  in  generall 
tearmes  allow  this  last  remedy,  which  she  ordaineth  for  all 
manner  of  necessities  ;  that  is,  to  make  an  end  of  that  life, 
which  we  cannot  endure.     Placet  ?  pare  :  Non  placet  ?  qua-  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu 
cunque  vis  ex'i.    Pungit  dolor  ?  velfodiat  sane  :  si  nudus  es,  da  "• 
jugulum:  sin  tectus  armis  vulcaniis,  id  est^fortitudme^  resiste. 
6  Doth  it  like  you  ?  obey  :  doth  it  not  like  you  ?  get  out  as 
'  you  will  :  doth  griefe  pricke  you  ?  and  let  it  pierce  you  too  : 
'  if  you  be  naked,  yeeld  your  throat  :  but  if  you  be  covered 
'  with  the  armour  of  Vulcan,  that  is,  with  fortitude,  resist.' 
And  that  saying  used  of  the  Graecians  in  their  banquets, 
which  they  aply  unto  it,  Aut  bibat,  out  abeat  :  '  Either  let  lb.  v. 
'  him  carouse,  or  carry  him  out  of  the  house  '  :  which  rather 

199 


CHAPTER 
XII 

An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

Sebond 

HOR.  ii.  Epist. 
ii.  ult. 


LUCR.  iii. 
1083. 


PLUT.  in 
Solons  life. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

fitteth  the  mouth  of  a  Gascoine,  than  that  of  Cicero,  who 
very  easily  doth  change  the  letter  B  into  V. 

Vivere  si  recte  nescis,  discede  peritis : 
Lusisti  satis,  edisti  satis,  utque  bibisti : 
Tempus  abire  tibi  est,  ne  potum  largius  <pquo 
Rideat,  et  pulset  lascima  decentius  cetas. 

Live  well  you  cannot,,  them  that  can  give  place  ; 
Well  have  you  sported,,  eaten  well,,  drunke  well  : 
Tis  time  you  part ;   lest  wanton  youth  with  grace 
Laugh  at,  and  knock  you  that  with  swilling  swell. 

What  is  it  but  a  confession  of  his  insufficiency,  and  a  sending 
one  backe  not  only  to  ignorance,  there  to  be  shrowded,  but 
unto  stupidity  it  selfe,  unto  unsensiblenesse  and  not  being  ? 

— Democritum  post  quam  matura  vetustas 
Admonuit  memorem,  motus  languescere  mentis: 
Sponte  sua  letho  caput  obvius  obtulit  ipse. 

When  ripe  age  put  Democritus  in  minde, 
That  his  mindes  motions  fainted,  he  to  finde 
His  death  went  willing,  and  his  life  resigned. 

It  is  that  which  Antisthenes  said,  that  a  man  must  provide 
himselfe  either  of  wit  to  understand,  or  of  a  halter  to  hang 
himselfe :  And  that  which  Chrysippus  alleaged  upon  the 
speech  of  the  Poet  Tyrtseus, 

De  la  vertUy  ou  de  mort  approchir. 

Or  vertue  to  approch, 
Or  else  let  death  incroch. 

And  Crates  said,  that  love  was  cured  with  hunger,  if  not 
by  time ;  and  in  him  that  liked  not  these  two  meanes,  by 
the  halter.  That  Sextius,  to  whom  Seneca  and  Plutarke  give 
so  much  commendation,  having  given  over  all  things  else 
and  betaken  himselfe  to  the  study  of  Philosophy,  seeing  the 
progresse  of  his  studies  so  tedious  and  slow,  purposed  to 
cast  himselfe  into  the  Sea ;  Ranne  unto  death  for  want  of 
knowledge :  Reade  here  what  the  law,  saith  upon  this  sub 
ject.  If  perad venture  any  great  inconvenience  happen,  which 
cannot  be  remedied,  the  haven  is  not  farre-ofF,  and  by  swim 
ming  may  a  man  save  himselve  out  of  his  body,  as  out  of  a 
leaking  boat :  for,  it  is  feare  to  die,  and  not  desire  to  live, 
which  keepes  a  foole  joyned  to  his  body.  As  life  through 

200 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

simplicity  becommeth  more  pleasant,  So  (as  I  erewhile  began  CHAPTER 
to  say)  becommeth  it  more  innocent  and  better.  The  simple 
and  the  ignorant  (saith  S.  Paul)  raise  themselves  up  to 
heaven,  and  take  possession  of  it ;  whereas  we,  withall  the 
knowledge  we  have,  plunge  our  selves  downe  to  the  pit  of 
hell.  I  rely  neither  upon  Valentinianus  (a  professed  enemy 
to  knowledge  and  learning)  nor  upon  Licinius  (both  Roman 
Emperours)  who  named  them  the  venime  and  plague  of  all 
politike  estates :  Nor  on  Mahomet,  who  (as  I  have  heard) 
doth  utterly  interdict  all  manner  of  learning  to  his  subjects. 
But  the  example  of  that  great  Lycurgus,  and  his  authority 
ought  to  beare  chiefe  sway,  and  the  reverence  of  that  divine 
Lacedemonian  policy,  so  great,  so  admirable,  and  so  long 
time  flourishing  in  all  vertue  and  felicity  without  any  in 
stitution  or  exercise  at  all  of  letters.  Those  who  returne 
from  that  new  world,  which  of  late  hath  beene  discovered  by 
the  Spaniards,  can  witnesse  unto  us,  how  those  nations  being 
without  Magistrates  or  law,  live  much  more  regularly  and 
formally  than  we,  who  have  amongst  us  more  Officers  and 
lawes,  than  men  of  other  professions,  or  actions. 

Di  citatorie  piene  e  di  libelli,  ARIOSTO,  can. 

D'  essamine,  di  carte,  e  di  procure  xiv.  stanz.  84. 

Hanno  le  mani  e'l  seno,  e  granfastelli 
Di  chiose,  di  consigli  e  di  letture, 
Per  cui  lefacultd  de'  poverelli 
Non  sono  mai  nette  cittd,  sicure. 
Hanno  dietre  e  dinanzi  e  d'  ambo  i  lati, 
Notai,  procuratori,  ed  advocati. 

Their  hands  and  bosoms  with  writs  and  citations, 
With  papers,  libels,  proxies,  full  they  beare, 
And  bundels  great  of  strict  examinations, , 
Of  glosses,  counsels,  readings  here  and  there. 
Whereby  in  townes  poore  men  of  occupations 
Possesse  not  their  small  goods  secure  from  feare, 
Before,  behind,  on  each  sides  Advocates, 
Proctors,  and  Notaries  hold  up  debates. 

It  was  that,  which  a  Roman  Senatour  said,  that  '  their 
'  predecessors  had  their  breath  stinking  of  garlike,  and  their 
'  stomake  perfumed  with  a  good  conscience ' :  and  contrary, 
the  men  of  his  times,  outwardly  smelt  of  nothing  but  sweet 
odours,  but  inwardly  they  stuncke  of  all  vices  :  Which  in 

2C  201 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  mine  opinion,  is  as  much  to  say,  they  had  much  Knowledge 
XI1  .  and  Sufficiency,  but  great  want  of  honesty.  Incivility,  ignor- 

of^IU  mond  ance>  simplicity,  and  rudnesse,  are  commonly  joyned  with 
Sefamd  innocency :  Curiosity,  subtilty,  and  knowledge,  are  ever 
followed  with  malice:  Humility,  feare,  obedience,  and 
honesty  (which  are  the  principal!  instruments  for  the  pre 
servation  of  humane  society)  require  a  single  docile  soule 
and  which  presumeth  little  of  her  selfe  :  Christians  have  a 
peculiar  knowledge,  how  curiosity  is  in  a  man  a  naturall, 
and  originall  infirmity.  The  care  to  encrease  in  wisdome 
and  knowledge  was  the  first  overthrow  of  man-kinde :  It  is 
the  way  whereby  man  hath  headlong  cast  himselfe  downe 
into  eternall  damnation.  Pride  is  his  losse  and  corruption  : 
It  is  pride,  that  misleadeth  him  from  common  waies ;  that 
makes  him  to  embrace  all  newfangles,  and  rather  chuse  to  be 
chiefe  of  a  stragling  troupe  and  in  the  path  of  perdition,  and 
be  regent  of  some  erronious  sect,  and  a  teacher  of  falsehood, 
than  a  disciple  in  the  schoole  of  truth,  and  suffer  himselfe 
to  be  led  and  directed  by  the  hand  of  others  in  the  ready 
beaten  high  way.  It  is  haply  that,  which  the  ancient  Greeke 
proverbe  implieth  ;  rj  SeLa-iSaijjiovla,  KadaTrep  Trarpl,  rco  rvcfxp 
ireiOerai.  '  Superstition  obaieth  pride  as  a  father.'  Oh 
over-weening,  how  much  doest  thou  hinder  us  ?  Socrates 
being  advertised,  that  the  God  of  wisdome,  had  attributed 
the  name  of  wise  unto  him,  was  thereat  much  astonished, 
and  diligently  searching  and  rouzing  up  himself,  and  ran- 
saking  the  very  secrets  of  his  heart  found  no  foundation  or 
ground  for  this  divine  sentence.  He  knew  some  that  were 
as  just,  as  temperate,  as  valiant  and  as  wise  as  he,  and  more 
eloquent,  more  faire  and  more  profitable  to  their  country. 
In  fine  he  resolved,  that  he  was  distinguished  from  others, 
and  reputed  wise,  only  because  he  did  not  so  esteeme  him 
selfe  :  And  that  his  God  deemed  the  opinion  of  science  and 
wisdome  a  singular  sottishnes  in  man  ;  and  that  his  best 
doctrine  was  the  doctrine  of  ignorance,  and  simplicitie  his 
greatest  wisdome.  The  sacred  writ  pronounceth  them  to  be 
miserable  in  this  world,  that  esteeme  themselves.  '  Dust  and 
'  ashes  '  (saith  he)  '  what  is  there  in  thee,  thou  shouldest  so 
'much  glory  of? '  And  in  another  place,  God  had  made  man 
like  unto  a  shadowe,  of  which  who  shall  judge,  when  the 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

light  being  gone,  it  shall  vanish  away?     Man  is  a  thing  of  CHAPTER 
nothing.     So  far  are  our  faculties  from  conceiving  that  high          XII 
Deitie,  that  of  our  Creators  works,  those  beare  his  marke     I1  Apologies 
best,  and  are  most  his  owne,  which  we  understand  least.     It  °  s^ond* 
is  an  occasion  to  induce    Christians  to  beleeve,  when  they 
chance  to  meet  with  any  incredible  thing,  that  it  is  so  much 
the  more  according  unto  reason,  by  how  much  more  it  is 
against  humane  reason.     If  it  were  according  unto  reason  it 
were  no  more  a  wonder  :  and  were  it  to  be  matched,  it  were 
no  more  singular.    Melius  scitur  Deus  nesciendo.     '  God  is  S.  AUGUS- 
'  better  knowen  by  our  not  knowing  him,"  saith  S.  Augus-  TINE- 
tine  :   And  Tacitus,  Sanctius  est  ac  reverentius  de  actis  deorum 
credere  quam  scire :   'It  is  a  course  of  more  holinesse  and 
6  reverence,  to  hold  beleefe,  than  to  have  knowledge  of  Gods 
'  actions.'    And  Plato  deemes  it  to  be  a  vice  of  impiety,  over- 
curiously  to  enquire  after  God,  after  the  world,  and  after  the 
first  causes  of  things.     Atque  ilium  quidem  parentem  hujus  TACITUS,  Mor. 
universitatis  invenire,  difficile :  et  quum  jam  inveneris,  indicare  German, 
in  vulgus,  nefas.  '  Both  it  is  difficult  to  finde  out  the  father  of 
'  this  universe,  and  when  you  have  found  him,  it  is  unlawfull  to 
'  reveale  him  to  the  vulgar,1  saith  Cicero.     We  easily  pro-  Cic.  Univer. 
nounce  puissance,  truth  and  justice ;  they  be  words  import 
ing  some  great  matter,  but  that  thing  we  neither  see  nor 
conceive.      We  say  that   God    feareth,  that    God    will   be 
angry,  and  that  God  loveth. 

Immortalia  mortali  sermone  notantes.  LUCR.  v.  122. 

Who  with  tearmes  of  mortality 

Note  things  of  immortality. 

They  be  all  agitations  and  motions,  which  according  to 
our  forme  can  have  no  place  in  God,  nor  we  imagine  them 
according  to  his.  It  onely  belongs  to  God  to  know  himselfe, 
and  interpret  his  owne  workes  ;  and  in  our  tongues  he  doth 
it  improperly,  to  descend  and  come  downe  to  us,  that  are, 
and  lie  groveling  on  the  ground.  How  can  wisdome  (which 
is  the  choice  betweene  good  and  evill)  beseeme  him,  seeing 
no  evill  doth  touch  him  ?  How  reason  and  intelligence,  which 
we  use  to  come  from  obscure  to  apparant  things,  seeing  there 
is  no  obscure  thing  in  God  ?  lustice  which  distributeth  unto 
every  man  what  belongs  unto  him,  created  for  the  society  and 
conversation  of  man,  how  is  she  in  God  ?  How  temperance, 

203 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which  is   the    moderation    of  corporall    sensualities,    which 
have  no  place  at  all  in  his  God-head  ?     Fortitude  patiently 
to  enciure  sorrowes)  and  labours  and  dangers,  appertained 
a  little  unto  him  :  these  three  things  no  way  approaching 
him,  having  no  accesse  unto  him.     And  therefore  Aristotle 
holds  him  to  be  equally  exempted  from  vertue  and  from  vice. 
Cic.Nai.Deor.  Neque  gratia,  neque  ira  teneri  potest,  quod  quce  talia  essent, 
i-  imbecilla  essent  omnia.     *  Nor  can  he  be  possessed  with  favor 

4  and  anger ;  for  all  that  is  so,  is  but  weake.1  The  partici 
pation  which  we  have  of  the  knowledge  of  truth,  what  soever 
she  is,  it  is  not  by  our  owne  strength  we  have  gotten  it ;  God 
hath  sufficiently  taught  it  us  in  that  he  hath  made  choice 
of  the  simple,  common  and  ignorant,  to  teach  us  his  wonder- 
full  secrets.  Our  faith  hath  not  been  purchased  by  us  :  it 
is  a  gift  proceeding  from  the  liberality  of  others.  It  is  not 
by  our  discourse  or  understanding,  that  we  have  received  our 
religion,  it  is  by  a  forreine  authority,  and  commandement. 
The  weaknesse  of  our  judgement,  helps  us  more  than  our 
strength  to  compasse  the  same,  and  our  blindnesse  more 
than  our  cleare-sighted  eies.  It  is  more  by  the  meanes  of 
our  ignorance,  than  of  our  skill,  that  we  are  wise  in  heavenly 
knowledge.  It  is  no  marvell  if  our  naturall  and  terrestriall 
meanes  cannot  conceive  the  supernaturall,  or  apprehend  the 
celestial  knowledge.  Let  us  adde  nothing  of  our  own  unto 
i  Cor.  i.  19,  it,  but  obedience  and  subjection:  For  (as  it  is  written)  'I 
20>  2I>  4  will  confound  the  wisdome  of  the  wise,  and  destroy  the 

4  understanding  of  the  prudent.  Where  is  the  wise  ?  Where  is 
4  the  Scribe  ?  Where  is  the  disputer  of  this  world  ?  Hath 
4  not  God  made  the  wisdome  of  this  world  foolishnesse  ?  For 
4  seeing  the  world  by  wisdome  knew  not  God  in  the  wisdome 
4  of  God,  it  hath  pleased  him,  by  the  vanity  of  preaching,  to 
4  save  them  that  beleeve.'  Yet  must  I  see  at  last,  whether 
it  be  in  mans  power  to  finde  what  he  seekes  for  :  and  if 
this  long  search,  wherein  he  hath  continued  so  many  ages, 
hath  enriched  him  with  any  new  strength  or  solid  truth  : 
I  am  perswaded,  if  he  speake  in  conscience,  he  will  confesse, 
that  all  the  benefit  he  hath  gotten  by  so  tedious  a  pursuit, 
hath  been,  that  he  hath  learned  to  know  his  owne  weaknesse. 
That  ignorance  which  in  us  was  naturall,  we  have  with 
long  study  confirmed  and  averred.  It  hath  happened  unto 
204 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

those  that  are  truly  learned,  as  it  hapneth   unto  eares  of  CHAPTER 
Corne,  which   as  long  as  they  are   empty,  grow  and  raise         XI1 

their  head  aloft,  upright  and  stout ;  but  if  they  once  be-  An  Apologie 
e>  n         i    i  •       r    °-,i      •        n  n        i       •    J.  i  i     of  Raymond 

come  lull  and  bigge,  with  ripe  Corne,  they  begin  to  humble       Sebond 

and  droope  downeward.  So  men  having  tried,  and  sounded 
all,  and  in  all  this  Chaos,  and  huge  heape  of  learning  and 
provision  of  so  infinite  different  things,  and  found  nothing 
that  is  substantiall  firme  and  steadie,  but  all  vanitie,  have 
renounced  their  presumption,  and  too  late  knowen  their 
naturall  condition.  It  is  that,  which  Vellcius  upbraids 
Cotta  and  Cicero  withall,  that  they  have  learnt  of  Philo, 
to  have  learned  nothing.  Pherecydes,  one  of  the  seven 
wise,  writing  to  Thales  even  as  he  was  yeelding  up  the 
Ghost ;  I  have  (saith  he)  appoynted  my  friends,  as  soone 
as  I  shalbe  layed  in  my  grave,  to  bring  thee  all  my  writings. 
If  they  please  thee  and  the  other  Sages  publish  them  ;  If 
not,  conceale  them.  They  containe  no  certaintie,  nor  doe  they 
any  whit  satisfie  mee.  My  profession  is  not  to  know  the 
truth  nor  to  attaine  it.  I  rather  open  than  discover  things. 
The  wisest  that  ever  was  being  demanded  what  he  knew, 
answered,  he  knew  that  he  knew  nothing.  He  verified  what 
some  say,  that  the  greatest  part  of  what  we  know,  is  the  least 
part  of  what  we  know  not :  that  is,  that  that  which  we  thinke 
to  know,  is  but  a  parcel,  yea  and  a  small  particle  of  our  ignor 
ance.  We  know  things  in  a  dreame  (saith  Plato)  and  we  are 
ignorant  of  them  in  truth.  Omnes  pene  veteres  nihil  cognosci,  Cic.  Acad.  Q. 
nihil  percipi,  nihil  sciri  posse  dixerunt :  angustos  sensus,  imbe- l' 
cilles  animos,  brevia  curricula  vitce.  '  Almost  all  the  ancients  ^ 
'  affirmed  nothing  may  be  knowen,  nothing  perceived,  no- 
'  thing  understood  :  that  our  senses  are  narrow,  our  mindes  \ 
'  are  weake,  and  the  race  of  our  life  is  short."*  Cicero  - 
himselfe,  who  ought  all  he  had  unto  learning,  Valerius 
saith,  that  in  his  age  he  began  to  disesteeme  letters  :  And 
whiFst  he  practised  them,  it  was  without  bond  to  any 
speciall  body,  following  what  seemed  probable  unto  him, 
now  in  the  one,  and  now  in  the  other  Sect ;  ever  holding 
himselfe  under  the  Academies  doubtfulnesse.  Dicendum  est,  IB.  Divin.  i. 
sed  ita  ut  nihil  qffirmem  :  quceram  omnia,  dubitans  plerumque, 
et  nihil  diffidens.  '  Speake  I  must,  but  so  as  I  avouch 
4  nothing,  question  all  things,  for  the  most  part  in  doubt 

205 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  and  distrust  of  my  selfe."     I  should  have  too  much  adoe,  if 

XII          I  would  consider  man  after  his  owne  fashion,  and  in  grose : 

An  Apologie  w}1ic]1  I  might  doe  by  his  owne  rule,  who  is  wont  to  judge 

Sebond        of  truth  not  %  the  weight  or  value  of  voices  but  bJ  the 
number.     But  leave  we  the  common  people, 

LUCR.  iii.  1091.  Qui  vigilans  stertit, 

Who  snoare  while  they  are  awake. 

IB.  1089.  Mortua  cui  vita  est,  propejam  vivo  atque  videnti: 

Whose  life  is  dead  while  yet  they  see, 
And  in  a  manner  living  be. 

Who  feeleth  not  himselfe,  who  j  udgeth  not  himselfe,  who 
leaves  the  greatest  part  of  his  naturall  parts  idle.  I  will 
take  man  even  in  his  highest  estate.  Let  us  consider  him 
in  this  small  number  of  excellent  and  choise  men,  who 
having  naturally  beene  endowed  with  a  peculiar  and 
exquisite  wit,  have  also  fostred  and  sharpened  the  same 
with  care,  with  study  and  with  art,  and  have  brought  and 
strained  unto  the  highest  pitch  of  wisdome,  it  may  possibly 
reach  unto.  They  have  fitted  their  soule  unto  all  senses, 
and  squared  the  same  to  all  byases  ;  they  have  strengthned 
and  under-propped  it  with  all  foraine  helpes,  that  might 
any  way  n't  or  stead  her,  and  have  enriched  and  adorned 
her  with  whatsoever  they  have  beene  able  to  borrow,  either 
within  or  without  the  world  for  her  availe :  It  is  in  them, 
that  the  extreme  height  of  humane  Nature  doth  lodge. 
They  have  reformed  the  world  with  policies  and  lawes. 
They  have  instructed  the  same  with  arts  and  sciences,  as 
also  by  example  of  their  wonderfull  manners  and  life.  I 
will  but  make  accompt  of  such  people,  of  their  witnesse 
and  of  their  experience.  Let  us  see  how  far  they  have 
gone,  and  what  holdfast  they  have  held  by.  The  maladies 
and  defects,  which  we  shall  finde  in  that  College,  the  world 
may  boldly  allow  them  to  be  his.  Whosoever  seekes  for 
any  thing,  commeth  at  last  to  this  conclusion  and  saith, 
that  either  lie  hath  found  it,  or  that  it  cannot  be  found, 
or  that  he  is  still  in  pursuit  after  it.  All  Philosophy  is 
divided  into  these  three  kindes.  Her  purpose  is  to  seeke 
out  the  truth,  the  knowledge  and  the  certainty.  The  Peri- 
patetike,  the  Epicurians,  the  Stoickes  and  others  have 


of  Raymond 
Sebond 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

thought  they  had  found  it.  These  have  established  the  CHAPTER 
Sciences  that  we  have,  and  as  of  certaine  knowledges  have 
treated  of  them  ;  Clitomochus,  Carneades  and  the  Acade- 
mikes,  have  despaired  the  finding  of  it,  and  judged  that 
truth  could  not  be  conceived  by  our  meanes.  The  end  of 
these  is  weaknesse  and  ignorance.  The  former  had  more 
followers,  and  the  worthiest  Sectaries.  Pyrrho  and  other 
Sceptikes,  or  Epochistes,  whose  doctrine  or  manner  of  teach 
ing,  many  auncient  learned  men  have  thought  to  have  beene 
drawne,  from  Homer,  from  the  seaven  wise  men,  from 
Archilochus  and  Euripides,  to  whom  they  joyne  Zeno, 
Democritus  and  Xenophanes,  say,  that  they  are  still  seeking 
after  truth.  These  judge  that  those  are  infinitely  deceived, 
who  imagine  they  have  found  it,  and  that  the  second  degree 
is  over  boldly  vaine  in  affirming  that  mans  power  is  alto 
gether  unable  to  attaine  unto  it.  For  to  stablish  the 
measure  of  our  strength,  to  know  and  distinguish  of  the 
difficulty  of  things  is  a  great,  a  notable  and  extreme  science, 
which  they  doubt  whether  man  be  capable  thereof  or  no. 

Nil  sciri  quisquis  putat,  id  quoque  nescit, 
An  sciri  possit,  quo  se  nil  scire  fatetur. 

Who  think's  nothing  is  knowne,  knowes  not  that, 

whereby  hee 
Graunts  he  knowes  nothing  if  it  knowne  may  bee. 

That  ignorance,  which  knoweth,  judgeth  and  condemneth 
it  selfe,  is  not  an  absolute  ignorance  :  For,  to  be  so,  she 
must  altogether  be  ignorant  of  her  selfe.  So  that  the  pro 
fession  of  the  Phyrronians  is  ever  to  waver,  to  doubt  and  to 
enquire  ;  never  to  be  assured  of  any  thing,  nor  to  take  any 
warrant  of  himself.  Of  the  three  actions  or  faculties  of  the 
soule,  that  is  to  say,  the  imaginative,  the  concupiscible,  and 
the  consenting,  they  allow  and  conceive  the  two  former  ;  the 
last,  they  hold  and  defend  to  be  ambiguous,  without  inclina 
tion  or  approbation,  either  of  one  or  other  side,  be  it  never 
so  light.  Zeno  in  jesture  painted  forth  his  imagination 
upon  this  division  of  the  soules  faculties  :  the  open  and  out 
stretched  hand  was  apparance ;  the  hand  halfe-shut,  and 
fingers  somewhat  bending,  consent :  the  fist  close,  compre 
hension  :  if  the  fist  of  the  left-hand  were  closely  clinched 
together,  it  signified  Science.  Now  this  situation  of  their 

207 


LUCR.  iv.  471. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  judgement,  straight  and  inflexible,  receiving  all  objects  with 
application  or  consent,   leads  them    unto   their  Ataraxie  ; 

which  is  the  condition  of  a  quiet  and  setled  life>  exempted 
from  the  agitations  which  we  receive  by  the  impression  of 
the  opinion  and  knowledge  we  imagine  to  have  of  things  ; 
whence  proceed,  feare,  avarice,  envie,  immoderate  desires, 
ambition,  pride,  superstition,  love  of  novelties,  rebellion, 
disobedience,  obstinacie,  and  the  greatest  number  of  corporall 
evils :  yea  by  that  meane  they  are  exempted  from  the 
jealousie  of  their  owne  discipline,  for  they  contend  but 
faintly  :  They  feare  nor  revenge,  nor  contradiction  in  the 
disputations.  When  they  say,  that  heavy  things  descend 
downeward,  they  would  be  loath  to  be  beleeved,  but  desire 
to  be  contradicted,  thereby  to  engender  doubt,  and  suspence 
of  judgement,  which  is  their  end  and  drift.  They  put  forth 
their  propositions,  but  to  contend  with  those,  they  imagine 
wee  hold  in  our  conceipt.  If  you  take  theirs,  then  will 
they  undertake  to  maintaine  the  contrary  :  all  is  one  to 
them,  nor  will  they  give  a  penny  to  chuse.  If  you  pro 
pose  that  snow  is  blacke,  they  wil  argue  on  the  other  side, 
that  it  is  white.  If  you  say  it  is  neither  one  nor  other, 
they  wil  maintaine  it  to  be  both.  If  by  a  certaine  judge 
ment,  you  say  that  you  cannot  tell,  they  will  maintaine 
that  you  can  tell.  Nay,  if  by  an  affirmative  axiome,  you 
sweare  that  you  stand  in  some  doubt,  they  will  dispute, 
that  you  doubt  not  of  it,  or  that  you  cannot  judge  or 
maintaine,  that  you  are  in  doubt.  And  by  this  extremitie 
of  doubt,  which  staggereth  it  selfe,  they  separat  and  devide 
themselves  from  many  opinions,  yea  from  those  which  divers 
wayes  have  maintained  both  the  doubt  and  the  ignorance. 
Why  shall  it  not  be  granted  then  (say  they)  as  to  Dog 
matists,  or  Doctrine-teachers,  for  one  to  say  greene,  and 
another  yellow,  so  for  them  to  doubt  ?  Is  there  any  thing 
can  be  proposed  unto  you,  eyther  to  allow  or  refuse,  which 
may  not  lawfully  be  considered  as  ambiguous  and  doubt- 
full  '?  And  whereas  others  be  carryed  either  by  the  custome 
of  their  Countrie,  or  by  the  institution  of  their  Parents, 
or  by  chance,  as  by  a  Tempest,  without  choyce  or  judge 
ment,  yea  sometimes  before  the  age  of  descretion,  to  such 
or  such  another  opinion,  to  the  Stoike  or  Epicurian  Sect, 
208 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

to  which  they  finde  themselves  more  engaged,  subjected  or  CHAPTER 
fast  tyed,  as  to  a  prize  they  cannot  let  goe  :    Ad   quam-         XI1 
cunque  disciplinam,  velut  Tempestate,  delati  ad  earn  tanquam  o"  Raymond 
ad  saxum  adhocrescunt.     6  Being   carryed   as    it  were    by  a       sebond 
'  Tempest,  to  any  kinde  of  doctrine,  they  sticke  close  to  it,  Cic.  Academ. 
6  as  it  were  to  a  rocke."     Why  shall  not  these  likewise  be  Qu-  x- 
permitted,  to  maintaine  their  liberty,  and  consider  of  things 
without  dutie  or  compulsion  ?    Hoc  liberiores,  et  solutiores.  Ibid. 
quod  Integra  illis  est  judicandi  potestas.     '  They  are  so  much 
4  the  freer  and  at  liberty,  for  that  their  power  of  judge- 
'  ment  is  kept  entire.1     Is  it  not  some  advantage  for  one  to 
finde  himselfe  disingaged   from   necessitie,  which  brideleth 
others  ?    Is  it  not  better  to  remaine  in  suspence,  than  to 
entangle  himselfe  in  so  many  errours,  that  humane  fantasie 
hath  brought  forth  ?    Is  it  not  better  for  a  man  to  suspend 
his  owne  perswasion,  than  to  meddle  with   these  sedicious 
and  quarellous  divisions  ?    What  shall  I  chuse  ?    Mary,  what 
you  list,  so  you  chuse.     A  very  foolish  answer  :   to  which 
it  seemeth  neverthelesse,  that  all  Dogmatisme  arriveth  ;  by 
which  it  is  not  lawfull  for  you  to  bee  ignorant  of  that  we 
know  not.     Take  the  best  and  strongest  side,  it  shall  never 
be  so  sure,  but  you  shall  have  occasion  to  defend  the  same, 
to  close  and  combat  a  hundred  and  a  hundred  sides  ?     Is 
it  not  better  to  keepe  out   of  this    confusion  ?     You    are 
suffered  to  embrace  as  your  honour  and  life  Aristotles  opinion, 
upon  the  eternitie  of  the  soule,  and  to  belie  and  contradict 
whatsoever  Plato  saith  concerning  that ;  and  shal  they  be 
interdicted  to  doubt  of  it  ?     If  it  be  lawfull  for  Pana?cius 
to    maintaine    his    judgement    about    Aruspices,    Dreames, 
Oracles  and  Prophecies,  whereof  the  Stoikes  makes  no  doubt 
at  all :     Wherfore    shall   not  a  wiseman   dare    that  in  all 
tilings,  which  this  man  dareth  in  such  as  he  hath  learned 
of  his  Masters  ?     Confirmed  and  established  by  the  general 
consent  of  the  Schoole  whereof  he  is  a  Sectary  and  a  Pro 
fessor  ?     If  it  be  a  Childe  that  judgeth,  he  wots  not  what 
it  is ;    if  a  learned    man,   he   is    fore-stalled.      They    have 
reserved  a  great  advantage  for  themselves  in  the  combat, 
having  discharged   themselves   of  the  care  how  to  shroud 
themselves.     They  care  not  to  be  beaten,  so  they  may  strike 
againe  :  And  all  is  fish  that  comes  to  net  witli  them  :  If  they 
2D  209 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  overcome,  your  proposition  halteth  ;  if  you,  theirs  is  lame  ; 

XII          if  they  faile  they  verifie  ignorance,  if  you,  she  is  verified  by 

An  Apologie  vou  .  jf  tliev  prove  that  nothing  is  knowen,  it  is  very  well : 

Second  If  they  cannot  Prove  i1:>  it;  is  g°od  alike  :  Vt  9uum  in  eadem 
Cic.  Academ.  re  paria  contrarijs  in  partibus  momenta  inveniuntur,  facilms 
Q.U-  x.  ab  utraque  parte  assertio  sustineatur.  '  So  as  when  the  same 

6  matter  the  like  weight  and  moment  is  found  on  divers  parts, 
'  we  may  the  more  easily  withhold  avouching  on  both  parts.' 
And  they  suppose  to  find  out  more  easily,  why  a  thing  is 
false,  than  true,  and  that  which  is  not,  than  that  which 
is  :  and  what  they  beleeve  not,  than  what  they  beleeve. 
Their  manner  of  speech  is,  I  confirme  nothing  :  It  is  no 
more  so  than  thus,  or  neither  :  I  conceive  it  not ;  Appar- 
ances  are  every  where  alike.  The  law  of  speaking  pro  or 
contra  is  all  one.  Nothing  seemeth  true,  that  may  not 
seeme  false.  Their  Sacramentall  word  is,  eVe%&>,  which  is 
as  much  to  say,  as  I  hold  and  stir  not.  Behold  the  burdons 
of  their  songs  and  other  such  like.  Theyr  effects  is,  a  pure, 
entire  and  absolute  surceasing  and  suspence  of  judgement. 
They  use  their  reason,  to  enquire  and  to  debate ;  and  not 
to  stay  and  choose.  Whosoever  shall  imagine  a  perpetuall 
confession  of  ignorance,  and  a  judgement  upright  and  with 
out  staggering,  to  what  occasion  soever  may  chance  ;  That 
man  conceives  the  true  Phyrrhonisme.  I  expound  this  fan- 
tazy  as  plaine  as  I  can,  because  many  deeme  it  hard  to  be 
conceived  ?  And  the  Authors  themselves  represent  it  some 
what  obscurely  and  diversly.  Touching  the  actions  of  life, 
in  that  they  are  after  the  common  sort,  they  are  lent  and 
applied  to  naturall  inclinations,  to  the  impulsion  and  con 
straint  of  passions,  to  the  constitutions  of  lawes,  and 
IB.  Divin.  i.  customes,  and  to  the  tradition  of  arts  :  Non  enim  nos  Deus 
ista  scire,  sed  tantummodo  uti  voluit.  '  For  God  would  not 
'  have  us  know  these  things,  but  onely  use  them/  By  such 
meanes  they  suffer  their  common  actions  to  be  directed, 
without  any  conceit  or  judgement,  which  is  the  reason  that 
I  cannot  well  sort  unto  this  discourse,  what  is  said  of  Pyrro. 
They  faine  him  to  be  stupicle  and  unmovable,  leading  a 
kinde  of  wild  and  unsociable  life,  not  shunning  to  be  hit 
with  Carts,  presenting  himselfe  unto  downefals,  refusing  to 
conforme  himselfe  to  the  lawes.  It  is  an  endearing  of  his 
210 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

discipline.  Hee  would  not  make  himselfe  a  stone  or  a  CHAPTER 
blocke,  but  a  living,  discoursing  and  reasoning  man,  enjoy-  -*11 
ing  all  pleasures  and  naturall  commodities,  busying  him-  0"Ra^°m°0^ 
selfe  with,  and  using  all  his  corporall  and  spirituall  parts,  in  Sebond 
rule  and  right.  The  fantastic-all  and  imaginary,  and  false 
privileges,  which  man  hath  usurped  unto  himselfe,  to  sway, 
to  appoint,  and  to  establish,  he  hath  absolutely  renounced 
and  quit  them.  Yet  is  there  no  Sect,  but  is  enforced  to 
allow  her  wise  Sectary,  in  chiefe  to  follow  diverse  things  nor 
comprized  nor  perceived,  nor  allowed,  if  he  will  live.  And 
if  he  take  shipping,  he  followes  his  purpose,  not  knowing 
whether  it  shall  be  profitable  or  no  :  and  yeeldes  to  this, 
that  the  shippe  is  good,  that  the  pilote  is  skilfull,  and  that 
the  season  is  fit ;  circumstances  only  probable ;  After 
which  he  is  bound  to  goe,  and  suffer  himselfe  to  be  removed 
by  apparances  alwaies  provided  they  have  no  expresse  con 
trariety  in  them.  Hee  hath  a  body,  he  hath  a  soule,  his 
senses  urge  him  forward,  his  mind  moveth  him.  Although 
he  finde  not  this  proper  and  singular  marke  of  judging  in 
himselfe,  and  that  hee  perceive  he  should  not  engage  his  con 
sent,  seeing  some  falshood  may  be  like  unto  this  truth  :  Hee 
ceaseth  not  to  detect  the  offices  of  his  life  fully  and  com- 
modiously.  How  many  arts  are  there,  which  professe  to  con 
sist  more  in  conjecture,  than  in  the  science  ;  That  distinguish 
not  betweene  truth  and  falshood,  but  onely  follow  seeming  ? 
There  is  both  true  and  false  (say  they)  and  there  are  meanes 
in  us  to  seeke  it  out,  but  not  to  stay  it  when  we  touch  it.  It 
is  better  for  us  to  suffer  the  order  of  the  world  to  manage  us 
without  further  inquisition.  A  mind  warranted  from  pre 
judice,  hath  a  marvellous  preferment  to  tranquility.  Men 
that  sensure  and  controule  their  judges,  doe  never  duly 
submit  themselves  unto  them.  How  much  more  docile  and 
tractable  are  simple  and  uncurious  mindes  found  both 
towards  the  lawes  of  religion  and  Politike  decrees,  than  these 
over-vigilant  and  nice  wits,  teachers  of  divine  and  humane 
causes  ?  There  is  nothing  in  mans  invention,  wherein  is  so 
much  likelyhood,  possibilitie  and  profit.  This  representeth 
man  bare  and  naked,  acknowledging  his  naturall  weakenesse, 
apt  to  receive  from  above  some  strange  power,  disfurnished 
of  all  humane  knowledge,  and  so  much  the  more  fitte  to 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  harbour  divine  understanding,  disannulling  his  judgement, 
XII          that  so  he  may  give  more  place  unto  faith  :   Neither  mis- 
f  R        ^t  beleevmo  nor  establishing  any  doctrine  or  opinion  repugnant 
" 


common  lawes  and  observances,  humble,  obedient,  dis- 
ciplinable  and  studious  ;  a  sworne  enemy  to  Heresie,  and  by 
consequence  exempting  himselfe  from  all  vaine  and  irreligious 
opinions,  invented  and  brought  up  by  false  Sects.  It  is  a 
white  sheet  prepared  to  take  from  the  finger  of  God  what 
form  soever  it  shall  please  him  to  imprint  therin.  The 
more  we  addresse  and  commit  our  selves  to  God,  and  reject 
our  selves,  the  better  it  is  for  us.  Accept  (saith  Ecclesiastes) 
in  good  part  things  both  in  shew  and  taste,  as  from  day  to 
day  they  are  presented  unto  thee,  the  rest  is  beyond  thy 

Psal.  xciii.  ii.  knowledge.  Domlnus  novit  cogitationes  hominum,  quoniam 
vance  sunt.  '  The  Lord  knowes  the  thoughts  of  men,  that 
4  they  are  vayne."  See  how  of  three  generall  Sects  of 
Philosophic,  two  make  expresse  profession  of  doubt  and 
ignorance  ;  and  in  the  third,  which  is  the  Dogmatists,  it  is 
easie  to  be  discerned,  that  the  greatest  number  have  taken 
the  face  of  assurance  ;  onely  because  they  could  set  a  better 
countenance  on  the  matter.  They  have  riot  so  much  gone 
about  to  establish  any  certainty  in  us,  as  to  shew  how  farre 
they  had  waded  in  seeking  out  the  truth.  Quam  doctijingunt 
magls  quam  norunt.  'Which  the  learned  doe  rather  conceit, 
*  than  know.' 

Tymseus,  being  to  instruct  Socrates,  of  what  he  knowes 
of  the  Gods,  of  the  world  and  of  men,  purposeth  to  speake 
of  it,  as  one  man  to  another  ;  and  that  it  sufficeth,  if  his 
reasons  be  as  probable  as  another  mans  :  For,  exact  reasons 
are  neither  in  his  hands,  nor  in  any  mortall  man  :  which  one 

Cic.  TUSC.  Qu.  of  his  Sectaries  hath  thus  imitated:  Vt  potero,  explicabo:  nee 
tamen,  ut  Pyihius  Apollo  >,  certa  ut  sint  etfxa,  quce  dixero;  sed, 
ut  liomunculus,  probabilia  conjectura  sequens.  '  As  I  can,  I  will 
'  explaine  them  ;  yet  not  as  Apollo  giving  oracles,  that  all 
'  should  bee  certaine  and  set  downe,  that  I  say,  but  as  a  meane 
6  man,  who  followes  likelihood  by  his  conjecture."  And  that 
upon  the  discourse  of  the  contempt  of  death  ;  a  naturall 
and  popular  discourse.  Elsewhere  he  hath  translated  it, 

IB.  Vnivcrs.      Upon  Platoes  very  words.    Si  forte,  de  Deorum  natura  ortuque 
mundi  disserentes^  minus  quod  habemw  in  ammo  consequimur, 
212 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

hand  erlt  mirum.  <ZEquum  est  enim  meminisse,  et  me,  qui  CHAPTER 
dixseram,  hominem  esse,  et  vos  quijudicetis :  ut,  si  probabilia  XII  . 
dicentur,  nihil  ultra  requiratis.  '  It  will  be  no  marvell,  if  ^  jfcj^JJJJ 
4  arguing  of  the  nature  of  Gods  and  originall  of  the  world,  Sebond 
4  we  scarsely  reach  to  that  which  in  our  minde  we  compre- 
4  hend ;  for  it  is  meet  we  remember,  that  both  I  am  a  man, 
4  who  am  to  argue,  and  you  who  are  to  judge,  so  as  you 
4  seeke  no  further,  if  I  speake  but  tilings  likely/  Aristotle 
ordinarily  hoardeth  us  up  a  number  of  other  opinions,  and 
other  beleefes,  that  so  he  may  compare  his  unto  it,  and  make 
us  see  how  farre  he  hath  gone  further,  and  how  neere  he 
comes  unto  true-likelyhood  ;  For  truth  is  not  judged  by 
authoritie,  nor  by  others  testimonie  ;  And  therefore  did 
Epicurus  religiously  avoyd  to  aleadge  any  in  his  composi 
tions.  He  is  the  Prince  of  Dogmatists,  and  yet  we  learne 
of  him,  that,  to  know  much,  breedes  an  occasion  to  doubt 
more.  He  is  often  seene  seriously  to  shelter  himselfe  under 
so  inextricable  obscuritie  that  his  meaning  cannot  be  per 
ceived.  In  effect,  it  is  a  Pyrrhonisme  under  a  resolving 
forme.  Listen  to  Ciceroes  protestation,  who  doth  declare  us 
others  fantasies  by  his  owne.  Qui  requirunt,  quid  de  quaque  Cic.  Nat.  Deo. 
re  ipsi  sentiamus ;  curiosius  idfac'mnt,  quam  necesse  est.  Hcec  i- 
in  Philosophia  ratio,  contra  omnia  disserendi  nullamque  rem 
aperte  judicandi,  prof'ecta  a  Socrate,  repetita  ab  Arcesila,  con- 
ftrmata  a  Carneade  usque  ad  nostram  viget  cetatem.  Hi 
sumus,  qui  omnibus  verisjulsa  qucedam  admncta  esse  dicamus, 
tanta  similitudine,  ut  in  ijs  nulla  insit  certe  judicandi  et  assen- 
tiendi  nota.  '  They  that  would  know  what  we  conceit  of 
4  every  thing,  use  more  curiosity  than  needs.  This  course 
4  in  Philosophy  to  dispute  against  all  things,  to  judge 
'  expresly  of  nothing,  derived  from  Socrates,  renewed  by 
4  Arcesilas,  confirmed  by  Carneades,  is  in  force  till  our  time  ; 
6  we  are  those  that  aver  some  falshood  entermixt  with  every 
'  truth,  and  that  with  such  likenesse,  as  there  is  no  set  note 
*  in  those  things  for  any  assuredly  to  give  judgement  or 
4  assent."1  Why  hath  not  Aristotle  alone,  but  the  greatest 
number  of  Philosophers  affected  difficulty,  unlesse  it  be  to 
make  the  vanity  of  the  subject  to  prevaile,  and  to  ammuse 
the  curiosity  of  our  minde,  seeking  to  feed  it,  by  gnawing  so 
raw  and  bare  a  bone  ?  Clytomachus  affirmed,  that  he  could 


CHAPTER 
XII 

An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

Sebond 


LUCR.  i.  656. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

never  understand  by  the  writings  of  Carneades,  what  opinion 
he  was  of.  Why  hath  Epicurus  interdicted  facility  unto 
his  Sectaries  ?  And  wherefore  hath  Heraclitus  beene  sur- 
named  cr/coretz/o?,  4  a  darke  mysty  clowded  fellow1?  Difficulty 
is  a  coine,  that  wisemen  make  use  of,  as  juglers  doe  with 
passe  and  repasse,  because  they  will  not  display  the  vanity 
of  their  art,  and  wherewith  humane  foolishnesse  is  easily 
apaid. 

Clarus  ob  obscurum  linguam,  magis  inter  inanes. 
Omnia  enim  stolidi  magis  admirantur  amantque, 
Inversis  qufB  sub  verbix  latitantia  cernunt. 

For  his  darke  speech  much  prais'd,,  but  of  th'  unwise  ; 
For  fooles  doe  all  still  more  admire  and  prize, 
That  under  words  turn'd  topsie-turvie  lies. 

Cicero  reproveth  some  of  his  friends,  because  they  were 
wont  to  bestow  more  time  about  Astrology,  Law,  Logike, 
and  Geometry,  than  such  Arts  could  deserve ;  and  diverted 
them  from  the  devoirs  of  their  life,  more  profitable  and  more 
honest.  The  Cyrenaike  Philosophers  equally  contemned 
naturall  Philosophy  and  Logicke.  Zeno  in  the  beginning  of 
his  bookes  of  the  Common-wealth  declared  all  the  liberall 
Sciences  to  be  unprofitable.  Chrysippus  said  that  which 
Plato  and  Aristotle  had  written  of  Logike,  they  had  written 
the  same  in  jest  and  for  exercise  sake  ;  and  could  not  beleeve 
that  ever  they  spake  in  good  earnest  of  so  vaine  and  idle  a 
subject.  Plutarke  saith  the  same  of  the  Metaphysikes ; 
Epicurus  would  have  said  it  of  Rethorike,  of  Grammar,  of 
Poesie,  of  the  Mathematikes,  and  (except  naturall  Philo 
sophy)  of  all  other  sciences :  And  Socrates  of  all,  but  of 
the  Art  of  civill  manners  and  life.  Whatsoever  he  was 
demanded  of  any  man,  he  would  ever  first  enquire  of  him, 
to  give  an  accompt  of  his  life,  both  present  and  past :  which 
he  would  seriously  examine  and  judge  of:  Deeming  all 
other  apprentiships  as  subsequents  and  of  supererogation 
in  regard  of  that.  Parum  mllii  placeant  cceliterce  quce  ad 
virtutem  doctoribus  nihil  profuerunt.  '  That  learning  pleaseth 
c  me  but  a  little  which  nothing  profiteth  the  teachers  of  it 
'  unto  vertue."  Most  of  the  Arts  have  thus  beene  con 
temned  by  knowledge  itselfe  :  For  they  thought  it  not 
amisse  to  exercise  their  mindes  in  matters  wherein  was  no 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

profitable  solidity.     As  for  the  rest,  some  have  judged  Plato  CHAPTER 
a  Dogmatist,  others  a  Doubter,  some  a  Dogmatist  in  one  ^  &  Q\O  je 
thing  and  some  a  Doubter,  in  another.    Socrates,  the  fore-man  of  JUymoSi 
of  his  Dialogues  doth  ever  aske  and  propose  his  Disputa-       Seboiid 
tion  ;  yet  never  concluding,  nor  ever  satisfying  :  and  saith,  he 
hath  no  other  Science,  but  that  of  opposing.     Their  Author 
Homer  hath  equally  grounded  the  foundations  of  all  Sects  of 
Philosophy,  thereby  to  shew,  how  indifferent  he  was  which 
way  we  went.     Some  say,  that  of  Plato  arose  ten  diverse 
Sects.    And  as  I  thinke,  never  was  instruction  wavering  and 
nothing  avouching,  if  his  be  not.     Socrates  was  wont  to  say, 
that  when  Midwives  begin  once  to  put  in  practice  the  trad 
to   make    other    women   bring    forth    children,    themselves 
become  barren.    That  he  by  the  title  of  wise,  which  the  gods 
had  conferred    upon    him,   had    also   in   his    man-like  and 
men  tall  love  shaken  off  the  faculty  of  begetting  :  Being  well 
pleased  to  afford  all  helpe  and  favor  to   such   as  were  en- 
gendrers ;  to  open  their  nature,  to  suple  their  passages,  to  ease 
the  issue  of  their  child-bearing,  to  judge  thereof,  to  baptise 
the  same,  to  foster  it,  to  strengthen  it,  to  swathe  it,  and  to 
circumcise  it ;  exercising  and  handling  his  instrument  at  the 
perill  and  fortune  of  others.     So  is  it  with  most  Authors 
of  this  third   kinde,  as   the  ancients   have   well   noted  by 
the  writings  of  Anaxagoras,  Democritus,  Parmenides,  Xeno- 
phanes,  and  others.     They  have  a  manner  of  writing  doubt- 
full  both  in  substance  and   intent,   rather  enquiring  than 
instructing  :  albeit  here  and  there,  they  enterlace  their  stile 
with  dogmaticall  cadences.     And  is  not  that  as  well  seene  in 
Seneca,  and  in  Plutarke  ?   How  much  doe  they  speake  some 
times  of  one  face,  and  sometimes  of  another,  for  such  as  looke 
neere   unto  it  ?    Those  who  reconcile  Lawyers,  ought  first 
to  have  reconciled  them  every  one    unto   himselfe.     Plato 
hath  (in  my  seeming)  loved  this  manner  of  Philosophying 
Dialogue  wise  in  good  earnest,  that  therby  he  might  more 
decently  place  in  sundry  mouthes  the  diversity  and  varia 
tion  of  his  owne  conceits.     Diversly  to  treat  of  matters  is 
as  good  and  better  as  to  treat  them  conformably  ;    that  is 
to  say,  more  copiously  and  more  profitably.     Let  us  take 
example  by  our  selves.     Definite  sentences    make  the  last 
period  of  dogmaticall  and  resolving  speech  :  yet  see  we,  that 

215 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  those  which  our  Parlaments  present  unto  our  people,  as 
XII  the  most  exemplare  and  fittest  to  nourish  in  them  the 

AnApologie  reverence  they  owe  unto  this  dignitie,  especialy  by  reason 
Sebond  °^  ^ne  sufficiencie  of  those  persons,  which  exercise  the  same, 
taking  their  glory,  not  by  the  conclusion,  which  to  them  is 
dayly,  and  is  common  to  al  judges  as  much  as  the  debating 
of  diverse,  and  agitations  of  contrary  reasonings  of  law 
causes  will  admit.  And  the  largest  scope  for  reprehensions 
of  some  Philosophers  against  others,  draweth  contradictions 
and  diversities  with  it,  wherein  every  one  of  them  findeth 
himselfe  so  entangled,  either  by  intent  to  shew  the  wavering 
of  mans  minde  above  all  matters,  or  ignorantly  forced  by  the 
volubilitie  and  incomprehensiblenesse  of  all  matters  :  What 
meaneth  this  burdon  ?  In  a  slippery  and  gliding  place 
let  us  suspend  our  beliefe.  For  as  Euripides  saith, 

EURIPIDES.  Les  ceuvres  de  Dieu  en  diverses 

Facons,  nous  donnent  des  traverses. 

Gods  workes  doe  travers  our  imaginations, 

And  crosse  our  workes  in  divers  different  fashions. 

Like  unto  that  which  Empedocles  was  wont  often  to 
scatter  amongst  his  bookes,  as  moved  by  a  divine  furie  and 
forced  by  truth.  No  no,  we  feel  nothing,  we  see  nothing ; 
all  things  are  hid  from  us  :  There  is  not  one,  that  we  may 
establish,  how  and  what  it  is :  But  returning  to  this  holy 
Wisd.  c.  ix.  14.  word.  Cogitationes  mortalium  timidce  et  incertcc  ad  mventiones 
nostrce,  etprovidentice.  '  The  thoughts  of  mortal  men  are  feare- 
'  ful,  our  devices  and  foresights  are  uncertaine.'  It  must  not 
be  thought  strange  if  men  disparing  of  the  goale  have  yet 
taken  pleasure  in  the  chase  of  it ;  studie  being  in  it  selfe  a 
pleasing  occupation,  yea  so  pleasing,  that  amid  sensualities, 
the  Stoikes  forbid  also  that  which  comes  from  the  exercise 
of  the  minde,  and  require  a  bridle  to  it,  and  finde  intemper 
ance  in  over  much  knowledge.  Democritus  having  at  his 
table  eaten  some  figges  that  tasted  of  hony,  began  presently 
in  his  minde  to  seeke  out  whence  this  unusual!  sweetnes  in 
them  might  proceed  ;  and  to  be  resolved,  rose  from  the 
board,  to  view  the  place  where  those  figges  had  beene 
gathered.  His  maide  servant  noting  this  alteration  in  her 
master,  smilingly  said  unto  him,  that  he  should  no  more 

216 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

busie  himselfe  about  it;  the  reason  was,  she  had  laide  CHAPTER 
them  in  a  vessell  where  hony  had  beene  ;  whereat  he  seemed  XI1 
to  be  wroth  in  that  shee  had  deprived  him  of  the  occasion  ^^ 
of  his  intended  search,  and  robbed  his  curiositie  of  matter  Sekmd 
to  worke  upon.  Away  (quoth  he  unto  her,)  thou  hast 
much  offended  mee  ;  yet  will  I  not  omit  to  finde  out  the 
cause,  as  if  it  were  naturally  so.  Who  perhaps  would  not 
have  missed  to  finde  some  likely  or  true  reason,  for  a  false 
and  supposed  effect.  This  storie  of  a  famous  and  great 
Philosopher  doth  evidently  represent  unto  us  this  studious 
passion,  which  so  doth  ammuse  us  in  pursuit  of  things,  of 
whose  obtaining  wee  despaire.  Plutarke  reporteth  a  like 
example  of  one  who  would  not  bee  resolved  of  what  he 
doubted,  because  hee  would  not  lose  the  pleasure  hee  had 
in  seeking  it :  As  another,  that  would  not  have  his  Physitian 
remove  the  thirst  he  felt  in  his  ague,  because  he  would  not 
lose  the  pleasure  he  tooke  in  quenching  the  same  with  drink 
ing.  Satius  est  supervacua  discere,  quam  nihil.  '  It  is  better  SEN.  Epist. 
'  to  learne  more  than  wee  need,  than  nothing  at  all.1  Even  as  89  f- 
in  all  feeding,  pleasure  is  alwayes  alone  and  single  ;  and  all 
we  take  that  is  pleasant  is  not  ever  nourishing  and  whole 
some  :  So  likewise,  what  our  minde  drawes  from  learning 
leaveth  not  to  be  voluptuous,  although  it  neither  nourish 
nor  be  wholesome.  Note  what  their  saying  is  :  4  The  con- 
4  sideration  of  nature  is  a  food  proper  for  our  mindes,  it 
4  raiseth  and  puffeth  us  up,  it  makes  us  by  the  comparison 
4  of  heavenly  and  high  things  to  disdaine  base  and  low 
'  matters  :  the  search  of  hidden  and  great  causes  is  very 
4  pleasant,  yea  unto  him  that  attaines  nought  but  the  rever- 
4  ence  and  feare  to  judge  of  them."  These  are  the  very 
words  of  their  profession.  The  vaine  image  of  this  crazed 
curiositie  is  more  manifestly  scene  in  this  other  example, 
which  they  for  honour-sake  have  so  often  in  their  mouths. 
Eudoxus  wished,  and  praid  to  the  Gods,  that  he  might  once 
view  the  Sunne  neere  at  hand,  to  comprehend  his  forme,  his 
greatnesse  and  his  beautie  ;  on  condition  he  might  imme 
diately  be  burnt  and  consumed  by  it.  Thus  with  the  price 
of  his  owne  life  would  he  attaine  a  Science,  whereof  both 
use  and  possession  shall  therewith  bee  taken  from  him  ;  and 
for  so  sudden  and  fleeting  knowledge,  lose  and  forgoe  all  the 
2E  217 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  knowledges  he  either  now  hath,  or  ever  hereafter  may  have. 
XII  I   can   not   easily   be   perswaded,   that    Epicurus,   Plato,   or 

ApApologie  Pythagoras  have  sold  us  their  Atonies,  their  Ideas,  and  their 
ot  Raymond      J      .  ^        „  rn, 

Sebond       Numbers   for   ready    payment.       Ihey    were    over    wise    to 

establish  their  articles  of  faith  upon  things  so  uncertaine 
and  disputable.  But  in  this  obscuritie  and  ignorance  of  the 
world,  each  of  these  notable  men  hath  endevoured  to  bring 
some  kinde  of  shew  or  image  of  light ;  and  have  busied  their 
mindes  about  inventions  that  might  at  least  have  a  pleas 
ing  and  wilie  apparance,  provided  (notwithstanding  it  were 
false)  it  might  be  maintained  against  contrary  oppositions  : 
Vmcuiquas  ista  pro  in  mgenio  finguntur,  non  ex  Scientice  vi. 
'  These  things  are  conceited  by  every  man  as  his  wit  serves, 
'  not  as  his  knowledge  stretches  and  reaches."  An  ancient 
Phylosopher  being  blamed  for  professing  that  Philosophie, 
whereof,  in  his  judgment  hee  made  no  esteeme  ;  answered, 
that  that  was  true  Philosophizing.  They  have  gone  about 
to  consider  all,  to  ballance  all,  and  have  found  that  it  was 
an  occupation  fitting  the  naturall  curiositie  which  is  in  us. 
Some  things  they  have  written  for  the  behoofe  of  common 
societie,  as  their  religions  :  And  for  this  consideration  was  it 
reasonable,  that  they  would  not  throughly  unfold  common 
opinions,  that  so  they  might  not  breed  trouble  in  the 
obedience  of  lawes  and  customes  of  their  countries.  Plato 
treateth  this  mysterie  in  a  very  manifest  kinde  of  sport. 
For,  where  he  writeth  according  to  himselfe,  he  prescribeth 
nothing  for  certaintie  :  When  he  institutes  a  Law  giver,  he 
borroweth  a  very  swaying  and  avouching  kinde  of  stile  : 
Wherein  he  boldly  entermingleth  his  most  fantasticall 
opinions ;  as  profitable  to  perswade  the  common  sort,  as 
ridiculous  to  perswade  himselfe :  Knowing  how  apt  wee  are 
to  receive  all  impressions,  and  chiefly  the  most  wicked  and 
enormous.  And  therefore  is  he  very  carefull  in  his  lawes 
that  nothing  bee  sung  in  publike  but  Poesies ;  the  fabulous 
fictions  of  which  tend  to  some  profitable  end  :  being  so  apt 
to  imprint  all  manner  of  illusion  in  mans  minde,  that  it  is 
injustice  not  to  feed  them  rather  with  commodious  lies,  than 
with  lies  either  unprofitable  or  damageable.  He  flatly 
saitli  in  his  Common-wealth,  that  for  the  benefit  of  men,  it 
is  often  necessarie  to  deceive  them.  It  is  easie  to  distinguish, 
218 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

how  some  Sects  have  rather  followed  truth,  and  some  profit;  CHAPTER 
by  which  the  latter  have  gained  credit.  It  is  the  miserie  of  XII 
our  condition,  that  often  what  offers  it  selfe  unto  our  ima-  ofRaP  m°(Sd 
gination  for  the  likelyest,  presents  not  it  selfe  unto  it  for  Seborid 
the  most  beneficiall  unto  our  life.  The  boldest  sects,  both 
Epicurian,  Pirrhonian  and  new  Academike,  when  they  have 
cast  their  acoumpt,  are  compelled  to  stoope  to  the  civill 
law.  There  are  other  subjects,  which  they  have  tossed,  some 
on  the  left  and  some  on  the  right  hand,  each  one  labouring 
and  striving  to  give  it  some  semblance,  were  it  right  or 
wrong :  For,  having  found  nothing  so  secret,  whereof  they 
have  not  attempted  to  speake,  they  are  many  times  forced 
to  forge  divers  feeble  and  fond  conjectures :  Not  that  them 
selves  tooke  them  for  a  ground-worke,  nor  to  establish  a 
truth,  but  for  an  exercise  of  their  studie.  Non  tarn  id 
sensisse,  quod  dicerent,  quam  exercere  mgenm  materice  diffi- 
cultate  videntur  voluisse.  'They  seeme  not  so  much  to 
'  have  thought  as  they  said,  as  rather  willing  to  exercise 
'  their  wits  in  the  difficulty  of  the  matter.1  And  if  it  were 
not  so  taken,  how  should  we  cloke  so  great  an  inconstancie, 
varietie  and  vanity  of  opinions,  which  we  see  to  have  beene 
produced  by  these  excellent  and  admirable  spirits  ?  As  for 
example,  What  greater  vanitie  can  there  be,  than  to  goe 
about  by  our  proportions  and  conjectures  to  guesse  at  God  ? 
And  to  governe  both  him  and  the  world  according  to  our 
capacitie  and  lawes  ?  And  to  use  this  small  scantlin  of 
sufficiencie,  which  he  hath  pleased  to  impart  unto  our  natu- 
rall  condition,  at  the  cost  and  charges  of  divinitie  ?  And 
because  we  cannot  extend  our  sight  so  farre  as  his  glorious 
throne,  to  have  removed  him  downe  to  our  corruption  and 
miseries  ?  Of  all  humane  and  ancient  opinions  concerning 
religion,  I  thinke  that  to  have  had  more  likelyhood  and 
excuse,  which  knowledged  and  confessed  God  to  be  an 
incomprehensible  power,  chiefe  beginning  and  preserver 
of  all  things ;  all  goodnes,  all  perfection ;  accepting  in 
good  part  the  honour  and  reverence  which  mortall  men 
did  yeeld  him,  under  what  usage,  name  and  manner  so 
ever  it  was. 

lupiter  omnipotens  rerum,  regumque,  Deumque, 
Progenitor,  genitrixque. 

219 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Almightie  love,  is  parent  said  to  be 

XII  Of  things,  of  Kings,,  of  Gods,  both  he  and  she. 

An  Apologie  This  zeale  hath  universally  beene  regarded  of  heaven  with 
3  S  bond11  a  &entle  anc^  graci°us  eve'  All  Policies  have  reaped  some 
fruit  by  their  devotion :  Men,  and  impious  actions  have 
every  where  had  correspondent  events.  Heathen  histories 
acknowledge  dignitie,  order,  justice,  prodigies,  and  oracles, 
employed  for  their  benefit  and  instruction,  in  their  fabulous 
religion:  God  of  his  mercy  daining  peradventure,  to  foster 
by  his  temporall  blessings  the  budding  and  tender  begin 
nings  of  such  a  brute  knowledge,  as  naturall  reason  gave 
them  of  him,  athwart  the  false  images  of  their  deluding 
dreames  :  Not  only  false,  but  impious  and  injurious  are 
those,  which  man  hath  forged  and  devised  by  his  owne 
invention.  And  of  al  religions  Saint  Paul  found  in  credit 
at  Athens,  that  which  they  had  consecrated  unto  a  certaine 
hidden  and  unknowne  divinitie,  seemed  to  be  most  excus 
able.  Pythagoras  shadowed  the  truth  somewhat  neerer, 
judgeing  that  the  knowledge  of  this  first  cause  and  Ens 
entium  must  be  undefined,  without  any  prescription  or 
declaration.  That  it  was  nothing  else  but  the  extreme 
indevour  of  our  imagination,  toward  perfection,  every  one 
amplifying  the  Idea  thereof  according  to  his  capacitie.  But 
if  Numa  undertooke  to  conforme  the  devotion  of  his  people 
to  this  project,  to  joyne  the  same  to  a  religion  meerly 
mentall,  without  any  prefixt  object  or  materiall  mixture, 
he  undertooke  a  matter  to  no  use.  Mans  minde  could 
never  be  maintained,  if  it  were  still  floting  up  and  downe  in 
this  infinite  deepe  of  shapeles  conceits.  They  must  be 
framed  unto  her  to  some  image,  according  to  her  model. 
The  majesty  of  God  hath  in  some  sort  suffered  it  selfe  to 
be  circumscribed  to  corporall  limits :  His  supernaturall  and 
celestiall  Sacraments  beare  signes  of  our  terrestriall  condition. 
His  adoration  is  exprest  by  offices  and  sensible  words  ;  for, 
it  is  man  that  beleeveth  and  praieth.  I  omit  other  argu 
ments,  that  are  emplyed  about  this  subject.  But  I  could 
hardly  be  made  beleeve,  that  the  sight  of  our  Crucifixes, 
and  pictures  of  that  pittiful  torment,  that  the  ornaments 
and  ceremonious  motions  in  our  Churches,  that  the  voyces 
accomodated  and  suted  to  our  thoughts- devotions,  and  this 
220 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

stirring  of  our  senses,  doth  not  greatly  inflame  the  peoples  CHAPTER 

soules,  with    a   religious    passion    of  wonderous   beneficiall         XII 

good.     Of  those,  to  which  they  have  given  bodies,  as  neces-  ^ 

sity  required    amid    this   generall  blindnesse ;  as  for  me,  I       Sebond 

should  rather  have  taken  part  with  those  who  worshipped 

the  Sunne. 

— la  lumiere  commune, 

L'ceil  du  monde :  et  si  Dieu  au  chef  porte  des  yeux, 
Les  rayons  du  So  HI  sont  ses  yeux  radieuoc 
Qui  donnent  vie  a  tons,  nous  maintiennent  et  gardent, 
Et  lesfaicts  des  humains  en  ce  monde  regardent: 
Ce  beau,  ce  grand  Soleil,  qui  nous  fait  les  say  sons, 
Selon  quil  entre  ou  sort  de  ses  douze  maysons : 
Qui  remplit  I'univers  de  ses  vertus  cognues, 
Qui  d'un  traict  de  ses  yeux  nous  dissipe  les  nues : 
L'  spirit,  I'ame  du  monde,  ardant  et  flamboyant, 
En  la  cource  d'un  iour  tout  le  Ciel  tour  noyand, 
Plein  d 'immense  grandeur,  rond,  vagabond  etferme: 
Lequel  tient  dessoubs  luy  tout :  le  monde  pour  terme, 
En  repos  sans  repos,  oysif  et  sans  seiour, 
Fils  aisne  de  nature,  et  le  pere  du  iour. 

The  common  light, 
The  worlds  eye :  and  if  God  beare  eyes  in  his  cheefe 

head., 
His  most  resplendent  eyes,  the  Sunne-beames  may  be 

said, 

Which  unto  all  give  life,  which  us  maintaine  and  guard, 
And  in  this  world  of  men,  the  workes  of  men  regard, 
This  great,  this  beauteous  Sunne,  which  us  our  seasons 

makes, 

As  in  twelve  houses  he,  ingresse  or  egresse  takes  ; 
Who  with  his  Vertues  knowne,  doth  fill  this  universe 
With  one  cast  of  his  eyes  doth  us  all  clowds  disperse. 
The  spirit,  and  the  soule  of  this  world,  flaming,  burning, 
Round  about  heav'n   in   course  of  one   dayes  journey 

turning. 

Of  endlesse  greatnesse  full,  round,  moveable  and  fast  : 
Who  all  the  world  for  bounds  beneath  himselfe  hath 

pla'st : 
In   rest,    without    rest,    and   still    more   staid,    without 

stay, 
Of  Nature  th'  eldest  Childe,  and  father  of  the  day. 

Forasmuch  as  besides  this  greatnesse  and  matchlesse 
beautie  of  his,  it  is  the  only  glorious  piece  of  this  vaste- 
worlds-frame,  which  we  perceive  to  be  furthest  from  us : 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  And  by  that  meane  so  little  known,  as  they  are  pardonable, 
that  entered  into  admiration,  and  reverence  of  it.     Thales, 

w'10  was  ^ie  ^rs^  ^°  en(lLUre  anc^  nnde  out  this  matter, 
esteemed  God  to  bee  a  spirit,  who  made  all  things  of  water. 
Anaximander  thought  the  Gods  did  dy,  and  were  new  borne 
at  divers  seasons :  and  that  the  worlds  were  infinite  in 
number.  Anaximenes  deemed  the  ayre  to  be  a  God,  which 
was  created  immense,  and  alwaies  moving.  Anaxagoras  was 
the  first  that  held  the  description  and  manner  of  all  things, 
to  be  directed  by  the  power  and  reason  of  a  spirit  infinit. 
Alcmaeon  hath  ascribed  Divinity  unto  the  Sunne,  unto  the 
Moone,  unto  Stars,  and  unto  the  Soule.  Pythagoras  hath 
made  God,  a  spirit  dispersed  through  the  Nature  of  all 
things,  whence  our  soules  are  derived.  Parmenides,  a  Circle 
circumpassing  the  heavens,  and  by  the  heat  of  light  main 
taining  the  world.  Empedocles  said,  the  foure  Natures, 
whereof  all  things  are  made,  to  be  Gods.  Protagoras,  that 
he  had  nothing  to  say,  whether  they  were  or  were  not,  or 
what  they  were.  Democritus  would  sometimes  say,  that  the 
images  and  their  circuitions  were  Gods,  and  othertimes  this 
Nature,  which  disperseth  these  images  ;  and  then  our  know 
ledge  and  intelligence.  Plato  scattereth  his  beliefe  after 
diverse  semblances.  In  his  Tymeus,  he  saith,  that  the 
worlds-father  could  not  be  named.  In  his  Lawes,  that  his 
being  must  not  be  enquired  after.  And  else-where  in  the 
said  bookes,  he  maketh  the  world,  the  heaven,  the  starres, 
the  earth  and  our  soules,  to  be  Gods ;  and  besides,  admit- 
teth  those  that  by  ancient  institutions  have  beene  received 
in  every  Common-wealth.  Xenophon  reporteth  a  like 
difference  of  Socrates  his  discipline.  Sometimes  that  Gods 
forme  ought  not  to  be  inquired  after ;  then  he  makes  him 
infer,  that  the  Sunne  is  a  God,  and  the  Soule  a  God :  other- 
times,  that  there  is  but  one,  and  then  more.  Speusippus 
Nephew  unto  Plato,  makes  God  to  be  a  certaine  power, 
governing  all  things,  and  having  a  soule.  Aristotle  saith 
sometimes  that  it  is  the  spirit,  and  sometimes  the  world ; 
othertimes  he  appoynteth  another  ruler  over  this  world, 
and  sometimes  he  makes  God  to  be  the  heat  of  heaven. 
Xenocrates  makes  eight;  five  named  amongst  the  planets, 
the  sixth  composed  of  all  the  fixed  starres,  as  of  his  owne 

QOQ 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

members  ;  the  seaventh  and  eight,  the  Sunneand  the  Moone.  CHAPTER 
Heraclides  Ponticus  doth  but  roame  among  his  opinions, 
and  in  fine  depriveth  God  of  sense,  and  maks  him  remove 
and  transchange  himselfe  from  one  form  to  another  ;  and  Sebond 
then  saith,  that  is  both  heaven  and  earth.  Theophrastus 
in  all  his  fantazies  wandereth  still  in  like  irresolutions, 
attributing  the  worlds  superintendency  now  to  the  intel 
ligence,  now  to  the  heaven,  and  now  to  the  starres.  Strato, 
that  it  is  Nature  having  power  to  engender,  to  augment  and 
to  diminish,  without  forme  or  sense.  Zeno,  the  naturall 
Lawe,  commaunding  the  good,  and  prohibiting  the  evil ; 
which  Lawe  is  a  breathing  creature ;  and  removeth  the 
accustomed  Gods,  lupiter,  luno  and  Vesta.  Diogenes  Apol- 
loniates,  that  it  is  Age.  Xenophanes  makes  God,  round, 
seeing,  hearing  not  breathing,  and  having  nothing  common 
with  humane  Nature.  Aristo  deemeth  the  forme  of  God 
to  bee  incomprehensible,  and  depriveth  him  of  senses,  and 
wotteth  not  certainely  whether  he  bee  a  breathing  soule 
or  something  else.  Cleanthes,  sometimes  reason,  othertimes 
the  World,  now  the  soule  of  Nature,  and  other-while  the 
supreme  heat,  enfoulding  and  containing  all.  Persseus, 
Zenoes  disciple  hath  beene  of  opinion,  that  they  were  sur- 
named  Gods,  who  had  brought  some  notable  good  or 
benefit  unto  humane  life,  or  had  invented  profitable  things. 
Chrysippus  made  a  confused  huddle  of  all  the  foresaid  sen 
tences,  and  amongst  a  thousand  formes  of  the  Gods,  which 
he  faineth,  hee  also  accompteth  those  men  that  are  im 
mortalized.  Diagoras  and  Theodorus,  flatly  denyed,  that 
there  were  anie  Gods :  Epicurus  makes  the  Gods,  bright- 
shining,  transparent  and  perflable,  placed  as  it  were  betweene 
two  Forts,  betweene  two  Worlds,  safely  sheltered  from  all 
blowes,  invested  with  a  humane  shape,  and  with  our  members, 
which  unto  them  are  of  no  use. 

Ego  Deum  genus  esse  semper  duxi,  et  dicam  ccelitum,  ENN.,  Cic.  e 

Sed  eos  non  curare  opinor,  quid  agat  humanum  genus.          Diu.  ii. 

I  still  thought  and  wil  say,,  of  Gods  there  is  a  kinde ; 
But  what   our  mankinde  doth,,  I  thinke  they  nothing 
minde. 

Trust  to  your  Philosophic,  boast  to  have  hit  the  naile  on 
the  head ;    or  to  have  found  out  the  beane  of  this  Cake,  to 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  see  this  coile  and  hurly-burly  of  so  many  Philosophical  wits. 
XII         The  trouble  or  confusion  of  worldly  shapes  and  formes  hath 
An  Apologie  gO^^en  this  of  mee,  that  customes  and  conceipts  differing 
*  11     fr°m  mme>  doe  not  so  much  dislike  me,  as  instruct  me ;  and 

at  what  time  I  conferre  or  compare  them  together,  they 
doe  not  so  much  puffe  me  up  with  pride,  as  humble  me 
with  lowlinesse.  And  each  other  choyce,  except  that  which 
commeth  from  the  expresse  hand  of  God,  seemeth  to  me  a 
choyce  of  small  prerogative  or  consequence.  The  worlds 
policies  are  no  lesse  contrary  one  to  another  in  this  subject, 
than  the  schooles.  Wherby  we  may  learne,  that  Fortune  her 
self  is  no  more  divers,  changing  and  variable,  than  our 
reason,  nor  more  blinde  and  inconsiderat.  Things  most 
unknowne  are  fittest  to  bee  deified.  Wherefore,  to  make 
gods  of  our  selves  (as  antiquitie  hath  done,)  it  exceeds  the 
extreme  weaknesse  of  discourse.  I  would  rather  have  folowed 
those  that  worshipped  the  Serpent,  the  Dogge  and  the  Oxe, 
forsomuch  as  their  Nature,  and  being  is  least  knowne  to  us  ; 
and  we  may  more  lawfully  imagine  what  we  list  of  those 
beasts  and  ascribe  extraordinarie  faculties  unto  them.  But 
to  have  made  Gods  of  our  condition,  whose  imperfections 
we  should  know,  and  to  have  attributed  desire,  choler,  re 
venge,  marriages,  generation,  alliances,  love  and  jealousie, 
our  limbes  and  our  bones,  our  infirmities,  our  pleasures, 
our  deathes,  and  our  Sepulchres  unto  them,  hath  of  neces 
sity  proceeded  from  a  meere  and  egregious  sottishnesse,  or 
drunkennesse  of  mans  wit. 

LUCR.  v.  123.  Qua  procul  usque  adeo  divino  ab  numine  distant. 

Inque  Deum  numero  qu&  sint  indigna  videri. 

Which  from  Divinity  so  distant  are,, 

To  stand  in  ranke  of  Gods  unworthy  farre. 

Formce,  octettes,  vestitus,  ornatus  noti  sunt :  genera,  conjugia, 
cognationes,  omniaque  traducta  ad  similitudinem  imbecillitatis 
humance:  nam  et  perturbatis  animis  inducuntur,  accipimus 
enim  Deorum  cupiditates,  (Fgritudines,  iracundias.  '  Their 
'  shapes,  their  ages,  their  apparrell,  their  furnitures  are 
'  knowen  ;  their  kindes,  their  marriages,  their  kindred,  and 
'  all  translated  to  the  likenesse  of  mans  weaknesse  :  For  they 
'  are  also  brought  in  with  mindes  much  troubled  :  for  we 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

'  reade  of  the  lustfulnesse,  the  grievings,  the  angrinesse  of  CHAPTER 
'  the  Gods.1  As  to  have  ascribed  Divinity,  not  only  unto  faith,          XI1 
vertue,  honour,  concord,  liberty,  victory  and  piety  ;  but  also  ^j^  ^mid 
unto   voluptuousnesse,  fraud,  death,  envy,  age  and  misery  ;        Sebond 
yea  unto  feare,  unto  ague,  and  unto  evill  fortune,  and  such 
other  injuries  and  wrongs  to  our  fraile  and  transitory  life. 

Quid  juvat  hoc,  templis  nostros  inducere  mores?  PERS.  Sat.  ii. 

0  curves  in  terris  animce  et  ccelestium  inanes  !  62,  61. 

What  boots  it,  into  Temples  to  bring  manners  of  our 

kindes  ? 
O   crooked   soules  on    earth,    and    void    of   heavenly 

mindes. 

The  ^Egyptians  with  an  impudent  wisdome  forbad  upon 
paine  of  hanging,  that  no  man  should  dare  to  say,  that 
Serapis  and  Isis  their  Gods,  had  whilome  beene  but  men, 
when  all  knew  they  had  beene  so.  And  their  images  or 
pictures  drawne  with  a  finger  a  crosse  their  mouthes  imported 
(as  Varro  saith)  this  misterious  rule  unto  their  priests,  to 
conceale  their  mortall  off-spring,  which  by  a  necessary  reason 
disanulled  all  their  veneration.  Since  man  desired  so  much 
to  equall  himselfe  to  God,  it  had  beene  better  for  him  (saith 
Cicero,)  to  draw  those  divine  conditions  unto  himselfe,  and 
bring  them  downe  to  earth,  than  to  send  his  corruption, 
and  place  his  misery  above  in  heaven :  but  to  take  him  aright, 
he  hath  divers  wayes,  and  with  like  vanitie  of  opinion,  done 
both  the  one  and  other.  When  Philosophers  blazon  and 
display  the  Hierarchy  of  their  gods,  and  to  the  utmost  of 
their  skill  endevour  to  distinguish  their  aliances,  their 
charges,  and  their  powers.  I  cannot  beleeve  they  speake  in 
good  earnest  when  Plato  decyphreth  unto  us  the  orchard  of 
Pluto,  and  the  commodities  or  corporall  paines,  which  even 
after  the  ruine  and  consumption  of  our  body,  waite  for  us, 
and  applyeth  them  to  the  apprehension  or  feeling  we  have 
in  this  life. 

Secreti  celant  colles,  et  myrtia  circum  VIRG.  sEn.  vi. 

Sylva  tegit,  euro,  non  ipsa  in  morte  relinquunt.  443- 

Them  paths  aside  conceale,  a  mirtle  grove 

Shades  them  round  ;  cares  in  death  doe  not  remove. 

When  Mahomet  promiseth  unto  his  followers  a  paradise 
2F 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  all  tapistred,  adorned  with  gold  and  precious  stones,  peopled 
XII  with  exceeding  beauteous  damsels,  stored  with  wines  and 

An  Apologie  smgular  cates.     I  well  perceive  they  are  but  scoffers,  which 

>f  Sebond  SLlte  an(*  aPP^  themselves  unto  our  foolishnesse,  thereby  to 
enhonny  and  allure  us  to  these  opinions  and  hopes  fitting 
our  mortall  appetite.  Even  so  are  some  of  our  men  falne 
into  like  errours  by  promising  unto  themselves  after  their 
resurrection  a  terrestriall  and  temporall  life,  accompanied  with 
al  sorts  of  pleasures  and  worldly  commodities.  Shall  we 
thinke  that  Plato,  who  had  so  heavenly  conceptions,  and  was 
so  well  acquainted  with  Divinity,  as  of  most  he  purchased 
the  surname  of  Divine,  was  ever  of  opinion,  that  man  (this 
seely  and  wretched  creature  man)  had  any  one  thing  in  him, 
which  might  in  any  sort  be  applied,  and  suted  to  this  incom 
prehensible  and  unspeakable  power  ?  or  ever  imagined,  that 
our  languishing  hold-fasts  were  capable,  or  the  vertue  of  our 
understanding  of  force,  to  participate  or  be  partakers,  either 
of  the  blessednesse,  or  eternall  punishment  ?  He  ought  in 
the  behalfe  of  humane  reason  be  answered  :  If  the  pleasures, 
thou  promisest  us  in  the  other  life,  are  such  as  I  have  felt 
here  below,  they  have  nothing  in  them  common  with  infinity. 
If  all  my  five  naturall  senses  were  even  surcharged  with  joy  and 
gladnesse,  and  my  soule  possessed  with  all  the  contents  and 
delights,  it  could  possibly  desire  or  hope  for  (and  we  know 
what  it  either  can  wish  or  hope  for)  yet  were  it  nothing.  If 
there  bee  any  thing  that  is  mine,  then  is  there  nothing  that  is 
Divine  ;  if  it  be  nothing  else,  but  what  may  appertaine  unto 
this  our  present  condition,  it  may  not  be  accounted  of.  All 
mortall  mens  contentment  is  mortall.  The  acknowledging 
of  our  parents,  of  our  children  and  of  our  friends,  if  it  can 
not  touch,  move  or  tickle  us  in  the  other  world,  if  we  still 
take  hold  of  such  a  pleasure,  we  continue  in  Terrestrial  and 
transitorie  commodities.  We  can  not  worthily  conceive  of 
these  high,  mysterious,  and  divine  promises ;  if  wee  can  but 
in  any  sort  conceive  them,  and  so  imagine  them  aright ;  they 
must  be  thought  to  be  inimaginable,  unspeakeable  and  incom 
prehensible,  and  absolutely  and  perfectly  other  than  those 

i  Cor.  ii.  9.  of  our  miserable  experience.  No  eye  can  behold,  (saith  Saint 
Paul)  the  hap  that  God  prepareth  for  his  elect,  nor  can  it 
possibly  enter  the  heart  of  man.  And  if  to  make  us  capable 
226' 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

of  it  (as  thou  saith  Plato  by  thy  purifications)  our  being  is  CHAPTER 
reformed  and  essence  changed,  it  must  be  by  so  extreme  and         XII 
universall  a  change,  that  according  to  Philosophical!  doctrine,  of\ay^°  ^d 
we  shall  be  no  more  our  selves  :  Sebond 


Hector  erat  tune  cum  bello  certabat,  at  ille  9.VID* 

Tractus  ab  JEmonio  non  erat  Hector  equo.  "i-  El.  xi.  27. 

Hector  he  was,  when  he  in  fight  us'd  force  ; 
Hector  he  was  not,  drawne  by  th'  enemies  horse. 

It  shall  be  some  other  thing,  that  shall  receive  these  recom- 
pences. 

—  quod  mutatur,  dissolvitur  ,  interit  ergo:  LUCR.  iii.  781. 

Trajiciuntur  enim  partes  atque  ordine  migrant. 

What  is  chang'd,  is  dissolved,  therefore  dies  : 
Translated  parts  in  order  fall  and  rise. 

For,  in  the  Metempsychosis,  or  transmigration  of  soules  of 
Pythagoras,  and  the  change  of  habitation,  which  he  ima 
gined  the  soules  to  make  ;  shall  we  thinke  that  the  Lion  in 
whom  abideth  the  soule  of  Caesar,  doth  wed  the  passions 
which  concerned  Caesar,  or  that  it  is  hee  ?  And  if  it  were  hee, 
those  had  some  reason,  who  debating  this  opinion  against 
Plato,  object  that  the  sonne  might  one  day  bee  found  com 
mitting  with  his  mother  under  the  shape  of  a  Mules  body, 
and  such  like  absurdities.  And  shall  wee  imagine,  that  in  the 
transmigrations  which  are  made  from  the  bodies  of  some 
creatures  into  others  of  the  same  kind,  the  new  succeeding- 
ones  are  not  other,  than  their  predecessors  were  ?  Of  a 
Phenixes  cinders,  first  (as  they  say)  is  engendred  a  worme 
and  then  another  Phenix  :  who  can  imagine  that  this  second 
Phenix  be  no  other  and  different  from  the  first  ?  Our  Silk- 
wormes  are  scene  to  dye  and  then  to  wither  drie,  and  of 
that  body  breedeth  a  Butter-flie,  and  of  that  a  worme,  were 
it  not  ridiculous  to  thinke,  the  same  to  be  the  first  Silke- 
worm  ?  what  hath  once  lost  his  being,  is  no  more. 

Nee  si  materiam  nostram  collegerit  cetas  Ib.  890. 

Post  obitum,  rursumque  redegerit,  ut  sita  nunc  est 
Atque  iterum  nobisfuerint  data  lumina  vita;, 
Pertineat  quidquam  tamen  ad  nos  id  quoquefactum, 
Interrupta  semel  cum  sit  repetentia  nostra. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  If  time  should  recollect,  when  life  is  past, 

XII  Our  stuffe,  and  it  replace,  as  now  tis  plac't, 

An  Apologie  And  %nt  of  life  were  granted  us  againe, 

of  Raymond  Yet  nothing  would  that  deed  to  us  pertaine, 

Sebond  When  interrupted  were  our  turne  againe. 

And  Plato,  when  in  another  place  thou  saist,  that  it  shall 
be  the  spirituall  part  of  man  that  shall  enjoy  the  recom- 
pences  of  the  other  life,  thou  tellest  of  things  of  as  small 
likely-hood. 

LUCR.  iii.  580.  Scilicet  avulsis  radicibus  ut  nequit  ullam 

Dispicere  ipse  oculus  rem  seorsum  corpore  toto. 

Ev'n  as  no  eye,  by  th'  root's  pull'd-out  can  see 
Ought  in  whole  body  several!  to  bee. 

For,  by  this  reckoning,  it  shall  no  longer  be  man,  nor  con 
sequently  us,  to  whom  this  enjoying  shall  appertaine ;  for 
we  are  built  of  two  principall  essentiall  parts,  the  separation 
of  which,  is  the  death  and  consummation  of  our  being. 

Ib.  903.  Inter  enim  jacta  est  vitai  pausa  vageque 

Deerrarunt  passim  motus  ab  sensibus  omnea. 

A  pause  of  life  is  interpos'd  ;  from  sense 
All  motions  straied  are,  far  wandring  thence. 

We  doe  not  say,  that  man  suffereth,  when  the  wormes  gnaw 
his  body  and  limbs  whereby  he  lived,  and  that  the  earth 
consumeth  them. 

Ib.  888.  Et  nihil  hoc  ad  nos,  qui  coitu  conjugloque 

Corporis  atque  animce  consistimus  uniter  apti. 

This  nought  concern's  us,  who  consist  of  union, 
Of  minde  and  body  joyn'd  in  meet  communion. 

Moreover,  upon  what  ground  of  their  justice,  can  the 
Gods  reward  man  and  be  thankfull  unto  him  after  his  death, 
for  his  good  and  vertuous  actions,  since  themselves  addressed 
and  bred  them  in  him  ?  And  wherefore  are  they  offended, 
and  revenge  his  vicious  deeds,  when  themselves  have  created 
him  with  so  defective  a  condition,  and  that  but  with  one 
twinkling  of  their  will,  they  may  hinder  him  from  sinning  ? 
Might  not  Epicurus  with  some  shew  of  humane  reason  object 
that  unto  Plato,  if  he  did  not  often  shrowd  himselfe  under 
this  sentence  ;  That  it  is  unpossible  by  mortall  nature  to 
establish  any  certainty  of  the  immortall  ?  Shee  is  ever  strav- 

228 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

ing,  but  especially  when  she  medleth  with  divine  matters.  CHAPTER 
Who  feeles  it  more  evidently  than  we  ?  For,  although  we  XII 
have  ascribed  unto  her  assured  and  infallible  principles, 
albeit  wee  enlighten  her  steps  with  the  holy  lampe  of  that  ° 
truth,  which  God  hath  beene  pleased  to  impart  unto  us,  we 
notwithstanding  see  daily,  how  little  soever  she  stray  from 
the  ordinary  path,  and  that  she  start  or  stragle  out  of  the 
way,  traced  and  measured  out  by  the  Church,  how  soone  she 
loseth,  entangleth  and  confoundeth  her  selfe  ;  turning,  tossing 
and  floating  up  and  downe,  in  this  vast,  troublesome  and 
tempestuous  sea  of  mans  opinions,  without  restraint  or  scope. 
So  soone  as  she  loseth  this  high  and  common  way,  shee 
divideth  and  scattereth  her  selfe  a  thousand  diverse  wayes. 
Man  can  be  no  other  than  he  is,  nor  imagine  but  according 
to  his  capacity  :  It  is  greater  presumption  (saith  Plutarch) 
in  them  that  are  but  men,  to  attempt  to  reason  and  dis 
course  of  Gods,  and  of  demi-Gods,  than  in  a  man  meerly 
ignorant  of  musicke,  to  j  udge  of  those  that  sing  ;  or  for  a 
man,  that  was  never  in  warres,  to  dispute  of  Armes  and 
warre,  presuming  by  some  light  conjecture,  to  comprehend 
the  effects  of  an  art  altogether  beyond  his  skill.  As  I 
thinke,  Antiquity  imagined  it  did  something  for  divine 
Majesty,  when  shee  compared  the  same  unto  man,  attiring 
her  with  his  faculties,  and  enriching  her  with  his  strange 
humours,  and  most  shamefull  necessities  :  offering  her  some 
of  our  cates  to  feed  upon,  and  some  of  our  dances,  mum 
meries,  and  enterludes  to  make  her  merry,  with  our  clothes 
to  apparrell  her  ;  and  our  houses  to  lodge  her,  cherishing 
her  with  the  sweet  odors  of  incense,  and  sounds  of  musicke, 
adorning  her  with  garlands  and  flowers,  and  to  draw  her  to 
our  vicious  passion,  to  flatter  her  justice  with  an  inhumane 
revenge,  gladding  her  with  the  ruine  and  dissipation  of 
things  created  and  preserved  by  her.  As  Tiberius  Sem- 
pronius,  who  for  a  sacrifice  to  Vulcan,  caused  the  rich  spoiles 
and  armes,  which  he  had  gotten  of  his  enemies  in  Sardinia, 
to  be  burned  :  And  Paulus  ^Emilius,  those  he  had  obtained 
in  Macedonia,  to  Mars  and  Minerva.  And  Alexander  com- 
ming  to  the  Ocean  of  India,  cast  in  favour  of  Thetis  many 
great  rich  vessels  of  gold  into  the  Sea,  replenishing  more 
over  her  Altars  with  a  butcherly  slaughter,  not  onely  of 

229 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  innocent  beasts,  but  of  men,  as  diverse  Nations,  and  amongst 
XI1          the  rest,  ours  were  wont  to  doe.    And  I  thinke  none  hath 
of  RamS  beene  exemPted  from  shewing  the  like  Essayes. 

Sebond  —Sulmone  creatos 

VIRG.  ALn.  x.  Quatuor  hicjuvenes,  totidem,  quos  educat  Ufens, 

5*7'  Viventes  rapit,  inferias  quos  immolet  umbris. 

Foure  young-men  borne  of  Sulmo,  and  foure  more 
Whom  Ufens  bred,  he  living  over-bore, 
Whom  he  to  his  dead  friend 
A  sacrifice  might  send. 

The  Getes  deeme  themselves  immortall,  and  their  death 
but  the  beginning  of  a  journey  to  their  God  Zamolxis. 
From  five  to  five  yeares,  they  dispatch  some  one  among 
themselves  toward  him,  to  require  him  of  necessarie  things. 
This  deputy  of  theirs  is  chosen  by  lots  ;  And  the  manner  to 
dispatch  him,  after  they  have  by  word  of  mouth  instructed 
him  of  his  charge,  is  that  amongst  those  which  assist  his 
election,  three  hold  so  many  javelins  upright,  upon  which 
the  others  by  meere  strength  of  armes,  throw  him  ;  if  he 
chance  to  sticke  upon  them  in  any  mortall  place,  and  that 
he  dye  suddenly,  it  is  to  them  an  assured  argument  of  divine 
favour  ;  but  if  he  escape,  they  deeme  him  a  wicked  and 
execrable  man,  and  then  chuse  another.  Amestris  mother 
unto  Xerxes,  being  become  aged,  caused  at  one  time  14 
young  striplings  of  the  noblest  houses  of  Persia  (following 
the  religion  of  her  countrie)  to  be  buried  all  alive,  thereby 
to  gratifie  some  God  of  under  earth.  Even  at  this  day  the 
Idols  of  Temixitan  are  cimented  with  the  bloud  of  young 
children,  and  love  no  sacrifice  but  of  such  infant  and  pure 
soules  :  Oh  justice  greedy  of  the  bloud  of  innocencie. 

LUCR.  i.  102.  Tantum  religio  potuit  suadere  malorum. 

Religion  so  much  mischeefe  could 
Perswade,  where  it  much  better  should. 

The  Carthaginians  were  wont  to  sacrifice  their  owne 
children  unto  Saturne,  and  who  had  none,  was  faine  to  buy 
some  :  and  their  fathers  and  mothers  were  enforced  in  their 
proper  persons,  with  cheerefull  and  pleasant  countenance  to 
assist  that  office.  It  was  a  strange  conceit,  with  our  owne 
affliction  to  goe  about  to  please  and  appay  divine  goodnesse. 

230 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

As  the  Lacedemonians,  who  flattered  and  wantonized  their  CHAPTER 
Diana,  by  torturing  of  yong  boyes,  whom  often  in  favour  of         X 
her  they  caused  to  be  whipped  to  death.     It  was  a  savage  ^j 
kinde  of  humor,  to  thinke  to  gratifie  the  Architect  with  the       Sebond 
subversion  of  his  architecture  :  and  to  cancel  the  punishment 
due   unto    the   guiltie,  by  punishing  the   guiltles,  and    to 
imagine  that  poore  Iphigenia,  in  the  port  of  Aulis,  should 
by  her  death  and  sacrifice  discharge  and  expiate,  towards 
God,  the  Grecians  armie  of  the  offences,  which  they  had 
committed. 

Et  casta  inceste  nubendi  tempore  in  ipso  LUCR.  i.  99. 

Hostia  concideret  mactatu  mcesta  parentis. 

She,  a  chaste  offring,  griev'd  incestuously 

By  fathers  stroke,  when  she  should  wed,  to  dye. 

And  those  two  noble  and  generous  soules  of  the  Decii, 
father  and  sonne,  to  reconcile,  and  appease  the  favour  of  the 
Gods,  towards  the  Romanes  affaires,  should  headlong  cast 
their  bodies  athwart  the  thickest  throng  of  their  enemies. 
Qucejuit  tanta  Deorum  iniquitas,  ut  placari  populo  Romano 
non  possinty  nisi  tales  v'iri  occidissent  ?  6  What  injustice  of  the 
4  Gods  was  so  great,  as  they  could  not  be  appeased,  unlesse 
'  such  men  perished  ? '  Considering  that  it  lies  not  in  the 
offender  to  cause  himselfe  to  be  whipped,  how  and  when 
he  list,  but  in  the  judge,  who  accompteth  nothing  a  right 
punishment,  except  the  torture  he  appointeth  ;  and  cannot 
impute  that  unto  punishment,  which  is  in  the  free  choice  of 
him  that  suffereth.  The  divine  vengeance  presupposeth  our 
full  dissent,  for  his  justice  and  our  paine.  And  ridiculous 
was  that  humor  of  Polycrates,  the  Tyrant  of  Samos,  who 
to  interrupt  the  course  of  his  continuall  happinesse,  and  to 
recompence  it,  cast  the  richest  and  most  precious  Jewell  he 
had  into  the  Sea,  deeming  that  by  this  purposed  mishap  he 
should  satisfie  the  revolution  and  vicissitude  of  fortune  ; 
which  to  deride  his  folly,  caused  the  very  same  jewel,  being 
found  in  a  fishes-belly,  to  returne  to  his  hands  againe.  And 
to  what  purpose  are  the  manglings  and  dismembrings  of 
the  Corybantes,  of  the  Maenades,  and  now  a  dayes  of  the 
Mahumetans,  who  skar,  and  gash  their  faces,  their  stomacke 
and  their  limbes,  to  gratifie  their  prophet :  seeing  the  offence 


AUG  Civ  Dei 
vi.  c.  10.         ' 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  consisteth  in  the  will,  not  in  the  breast,  nor  eyes,  nor  in 
XII  the  genitories,  health,  shoulders,  or  throat  ?  Tantus  est  per- 

An  Apologie  fur^af^  mentis  et  sedibus  suis  pulsoe  Juror  •,  ut  sic  Dii  placentur, 
quemadmodum  Tie  homines  quidem  sceviunt.  6  So  great  is  the 
'  ^UIT  °^  a  troubled  minde  put  from  the  state  it  should  be  in, 
'  as  the  Gods  must  be  so  pacified,  as  even  men  would  not  be 
'  so  outragious."1  This  naturall  contexture  doth  by  her  use 
not  only  respect  us,  but  also  the  service  of  God,  and  other 
mens  :  it  is  injustice  to  make  it  miscarie  at  our  pleasure,  as 
under  what  pretence  soever  it  be  to  kill  our  selves.  It 
seemeth  to  be  a  great  cowardise  and  manifest  treason,  to 
abuse  the  stupide  and  corrupt  the  servile  functions  of  the 
body,  to  spare  the  diligence  unto  the  soule  how  to  direct 

IBID,  e  Senec.  them  according  unto  reason.  Vbi  iratos  Deos  foment,  qui 
sic  propitios  habere  merentur.  In  regioe  libidinis  voluptatem 
castrati  sunt  quidam  ;  sed  nemo  sibi,  ne  vir  esset,  jubente 
Domino,  manus  intulit.  '  Where  are  they  afeard  of  Gods 
4  anger,  who  in  such  sort  deserve  to  have  his  favour  ;  some 
'  have  beene  guelded  for  Princes  lustfull  pleasure  :  but  no 
'  man  at  the  Lords  command,  hath  laid  hands  on  himselfe, 
'  to  be  lesse  than  a  man.1  Thus  did  they  replenish  their 
religion  and  stuffe  it  with  divers  bad  effects. 

LUCR.  i.  82.  —  sfppius  olim 

Religio  peperit  scelerosa  atque  impia  facta. 

Religion  hath  oft  times  in  former  times 
Bred  execrable  facts.,  ungodly  crimes. 

Now  can  nothing  of  ours,  in  what  manner  soever,  be  either 
compared  or  referred  unto  divine  nature,  that  doth  not 
blemish  or  defile  the  same  with  as  much  imperfection. 
How  can  this  infinit  beauty,  power  and  goodnes  admit  any 
correspondencie  or  similitude  with  a  thing  so  base  and 
abject  as  we  are,  without  extreme  interest  and  manifest 
i  Cor.  i.  25.  derogation  from  his  divine  greatnesse  ?  Injirmum  Dei  for- 
tius  est  Jiominibus  ;  et  stultum  Dei  sapientius  est  hominibus. 
'  The  weaknesse  of  God  is  stronger  than  men  :  and  the 
'  foolishnesse  of  God  is  wiser  than  men.1  Stilpo  the  Philo 
sopher,  being  demanded,  whether  the  Gods  rejoyce  at  our 
honours  and  sacrifices  ;  You  are  indiscreet  (said  he)  let  us 
withdraw  our  selves  apart,  if  you  speak  e  of  such  matters. 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Notwithstanding  we  prescribe  him  limits,  we  lay  continuall  CHAPTER 
siege  unto    his   power  by  our   reasons  (I  call  our  dreames          XII 
and  our  vanities  reason,  with  the  dispensation  of  Philosophy,  A^  Apologie 
which  saith,  that  both  the  foole  and  the  wicked  doe  rave  °   Sebcmd" 
and  dote  by  reason ;  but  that  it  is  a  reason  of  severall  and 
particular  forme)  we  will  subject  him  to  the  vaine  and  weake 
apparences  of  our  understanding  :  him  who  hath  made  both 
us  and  our  knowledge.    Because  nothing  is  made  of  nothing  : 
God    was   not   able    to   frame   the    world    without    matter. 
What?  hath  God  delivered  into  our  hands  the  keyes,  and 
the    strongest   wards    of    his   infinit    puissance  ?     Hath    he 
obliged  himselfe  not  to  exceed  the  bounds  of  our  know 
ledge  ?     Suppose,  oh  man,  that  herein  thou  hast  beene  able 
to  marke  some  signes  of  his  effects  :  Thinkest  thou,  he  hath 
therein   employed  all  he  was  able  to  doe,  and  that  he  hath 
placed  all  his  formes  and  Ideas,   in  this   peece   of  worke  ? 
Thou  seest  but  the  order  and  policie  of  this  little  little  Cell 
wherein  thou  art   placed :  The  question    is,   whether  thou 
seest  it:  His  divinity  hath  an  infinit  jurisdiction  far  beyond 
that :  This  peece  is  nothing  in  respect  of  the  whole. 

— omnia  cum  caelo  terraque  marique,  LUCR.  vi.  675. 

Nil  sunt  ad  summam  summai  totius  omnem. 

All  things  that  are,  with  heav'n,  with  Sea,  and  land, 
To  th'  whole   summe  of  th'  whole  summe,  as  nothing 
stand. 

This  law  thou  aleagest  is  but  a  municipall  law,  and  thou 
knowest  not  what  the  universall  is  :  Tie  thy  selfe  unto  that, 
whereto  thou  are  subject,  but  tie  not  him  ;  he  is  neither  thy 
companion,  nor  thy  brother,  nor  thy  fellow  Citizen,  nor  thy 
copesmate.  If  he  in  any  sort  have  communicated  himselfe 
unto  thee,  it  is  not  to  debase  himselfe,  or  stoope  to  thy  smal- 
nesse,  nor  to  give  thee  the  controulment  of  his  power.  Mans 
body  cannot  soare  up  unto  the  clouds,  this  is  for  thee.  The 
Sunne  uncessantly  goeth  his  ordinary  course:  The  bounds 
of  the  Seas  and  of  the  earth  cannot  be  confounded  :  The 
water  is  ever  fleeting,  wavering,  and  without  firmenesse :  A 
wall  without  breach  or  flaw,  impenetrable  unto  a  solid 
body:  Man  cannot  preserve  his  life  amidst  the  flames,  he 
cannot  corporally  be  both  in  heaven  and  on  earth,  and  in 

2  G  233 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  a  thousand  places  together  and  at  once.  It  is  for  thee  that 
he  hath  made  these  rules  ;  it  is  thou  they  take  hold  off.  He 
hath  testified  unto  Christians,  that  when  ever  it  pleased  him 
Seond  ^e  na^  ou^  gone  them  all.  And  in  truth,  omnipotent  as 
he  is,  wherefore  should  he  have  restrained  his  forces  unto  a 
limited  measure  ?  In  favour  of  whom  should  he  have  re 
nounced  his  privilege  ?  Thy  reason  hath  in  no  one  other 
thing  more  likely-hood  and  foundation,  than  in  that  which 
perswadeth  thee  a  plurality  of  worlds. 

LUCR.  ii.  1094.  Terramque  et  solem,  lunam,  mare,  ccetera  quce  sunt, 

Non  esse  unica,  sed  numero  magis  innumerali. 

The  earth,  the  Sunne,  the  Moone,  the  sea  and  all 
In  number  numberlesse,  not  one  they  call. 

The  famousest  wits  of  former  ages  have  beleeved  it,  yea 
and  some  of  our  moderne,  as  forced  thereunto  by  the  ap- 
parence  of  humane  reason.  For  as  much  as  whatsoever  we 
see  in  this  vast  worlds  frame,  there  is  no  one  thing  alone, 
single  and  one  : 

Ib.  1086,  —cum  in  summa  res  nulla  sit  una, 

Unica  quce  gignatur,  et  unica  solaque  crescat : 
Whereas  in  generall  summe,  nothing  is  one, 
To  be  bred  only  one,  grow  only  one  ; 

and  that  all  severall  kindes  are  multiplied  in  some  num 
ber:  Whereby  it  seemeth  unlikely,  that  God  hath  framed 
this  peece  of  worke  alone  without  a  fellow ;  and  that  the 
matter  of  this  forme  hath  wholy  beene  spent  in  this  only 
Individuum ; 

lb-  I073-  Quare  etiam  atque  etiam  tales  fateare  necesse  est, 

Esse  alios  alibi  congress  us  material, 
Qualis  hie  est  avido  complexu  quern  tenet  ^Ether. 
Wherefore  you  must  confesse,  againe  againe, 
Of  matter  such  like  meetings  elsewhere  raigne 
As  this,  these  skies  in  greedy  gripe  containe. 

Namely,  if  it  be  a  breathing  creature,  as  it's  motions  make 
it  so  likely,  that  Plato  assureth  it,  and  divers  of  ours  either 
affirme  it,  or  dare  not  impugne  it ;  no  more  than  this  old 
opinion,  that  the  Heaven,  the  Starres,  and  other  members  of 
the  World,  are  creatures  composed  both  of  body  and  soule ; 
mortall  in  respect  of  their  composition,  but  immortall  bv 

234  y 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

the  Creators  decree.  Now,  if  there  be  divers  worlds,  as  CHAPTER 
Democritus,  Epicurus,  and  well  neere  all  Philosophy  hath 
thought ;  what  know  wee,  whether  the  principles  and  the 
rules  of  this  one  concerne  or  touch  likewise  the  others  ? 
Haply  they  have  another  semblance  and  another  policie. 
Epicurus  imagineth  them  either  like  or  unlike.  We  see  an 
infinite  difference  and  varietie  in  this  world,  only  by  the  dis 
tance  of  places.  There  is  neither  Corne,  nor  Wine  ;  no  nor 
any  of  our  beasts  seene  in  that  new  Corner  of  the  World, 
which  our  fathers  have  lately  discovered :  All  things  differ 
from  ours.  And  in  the  old  time,  marke  but  in  how  many 
parts  of  the  world,  they  had  never  knowledge  nor  of  Bacchus 
nor  of  Ceres.  If  any  credit  may  be  given  unto  Plinie  or  to 
Herodotus,  there  is  in  some  places  a  kinde  of  men  that  have 
very  little  or  no  resemblance  at  all  with  ours.  And  there 
be  mungrell  and  ambiguous  shapes,  betweene  a  humane  and 
brutish  Nature.  Some  Countries  there  are,  where  men  are 
borne  headlesse,  with  eyes  and  mouthes  in  their  breasts ; 
where  all  are  Hermaphrodites ;  where  they  creep  on  all 
foure ;  Where  they  have  but  one  eye  in  their  forehead,  and 
heads  more  like  unto  a  dog  than  ours :  Where  from  the 
Navill  downewards  they  are  halfe  fish,  and  live  in  the  water ; 
Where  women  are  brought  a  bed  at  five  yeares  of  age,  and 
live  but  eight ;  Where  their  heads  and  the  skin  of  their 
browes  are  so  hard,  that  no  yron  can  pierce  them,  but  will 
rather  turne  edge ;  Where  men  never  have  beards.  Other 
Nations  there  are,  that  never  have  use  of  fire ;  Others,  whose 
sperme  is  of  a  blacke  colour.  What  shall  we  speake  of  them, 
who  naturally  change  themselves  into  Woolves,  into  Courts, 
and  then  into  Men  againe  ?  And  if  it  bee  (as  Plutark  saith) 
that  in  some  part  of  the  Indiaes,  there  are  men  without 
mouthes,  and  who  live  only  by  the  smell  of  certaine  sweet 
odours  ;  how  many  of  our  descriptions  be  then  false  ?  Hee 
is  no  more  risible ;  nor  perhaps  capable  of  reason  and 
societie  :  The  direction  and  cause  of  our  inward  frame,  should 
for  the  most  part  be  to  no  purpose.  Moreover,  how  many 
things  are  there  in  our  knowledge,  that  oppugne  these 
goodly  rules,  which  we  have  allotted  and  prescribed  unto 
Nature?  And  we  undertake  to  joyne  God  himselfe  unto 
her.  How  many  things  doe  we  name  miraculous  and  against 

235 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Nature?  Each  man  and  every  Nation  doth  it  according  to 
XII  the  measure  of  his  ignorance.  How  many  hidden  proprieties 

An  Apologie  anj  quintessences  doe  we  daily  discover  ?  For  us  to  goe 
Sebond11  according  to  Nature,  is  but  to  follow  according  to  our 
understanding,  as  far  as  it  can  follow,  and  asmuch  as  we 
can  perceive  in  it.  Whatsoever  is  beyond  it,  is  monstrous 
and  disordred.  By  this  accompt  all  shall  then  be  monstrous, 
to  the  wisest  and  most  sufficient ;  for  even  to  such,  humane 
reason  hath  perswaded,  that  she  had  neither  ground  nor 
footing,  no  not  so  much  as  to  warrant  snow  to  be  white : 
And  Anaxagoras  said,  it  was  blacke ;  Whether  there  be  any 
thing  or  nothing  ;  Whether  there  be  knowledge  or  ignor 
ance  ;  Which  Metrodorus  Chi  us  denied,  that  any  man  might 
say.  Or  whether  we  live,  as  Euripides  seemeth  to  doubt, 
and  call  in  question,  whether  the  life  we  live  be  a  life  or  no, 
or  whether  that  which  we  call  death  be  a  life : 

PLAT.  Gorg.  Tis  8'  oldev  el  £rjv  rov$'  6  K.€K\r)rai  Baveiv, 

ex  Eurip.  To  £rjv  Se  dvr)(rKeiv  ecrn  ; 

Who  knowes  if  thus  to  live,  be  called  death, 
And  if  it  be  to  dye,  thus  to  draw  breath  ? 

And  not  without  apparence.  For,  wherefore  doe  we  from 
that  instant  take  a  title  of  being,  which  is  but  a  twinckling 
in  the  infinit  course  of  an  eternall  night,  and  so  short  an 
interruption  of  our  perpetuall  and  naturall  condition  ? 
Death  possessing  what  ever  is  before  and  behind  this 
moment,  and  also  a  good  part  of  this  moment.  Some 
others  affirme,  there  is  no  motion,  and  that  nothing  stirreth; 
namely,  those  which  follow  Melissus.  For  if  there  be  but 
one,  neither  can  this  sphericall  motion  serve  him,  nor  the 
moving  from  one  place  to  another,  as  Plato  proveth,  that 
there  is  neither  generation  nor  corruption  in  nature.  Prota 
goras  saith,  there  is  nothing  in  Nature,  but  doubt :  That  a 
man  may  equally  dispute  of  all  things :  and  of  that  also, 
whether  all  things  may  equally  be  disputed  of:  Mansiphanes 
said,  that  of  things  which  seeme  to  be,  no  one  thing,  is  no 
more,  than  it  is  not.  That  nothing  is  certaine,  but  uncer 
tainty.  Parmenides,  that  of  that  which  seemeth,  there  is  no 
one  thing  in  Generall.  That  there  is  but  one  Zeno,  that 
one  selfe  same  is  not :  And  that  there  is  nothing.  If  one 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

were,  he  should  either  be  in  another,  or  in  himselfe  :  if  he  CHAPTER 
be  in  another,  then  are  they  two  :  If  he  be  in  himselfe,  they          XH 

are  also  two,  the  comprizing  and  the  comprized.     According  An  Apologie 
i      ,    •  .1       -XT  ±.  f   1 1  •  i     ,    °    of  Kaymond 

to  these  rules  or  doctrines,  the  JNature  or  things  is   but  a       Sebond 

false  or  vaine  shadow.  I  have  ever  thought,  this  manner  of 
speech  in  a  Christian,  is  full  of  indiscretion  and  irreverence ; 
God  cannot  dye,  God  cannot  gaine-say  himselfe,  God  cannot 
doe  this  or  that.  I  cannot  allow  a  man  should  so  bound 
Gods  heavenly  power  under  the  Lawes  of  our  word.  And 
that  apparence,  which  in  these  propositions  offers  it  selfe 
unto  us,  ought  to  be  represented  more  reverently  and  more 
religiously.  Our  speech  hath  his  infirmities  and  defects,  as 
all  things  else  have.  Most  of  the  occasions  of  this  worlds 
troubles  are  Grammaticall.  Our  suits  and  processes  proceed 
but  from  the  canvasing  and  debating  the  interpretation  of 
the  Lawes,  and  most  of  our  warres,  from  the  want  of  know 
ledge  in  State-counsellors,  that  could  not  cleerely  distinguish 
and  fully  expresse  the  Covenants,  and  Conditions  of  accords 
betweene  Prince  and  Prince.  How  many  weighty  strifes, 
and  important  quarels,  hath  the  doubt  of  this  one  sillable, 
hoc,  brought  forth  in  the  world  ?  examine  the  plainest  sen 
tence  that  Logike  it  selfe  can  present  unto  us.  If  you  say, 
it  is  faire  weather,  and  in  so  saying,  say  true  ;  it  is  faire 
weather  then.  Is  not  this  a  certaine  forme  of  speech  ?  Yet 
will  it  deceive  us  :  That  it  is  so  ;  Let  us  follow  the  example  : 
If  you  say,  I  lye,  and  that  you  should  say  true,  you  lye  then. 
The  Art,  the  reason,  the  force  of  the  conclusion  of  this  last, 
are  like  unto  the  other ;  notwithstanding  we  are  entangled. 
I  see  the  Pyrhonian  Phylosophers,  who  can  by  no  manner  of 
speech  expresse  their  Generall  conceit :  for,  they  had  need  of 
a  new  language.  Ours  is  altogether  composed  of  affirmative 
propositions,  which  are  directly  against  them.  So  that, 
when  they  say  I  doubt,  you  have  them  fast  by  the  throat  to 
make  them  avow,  that  at  least  you  are  assured  and  know, 
that  they  doubt.  So  have  they  beene  compelled  to  save 
themselves  by  this  comparison  of  Physicke,  without  which 
their  conceit  would  be  inexplicable  and  intricate.  When 
they  pronounce,  I  know  not,  or  I  doubt,  they  say,  that  this 
proposition  transportes  it  selfe  together  with  the  rest,  even 
as  the  Rewbarbe  doeth,  which  scowred  ill  humours  away, 

237 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and   therewith   is  carried  away  himselfe.     This  conceipt  is 
XII          more  certainly  conceived  by  an  interrogation :   What  can  I 

rf1^  mond  tel1  ?  As  *  ^eare  ^  *n  an  ImPrese  °f  a  Paire  °f  ballances. 
Sebond  Note  how  some  prevaile  with  this  kinde  of  unreverent  and 
unhallowed  speech.  In  the  disputations  that  are  now-adayes 
in  our  religion,  if  you  overmuch  urge  the  adversaries,  they 
will  roundly  tell  you,  that  it  lieth  not  in  the  power  of  God 
to  make  his  body  at  once  to  be  in  Paradise,  and  on  earth, 
and  in  many  other  places  together.  And  how  that  ancient 
skoffer  made  profitable  use  of  it.  At  least  (saith  he)  it  is 
no  small  comfort  unto  man,  to  see  that  God  cannot  doe 
all  things  ;  for  he  cannot  kill  himselfe  if  he  would,  which  is 
the  greatest  benefit  we  have  in  our  condition ;  he  cannot 
make  mortall  men  immortall,  nor  raise  the  dead  to  life 
againe,  nor  make  him  that  hath  lived,  never  to  have  lived, 
and  him,  who  hath  had  honours,  not  to  have  had  them, 
having  no  other  right  over  what  is  past,  but  of  forgetful- 
nesse.  And  that  this  society  betweene  God  and  Man,  may 
also  be  combined  with  some  pleasant  examples,  he  cannot 
make  twice  ten  not  to  be  twenty.  See  what  he  saith,  and 
which  a  Christian  ought  to  abhor,  that  ever  such  and  so 
profane  words  should  passe  his  mouth :  Whereas  on  the 
contrary  part,  it  seemeth  that  fond  men  endevour  to  finde 
out  this  foolish-boldnesse  of  speech,  that  so  they  may  turne 
and  winde  God  almighty  according  to  their  measure. 

HOR.  Car.  iii.  —eras  vel  atra 

Od.  xxix.  43.  Nube  polum  pater  occupato, 

Vel  sole  pur 3,  non  tamen  irritum 

Quodcumque  retro  est  efficiet,  neque 

Diffinget  infectumque  reddet 

Quodfuyiens  semel  hora  vexit. 

To-morrow  let  our  father  fill  the  skie, 

With  darke  cloud,  or  with  cleare  Sunne,  he  thereby 

Shall  not  make  voyd  what  once  is  overpast : 

Nor  shall  he  undoe,  or  in  new  mold  cast, 

What  time  hath  once  caught ;  that  flyes  hence  so  fast. 

When  we  say,  that  the  infinitie  of  ages,  as  well  past  as 
to  come,  is  but  one  instant  with  God  ;  that  his  wisdome, 
goodnesse  and  power,  are  one  selfe-same  thing  with  his 
essence;  our  tongue  speakes  it,  but  our  understanding  can  no 

238 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

whit  apprehend  it.     Yet  will  our  selfe  overweening  sift  his  CHAPTER 
divinitie  through  our  scarce  :   whence  are  engendred  all  the          XI1 
vanities  and  errours  wherewith  the  world  is  so  full-fraught,  ^fl^°^°81^ 
reducing  and  weighing  with  his  uncertaine  balance,  a  thing  °   Sebond" 
so  farre  from   his  reach,   and  so   distant  from  his  weight. 
Mirum  quo  procedat  improbitas  cordis  humani,  parvulo  aliquo  PLIN.  Nat. 
invitata   successu.     'It  is  a   wonder,  whether  the  perverse  Hist-  »•  c-  23- 
'  wickednesse  of  mans  heart  will  proceed,  if  it  be  but  called-on 
'  with  any  little  successe.1     How  insolently  doe  the  Stoikes 
charge   Epicurus,   because   he    holds,  that   to   be   perfectly 
good  and  absolutely  happy,  belongs  but  only  unto  God  ;  and 
that  the  wiseman  hath  but  a  shadow  and  similitude  thereof? 
How  rashly  have  they  joyned  God  unto  destiny  ?  (which  at 
my  request,  let  none  that  beareth  the  surname  of  a  Christian, 
doe  at  this  day)  And  Thales,  Plato,  and  Pythagoras  have 
subjected  him  unto  necessitie.   This  over-boldnesse,  or  rather 
bold  fiercenesse,  to  seeke  to  discover  God,  by  and  with  our 
eyes,  hath  beene  the  cause,  that  a  notable  man  of  our  times 
hath  attributed  a  corporall  forme  unto  divinitie,  and  is  the 
cause  of  that  which  daily  hapneth  unto  us,  which  is,  by  a 
particular  assignation,   to  impute  all  important  events  to 
God  :  which  because   they  touch   us,   it  seemeth  they  also 
touch  him,  and  that  he  regardeth  them  with  more  care  and 
attention,  than  those  that  are  but  slight  and  ordinary  unto 
us.  Magna  dii  curant,parva  negligunt.    '  The  Gods  take  some  GIC.  Nat.  Dear. 
6  care  for  great  things,  but  none  for  little.1    Note  his  example;  "• 
he  will  enlighten  you  with  his  reason.     Nee  in  regnis  quidem  ib.  Hi. 
reges  omnia  minima  cur  ant.  '  Nor  doe  Kings  in  their  Kingdomes 
'  much  care  for  the  least  matters.1     As  if  it  were  all  one  to 
that  King,  either  to  remove  an  Empire,  or  a  leafe  of  a  tree :  and 
if  his  providence  were  otherwise  exercised,  inclining  or  regard 
ing  no  more  the  successe  of  a  battell,  than  the  skip  of  a  flea. 
The  hand  of  his  government  affords  it  selfe  to  all  things  after 
a  like  tenure,  fashion  and  order  ;    our  interest  addeth  no 
thing  unto  it :  our  motions  and  our  measures  concerne  him 
nothing  and  move  him  no  whit.     Deus  ita  artifex  magnns  in 
magnis,  ut  minor  non  sit  in  parvis.     'God  is   so  great  a 
'  workeman  in  great  things,  as  he  is  no  lesse  in  small  things.1 
Our    arrogancie,    setteth    ever  before  us  this    blasphemous 
equality ;    because  our  occupations  charge  us.     State  hath 

239 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  presented  the  Gods  with  all  immunitie  of  offices,  as  are  their 

XII         Priests.      He    maketh   nature  to   produce  and  preserve  all 

f  RaP        r?  things,    and  by  her  weights   and    motions  to  compact    all 

Sebond11     parts  of  the  world,  discharging  humane  nature  from  the  feare 

Cic.Nat.Deor.  of  divine  judgements.  Quod  beatum  ccternumque  sit,  id  nee 
habere,  negotii  quicquam,  nee  exhibere  alteri.  'That  which 
'  is  blessed  and  eternall,  nor  is  troubled  it  selfe,  nor  troubleth 
'  others.'  Nature  willeth  that  in  all  things  alike,  there  be 
also  like  relation.  Then  the  infinite  number  of  mortall  men, 
concludeth  a  like  number  of  immortall :  The  infinite  things 
that  kill  and  destroy,  presuppose  as  many  that  preserve  and 
profit.  As  the  soules  of  the  Gods,  sanse  tongues,  sanse  eyes, 
and  sanse  eares,  have  each  one  in  themselves  a  feeling  of 
that  which  the  other  feel,  and  judge  of  our  thoughts ;  so 
mens  soules,  when  they  are  free  and  severed  from  the  body, 
either  by  sleepe  or  any  distraction  ;  divine,  prognosticate  and 
see  things,  which  being  conjoyned  to  their  bodies,  they  could 

Rom.  i.  22,  23.  not  see.  Men  (saith  Saint  Paul)  when  they  professed  them 
selves  to  bee  wise,  they  became  fooles,  for  they  turned  the 
glory  of  the  incorruptible  God  to  the  similitude  of  the  image 
of  a  corruptible  man.  Marke  I  pray  you  a  little  the  j  ugling  of 
ancient  Deifications.  After  the  great,  solemne  and  prowd 
pompe  of  funerals,  when  the  fire  began  to  burne  the  top  of 
the  Pyramis  :  and  to  take  hold  of  the  bed  or  hearce  wherein 
the  dead  corps  lay,  even  at  that  instant,  they  let  fly  an  Eagle, 
which  taking  her  flight  aloft  upward,  signified  that  the  soule 
went  directly  to  Paradise.  We  have  yet  a  thousand  medailes 
and  monuments,  namely,  of  that  honest  woman  Faustina, 
wherein  that  Eagle  is  represented,  carrying  a  cocke-horse  up 
towards  heaven  those  Deified  soules.  It  is  pity  we  should 
so  deceive  our  selves  with  our  owne  foolish  devises  and  apish 
inventions, 

Luc  AN.  i.  484.  Quodfinxere  timent — 

Of  that  they  stand  in  feare, 
Which  they  in  fancie  beare  ; 

as  children  will  be  afeard  of  their  fellowes  visage,  which 
themselves  have  besmeared  and  blackt.  Quasi  quicquam 
infielicius  sit  homine,  cui  sua  figmenta  dominantur.  'As 
'  though  any  thing  were  more  wretched  than  man  over  whom 
240 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

'  his   owne   imaginations   beare   sway  and    domineered     To  CHAPTER 
honour  him  whom  we  have  made,  is  farre  from  honouring  him          XII 

that  hath  made  us.    Augustus  had  as  many  Temples  as  lupiter,  »n  Apologia 
,  ,       ..,  &,         ,.    .  j         •    •  r       e       .  r  ,     '  of  Raymond 

and  served  with  as  much  religion  and  opinion  of  miracles.       Sebond 

The  Thracians,  in  requitall  of  the  benefits  they  had  received 
of  Agesilaus,  came  to  tell  him  how  they  had  canonized  him. 
Hath  your  Nation  (said  he)  the  power  to  make  those  whom 
it  pleaseth,  Gods  :  Then  first  (for  example  sake)  make  one  of 
your  selves,  and  when  I  shall  have  scene  what  good  he  shall 
have  thereby,  I  will  then  thanke  you  for  your  offer.  Oh 
sencelesse  man,  who  cannot  possibly  make  a  worme,  and  yet 
will  make  Gods  by  dozens.  Listen  to  Trismegistus  when  he 
praiseth  our  sufficiencie  :  For  man  to  finde  out  divine  nature, 
and  to  make  it,  hath  surmounted  the  admiration  of  all 
admirable  things.  Loe  here  arguments  out  of  Philosophies 
schooles  it  selfe. 

Noscere  cui  Divos  et  cceli  numina  soli,  LUCAN.  i.  452. 

Aut  soli  nescire  datum. 

Only  to  whom  heav'ns  Deities  to  know, 
Only  to  whom  is  giv'n,  them  not  to  know. 

If  God  be,  he  is  a  living  creature  ;  if  he  be  a  living  creature, 
he  hath  sense  ;  and  if  hee  have  sense,  he  is  subject  to  corrup 
tion.  If  he  be  without  a  body,  he  is  without  a  soule,  and 
consequently  without  action :  and  if  he  have  a  body,  he  is 
corruptible.  Is  not  this  brave  ?  we  are  incapable  to  have 
made  the  world,  then  is  there  some  more  excellent  nature, 
that  hath  set  her  helping  hand  unto  it.  Were  it  not  a 
sottish  arrogancie,  that  wee  should  thinke  our  selves  to  be 
the  perfectest  thing  of  this  Universe  ?  Then  sure  there  is 
some  better  thing,  and  that  is  God.  When  you  see  a  rich 
and  stately  Mansion  house,  although  you  know  not  who 
is  owner  of  it,  yet  will  you  not  say,  that  it  was  built  for 
Rats.  And  this  more  than  humane  frame,  and  divine  com 
position,  which  we  see,  of  heavens  pallace,  must  we  not  deeme 
it  to  be  the  mansion  of  some  Lord,  greater  than  our  selves  ? 
Is  not  the  highest  ever  the  most  worthy  ?  And  we  are  seated 
in  the  lowest  place.  Nothing  that  is  without  a  soule  and 
void  of  reason,  is  able  to  bring  forth  a  living  soule  cap 
able  of  reason.  The  world  doth  bring  us  forth,  then  the 
2H 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  world  hath  both  soule  and  reason.  Each  part  of  us,  is  lesse 
than  our  selves,  we  are  part  of  the  world,  then  the  world  is 
st°red  with  wisdome  and  with  reason,  and  that  more  plente- 

ously> than  we  are-   li  is  a  g°odly  thins  to  have  a  great 

government.  Then  the  worlds  government  belongeth  to 
some  blessed  and  happy  nature.  The  Starres  annoy  us  not, 
then  the  Starres  are  full  of  goodnesse.  We  have  need  of 
nourishment,  then  so  have  the  Gods,  and  feed  themselves 
with  the  vapours  arising  here  below.  Worldly  goods,  are 
not  goods  unto  God.  Then  are  not  they  goods  unto  us. 
To  offend  and  to  bee  offended,  are  equall  witnesses  of 
imbecillitie ;  Then  it  is  folly  to  feare  God.  God  is  good 
by  his  owne  nature,  man  by  his  industry :  which  is  more  ? 
Divine  wisdome  and  mans  wisdome,  have  no  other  distinc 
tion,  but  that  the  first  is  eternall.  Now  lastingnesse  is  not 
an  accession  unto  wisdome.  Therefore  are  we  fellowes.  We 
have  life,  reason  and  libertie,  we  esteeme  goodnesse,  charitie 
and  justice  ;  these  qualities  are  then  in  him.  In  conclusion 
the  building  and  destroying  the  conditions  of  divinity,  are 
forged  by  man  according  to  the  relation  to  himselfe.  Oh 
what  a  patterne,  and  what  a  modell !  Let  us  raise,  and  let  us 
amplifie  humane  qualities  as  much  as  we  please.  Puffe-up 
thy  selfe  poore  man,  yea  swell  and  swell  againe. 

HOR.  Serm.  ii.  — non  si  te  ruperis,  inquit. 

Swell  till  you  breake,  you  shall  not  be, 
Equall  to  that  great  one,  quoth  he. 

Prqfecto  non  Deum,  quern  cogitare  non  possunt,  sed  semet- 
ipsospro  illo  cogitantes,  non  ilium,  sed  seipsos,  non  illi,  sed  sibi 
comparant.  '  Of  a  truth,  they  conceiting,  not  God,  whom 
'  they  cannot  conceive,  but  themselves  instead  of  God,  doe 
4  not  compare  him,  but  themselves,  not  to  him,  but  them- 
'  selves.1  In  naturall  things  the  effects  doe  but  halfe  referre 
their  causes.  What  this  ?  It  is  above  natures  order,  it's  con 
dition  is  too  high,  too  far  out  of  reach,  and  overswaying  to 
endure,  that  our  conclusions  should  seize  upon,  or  fetter  the 
same.  It  is  not  by  our  meanes  we  reach  unto  it,  this  traine 
is  too  low.  We  are  no  nerer  heaven  on  the  top  of  Sina 
mount,  than  in  the  bottome  of  the  deepest  Sea :  Consider  of 
it,  that  you  may  see  with  your  Astrolabe.  They  bring  God 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

even  to  the  carnall  acquaintance  of  women,  to  a  prefixed  CHAPTER 
number  of  times,  and  to  how  many  generations.     Paulina,          XIJ 
wife  unto  Saturnius,  a  matron  of  great  reputation  in  Rome,  An  Apologie 
.  ,  ^     i    o          •     i      ii  i          of  Raymond 

supposing  to  lye  with  the  God  Serapis,  by  the  maquerelage       Sebond 

of  the  Priests  of  that  Temple,  found  her  selfe  in  the  armes  of 
a  wanton  lover  of  hers.  Varro  the  most  subtill,  and  wisest 
Latine  Author,  in  his  bookes  of  divinitie  writeth,  that 
Hercules  his  Sextaine,  with  one  hand  casting  lots  for  himselfe, 
and  with  the  other  for  Hercules,  gaged  a  supper  and  a  wench 
against  him  :  if  he  won,  at  the  charge  of  his  offerings,  but  if 
he  lost,  at  his  owne  cost.  He  lost  and  paid  for  a  supper  and 
a  wench :  Her  name  was  Laurentina :  Who  by  night  saw 
that  God  in  her  armes,  saying  moreover  unto  her,  that  the 
next  day,  the  first  man  she  met  withall,  should  heavenly  pay 
her  her  wages.  It  fortuned  to  be  one  Taruncius,  a  very  rich 
young-man,  who  tooke  her  home  with  him,  and  in  time  left 
her  absolute  heire  of  all  he  had.  And  she,  when  it  came  to 
her  turne,  hoping  to  doe  that  God  some  acceptable  service, 
left  the  Romane  people  heire  generall  of  all  her  wealth  : 
And  therefore  had  she  divine  honours  attributed  unto  her. 
As  if  it  were  not  sufficient  for  Plato  to  descend  originally 
from  the  Gods ;  by  a  two-fold  line,  and  to  have  Neptune  for 
the  common  Author  of  his  race.  It  was  certainly  beleeved 
at  Athens,  that  Ariston  desiring  to  enjoy  faire  Perictyone, 
he  could  not,  and  that  in  his  dreame  he  was  warned  by  God 
Apollo,  to  leave  her  untouchft  and  unpolluted,  untill  such 
time  as  she  were  brought  a  bed.  And  these  were  the  father 
and  mother  of  Plato.  How  many  such-like  cuckoldries  are 
there  in  histories,  procured  by  the  Gods  against  seely 
mortall  men  ?  And  husbands  most  injuriously  blazoned  in 
favor  of  their  children  ?  In  Mahomets  religion,  by  the 
easie  beleefe  of  that  people  are  many  merlins  found  ;  That  is 
to  say  fatherles  children  :  Spirituall  children,  conceived  and 
borne  divinely  in  the  wombs  of  virgins,  and  that  in  their 
language  beare  names,  importing  as  much.  We  must  note, 
that  nothing  is  more  deare  and  precious  to  any  thing,  than  it's 
owne  being  (the  Lyon,  the  Eagle  and  the  Dolphin  esteeme 
nothing  above  their  kinde)  each  thing  referreth  the  qualities 
of  all  other  things  unto  her  owne  conditions,  which  we  may 
either  amplifie  or  shorten ;  but  that  is  all :  for  besides  this 

243 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  principle,  and  out  of  this  reference,  our  imagination  cannot 
go,  and  guesse  further :  and  it  is  unpossible  it  should  exceede 
that,  or  goe  beyond  it :  Whence  arise  these  ancient  conclu- 
si°ns-  Of  all  formes,  that  of  man  is  the  fairest :  Then  God 
is  of  this  forme.  No  man  can  be  happy  without  vertue,  nor 
can  vertue  be  without  reason  ;  And  no  reason  can  lodge  but 
in  a  humane  shape :  God  is  then  invested  with  a  humane 
Cic.  Nat.  Deo.  figure.  Ita  est  iiifbrmatum  anticipatum  mentibus  nostris,  ut 
i-  homini,  quum  de  Deo  cogitet^forma  occurrat  humana.  '  The 

6  prejudice  forestaled  in  our  mindes  is  so  framed,  as  the  forme 
'  of  man  comes  to  mans  minde,  when  he  is  thinking  of  God.1 
Therefore  Xenophanes  said  pleasantly,  that  if  beasts  frame 
any  Gods  unto  themselves,  (as  likely  it  is  they  doe)  they 
surely  frame  them  like  unto  themselves,  and  glorifie  them 
selves  as  we  do.  For,  why  may  not  a  Goose  say  thus  ?  All 
parts  of  the  world  behold  me,  the  earth  serveth  me  to  tread 
upon,  the  Sunne  to  give  me  light,  the  starres  to  inspire  me 
with  influence :  this  commoditie  I  have  of  the  winds,  and 
this  benefit  of  the  waters ;  there  is  nothing  that  this  worlds- 
vault  doth  so  favorably  looke  upon  as  me  selfe  ;  I  am  the 
favorite  of  nature ;  Is  it  not  man  that  careth  for  me,  that 
keepeth  me,  lodgeth  me,  and  serveth  me  ?  For  me  it  is  he 
soweth,  reapeth  and  grind eth  :  If  he  eat  me,  so  doth  man 
feede  on  his  fellow,  and  so  doe  I  on  the  wormes,  that  con 
sume  and  eat  him.  As  much  might  a  Crane  say,  yea  and 
more  boldly,  by  reason  of  her  flights-libertie,  and'the  posses- 
Ib.  sion  of  this  goodly  and  high-bownding  region.  Tarn  Uanda 

conciliatrix,  et  tarn  sui  est  lena  ipsa  natura.  6  So  flattring 
'  a  broker,  and  bawd  (as  it  were)  is  nature  to  it  selfe."  Now 
by  the  same  consequence,  the  destinies  are  for  us,  the  world 
is  for  us  ;  it  shineth,  and  thundreth  for  us  :  Both  the 
creator  and  the  creatures  are  for  us :  It  is  the  marke  and 
point  whereat  the  universitie  of  things  aymeth.  Survay  but 
the  register,  which  Philosophy  hath  kept  these  two  thousand 
yeares  and  more,  of  heavenly  affaires.  The  Gods  never 
acted,  and  never  spake,  but  for  man  :  She  ascribeth  no  other 
consultation,  nor  imputeth  other  vacation  unto  them.  Loe 
how  they  are  up  in  armes  against  us. 

HOR.  6ar.  ii.  — domitosque  Herculea  manu 

Oa.  xn.  6.  Telluris  iuvenes,  unde  periculum 

244 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Fulgens  contremuit  domus  CHAPTER 

Saturni  veteris.  XII 

And  young  earth-gallants  tamed  by  the  hand  Q^  Raym0nd 

Of  Hercules,  whereby  the  habitation  o  J 

Of  old  Saturnus  did  in  perill  stand, 
And,  shyn'd  it  ne're  so  bright,  yet  fear'd  invasion. 

See  how  they  are  partakers,  of  our  troubles,  that  so  they 
may  be  even  with  us,  forsomuch  as  so  many  times  we  are 
partakers  of  theirs. 

Neptunus  muros  magnoque  emota  tridenti  ViRG.y£«.  ii. 

Fundament  a  quatit,  totamque  a  sedibus  urbem  610. 

Emit ;  hie  luno  Scceas  scevissima  portas 
Prima  tenet. — 

Neptunus  with  his  great  three-forked  mace 
Shak's  the  weake  wall,  and  tottering  foundation, 
And  from  the  site  the  Cittie  doth  displace, 
Fierce  luno  first  holds-ope  the  gates  t' invasion. 

The  Caunians,  for  the  jelousie  of  their  owne  Gods  domina 
tion,  upon  their  devotion-day  arme  themselves,  and  running 
up  and  downe,  brandishing  and  striking  the  ayre  with  their 
glaives,  and  in  this  earnest  manner  they  expell  all  foraine, 
and  banish  all  strange  Gods  from  out  their  territorie.  Their 
powers  are  limited  according  to  our  necessitie.  Some  heale 
Horses,  some  cure  men,  some  the  plague,  some  the  scald, 
some  the  cough,  some  one  kinde  of  scab,  and  some  another  : 
Adeo  minimis  etiam  rebus  prava  religio  inserit  Deos :  '  This 
'  corrupt  religion  engageth  and  inserteth  Gods  even  in  the 
4  least  matters ' :  Some  make  grapes  to  growe,  and  some  gar- 
like  ;  Some  have  the  charge  of  bawdrie  and  uncleannesse, 
and  some  of  merchandise  :  To  every  kinde  of  trades-man  a 
God.  Some  one  hath  his  province  and  credit  in  the  East, 
and  some  in  the  West : 

— hie  illius  arma  VIRG.  ALn.  i. 

Hie  currusfuit —  20. 

His  armor  here 

His  chariots  there  appeare. 

0  sancte  Apollo,  qui  umbilicum  cerium  terrarum  obtines.       Cic.  Div.  ii. 

Sacred  Apollo,  who  enfoldest, 

The  earths  set  navell,  and  it  boldest. 

245 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER    OVID.  Fast.    Pallada  Cecropidce,  Minoya  Greta  Dianam, 

XII  iii.  81.  Vulcanum  tellus  Hipsipilcea  colit. 

An  Apologie  lunonem  Sparte,  Pelopeiadesque  Mycena, 

of  Raymond  Pinigerum  Fauni  Mffnalis  ora  caput : 

Sebond  Mars  Latio  venerandus. — 

Besmeared  with  bloud  and  goare. 

Th'  Athenians  Pallas  ;  Minos-Candy  coast 
Diana  ;  Lemnos  Vulcan  honor's  most ; 

Mycene  and  Sparta,  luno  thinke  divine  ; 
The  coast  of  Msenalus  Faune  crown'd  with  pine  ; 
Latium  doth  Mars  adore. 

Some  hath  but  one  borough  or  family  in  his  possession  : 
Some  lodgeth  alone,  and  some  in  company,  either  voluntarily 
or  necessarily. 
Ib.  i.  294.  lunctaque  sunt  magno  templa  nepotis  avo. 

To  the  great  grand-sires  shrine, 
The  nephews  temples  doe  combine. 

Some  there  are  so  seely  and  popular  (for  their  number 
amounteth  to  six  and  thirty  thousand)  that  five  or  six  of 
them  must  be  shufled  up  together  to  produce  an  eare  of 
corne,  and  thereof  they  take  their  severall  names.  Three  to 
a  doore ;  one  to  be  the  boards,  one  to  be  the  hinges,  and  the 
third  to  the  threshold.  Foure  to  a  childe,  as  protectors  of 
his  bandels,  of  his  drinke,  of  his  meat,  and  of  his  sucking. 
Some  are  certaine,  others  uncertaine,  some  doubtfull ;  and 
some  that  come  not  yet  into  paradise. 

IB.  Met  am.  Quos,  quoniam  cceli  nondum  dignamur  honor  e, 

i.  194.  Quas  dedimus  certe  terras,  habitare  sinamus. 

Whom  for  as  yet  with  heav'n  we  have  not  graced,, 
Let  them  on  earth  by  our  good  grant  be  placed. 

There  are  some  Philosophicall,  some  poeticall,  and  some  civill, 
some  of  a  meane  condition,  betweene  divine  and  humane 
nature,  mediators,  and  spokes-men  betweene  us  and  God  : 
worshipped  in  a  kinde  of  second  or  diminutive  order  of 
adoration :  infinite  in  titles  and  offices  :  some  good,  some 
bad  ;  some  old  and  crazed,  and  some  mortall.  For  Chry- 
sippus  thought,  that  in  the  last  conflagration  or  burning  of 
the  world,  all  the  Gods  should  have  an  end,  except  lupiter. 
Man  faineth  a  thousand  pleasant  societies  betweene  God  and 
him.  Nay  is  he  not  his  countrieman  ? 
246 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

— lovis  incunabula  Creten.  OVID.  Met.     CHAPTER 

The  He  of  famous  Creet,  viii-  "'  XII 

For  love  a  cradle  meet.  An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

Behold  the  excuse,  that  Scaevola  chiefe  Bishop,  and  Varro,  Sebond 
a  great  Divine  in  their  dayes,  give  us  upon  the  consideration 
of  this  subject.  It  is  necessary  (say  they)  that  man  be 
altogether  ignorant  of  true  things,  and  beleeve  many  false. 
Quum  veritatem  qua  liberetur,  inquirat :  credatur  ei  expedire, 
quod  fallitur.  'Since  they  seeke  the  truth,  whereby  they 
'  may  be  free,  let  us  beleeve  it  is  expedient  for  them,  to  be 
'  deceived/  Mans  eye  cannot  perceive  things,  but  by  the 
formes  of  his  knowledge.  And  we  remember  not  the  down 
fall  of  miserable  Phaeton,  forsomuch  as  he  undertooke  to 
guide  the  reins  of  his  fathers  steeds,  with  a  mortall  hand. 
Our  minde  doth  still  relapse  into  the  same  depth,  and  by 
her  owne  temeritie  doth  dissipate  and  bruise  it  selfe.  If  you 
enquire  of  Philosophy,  what  matter  the  Sun  is  composed  of? 
What  will  it  answer,  but  of  yron  and  stone,  or  other  stuffe 
for  his  use  ?  Demand  of  Zeno,  what  Nature  is  ?  A  fire  (saith 
he)  an  Artist,  fit  to  engender,  and  proceeding  orderly. 
Archimedes  master  of  this  Science,  and  who  in  truth  and 
certaintie  assumeth  unto  himselfe  a  precedencie  above  all 
others,  saith,  the  Sunne  is  a  God  of  enflamed  yron.  Is  not 
this  a  quaint  imagination,  produced  by  the  inevitable 
necessitie  of  Geometricall  demonstrations  ?  Yet  not  so 
unavoidable  and  beneficiall,  but  Socrates  hath  beene  of 
opinion,  that  it  sufficed  to  know  so  much  of  it  as  that  a 
man  might  measure  out  the  land,  he  either  demised  or  tooke 
to  rent :  and  that  Polyaenus,  who  therein  had  beene  a  famous 
and  principall  Docter,  after  he  had  tasted  the  sweet  fruits  of 
the  lazie,  idle  and  delicious  gardens  of  Epicurus,  did  not 
contemne  them,  as  full  of  falsehood  and  apparent  vanity. 
Socrates  in  Xenophon,  upon  this  point  of  Anaxagoras, 
allowed  and  esteemed  of  antiquitie,  well  seene  and  expert 
above  all  others  in  heavenly  and  divine  matters,  saith,  that 
he  weakened  his  braines  much,  as  all  men  doe,  who  over 
nicely  and  greedily  will  search  out  those  knowledges,  which 
hang  not  for  their  mowing,  nor  pertaine  unto  them.  When 
he  would  needs  have  the  Sunne  to  be  a  burning  stone,  he 
remembered  not,  that  a  stone  doth  not  shine  in  the  fire  ; 

247 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  which  is  more,  that  it  consumes  therein.  And  when  he 
made  the  Sunne  and  fire  to  be  all  one,  he  forgot,  that  fire 
c|oth  not  tan  and  blacke  those  he  looketh  upon  ;  that  wee 
Sebond  nxly  l°°ke  upon  the  fire,  and  that  fire  consumeth  and  killeth 
all  plants  and  hearbs.  According  to  the  advice  of  Socrates 
and  mine,  The  wisest  judging  of  heaven,  is  not  to  judge  of  it 
at  all.  Plato  in  his  Timeus,  being  to  speake  of  Doemons  and 
spirits,  saith,  It  is  an  enterprise  far  exceeding  my  skill  and 
ability  :  we  must  beleeve  what  those  ancient  forefathers 
have  said  of  them,  who  have  said  to  have  beene  engendred 
by  them.  It  is  against  reason  not  to  give  credit  unto  the 
children  of  the  Gods,  although  their  sayings  be  neither 
grounded  upon  necessary,  nor  likely  reasons,  since  they  tell 
us,  that  they  speake  of  familiar  and  houshold  matters.  Let 
us  see,  whether  we  have  a  little  more  insight  in  the  know 
ledge  of  humane  and  naturall  things.  Is  it  not  a  fond 
enterprise,  to  those  unto  which,  by  our  owne  confession,  our 
learning  cannot  possible  attaine,  to  devise  and  forge  them 
another  body,  and  of  our  owne  invention  to  give  them  a  false 
forme  ?  as  is  seene  in  the  planetary  motions,  unto  which 
because  our  minde  cannot  reach,  nor  imagine  their  naturall 
conduct,  we  lend  them  something  of  ours,  that  is  to  say, 
materiall,  grose  and  corporall  springs  and  wards  : 

OVID.  Met,  ii.  —  temo  aureus,  aurea  summa 

IO7-  Curvatura  rotes,  radiorum  argenteus  ordo. 

The  Axe-tree  gold,  the  wheeles  whole  circle  gold, 
The  ranke  of  raies  did  all  of  silver  hold. 

You  would  say,  we  have  had  Coach-makers,  Carpenters,  and 
Painters,  who  have  gone  up  thither,  and  there  have  placed 
engines  with  diverse  motions,  and  ranged  the  wheelings,  the 
windings,  and  enterlacements  of  the  celestiall  bodies  diapred 
in  colours,  according  to  Plato,  about  the  spindle  of  necessity. 

Mundus  domus  ext  maxima  rerum, 
Quam  quinque  altitortce  fragmine  zoncB 
Cingunt,  per  quam  limbus  pictus  bis  sex  signis, 
Stellimicantibus  ,  alms,  in  obliquo  cethere,  Lunce 
Bigas  acceptat. 


248 


The  world,  of  things  the  greatest  habitation, 
Which  live  high-thundring  Zones  by  separation 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Engird,,  through  which  a  scarfe  depainted  faire  CHAPTER 

With  twice  six  signes  star-shining  in  the  aire.  XII 

Obliquely  raisde,  the  waine  An  Apologie 

O'  th'  Moone  doth  entertaine.  of  Raymond 

They  are  all  dreames,  and  mad  follies.  Why  will  not 
nature  one  day  be  pleased  to  open  her  bosome  to  us,  and 
make  us  perfectly  see  the  meanes  and  conduct  of  her 
motions,  and  enable  our  eyes  to  judge  of  them  ?  Oh  good 
God,  what  abuses,  and  what  distractions  should  we  find  in 
our  poore  understanding,  and  weake  knowledge  !  I  am 
deceived,  if  she  hold  one  thing  directly  in  it's  point ;  and  I 
shall  part  hence  more  ignorant  of  all  other  things,  than  mine 
ignorance.  Have  I  not  scene  this  divine  saying  in  Plato, 
that  Nature  is  nothing  but  an  senigmaticall  poesie  ?  As  a 
man  might  say,  an  overshadowed  and  darke  picture,  enter- 
shining  with  an  infinit  varietie  of  false  lights,  to  exercise  our 
conjectures.  Latent  ista  omnia  crassis  occultata  et  drcumfusa  Cic.  Acad.  Q. 
tenebris  ut  nulla  acies  humani  ingenii  tanta  sit,  quce  penetrare  iv- 
in  coelum,  terrain  intrare  possit.  'All  these  things  lye  hid  so 
'  veiled  and  environed  with  misty  darknesse,  as  no  edge  of 
'  man  is  so  piersant,  as  it  can  passe  into  heaven,  or  dive  into 
'  the  earth."  And  truly,  Philosophy  is  nothing  else  but  a 
sophisticated  poesie  :  whence  have  these  ancient  Authors  all 
their  authorities,  but  from  Poets  ?  And  the  first  were  Poets 
themselves,  and  in  their  Art  treated  the  same.  Plato  is  but 
a  loose  Poet.  All  high  and  more  than  humane  Sciences  are 
decked  and  enrobed  with  a  Poeticall  stile.  Even  as  women, 
when  their  naturall  teeth  faile  them,  use  some  of  yvorie,  and 
in  stead  of  a  true  beautie,  or  lively  colour,  lay-on  some  arti- 
ficiall  hew  ;  and  as  they  make  trunk -sleeves  of  wyre  and 
whale-bone  bodies,  backes  of  lathes,  and  stiffe  bumbasted 
verdugals,  and  to  the  open-view  of  all  men  paint  and  em 
bellish  themselves  with  counterfeit  and  borrowed  beauties  ; 
so  doth  learning  (and  our  law  hath,  as  some  say,  certaine 
lawfull  fictions,  on  which  it  groundeth  the  truth  of  justice) 
which  in  liew  of  currant  payment  and  presupposition,  de- 
livereth  us  those  things,  which  she  her  selfe  teacheth  us  to 
be  meere  inventions  :  For,  these  Epicycles,  Excentriques,  and 
Concentriques,  which  Astrology  useth  to  direct  the  state  and 
motions  of  her  Starres,  she  giveth  them  unto  us,  as  the  best 

21  249 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  she  could  ever  invent,  to  fit  and  sute  unto  this  subject :  as 
XU  .  in  all  things  else,  Philosophy  presenteth  unto  us,  not  that 

Af1R^P°10gld  w^ch  i§>  or  s^e  beleeveth,  but  what  she  inventeth,  as  having 
Sebond  most  apparance,  likelyhood,  or  comelinesse.  Plato  upon  the 
discourse  of  our  bodies-estate,  and  of  that  of  beasts  :  That 
what  we  have  said,  is  true,  we  would  be  assured  of  it,  had  we 
but  the  confirmation  of  some  oracle,  to  confirme  it.  This 
only  we  warrant,  that  it  is  the  likeliest  we  could  say.  It  is 
not  to  heaven  alone,  that  she  sendeth  her  cordages,  her 
engines,  and  her  wheeles  :  Let  us  but  somewhat  consider, 
what  she  saith  of  our  selves,  and  of  our  contexture.  There 
is  no  more  retrogradation,  trepidation,  augmentation,  recoyl- 
ing,  and  violence  in  the  Starres  and  celestiall  bodies,  than 
they  have  fained  and  devised  in  this  poore  seely  little  body 
of  man.  Verily  they  have  thence  had  reason  to  name  it 
Microcosmos,  or  little  world,  so  many  severall  parts  and 
visages  have  they  imploied  to  fashion  and  frame  the  same. 
To  accommodate  the  motions  which  they  see  in  man,  the 
divers  functions  and  faculties,  that  we  feel  in  our  selves  ;  Into 
how  many  severall  parts  have  they  divided  our  soule  ?  Into 
how  many  seats  have  they  placed  her  ?  Into  how  many  orders, 
stages,  and  stations  have  they  divided  this  wretched  man, 
beside  the  naturall  and  perceptible  ?  and  to  how  many 
distinct  offices  and  vacation  ?  They  make  a  publike  ima- 
ginarie  thing  of  it.  It  is  a  subject,  which  they  hold  and 
handle  :  they  have  all  power  granted  them,  to  rip  him,  to 
sever  him,  to  range  him,  to  joyne  and  reunite  him  together 
againe,  and  to  stuffe  him,  every  one  according  to  his  fantasie, 
and  yet  they  neither  have  nor  possesse  him.  They  cannot 
so  order  or  rule  him,  not  in  truth  onely,  but  in  imagination, 
but  still  some  cadence  or  sound  is  discovered,  which  escapeth 
their  Architecture,  bad  as  it  is,  and  botcht  together  with  a 
thousand  false  patches,  and  fantasticall  peeces.  And  they 
have  no  reason  to  be  excused  :  For,  to  Painters,  when  they 
pourtray  the  heaven,  the  earth,  the  seas,  the  hills,  the 
scattered  Hands,  we  pardon  them,  if  they  but  represent  us 
with  some  slight  apparence  of  them  ;  and  as  of  things  un- 
knowne  we  are  contented  with  such  fained  shadowes  :  But 
when  they  draw  us,  or  any  other  subject  that  is  familiarly 
knowne  unto  us,  to  the  life,  then  seeke  we  to  draw  from 
250 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

them  a  perfect  and  exact  representation  of  theirs  or  our  CHAPTER 
true  lineaments,  or  colours  ;  and  scorne  if  they  misse  never         XII 
so  little.     I  commend  the  Milesian  wench,  who  seeing  Thales  An  Apologie 
the  Philosopher  continually  amm using  himselfe  in  the  con-  °   se^^Jn 
templation  of  heavens  wide-bounding  vault,  and  ever  holding 
his    eyes  aloft,   laid    something   in    his  way  to    make    him 
stumble,  therby  to  warne  and  put  him  in  rninde,  that  he 
should  not  ammuse  his  thoughts  about  matters  above  the 
clowds,  before  he  had  provided  for,  and  well  considered  those 
at   his   feet.      Verily  she  advised  him  well,  and  it  better 
became  him,  rather  to  looke  to  himselfe  than  to  gaze  on 
heaven  ;  For,  as  Democritus  by  the  mouth  of  Cicero  saith, 

Quod  est  ante  pedes,   nemo  spectat :    coeli  scrutantur      Cic.  Div.  ii. 
plagas. 

No  man  lookes,  what  before  his  feet  doth  lie, 
They  seeke  and  search  the  climates  of  the  skie. 

But  our  condition  beareth,  that  the  knowledge  of  what  we 
touch  with  our  hands,  and  have  amongst  us,  is  as  far  from  us 
and  above  the  clouds,  as  that  of  the  stars  :  As  saith  Socrates 
in  Plato,  That  one  may  justly  say  to  him  who  niedleth  with 
Philosophy,  as  the  woman  said  to  Thales,  which  is,  he  seeth 
nothing  of  that  which  is  before  him.  For,  every  Philosopher 
is  ignorant  of  what  his  neighbour  doth,  yea,  he  knowes  not 
what  himselfe  doth,  and  wots  not  what  both  are,  whether 
beasts  or  men.  These  people  who  thinke  Sebondes  reasons 
to  be  weake  and  lame,  who  know  nothing  themselves,  and 
yet  will  take  upon  them  to  governe  the  world  and  know  all : 

Qua  mare  compescant  causa,  quid  temperet  annum,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Stella  sponte  sua,  jussave  vayentur  et  errent :  xii.  16. 

Quid  pramat  obscurum  Luna,  quid  proferat  orbem, 
Quid  velit  et  possit  rerum  concordia  discors. 

What  cause  doth  calme  the  Sea,  what  cleares  the  yeare, 
Whether  Stars  forc't,  or  of  selfe-will  appeare  : 
What  makes  the  Moones  darke  Orbe  to  wax  or  wane. 
What  friendly  fewd  of  things  both  will  and  can. 

Did  they  never  sound  amid  their  books,  the  difficulties 
that  present  themselves  to  them,  to  know  their  owne  being  ? 
We  see  very  well,  that  our  finger  stirreth,  and  our  foot 
moveth,  that  some  parts  of  our  body,  move  of  themselves 

251 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  without  our  leave,  and  other  some  that  stir  but  at  our 
XI1  .  pleasure  :  and  we  see  that  certaine  apprehensions  engender  a 

APj^P0*0^?  blushing-red  colour,  others  a  palenesse  ;  that  some  imagina- 
Sebond  tiou  doth  only  worke  in  the  milt,  another  in  the  braine  ; 
some  one  enduceth  us  to  laugh,  another  causeth  us  to  weepe  ; 
some  astonisheth  and  stupih'eth  all  our  senses,  and  staieth 
the  motion  of  all  our  limbs  :  at  some  object  the  stomake 
riseth,  and  at  some  other  the  lower  parts.  But  how  a 
spirituall  impression  causeth  or  worketh  such  a  dent  or  flaw 
in  a  massie  and  solid  body  or  subject,  and  the  nature  of  the 
conjoyning,  and  compacting  of  these  admirable  springs  and 

PLIN.  wards,  man  yet  never  knew  :  Omnia  incerta  ratione,  et  in 

naturae  maj estate  abdita.  '  All  uncertaine  in  reason,  and 
'  hid  in  the  majesty  of  nature,'  saith  Plinie.  And  Saint 

AUG.  De  Spir.   Augustine,  Modus,  quo  corporibus  adhcerent  spiritus,  omnino 

et  Anim.  mirus  est,  nee  comprehendi  ab  homine  potest,  et  hoc  ipse  homo 

est.  '  The  meane  is  clearely  wonderfull,  whereby  spirits 
4  cleave  to  our  bodies,  nor  can  it  be  comprehended  by  man, 
'  and  that  is  very  man.1  Yet  is  there  no  doubt  made  of 
him  :  For  mens  opinions  are  received  after  ancient  beliefes, 
by  authority  and  upon  credit ;  as  if  it  were  a  religion  and  a 
law.  What  is  commonly  held  of  it,  is  received  as  a  gibrish 
or  fustian  tongue.  This  trueth  with  all  her  framing  of 
arguments,  and  proporcioning  of  proofes,  is  received  as  a 
firme  and  solid  body,  which  is  no  more  shaken,  which  is  no 
more  judged.  On  the  other  side,  every  one,  the  best  he  can, 
patcheth  up  and  comforteth  this  received  beliefe,  with  all 
the  meanes  his  reason  can  afford  him,  which  is  an  instrument 
very  supple,  pliable,  and  yeelding  to  all  shapes.  Thus  is  the 
world  filled  with  toyes,  and  overwhelmed  in  lies  and  leasings. 
The  reason  that  men  doubt  not  much  of  things,  is  that 
common  impressions  are  never  throughly  tride  and  sifted, 
their  ground  is  not  sounded,  nor  where  the  fault  and  weak- 
nes  lieth  :  Men  only  debate  and  question  of  the  branch,  not 
of  the  tree :  They  aske  not  whether  a  thing  be  true,  but 
whether  it  was  understood  or  meant  thus  and  thus.  They 
enquire  not  whether  Galen  hath  spoken  any  thing  of  worth, 
but  whether  thus,  or  so,  or  otherwise.  Truly  there  was 
some  reason,  this  bridle  or  restraint  of  our  judgements 
liberty,  and  this  tyranny  over  our  beliefes  should  extend  it 
252 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

selfe  even  to  schooles  and  arts.  The  God  of  scholasticall  CHAPTER 
learning,  is  Aristotle  :  It  is  religion  to  debate  of  his  ordi-  XH 
nances,  as  of  those  of  Lycurgus  in  Sparta.  His  doctrine  is  to  An  Apologie 
us  as  a  canon  Law,  which  peradventure  is  as  false  as  another.  ° 
I  know  not  why  I  should  or  might  not,  as  soone,  and  as  easie 
accept,  either  Platoes  Ideas,  or  Epicurus  his  Atonies  and 
indivisible  things,  or  the  fulnesse  and  emptines  of  Leucippus 
and  Democritus,  or  the  water  of  Thales,  or  of  Anaximanders 
infinite  of  nature,  or  the  aire  of  Diogenes,  or  the  numbers  or 
proportion  of  Pythagoras,  or  the  infinite  of  Parmenides,  or 
the  single-one  of  Musaeus,  or  the  water  and  fire  of  Apollo- 
dor  us,  or  the  similarie  and  resembling  parts  of  Anaxagoras, 
or  the  discord  and  concord  of  Empedocles,  or  the  fire  of 
Heraclitus,  or  any  other  opinion  (of  this  infinit  confusion  of 
opinions  and  sentences,  which  this  goodly  humane  reason, 
by  her  certainty  and  cleare-sighted  vigilancie  brings  forth  in 
whatsoever  it  medleth  withal)  as  I  should  of  Aristotles  con 
ceit,  touching  this  subject  of  the  principles  of  naturall 
things  ;  which  he  frameth  of  three  parts,  that  is  to  say, 
Matter,  Forme,  and  Privation.  And  what  greater  vanitie 
can  there  be,  than  to  make  inanitie  it  selfe  the  cause  of  the 
production  of  things  ?  Privation  is  a  negative  :  With  what 
humour  could  he  make  it  the  cause  and  beginning  of  things 
that  are  ?  Yet  durst  no  man  move  that  but  for  an  exercise 
of  Logike  :  Wherein  nothing  is  disputed  to  put  it  in  doubt, 
but  to  defend  the  Author  of  the  Schoole  from  strange 
objections  :  His  authoritie  is  the  marke,  beyond  which  it  is 
not  lawfull  to  enquire.  It  is  easie  to  frame  what  one  list 
upon  allowed  foundations  :  For,  according  to  the  law  and 
ordinance  of  this  positive  beginning,  the  other  parts  of  the 
frame  are  easily  directed  without  crack  or  danger.  By  which 
way  we  finde  our  reason  well  grounded,  and  we  discourse 
without  rub  or  let  in  the  way  :  For  our  masters  preoccupate 
and  gaine  afore-hand  as  much  place  in  our  beleefe,  as  they 
need  to  conclude  afterward  what  they  please,  as  Geometri 
cians  doe  by  their  graunted  questions  :  The  consent  and 
approbation  which  we  lend  them,  giving  them  wherewith 
to  draw  us,  either  on  the  right  or  left  hand,  and  at  their 
pleasure  to  winde  and  turne  us.  Whosoever  is  beleeved  in 
his  presuppositions,  he  is  our  master,  and  our  God  :  He  will 

253 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  lay  the  plot  of  his  foundations  so  ample  and  easie,  that,  if 

XII          he  list,  he  will  carrie  us  up,  even  unto  the  clouds.     In  this 

An  Apologie  practice  or  negotiation  of  learning,  we  have  taken  the  saying 

Seboiid       °f  Pythagoras  for  currant  payment ;    which  is,  that  every 

expert  man  ought  to  be  beleeved  in  his  owne  trade.     The 

Logitian  referreth  himselfe  to  the  Grammarian  for  the  sis;- 

O  O 

nitication  of  words :  The  Rethoritian  borroweth  the  places 
of  arguments  from  the  Logitian :  The  Poet  his  measures 
from  the  Musitian  :  The  Geometrician  his  proportions  from 
the  Arithmetician  :  The  Metaphisikes  take  the  conjectures 
of  the  Physikes,  for  a  ground.  For,  every  art  hath  her 
presupposed  principles,  by  which  mans  judgement  is  bridled 
on  all  parts.  If  you  come  to  the  shocke  or  front  of  this 
barre,  in  which  consists  the  principall  error,  they  immediatly 
pronounce  this  sentence  ;  That  there  is  no  disputing  against 
such  as  deny  principles.  There  can  be  no  principles  in  men, 
except  divinitie  hath  revealed  them  unto  them  :  All  the  rest, 
both  beginning,  middle,  and  end,  is  but  a  dreame  and  a 
vapor.  Those  that  argue  by  presupposition,  we  must  pre 
suppose  against  them,  the  very  same  axiome,  which  is 
disputed  of.  For,  each  humane  presupposition,  and  every 
invention,  unlesse  reason  make  a  difference  of  it,  hath  as 
much  authoritie  as  another.  So  must  they  all  be  equally 
balanced,  and  first  the  generall  and  those  that  tyrannize  us. 
A  perswasion  of  certaintie  is  a  manifest  testimonie  of  foolish- 
nesse,  and  of  extreme  uncertaintie.  And  no  people  are  lesse 
Philosophers  and  more  foolish,  than  Platoes  Philodoxes,  or 
lovers  of  their  owne  opinions.  We  must  know  whether  fire 
be  hot,  whether  snow  be  white,  whether  in  our  knowledge 
there  be  any  thing  hard  or  soft.  And  touching  the  answeres, 
whereof  they  tell  old  tales,  as  to  him  who  made  a  doubt  of 
heat,  to  whom  one  replied,  that  to  trie  he  should  cast  him 
selfe  into  the  fire  ;  to  him  that  denied  the  yce  to  be  cold, 
that  he  should  put  some  in  his  bosome  ;  they  are  most 
unworthy  the  profession  of  a  Philosopher.  If  they  had  left 
us  in  our  owne  naturall  estate,  admitting  of  strange  appar- 
ences,  as  they  present  themselves  unto  us  by  our  senses,  and 
had  suffred  us  to  follow  our  naturall  appetites,  directed  by 
the  condition  of  our  birth,  they  should  then  have  reason  to 
speake  so.  But  from  them  it  is,  that  we  have  learn't  to 
254 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

become  Judges  of  the  world  ;  it  is  from  them  we  hold  this  CHAPTER 
conceit,  that  mans  reason  is  the  generall  controuler  of  all 
that  is,  both  without  and  within  h eavens- vault ;  which 
imbraceth  all,  and  can  doe  all,  by  meanes  wherof,  all  things  Sebond 
are  knowne  and  discerned.  This  answer  were  good  among 
the  Canibals,  who  without  any  of  Aristotles  precepts,  or  so 
much  as  knowing  the  name  of  naturall  Philosophy,  enjoy 
most  happily,  a  long,  a  quiet,  and  a  peaceable  life.  This 
answer  might  haply  availe  more,  and  be  of  more  force,  than 
all  those  they  can  borrow  from  their  reason  and  invention. 
All  living  creatures,  yea,  beasts  and  all,  where  the  com- 
mandement  of  the  naturall  law  is  yet  pure  and  simple, 
might  with  us  be  capable  of  this  answer  ;  but  they  have 
renounced  it.  They  shall  not  need  to  tell  me,  it  is  true,  for 
you  both  heare  and  see,  that  it  is  so :  They  must  tell  me, 
if  what  I  thinke  I  feel,  I  feel  the  same  in  effect ;  and  if  I 
feel  it,  then  let  them  tell  me,  wherefore  I  feel  it,  and  how 
and  what :  Let  them  tell  me  the  name,  the  beginning,  the 
tennons,  and  the  abuttings  of  heat  and  of  cold,  with  the 
qualities  of  him  that  is  agent,  or  of  the  patient ;  or  let  them 
quit  me  their  profession,  which  is  neither  to  admit,  nor 
approve  any  thing,  but  by  the  way  of  reason  :  It  is  their 
touchstone,  to  trie  all  kindes  of  Essayes.  But  surely  it  is  a 
touchstone  full  of  falsehood,  errors,  imperfection  and  weak- 
nesse  :  which  way  can  we  better  make  triall  of  it,  than  by  it 
selfe  ?  If  she  may  not  be  credited  speaking  of  her  selfe, 
hardly  can  she  be  fit  to  judge  of  strange  matters  :  If  she 
know  any  thing,  it  can  be  but  her  being  and  domicile.  She 
is  in  the  soule,  and  either  a  part  or  effect  of  the  same.  For, 
the  true  and  essentiall  reason  (whose  name  we  steal  by  false 
signes)  lodgeth  in  Gods  bosome  :  There  is  her  home,  and 
there  is  her  retreat,  thence  she  takes  her  flight,  when  Gods 
pleasure  is  that  we  shall  see  some  glimps  of  it :  Even  as 
Pallas  issued  out  of  her  fathers  head,  to  communicate  and 
empart  her  selfe  unto  the  world.  Now  let  us  see  what  mans 
reason  hath  taught  us  of  her  selfe  and  of  the  soule  :  Not 
of  the  soule  in  generall,  whereof  well  nigh  all  Philosophy 
maketh  both  the  celestiall  and  first  bodies  partakers  ;  nor 
of  that  which  Thales  attributed  even  unto  things,  that  are 
reputed  without  soule  or  life,  drawne  thereunto  by  the  con- 

255 


CHAPTER 
XII 

An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

Sebond 

LUCR.  i.  113. 


VIRG.  ALn.  ix. 
349- 


Ib.  vi.  730. 


LUCR.  iii.  100. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

sideration  of  the  Adamant  stone  :  But  of  that  which  apper- 
taineth  to  us,  and  which  we  should  know  best. 

Ignoratur  enim  qute  sit  natura  animai, 
Nata  sit,  an  contra  nascentibus  insinuetur, 
Et  simul  intereat  nobiscum  morte  dirempta, 
An  tenebras  orci  visat,  vastasque  lacunas, 
An  pecudes  alias  divinitus  insinuet  se. 

What  the  soules  nature  is,  we  doe  not  know  ; 
If  it  be  bred,  or  put  in  those  are  bred, 
Whether  by  death  divorst  with  us  it  goe, 
Or  see  the  darke  vast  lakes  of  hell  below, 
Or  into  other  creatures  turne  the  head. 

To  Crates  and  Dicaearchus  it  seemed  that  there  was  none 
at  all;  but  that  the  body  stirred  thus  with  and  by  a  naturall 
motion  :  To  Plato,  that  it  was  a  substance  moving  of  it  selfe : 
To  Thales,  a  Nature  without  rest ;  To  Asclepiades,  an  exer- 
citation  of  the  senses  :  To  Hesiodus  and  Anaximander,  a 
thing  composed  of  earth  and  water :  To  Parmenides,  of 
earth  and  fire  :  To  Empedoeles,  of  bloud  : 

Sanguineam  vomit  ille  animam — 

His  soule  of  purple-bloud  he  vomits  out. 

To  Possidonius,  Cleanthes,  and  Galen,  a  heat,  or  hot  com 
plexion  : 

Igneus  est  ollis  vigor,  et  ccelestis  origo : 

A  firy  vigor  and  celestiall  spring-, 

In  their  originall  they  strangely  bring. 

To  Hyppocrates,  a  spirit  dispersed  thorow  the  body  :  To 
Varro,  an  aire  received  in  at  the  mouth,  heated  in  the  lungs, 
tempered  in  the  heart,  and  dispersed  thorow  all  parts  of  the 
body  :  To  Zeno,  the  quintessence  of  the  foure  Elements  :  To 
Heraclides  Ponticus,  the  light :  To  Xenocrates,  and  to  the 
Egyptians,  a  moving  number  :  To  the  Chaldeans,  a  vertue 
without  any  determinate  forme. 

— Habitum  quendam  vitalem  corporis  esse, 

Harmoniam  Greed  quam  dicunt — 

There  of  the  body  is  a  vitall  frame, 

The  which  the  Greeks  a  harmony  doe  name. 

And  not  forgetting  Aristotle,  that  which  naturally  causeth 
the  body  to  move,  who  calleth  it  Entelechy,  or  perfection 
256 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

moving  of  it  selfe  (as  cold  an  invention  as  any  other)  for  he  CHAPTER 

neither  speaketh  of  the  essence,  nor  of  the  beginning,  nor  of         XII 

the  soules  nature :  but  onely  noteth  the  effects  of  it :  Lac-  An  Apologie 

tantius,  Seneca,  and  the  better  part  amongst  the  Dogmatists,  °   g^bo™^1 

have  confessed,  they  never  understood  what    it    was :    And 

after  all  this  rable  of  opinions :  Harum  sententiarum  quce  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 

vera  sit,  Deus  aliquis  viderit.      '  Which  of  these  opinions  is  i> 

4  true,  let  some  God  looke  unto  it,1  (saith  Cicero).      I  know 

by  my  selfe  (quoth  Saint  Bernard)  how  God  is  incompre-  SAINT  BER- 

hensible,  since  I  am  not  able   to  comprehend  the  parts  of NARD- 

mine  owne  being  :  Heraclitus,  who  held  that  every  place  was 

full  of  Soules  and  Daemons,  maintained  neverthelesse,  that  a 

man  could  never  goe  so  far  towards  the  knowledge  of  the 

soule,  as  that  he  could  come  unto  it ;  so  deep  and  mysterious 

was  her  essence.      There  is  no  lesse  dissention  nor  disputing 

about  the  place,  where  she  should  be  seated.     Hypocrates 

and    Herophilus   place  it  in  the   ventricle  of  the   braine  : 

Democritus  and  Aristotle,  through  all  the  body : 

Ut  bona  s&pe  valetudo  cum  dicitur  esse  LUCR.  iii.  103. 

Corporis,  et  non  est  tamen  hcec  pars  ulla  valentis. 

As  health  is  of  the  body  said  to  be, 
Yet  is  no  part  of  him,  in  health  we  see. 

Epicurus  in  the  stomacke. 

H(BC  exulted  enim  pavor  ac  metus,  hcec  loca  circum  142. 

Lcetitice  mulcent — 

For  in  these  places  feare  doth  domineers, 

And  neere  these  places  joy  keepes  merry  cheere. 

The  Stoickes,  within  and  about  the  heart :  Erasistratus, 
joyning  the  membrane  of  the  Epicranium  :  Empedocles,  in 
the  bloud  :  as  also  Moses,  which  was  the  cause  he  forbad 
the  eating  of  beasts  bloud,  unto  which  their  soule  is  com 
mixed  :  Galen  thought  that  every  part  of  the  body  had  his 
soule  :  Strato  hath  placed  it  betweene  the  two  upper  eye-lids  : 
Qua  facie  qnidem  sit  animus  aut  ubi  habitet,  nee  qucerendum  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
quidem  est.  '  We  must  not  so  much  as  enquire,  what  face  *• 
4  the  minde  beares,  or  where  it  dwels':  saith  Cicero.  I  am 
well  pleased  to  let  this  man  use  his  owne  words :  For,  why 
should  I  alter  the  speech  of  eloquence  it  selfe  ?  since  there  is 
small  gaine  in  stealing  matter  from  his  inventions  :  They 

2  K  257  * 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  are  both  little  used,  not  very  forcible,  and  little  unknowne. 


But  the  reason  why  Chrysippus,  and  those  of  his  Sect,  will 
An  Apologie  prove  tne  soule  to  be  about  the  heart,  is  not  to  be  forgotten. 
}  "  ^  ™>  (sa-ith  he)  because  when  we  will  affirme  or  sweare  any 

thing  we  lay  our  hand  upon  the  stomacke  ;  And  when  we  will 
pronounce,  €70),  which  signifieth,  my  selfe,  we  put  downe 
our  chin  toward  the  stomacke.  This  passage  ought  not  to 
be  past-over  without  noting  the  vanity  of  so  great  a  person 
age  :  For,  besides  that  his  considerations  are  of  themselves 
very  slight,  the  latter  proveth  but  to  the  Grsecians,  that  they 
have  their  soule  in  that  place.  No  humane  judgement  is  so 
vigilant  or  Argos-eied,  but  sometimes  shal  fall  a  sleep  or 
slumber.  What  shal  we  feare  to  say  ?  Behold  the  Stoickes, 
fathers  of  humane  wisdome,  who  devise  that  the  soule  of  man, 
overwhelmed  with  any  ruine,  laboureth  and  panteth  a  long 
time  to  get  out,  unable  to  free  her  selfe  from  that  charge, 
even  as  a  Mouse  taken  in  a  trap.  Some  are  of  opinion,  that 
the  world  was  made,  to  give  a  body  in  lieu  of  punishment, 
unto  the  spirits,  which  through  their  fault  were  fallen  from 
the  puritie,  wherin  they  were  created  :  The  first  creation 
having  beene  incorporeall.  And  that  according  as  they  have 
more  or  lesse  removed  themselves  from  their  spirituality,  so 
are  they  more  or  lesse  merily  and  Giovially,  or  rudely  and 
Saturnally  incorporated  :  Whence  proceedeth  the  infinite 
variety  of  so  much  matter  created.  But  the  spirit,  who 
for  his  chastizement  was  invested  with  the  body  of  the 
Sun,  must  of  necessitie  have  a  very  rare  and  particular 
measure  of  alteration.  The  extremities  of  our  curious  search 
turne  to  a  glimmering  and  all  to  a  dazeling.  As  Plutarke 
saith,  of  the  off-spring  of  Histories,  that  after  the  manner  of 
Cards  or  Maps,  the  utmost  limits  of  knowne  Countries,  are 
set  downe  to  be  full  of  thicke  marrish  grounds,  shady  forrests, 
desart  and  uncouth  places.  See  here  wherefore  the  grosest 
and  most  Childish  dotings,  are  more  commonly  found  in 
these  which  treat  of  highest  and  furthest  matters  ;  even  con 
founding  and  overwhelming  themselves  in  their  owne  curio- 
sitie  and  presumption.  The  end  and  beginning  of  learning 
are  equally  accompted  foolish.  Marke  but  how  Plato  taketh 
and  raiseth  his  flight  aloft  in  his  Poeticall  clouds,  or  cloudy 
Poesies.  Behold  and  read  in  him  the  gibbrish  of  the  Gods, 
258 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

But  what  dream'd  or  doted  he  on,  when  he  defined  man  to  CHAPTER 
be  a  creature  with  two  feet,  and  without  feathers;  giving  them 
that  were  disposed  to  mocke  at  him,  a  pleasant  and  scopefull 
occasion  to  doe  it  ?  For,  having  plucked-off  the  feathers  of 
a  live  capon,  they  named  him  the  man  of  Plato.  And  by 
what  simplicitie  did  the  Epicureans  first  imagine,  that  the 
Atonies  or  Motes,  which  they  termed  to  be  bodies,  having 
some  weight  and  a  naturall  moving  downeward,  had  framed 
the  world ;  untill  such  time  as  they  were  advised  by  their 
adversaries,  that  by  this  description,  it  was  not  possible,  they 
should  joyne  and  take  hold  one  of  another  ;  their  fall  being 
so  downe-right  and  perpendicular,  and  every  way  engendring 
Parallel  lines  ?  And  therefore  was  it  necessarie,  they  should 
afterward  adde  a  casuall  moving,  sideling  unto  them  :  And 
moreover  to  give  their  Atonies  crooked  and  forked  tailes, 
that  so  they  might  take  hold  of  any  thing  and  claspe  them 
selves.  And  even  then,  those  that  pursue  them  with  this 
other  consideration,  doe  they  not  much  trouble  them  ?  If 
Atonies  have  by  chance  formed  so  many  sorts  of  figures,  why 
did  they  never  meet  together  to  frame  a  house,  or  make 
a  shooe  ?  Why  should  we  not  likewise  beleeve  that  an  infinit 
number  of  Greek  Letters  confusedly  scattred  in  some  open 
place,  might  one  day  meet  and  joyne  together  to  the  con 
texture  of  th1  Iliads  ?  That  which  is  capable  of  reason  (saith 
Zeno)  is  better  than  that  which  is  not.  There  is  nothing 
better  than  the  world  :  then  the  world  is  capable  of  reason. 
By  the  same  arguing  Cotta  maketh  the  world  a  Mathema 
tician,  and  by  this  other  arguing  of  Zeno,  he  makes  him 
a  Musitian,  and  an  Organist.  The  whole  is  more  than  the 
part :  We  are  capable  of  wisdome,  and  we  are  part  of  the 
world :  Then  the  world  is  wise.  There  are  infinit  like 
examples  scene,  not  only  of  false,  but  foolish  arguments, 
which  cannot  hold,  and  which  accuse  their  authors  not  so 
much  of  ignorance,  as  of  folly,  in  the  reproches  that  Philo 
sophers  charge  one  another  with,  about  the  disagreeings  in 
their  opinions  and  Sects.  He  that  should  fardle-up  a  bundle 
or  huddle  of  the  fooleries  of  mans  wisdome,  might  recount 
wonders.  I  willingly  assemble  some  (as  a  shew  or  patterne) 
by  some  meanes  or  byase,  no  lesse  profitable  than  the  most 
moderate  instructions.  Let  us  by  that  judge,  what  we  are 

259 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  esteeme  of  man,  of  his  sense,  and  of  his  reason;  since  in 
XII  these  great  men,  and  who  have  raised  mans  sufficiencie  so 

An  Apologie  nigh5  there  are  found  so  grose  errors,  and  so  apparant  defects. 

}  '11  ^s  ^or  me>  ^  wou^  rather  beleeve,  that  they  have  thus 
casually  treated  learning,  even  as  a  sporting  childs  baby,  and 
have  sported  themselves  with  reason,  as  of  a  vaine  and 
frivolous  instrument,  setting  forth  all  sorts  of  inventions, 
devices,  and  fantasies,  sometimes  more  outstretched,  and 
sometimes  more  loose.  The  same  Plato,  who  defineth  man 
like  unto  a  Capon,  saith  elsewhere  after  Socrates,  that  in 
good  sooth,  he  knoweth  not  what  man  is ;  and  that  of  all 
parts  of  the  world,  there  is  none  so  hard  to  be  knowne.  By 
this  varietie  of  conceits  and  instabilitie  of  opinions,  they  (as 
it  were)  leade  us  closely  by  the  hand  to  this  resolution  of 
their  irresolution.  They  make  a  profession  not  alwayes  to 
present  their  advice  manifest  and  unmasked :  they  have  oft 
concealed  the  same  under  the  fabulous  shadows  of  Poesie, 
and  sometimes  under  other  .vizards.  For,  our  imperfection 
admitteth  this  also,  that  raw  meats  are  not  alwayes  good  for 
our  stomacks  :  but  they  must  be  dried,  altred  and  corrupted, 
and  so  doe  they,  who  sometimes  shadow  their  simple  opinions 
and  j  udgements  ;  And  that  they  may  the  better  sute  them 
selves  unto  common  use,  they  many  times  falsifie  them. 
They  will  not  make  open  profession  of  ignorance,  and  of  the 
imbecillitie  of  mans  reason,  because  they  will  not  make 
children  afraid  :  But  they  manifestly  declare  the  same  unto 
us  under  the  shew  of  a  troubled  Science  and  unconstant 
learning.  I  perswade  somebody  in  Italy,  who  laboured  very 
much  to  speake  Italian,  that  alwayes  provided,  he  desired  but 
to  be  understood,  and  not  to  seek  to  excell  others  therein, 
he  should  onely  imploy  and  use  such  words  as  came  first  to 
his  mouth,  whether  they  were  Latine,  French,  Spanish,  or 
Gascoine,  and  that  adding  the  Italian  terminations  unto 
them,  he  should  never  misse  to  fall  upon  some  idiome  of  the 
Countrie,  either  Tuscan,  Roman,  Venetian,  Piemontoise,  or 
Neapolitan  ;  and  amongst  so  many  severall  formes  of  speech 
to  take  hold  of  one.  The  very  same  I  say  of  Philosophy. 
She  hath  so  many  faces,  and  so  much  varietie,  and  hath  said 
so  much,  that  all  our  dreames  and  devises  are  found  in  her. 
The  fantasie  of  man  can  conceive  or  imagine  nothing,  be  it 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

good  or  evill,  that  is  not  to  be  found  in  her:   Nihil  tarn  CHAPTER 
absurde  did  potest,  quod  non  dicatur  ab  aliquo  Philosophorum.          XII 
'  Nothing  may  be  spoken  so  absurdly,  but  that  it  is  spoken  by  An  Apologie 
4  some  of  the  Philosophers/     And  therefore  doe  I  suffer  my       a2Si 

humours  or  caprices  more  freely  to  passe  in  publike ;  For-  „ 

i         .1  i  •  .?         i     pr  i     -^i     Cic.jDtv.u. 

asmuch  as  though  they  are  borne  with,  and  of  me,  and  with 
out  any  patterne ;  well  I  wot,  they  will  be  found  to  have 
relation  to  some  ancient  humour,  and  some  shall  be  found, 
that  will  both  know  and  tell  whence,  and  of  whom  I  have 
borrowed  them.  My  customes  are  naturall;  when  I  contrived 
them,  I  called  not  for  the  help  of  any  discipline:  And  weake 
and  faint  as  they  were,  when  I  have  had  a  desire  to  expresse 
them,  and  to  make  them  appeare  to  the  world  a  little  more 
comely  and  decent,  I  have  somewhat  indevoured  to  aide 
them  with  discourse,  and  assist  them  with  examples.  I  have 
wondred  at  my  selfe,  that  by  meere  chance  I  have  met  with 
them,  agreeing  and  sutable  to  so  many  ancient  examples  and 
Philosophicall  discourses.  What  regiment  my  life  was  of,  I 
never  knew  nor  learned  but  after  it  was  much  worne  and  spent. 
A  new  figure  :  An  unpremeditated  Philosopher  and  a  casuall. 
But  to  returne  unto  our  soule,  where  Plato  hath  seated  reason 
in  the  braine  ;  anger  in  the  heart ;  lust  in  the  liver  ;  it  is 
very  likely,  that  it  was  rather  an  interpretation  of  the  soules 
motions,  than  any  division  or  separation  he  meant  to  make 
of  it,  as  of  a  body  into  many  members.  And  the  likeliest 
of  their  opinion  is,  that  it  is  alwayes  a  soule,  which  by  her 
rationall  faculty,  remembreth  her  selfe,  comprehendeth, 
judgeth,  desireth,  and  exerciseth  all  her  other  functions, 
by  divers  instruments  of  the  body,  as  the  Pilote  ruleth 
and  directeth  his  ship  according  to  the  experience  he  hath 
of  it;  now  stretching,  haling,  or  loosing  a  cable,  some 
times  hoysing  the  Main-yard,  removing  an  Oare,  or  stirring 
the  Rudder,  causing  severall  effects  with  one  only  power : 
And  that  she  abideth  in  the  braine,  appeareth  by  this,  that 
the  hurts  and  accidents,  which  touch  that  part,  doe  presently 
offend  the  faculties  of  the  soule,  whence  she  may  without 
inconvenience  descend  and  glide  through  other  parts  of  the 

body: 

CLAUD,  vi. 

— medium  non  deserit  unquam  Hon.  Cons. 

Cali  Phcebus  iter:  radiis  tamen  omnia  lustrat.  Pan.  411. 

261 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Never  the  Sunne  forsakes  heav'ns  middle  waves, 

XII  Yet  with  his  rayes  he  light's  all,  all  survayes  : 

^Raymond  ™  the  Sunne  spreadeth   his  light,  and  infuseth  his  power 
Sebond      from  heaven,  and  therewith  filleth  the  whole  world. 

LUCR.  iii.  144.  Cfet era  pars  animcK  per  totum  dissita  corpus 

Paret,  et  ad  numen  mentis  nomenque  movetur. 

Th'  other  part  of  the  soule  through  all  the  body  sent 
Obeyes,  and  moved  is,  by  the  mindes  government. 

Some  have  said,  that  there  was  a  generall  soule,  like  unto 
a  great  body,  from  which  all  particular  soules  were  extracted, 
and  returned  thither,  alwayes  reconjoyning  and  entermingling 
themselves  unto  that  Universall  matter : 

VIRG.  Georg.  — Deum  namque  ire  per  omnes 

iv.  Ge.  222.  Terrasque  tractusque  maris  ccelumque  profundum : 

Hinc  pecudes ;  armenta,  viros,  genus  omneferarum, 
Quemque  sibi  tenues  nascentem  arcesxere  vitas, 
Scilicet  hue  reddi  deinde,  ac  resoluta  referri 
Omnia :  nee  morti  esse  locum — 
For  God  through  all  the  earth  to  passe  is  found, 
Through  all  Sea  currents,  through  the  heav'n  profound, 
Here  hence  men,  heards,  and  all  wilde  beasts  that  are, 
Short  life  in  birth  each  to  themselves  doe  share. 
All  things  resolved  to  this  point  restor'd 
Returne,  nor  any  place  to  death  affoord  : 

others,  that  they  did  but  reconjoyne  and  fasten  themselves 
to  it  againe :  others,  that  they  were  produced  by  the  divine 
substance  :  others,  by  the  Angels,  of  fire  and  aire :  some 
from  the  beginning  of  the  world  ;  and  some,  even  at  the  time 
of  need  :  others,  make  them  to  descend  from  the  round  of 
the  Moone,  and  that  they  returne  to  it  againe.  The  common 
sort  of  antiquitie,  that  they  are  begotten  from  Father  to 
Sonne,  after  the  same  manner  and  production,  that  all  other 
naturall  things  are ;  arguing  so  by  the  resemblances,  which 
are  betweene  Fathers  and  Children. 

HOR.  Car.  iv.  Instillat  a  patris  virtus  tibi, — 

od-  iv-  29-  Thy  Fathers  vertues  be 

Instilled  into  thee. 

Fortes  creantur  fortibus  et  bonis, 

Of  valiant  Sires  and  good, 
There  comes  a  valiant  brood  ; 
262 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

and    that  from  fathers  we  see  descend   unto  children,  not  CHAPTER 
only  the  marks  of  their  bodies,  but  also  a  resemblance  of         XI1 

humours,  of  complexions,  and  inclinations  of  the  soule.  An  Apologie 

of  Raymond 

Denique  cur  acrum  violentia  triste  Leonum  Sebond 

Seminium  sequitur,  dolus  Vulpibus,  etfuga  Germs  LUCR.  iii.  766. 

A  patribus  datur,  et  patrius  pavor  incited  Artus  771. 

Si  non  certa  suo  quia  semine  seminioque 
Vis  animi  pariter  crescit  cum  corpore  toto  ? 

Why  followes  violence  the  savage  Lyons  race  ? 
Why  craft  the  Foxes  ?     Why  to  Deere  to  flye  apace  ? 
By  parents  is  it  given,  when  parents  feare  incites, 
Unlesse  because  a  certaine  force  of  inward  spirits 
With  all  the  body  growes, 
As  seed  and  seed-spring  goes  ? 

That  divine  justice  is  grounded  thereupon,  punishing  the 
fathers  offences  upon  the  children  ;  forsomuch  as  the  conta 
gion  of  the  fathers  vices,  is  in  some  sort  printed,  in  childrens 
soules,  and  that  the  misgovernment  of  their  will  toucheth 
them.  Moreover,  that  if  the  soules  came  from  any  other 
place,  then  by  a  naturall  consequence,  and  that  out  of  the 
body  they  should  have  beene  some  other  thing,  they  should 
have  some  remembrance  of  their  first  being  :  Considering  the 
naturall  faculties,  which  are  proper  unto  him,  to  discourse, 
to  reason,  and  to  remember. 


i  in  corpus  nascentibus  insinuatur, 
Cur  super  ante  actam  cetatem  meminisse  nequimus, 
Nee  vestigia  gestarum  rerum  ulla  tenemus  ? 

If  our  soule  at  our  birth  be  in  our  body  cast, 

Why  can  we  not  remember  ages  over-past, 

Nor  any  markes  retaine  of  things  done  first  or  last  ? 

For,  to  make  our  soules-condition,  to  be  of  that  worth  we 
would,  they  must  all  be  presupposed  wise,  even  when  they 
are  in  their  naturall  simplicitie  and  genuine  puritie.  So 
should  they  have  beene  such,  being  freed  from  the  corporall 
prison,  aswell  before  they  entred  the  same,  as  we  hope  they 
shall  be,  when  they  shall  be  out  of  it.  And  it  were  neces- 
sarie  they  should  (being  yet  in  the  body)  remember  the  said 
knowledge  (as  Plato  said)  that  what  we  learn't,  was  but  a 
new  remembring  of  that  which  we  had  knowne  before  :  A 
thing  that  any  man  may  by  experience  maintaine  to  be 

263 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  false  and  erronious.  First,  because  we  doe  not  precisely 
remember  what  we  are  taught,  and  that  if  memorie  did 

of  IU  momi  meerety  execute  her  function,  she  would  at  least  suggest  us 
Sebond11  w^h  something  besides  our  learning.  Secondly,  what  she 
knew  being  in  her  puritie,  was  a  true  understanding,  know 
ing  things  as  they  are,  by  her  divine  intelligence :  Whereas 
here,  if  she  be  instructed,  she  is  made  to  receive  lies  and 
apprehend  vice,  wherein  she  cannot  imploy  her  memorie ; 
this  image  and  conception,  having  never  had  place  in  her. 
To  say,  that  the  corporall  prison,  doth  so  suppresse  her 
naturall  faculties,  that  they  are  altogether  extinct  in  her  : 
first,  is  cleane  contrarie  to  this  other  beleefe,  to  knowledge 
her  forces  so  great,  and  the  operations  which  men  in  this 
transitorie  life  feel  of  it,  so  wonderfull,  as  to  have  thereby 
concluded  this  divinitie,  and  fore-past  eternitie,  and  the 
immortalitie  to  come : 

LUCR.  iii.  695.  Nam  si  tantopere  est  animi  mutata  potestas, 

Omnis  ut  actarum  exciderit  retinentia  rerum, 
Non  ut  opinor  ea  ab  letho  jam  longior  errat. 

If  of  our  minde  the  power  be  so  much  altered, 
As  of  things  done  all  hold,,  all  memorie  is  fled, 
Then  (as  I  ghesse)  it  is  not  far  from  being  dead. 

Moreover,  it  is  here  with  us,  and  no  where  else,  that  the 
soules  powers  and  effects,  are  to  be  considered  ;  all  the  rest 
of  her  perfections,  are  vaine  and  unprofitable  unto  her  :  it  is 
by  her  present  condition,  that  all  her  immortalitie  must  be 
rewarded  and  paid,  and  she  is  only  accomptable  for  the  life 
of  man  :  It  were  injustice  to  have  abridged  her  of  her  meanes 
and  faculties,  and  to  have  disarmed  her  against  the  time  of 
her  captivitie  and  prison,  of  her  weaknesse  and  sicknesse,  of 
the  time  and  season  where  she  had  beene  forced  and  com 
pelled  to  draw  the  judgement  and  condemnation  of  infinite 
and  endlesse  continuance,  and  to  relye  upon  the  considera 
tion  of  so  short  a  time,  which  is  peradventure  of  one  or  two 
houres,  or  if  the  worst  happen,  of  an  age,  (which  have  no 
more  proportion  with  infinite,  than  a  moment)  definitively 
to  appoint  and  establish  of  all  her  being,  by  that  instant  of 
space.  It  were  an  impious  disproportion  to  wrest  an  eternall 
reward  in  consequence  of  so  short  a  life.  Plato,  to  save 
himselfe  from  this  inconvenience,  would  have  future  pay- 

264 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

ments  limited   to  a  hundred  yeares  continuance,  relatively  CHAPTER 

unto  a  humane  continuance :  and  many  of  ours  have  given 

them  temporall  limits.    By  this  they  judged,  that  her  genera- 

tion  followed  the  common  condition  of  humane  things :  As       Sebond 

also  her  life,  by  the  opinion  of  Epicurus  and  Democritus, 

which    hath    most   beene   received,   following   these   goodly 

apparences.     That  her  birth  was  seene,  when  the  body  was 

capable  of  her ;  her  vertue  and  strength  was  perceived  as  the 

corporall  encreased  ;  in  her  infancie  might  her  weaknesse  be 

discerned,  and   in    time  her  vigor   and  ripenesse,  then  her 

decay  and  age,  and  in  the  end  her  decrepitude : 

— gigni  pariter  cum  corpore,  et  una  LUCR.  iii.  450. 

Crescere  scutimus,  pariterque  senescere  mentem. 

The  minde  is  with  the  body  bred,  we  doe  behold, 
It  jointly  growes  with  it,  with  it  it  waxeth  old. 

They  perceived  her  to  be  capable  of  diverse  passions,  and 
agitated  by  many  languishing  and  painfull  motions,  where 
through  she  fell  into  wearinesse  and  griefe,  capable  of  altera 
tion  and  change,  of  joy,  stupefaction  and  languishment, 
subject  to  her  infirmities,  diseases,  and  offences,  even  as  the 
stomacke  or  the  foot : 

— mentem  sanari,  corpus  ut  cegrum  Ib.  517. 

Cernimus,  etflecti  medicina  posse  videmus : 

We  see  as  bodies  sicke  are  cur'd,  so  is  the  minde, 

We  see,  how  Physicke  can  it  each  way  turne  and  winde; 

dazled  and  troubled  by  the  force  of  wine  ;  removed  from  her 
seat  by  the  vapors  of  a  burning  feaver ;  drowzie  and  sleepy 
by  the  application  of  some  medicaments,  and  rouzed  up 
againe  by  the  vertue  of  some  others. 

— corpoream  naturam  animi  esse  necesse  est,  Ib.  176. 

Corporeis  quoniam  telis  ictuque  laborat. 

The  nature  of  the  minde  must  needs  corporeall  bee, 
For  with  corporeall  darts  and  strokes  it's  griev'd  we  see. 

She  was  seene  to  dismay  and  confound  all  her  faculties  by 
the  only  biting  of  a  sicke  dog,  and  to  containe  no  great 
constancie  of  discourse,  no  sufficiencie,  no  vertue,  no  philo- 
sophicall  resolution,  no  contention  of  her  forces,  that  might 
2L  265 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  exempt  her  from  the  subjection  of  these  accidents:  The 
spittle  or  slavering  of  a  mastive  dog  shed  upon  Socrates  his 

A^J^P(rmmd  ^an<^s?  ^°  trouble  all  his  wisdome,  to  distemper  his  great  and 
Sebond  regular  imaginations,  and  so  to  vanquish  and  annull  them,  that 
no  signe  or  shew  of  his  former  knowledge  was  left  in  him  : 

LUCR.  iii.  501.  — vis  animal 

Conturbatur,  —  et  divisa  seorsum 

Disiectatur  eodem  illo  distracta  veneno. 

The  soules  force  is  disturbed,  seperated, 
Distraught  by  that  same  poison,  alienated. 

And  the  said  venome  to  finde  no  more  resistance  in  his 
soule,  than  in  that  of  a  childe  of  foure  yeares  old,  a  venome 
able  to  make  all  Philosophy  (were  she  incarnate)  become 
furious  and  mad  :  So  that  Cato,  who  scorned  both  death  and 
fortune,  could  not  abide  the  sight  of  a  looking  glasse,  or  of 
water  ;  overcome  with  horrour,  and  quelled  with  amazement, 
if  by  the  contagion  of  a  mad  dog,  he  had  falne  into  that 
sicknesse,  which  Physitians  call  Hydrophobia,  or  feare  of 
waters. 

Ib.  495.  — vis  morbi  distracta  per  artus 

Turbat  agens  animam,  spumantes  fequore  salso 
Ventorum  ut  validis  fervescunt  viribus  undce. 

The  force  of  the  disease  disperst  through  joints  offends, 
Driving  the  soule,  as  in  salt  Seas  the  wave  ascends, 
Foming  by  furious  force  which  the  wind  raging  lends. 

Now  concerning  this  point,  Philosophy  hath  indeed  armed 
man  for  the  enduring  of  all  other  accidents,  whether  of 
patience,  or  if  it  be  overcostly  to  be  found,  of  an  infallible 
defeat,  in  conveying  her  selfe,  altogether  from  the  sense  :  but 
they  are  meanes,  which  serve  a  soule,  that  is  her  owne,  and 
in  her  proper  force,  capable  of  discourse  and  deliberation  : 
not  to  this  inconvenience,  wherewith  a  Philosopher,  a  soule 
becommeth  the  soule  of  a  foole  troubled,  vanquished  and  lost, 
which  divers  occasions  may  produce,  as  in  an  over- violent 
agitation,  which  by  some  vehement  passion,  the  soule  may 
beget  in  her  selfe  :  or  a  hurt  in  some  part  of  the  body ;  or  an 
exhalation  from  the  stomacke,  casting  us  into  some  astonish 
ment,  dazling,  or  giddinesse  of  the  head  : 

266 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

LUCR.  iii.          — morbia  in  corporis  avius  err  at  CHAPTER 

467-                  Scepe  animus,  dementit  enim,  deliraque  fatur ,  XII 

Interdumque  gravi  Lethargo  fertur  in  altum  An  Apologie 

JEternumque  soporem,  oculis  nutuque  cadenti.  of  Raymond 

Sebond 

The  minde  in  bodies  sicknesse  often  wandring  strayes  : 
For  it  enraged  rave's,  and  idle  talke  outbrayes  : 
Brought  by  sharpe  Lethargy  sometime  to  more  than 

deepe, 
While  eyes  and  eye-lids  fall  into  eternall  sleepe. 

Philosophers  have  in  mine  opinion  but  slightly  harp't 
upon  this  string,  no  more  than  another  of  like  consequence. 
They  have  ever  this  Dilemma  in  their  mouth,  to  comfort  our 
mortall  condition.  '  The  soule  is  either  mortall  or  immortall : 
6  if  mortall,  she  shall  be  without  paine  :  if  immortall,  she 
'  shall  menoV  They  never  touch  the  other  branch  :  What,  if 
she  empaire  and  be  worse  ?  And  leave  the  menaces  of  future 
paines  to  Poets.  But  thereby  they  deal  themselves  a  good 
game.  They  are  two  omissions,  which  in  their  discourses  doe 
often  offer  themselves  unto  me.  I  come  to  the  first  againe  : 
the  soule  loseth  the  use  of  that  Stoicall  chiefe  felicitie,  so 
constant  and  so  firme.  Our  goodly  wisdome  must  necessarily 
in  this  place  yeeld  her  selfe,  and  quit  her  weapons.  As  for 
other  matters,  they  also  considered  by  the  vanitie  of  mans 
reason,  that  the  mixture  and  societie  of  two  so  different 
parts,  as  is  the  mortall  and  the  immortall  is  inimaginable : 

Quippe  etenim  mortale  ceterno  jungere,  et  und  Ib.  831. 

Consentire  putare,  et  fungi  mutua  posse, 

Desipere  est.     Quid  enim  diversius  esse  putandum  est, 

Aut  magis  inter  se  disjunctum  discrepitansque, 

Quam  mortale  quod  est,  immortall  atque  perenni 

lunctum  in  concilio  stevas  tolerare  procellas  ? 

For  what  immortall  is,  mortall  to  joyne  unto, 
And  thinke  they  can  agree,  and  mutuall  duties  doe, 
Is  to  be  foolish  :  For  what  thinke  we  stranger  is. 
More  disagreeable,  or  more  disjoyn'd,  than  this, 
That  mortall  with  immortall  endlesse  joyn'd  in  union, 
Can  most  outragious   stormes  endure  in  their  com 
munion  ? 

Moreover  they  felt  their  soule  to  be  engaged  in  death,  as  well 
as  the  body ; 

267 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


CHAPTER 

X1I 


imulcBvofessafatiscit. 
faint's  in  one, 


LUCR.  iii. 


Cic.  Div.  ii. 


LUCR.  iii.  HI. 


Which  thing  (according  to  Zeno)  the  image  of  sleep  doth 
manifestly  shew  unto  us.  For  he  esteemeth,  that  it  is  a 
fainting  and  declination  of  the  soule,  aswell  as  of  the  body. 
Contrahi  animum,  et  quasi  labi  putat  atque  decidere.  '  He 
'  thinks  the  minde  is  contracted,  and  doth  as  it  were  slide  and 
'  fall  downe.'  And  that  (which  is  perceived  in  some)  it's 
force  and  vigor  maintaineth  it  selfe  even  in  the  end  of  life, 
they  referred  and  imputed  the  same  to  the  diversitie  of 
diseases,  as  men  are  scene  in  that  extremitie,  to  maintaine, 
some  one  sense,  and  some  another,  some  their  hearing,  and 
some  their  smelling,  without  any  alteration  ;  and  there  is  no 
weaknesse  or  decay  seene  so  universall,  but  some  entire  and 
vigorous  parts  will  remaine. 

Non  alio  pacto  quam  si  pes  cum  dolet  eegri, 
In  nullo  caput  interea  sit  forte  dolore. 

No  otherwise,,  than  if,  when  sick-mans  foote  doth  ake, 
Meane  time  perhaps  his  head  no  fellow-feeling  take. 

Our  judgements  sight  referreth  it  selfe  unto  truth,  as  doth 
the  Owles  eyes  unto  the  shining  of  the  Sunne,  as  saith 
Aristotle.  How  should  we  better  convince  him,  than  bv  so 
grosse  blindnesse,  in  so  apparent  a  light  ?  For,  the  con- 
trarie  opinion  of  the  soules  immortalitie,  which  Cicero  saith, 
to  have  first  beene  brought  in  (at  least  by  the  testimonie  of 
books)  by  Pherecydes  Syrius,  in  the  time  of  King  Tullus 
(others  ascribe  the  invention  thereof  to  Thales,  and  other  to 
others)  it  is  the  part  of  humane  knowledge  treated  most 
sparingly  and  with  more  doubt.  The  most  constant  Dog 
matists  (namely  in  this  point)  are  inforced  to  cast  themselves 
under  the  shelter  of  the  Academikes  wings.  No  man  knowes 
what  Aristotle  hath  established  upon  this  subject,  no  more 
than  all  the  ancients  in  Generall,  who  handle  the  same  with 
a  very  wavering  beliefe  :  Rem  gratissimam  promittentium 
magis  quam  probantium.  'Who  rather  promise  than  approve 
4  a  thing  most  acceptable."  He  hath  hidden  himselfe  under 
the  clouds  of  intricat  and  ambiguous  words,  and  unintel- 

268 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

ligible  senses,  and  hath  left  his  Sectaries  as  much  cause  to  CHAPTER 
dispute  upon  his  judgement,  as  upon  the  matter.  Two  things  XI1 
made  this  his  opinion  plausible  to  them  :  the  one,  that  with-  of^^o^d 
out  the  immortality  of  soules,  there  should  no  meanes  be  left  Sebond 
to  ground  or  settle  the  vaine  hopes  of  glory  ;  a  consideration 
of  wonderfull  credit  in  the  world  :  the  other  (as  Plato  saith) 
that  it  is  a  most  profitable  impression,  that  vices,  when  they 
steal  away  from  out  the  sight  and  knowledge  of  humane 
justice,  remaine  ever  as  a  blancke  before  divine  justice,  which 
even  after  the  death  of  the  guilty,  will  severely  pursue  them. 
Man  is  ever  possessed  with  an  extreme  desire  to  prolong  his 
being,  and  hath  to  the  uttermost  of  his  skill  provided  for  it. 
Toombs  and  Monuments  are  for  the  preservation  of  his  body, 
and  glorie  for  the  continuance  of  his  name.  He  hath  im- 
ployed  all  his  wit  to  frame  him  selfe  a  new,  (as  impacient  of 
his  fortune)  and  to  underprop  or  uphold  him  selfe  by  his  in 
ventions.  The  soule  by  reason  of  her  trouble  and  imbecility, 
as  unable  to  subsist  of  her  selfe,  is  ever,  and  in  all  places 
questing  and  searching  comforts,  hopes,  foundations,  and 
forraine  circumstances,  on  which  she  may  take  hold  and 
settle  her  selfe.  And  how  light  and  fantasticall  soever  his 
invention  doth  frame  them  unto  him,  he  notwithstanding 
relieth  more  surely  upon  them,  and  more  willingly,  than 
upon  himselfe :  But  it  is  a  wonder  to  see  how  the  most 
obstinat  in  this  so  just  and  manifest  perswasion  of  our 
spirits  immortalitie,  have  found  themselves  short  and  unable 
to  establish  the  same  by  their  humane  forces.  Somnia  sunt 
non  docentis,  sed  optantis.  6  These  are  dreames  not  of  one 
'  that  teacheth,  but  wisheth  what  he  would  have ' :  said  an 
ancient  Writer.  Man  may  by  his  owne  testimonie  know, 
that  the  truth  he  alone  discovereth,  the  same  he  oweth  unto 
fortune  and  chance ;  since  even  when  she  is  falne  into  his 
hands,  he  wanteth  wherwith  to  lay  hold  on  her,  and  keepe 
her ;  and  that  this  reason  hath  not  the  power  to  prevaile 
with  it.  All  things  produced  by  our  owne  discourse  and 
sufficiencie,  as  well  true  as  false,  are  subject  to  uncertaintie 
and  disputation.  It  is  for  the  punishment  of  our  temeritie, 
and  instruction  of  our  miserie  and  incapacitie,  that  God 
caused  the  trouble,  downefall  and  confusion  of  Babels  Tower. 
Whatsoever  we  attempt  without  his  assistance,  what  ever  we 

269 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  see  without  the  lampe  of  his  grace,  is  but  vanity  and  folly  : 
XII          With  our  weaknes  we  corrupt  and  adulterate  the  very  essence 
A?  Apologia  of  truth   /whjch   is   uniforme   and  constant)  when  fortune 
of  Raymond      .       ,  V,  .  „  .         T1in 

Sebond      giveth   us  the  possession  of  it.     What  course  soever  man 

taketh  of  himselfe,  it  is  Gods  permission  that  he  ever 
commeth  to  that  confusion,  whose  image  he  so  lively  repre- 
senteth  unto  us,  by  the  just  punishment,  wherwith  he  framed 
the  presumptuous  over-weening  of  Nembroth,  and  brought 
to  nothing  the  frivolous  enterprises  of  the  building  of  his 
i  Cor,  i.  19.  high-towring  Pyramis,  or  Heaven-menacing  Tower.  Perdam 
sapientiam  sapientium,  et  prudentiam  prudentium  reprobabo. 
6  I  will  destroy  the  wisdome  of  the  wise,  and  reprove  the  pro- 
'  vidence  of  them  that  are  most  prudent.'  The  diversitie  of 
tongues  and  languages,  wherewith  he  disturbed  that  worke, 
and  overthrew  that  proudly-raisd  Pile ;  what  else  is  it,  but 
this  infinit  altercation,  and  perpetuall  discordance  of  opinions 
and  reasons,  which  accompanieth  and  entangleth  the  frivol 
ous  frame  of  mans  learning,  or  vaine  building  of  humane 
science  ?  Which  he  doth  most  profitably.  Who  might  con- 
taine  us,  had  we  but  one  graine  of  knowledge  ?  This  Saint 
hath  done  me  much  pleasure :  Ipsa  utilitatis  occultatio,  aut 
humilitatis  exercitatio  est,  aut  elationis  attritio.  4  The  very 
'  concealing  of  the  profit,  is  either  an  exercise  of  humilitie, 
4  or  a  beating  downe  of  arrogancie/  Unto  what  point  of 
presumption  and  insolencie,  doe  we  not  carrie  our  blindnesse 
and  foolishnesse  ?  But  to  returne  to  my  purpose :  Verily 
there  was  great  reason,  that  we  should  be  beholding  to  God 
alone,  and  to  the  benefit  of  his  grace,  for  the  truth  of  so 
noble  a  beliefe,  since  from  his  liberalise  alone  we  receive  the 
fruit  of  immortalitie,  which  consisteth  in  enjoying  of  eternall 
blessednesse.  Let  us  ingenuously  confesse,  that  only  God 
and  Faith,  hath  told  it  us :  For,  it  is  no  lesson  of  Nature, 
nor  comming  from  our  reason.  And  he  that  shall  both 
within  and  without  narrowly  sift,  and  curiously  sound  his 
being  and  his  forces  without  this  divine  privilege  ;  he  that 
shall  view  and  consider  man,  without  flattering  him,  shall 
nor  finde  nor  see  either  efficacie  or  facultie  in  him,  that 
tasteth  of  any  other  thing  but  death  and  earth.  The  more 
we  give,  the  more  we  owe  ;  and  the  more  we  yeeld  unto  God, 
the  more  Christian-like  doe  we.  That  which  the  Stoike 
270 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Philosopher  said,  he  held  by  the  casuall  consent  of  the  CHAPTER 
peoples  voice ;  had  it  not  beene  better  he  had  held  it  of 
God  ?  Cum  de  animorum  ceternitate  disserimus,  non  leue 
momentum  apud  nos  habet  consensus  hominum,  aut  timentium  Sebond 
inferos  aut  colentium.  Vtor  hac  publicapersuasione.  '  When  SEN.  Epist.n'j 
'  we  discourse  of  the  immortalitie  of  soules  in  my  conceit  the 
'  consent  of  those  men  is  of  no  small  authority,  who  either 
'  feare  or  adore  the  infernall  powers.  This  publike  perswa- 
'  sion  I  make  use  of/  Now  the  weaknes  of  humane  Argu 
ments  upon  this  subject,  is  very  manifestly  knowne  by  the 
fabulous  circumstances  they  have  added  unto  the  traine  of 
this  opinion,  to  finde  out  what  condition  this  our  immorta 
litie  was  of.  Let  us  omit  the  Stoickes.  Usuram  nobis  lar-  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
giuntur,  tanquam  cornicibus ;  diu  mansuros  aiunt  animos,  *• 
semper  negant.  'They  grant  us  use  of  life,  as  is  unto 
4  Ravens  :  they  say,  our  soules  shall  long  continue,  but  they 
'  deny  they  shall  last  ever/  Who  gives  unto  soules  a  life 
beyond  this  but  finite.  The  most  universall  and  received 
fantasie,  and  which  endureth  to  this  day,  hath  beene  that 
whereof  Pythagoras  is  made  Author ;  not  that  he  was  the 
first  inventor  of  it,  but  because  it  received  much  force  and 
credit  by  the  authoritie  of  his  approbation  ;  Which  is,  that 
soules  at  their  departure  from  us,  did  but  passe  and  roule 
from  one  to  another  body,  from  a  Lyon  to  a  Horse,  from  a 
Horse  to  a  King,  uncessantly  wandring  up  and  downe,  from 
House  to  Mansion.  And  himselfe  said,  that  he  remembred 
to  have  beene  JEthaledes,  then  Euphorbus,  afterward  Her- 
motimus,  at  last  from  Pyrrhus  to  have  passed  into  Pytha 
goras  :  having  memorie  of  himselfe,  the  space  of  two  hundred 
and  six  yeares  :  some  added  more,  that  the  same  soules  doe 
sometimes  ascend  up  to  heaven,  and  come  downe  againe : 

0  Pater  anne  aliquas  ad  ccelum  hinc  ire  putandum  est  VIRG.  ALII.  vi. 

Sublimes  animas,  iterumque  ad  tarda  reverti  739. 

Corpora  ?    Qua  lucis  miseris  tarn  dira  cupido  ? 

Must  we  thinke  (Father)  some  soules  hence  doe  go, 
Raized  to  heav'n,  thence  turne  to  bodies  slow  ? 
Whence  doth  so  dyre  desire  of  light  on  wretches  grow  ? 

Origen  makes  them  eternally  to  go  and  come  from  a  good, 
to  a  bad  estate.     The  opinion  that  Varro  reporteth  is,  that 

271 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  in  the  revolution  of  foure  hundred  and  forty  yeares,  they 
XII  reconjoyne  themselves  unto  their  first  bodies.  Chrysippus, 

oAu'mond  ^at  ^la^  mus^  come  to  passe  after  a  certaine  space  of  time 
Sebond  unknowne,  and  not  limitted.  Plato  (who  saith  that  he  holds 
this  opinion  from  Pindarus,  and  from  ancient  Poesie,)  of 
infinite  Vicissitudes  of  alteration,  to  which  the  soule  is  pre 
pared,  having  no  paines  nor  rewards  in  the  other  World,  but 
temporall,  as  her  life  in  this  is  but  temporall,  concludeth  in 
her  a  singular  knowledge  of  the  affaires  of  Heaven,  of  Hell, 
and  here  below,  where  she  hath  passed,  repassed,  and  so 
journed  in  many  voyages  ;  a  matter  in  his  remembrance. 
Behold  her  progresse  elsewhere  :  He  that  hath  lived  well, 
reconjoyneth  himselfe  unto  that  Star  or  Planet,  to  which  he 
is  assigned  :  Who  evill,  passeth  into  a  woman  :  And  if  then 
he  amend  not  himselfe,  he  transchangeth  himselfe  into  a 
beast,  of  condition  agreeing  to  his  vicious  customes,  and 
shall  never  see  an  end  of  his  Punishments,  untill  he  returne 
to  his  naturall  condition,  and  by  vertue  of  reason,  he  have 
deprived  himselfe  of  those  grose,  stupide,  and  elementarie 
qualities  that  were  in  him.  But  I  will  not  forget  the 
objection,  which  the  Epicureans  make  unto  this  transmigra 
tion  from  one  body  to  another  :  Which  is  very  pleasant. 
They  demand,  what  order  there  should  be,  if  the  throng  of 
the  dying  should  be  greater  than  that  of  such  as  be  borne. 
For,  the  soules  removed  from  their  abode  would  throng  and 
strive  together,  who  should  get  the  best  seat  in  this  new 
case :  And  demand  besides,  what  they  would  passe  their 
time  about,  whilst  they  should  stay,  untill  any  other  man 
sion  were  made  ready  for  them  :  Or  contrary-wise,  if  more 
creatures  were  borne  than  should  dye ;  they  say,  bodies 
should  be  in  an  ill  taking,  expecting  the  infusion  of  their 
soule,  and  it  would  come  to  passe,  that  some  of  them  should 
dye,  before  they  had  ever  beene  living. 

LUCR.  iii.  802.  Denique  connubia  adveneris,  partusqueferarum, 

Esse  animas  pr&sto  deridiculum  esse  videtur, 
Et  spectare  immortales  mortalia  membra 
Innumero  numero,  certareque  prceproperanter 
Inter  se,  qua  prima  potissimaque  insinuetur. 

Lastly,  ridiculous  it  is,  soules  should  be  prest 
To  Venus  meetings,  and  begetting  of  a  beast  : 

272 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

That  they  to  mortall  lims  immortall  be  addrest  CHAPTER 

In  number  numberlesse,  and  over-hasty  strive,  XII 

Which  of  them  first  and  chiefe  should  get  in  there     An  Apologie 
to  live.  of  Raymond 

Sebond 

Others  have  staid  the  soule  in  the  deceased  bodies,  therwith 
to  animate  serpents,  wormes  and  other  beasts,  which  are 
said  to  engender  from  the  corruption  of  our  members,  yea 
and  from  our  ashes  :  Others,  divide  it  in  two  parts,  one 
mortall,  another  immortal  :  Others,  make  it  corporeall,  and 
yet  notwithstanding  immortall :  Others,  make  it  immortall, 
without  any  science  or  knowlege.  Nay  there  are  some  of 
ours,  who  have  deemed,  that  of  condemned  mens  soules 
divels  were  made  :  As  Plutarke  thinks,  that  Gods  are  made 
of  those  soules  which  are  saved  :  For,  there  be  few  things 
that  this  authour  doth  more  resolutely  averre,  then  this  ; 
holding  every  where  else  an  ambiguous  and  doubtfull  kind 
of  speech.  It  is  to  be  imagined  and  firmlie  believed  (saith 
he)  that  the  soules  of  men,  vertuous  both  according  unto 
nature  and  divine  Justice,  become  of  Men,  Saints,  and  of 
Saints,  Demi-Gods,  and  after  they  are  once  perfectly,  as  in 
sacrifices  of  purgation,  cleansed  and  purified,  being  delivered 
from  all  passibility  and  mortalitie,  they  become  of  Demi- 
Gods  (not  by  any  civill  ordinance,  but  in  good  truth,  and 
according  to  manifest  reason)  perfect  and  very  very  Gods  ; 
receiving  a  most  blessed  and  thrice  glorious  end.  But  who 
soever  shall  see  him,  who  is  notwithstanding,  one  of  the 
most  sparing  and  moderate  of  that  faction,  so  undantedly  to 
skirmish,  and  will  heare  him  relate  his  wonders  upon  this 
subject,  him  I  refer  to  his  discourse  of  the  Moone,  and  of 
Socrates  his  Daemon  ;  where  as  evidently  as  in  any  other 
place,  may  be  averred,  that  the  mysteries  of  Philosophy  have 
many  strange  conceits,  common  with  those  of  Poesie  ;  mans 
understanding  losing  it  selfe  once  goe  about  to  sound  and 
controule  all  things  to  the  utmost  ende ;  as  tired  and  troubled 
by  a  long  and  wearisome  course  of  our  life,  we  returne  to 
a  kind  of  doting  child-hood.  Note  here  the  goodly  and 
certaine  instructions,  which  concerning  our  soules-subject  we 
drawe  from  humane  knowledge.  There  is  no  lesse  rashnesse 
in  that  which  shee  teacheth  us  touching  our  corporall  parts. 
Let  us  make  choyse  but  of  one  or  two  examples,  else  should 
2M  273 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  we  lose  our  selves  in  this  troublesome  and  vaste  Ocean  of 
XII  Physicall  errours.  Let  us  know  whether  they  agree  but  in 
An  Apologie  ^^  one^  that  js  £o  say?  of  wnat  matter  men  are  derived  and 
produced  one  from  another.  For,  touching  their  first  pro 
duction,  it  is  no  marvel  if  in  a  thing  so  high  and  so  ancient, 
mans  wit  is  troubled  and  confounded.  Archelaus  the 
Physition,  to  whom  (as  Aristoxenus  affirmeth)  Socrates  was 
Disciple  and  Minion,  assevered  that  both  men  and  beastes 
had  beene  made  of  milkie  slime  or  mudde,  expressed  by  the 
heate  of  the  earth.  Pythagoras  saith,  that  our  seed  is  the 
scumme  or  froth  of  our  best  blood,  Plato  the  distilling  of  the 
marrow  in  the  backe-bone,  which  hee  argueth  thus,  because 
that  place  feeleth  first  the  wearinesse  which  followeth  the 
generative  businesse. 

Alcmaeon,  a  part  of  the  braines-substance,  which  to  prove, 
he  saith,  their  eyes  are  ever  most  troubled,  that  over- 
intemperately  addict  themselves  to  that  exercise.  Demo- 
critus,  a  substance  extracted  from  all  parts  of  this  corporall 
Masse.  Epicurus,  extracted  from  the  last  soule  and  the 
body  :  Aristotle,  an  excrement  drawne  from  the  nourishment 
of  the  bloud,  the  last  scattereth  it  selfe  in  our  severall 
members  ;  others,  blood,  concocted  and  disgested  by  the 
heate  of  the  genitories,  which  they  judge,  because  in  the 
extreame,  earnest  and  forced  labours,  many  shed  drops  of 
pure  blood ;  wherein  some  appearance  seemeth  to  be,  if  from 
so  infinite  a  confusion  any  likelihood  may  be  drawne.  But 
to  bring  this  seed  to  effect,  how  many  contrary  opinions 
make  they  of  it  ?  Aristotle  and  Democritus  hold,  that 
women  have  no  sperme,  that  it  is  but  a  sweate,  which  by 
reason  of  the  pleasure,  and  frication  they  cast  forth,  and 
availeth  nothing  in  generation. 

Galen,  and  his  adherents,  contrariwise  affirme,  that  there 
can  be  no  generation,  except  two  seeds  meete  together. 
Behold  the  Physitians,  the  Philosophers,  the  Lawyers,  and 
the  Divines  pell-mell  together  by  the  eares  with  our  women 
about  the  question  and  disputation  how  long  women  beare 
their  fruite  in  their  wombe.  And  as  for  mee,  by  mine  owne 
example  I  take  their  part,  that  maintaine,  a  woman  may  goe 
eleven  months  with  childe.  The  world  is  framed  of  this 
experience ;  there  is  no  meane  woman  so  simple,  that  cannot 

274 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

give  her  censure  upon  all  these  contestations,  although  we  CHAPTER 
could  not  agree.  This  is  sufficient  to  verifie,  that  in  the  XII 
corporall  part,  man  is  no  more  instructed  of  himselfe,  then 
in  the  spirituall.  We  have  proposed  himselfe  to  himselfe, 
and  his  reason  to  his  reason,  to  see  what  shee  can  tell  us  of 
it.  Mee  thinkes  I  have  sufficiently  declared,  how  little 
understanding  shee  hath  of  her  selfe.  And  hee  who  hath  no 
understanding  of  himselfe,  what  can  he  have  understanding 
of  ?  Quasi  verb  memuram  ullius  rei  possit  agere  qui  sui  PLIN.  Nat. 
nesciat.  '  As  though  he  could  take  measure  of  any  thing  Hlst-  "•  caP- 
'  that  knowes  not  his  owne  measure.'  Truely  Protogoras 
told  us  prettie  tales,  when  hee  makes  man  the  measure  of  all 
things,  who  never  knew  so  much  as  his  owne.  If  it  be  not 
he,  his  dignitie  will  never  suffer  any  other  creature  to  have 
this  advantage  over  him.  Now  he  being  so  contrary  in  him 
selfe,  and  one  judgement  so  uncessantly  subverting  another, 
this  favorable  proposition  was  but  a  jest,  which  induced  us 
necessarily  to  conclude  the  nullity  of  the  Compasse  and  the 
Compasser.  When  Thales  judgeth  the  knowledge  of  man 
very  hard  unto  man,  hee  teacheth  him  the  knowledge  of  all 
other  things  to  be  impossible  unto  him.  You  for  whom  I 
have  taken  the  paines  to  enlarge  so  long  a  worke  (against 
my  custome)  will  not  shun  to  maintaine  your  Sebond,  with 
the  ordinary  forme  of  arguing,  whereof  you  are  daily  in 
structed,  and  will  therein  exercise  both  your  minde  and 
study  :  For  this  last  trick  of  fence,  must  not  be  employed 
but  as  an  extreme  remedy.  It  is  a  desperate  thrust,  gainst 
which  you  must  forsake  your  weapons,  to  force  your  adversary 
to  renounce  his,  and  a  secret  slight,  which  must  seldome  and 
very  sparingly  be  put  in  practise.  It  is  a  great  fond-hard- 
nesse  to  lose  our  selfe  for  the  losse  of  another.  A  man  must 
not  be  willing  to  die  to  revenge  himselfe,  as  Gobrias  was  : 
who  being  close  by  the  eares  with  a  Lord  of  Persia,  Darius  IUSTIN.  i. 
chanced  to  come  in  with  his  sword  in  his  hand,  and  fearing 
to  strike,  for  feare  he  should  hurt  Gobrias,  he  called  unto 
him,  and  bade  him  smite  boldly,  although  he  should  smite 
through  both.  I  have  heard,  armes,  and  conditions  of  single 
combates  being  desperate,  and  in  which  he  that  offered  them, 
put  both  himselfe  and  his  enemy  in  danger  of  an  end  in 
evitable  to  both,  reproved  as  unjust,  and  condemned  as 

275 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  unlawfull.  The  Portugals  tooke  once  certaine  Turkes  pri- 
XII  .  soners  in  the  Indian  seas,  who  impatient  of  their  captivity, 

of  Ra  mond  reso^vec^  w^n  themselves  (and  their  resolution  succeeded)  by 
Sebond  rubbing  of  Ship-nailes  one  against  another,  and  causing 
sparkles  of  fire  to  fal  amongst  the  barrels  of  powder  (which 
lay  not  far  from  them)  with  intent  to  consume  both  them- 
selvs,  their  masters,  and  the  ship.  We  but  touch  the  skirts, 
and  glance  at  the  last  closings  of  Sciences,  wherein  extremity, 
as  well  as  in  vertue,  is  vicious.  Keepe  your  selves  in  the 
common  path,  it  is  not  good  to  be  so  subtill,  and  so  curious. 
Remember  what  the  Italian  proverbe  saith, 

PETR.  p.  i.  Chi  troppos'  assottiglia,  si  scavezza. 

Who  makes  himselfe  too  fine, 
Doth  break  himselfe  in  fine. 

I  perswade  you,  in  your  opinions  and  discourses,  as  much 
as  in  your  customes,  and  in  every  other  thing,  to  use  modera 
tion  and  temperance,  and  avoide  all  newfangled  inventions 
and  strangenesse.  All  extravagant  waies  displease  me. 
You,  who  by  the  authority  and  preheminence,  which  your 
greatnesse  hath  laied  upon  you,  and  more  by  the  advantages, 
which  the  qualities  that  are  most  your  owne,  bestow  on  you, 
may  with  a  nod  command  whom  you  please,  should  have 
laied  this  charge  upon  some  one,  that  had  made  profession 
of  learning,  who  might  otherwise  have  disposed  and  enriched 
this  fantasie.  Notwithstanding  here  have  you  enough  to 
supply  your  wants  of  it.  Epicurus  said  of  the  lawes,  that 
the  worst  were  so  necessary  unto  us,  that  without  them,  men 
would  enter-devoure  one  another.  And  Plato  verifieth,  that 
without  lawes  we  should  live  like  beastes.  Our  spirit  is  a 
vagabond,  a  dangerous,  and  fond-hardy  implement ;  It  is 
very  hard  to  joyne  order  and  measure  to  it.  In  my  time, 
such  as  have  any  rare  excellency  above  others,  or  extra 
ordinary  vivacity,  we  see  them  almost  all  so  lavish  and 
unbridled  in  licence  of  opinions  and  manners,  as  it  may 
be  counted  a  wonder  to  find  any  one  settled  and  sociable. 
There  is  great  reason  why  the  spirit  of  man  should  be  so 
strictly  embarred.  In  his  study,  as  in  all  things  else,  he 
must  have  his  steps  numbred  and  ordered.  The  limits  of 
his  pursuite  must  be  cut  out  by  art.  He  is  bridled  and 

276 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

fettered  with,  and  by  religions,  lawes,  customes,  knowledge,  CHAPTER 
precepts,  paines   and    recompences,  both   mortall   and  im-          XII 
mortall ;  yet  we  see  him,  by  meanes  of  his  volubility  and  An  Apologie 
v  .  •    J  i         i         T,    •  •  i   J  ,       ,    of  Raymond 

dissolution  escape  all  these  bonds.     It  is  a  vame  body,  that       Sebond 

hath  no  way  about  him  to  be  seized  on,  or  cut  off':  a  diverse 
and  deformed  body,  on  which  neither  knot  nor  hold  may  be 
fastened.  Verily  there  are  few  soules,  so  orderly,  so  con 
stant,  and  so  well  borne,  as  may  be  trusted  with  their  owne 
conduct,  and  may  with  moderation,  and  without  rashnes, 
faile  in  the  liberty  of  their  judgments  beyond  common 
opinions.  It  is  more  expedient  to  give  some  body  the 
charge  and  tuition  of  them.  The  spirit  is  an  outragious 
glaive,  yea  even  to  his  owne  possessor,  except  he  have  the 
grace,  very  orderly  and  discreetly  to  arme  himselfe  therewith. 
And  there  is  no  beast,  to  whom  one  may  more  justly  apply 
a  blinding  bord,  to  keepe  her  sight  in,  and  force  her  looke 
to  her  footing,  and  keepe  from  straying  here  and  there, 
without  the  tracke  which  use  and  lawes  trace  her  out. 
Therefore  shall  it  be  better  for  you  to  close  and  bound  your 
selves  in  the  accustomed  path  ;  howsoever  it  be,  then  to  take 
your  flight  to  this  unbridled  licence.  But  if  any  one  of  these 
new  doctors  shall  undertake,  to  play  the  wise  or  ingenious 
before  you,  at  the  charge  of  his  and  your  health  :  to  rid  you 
out  of  this  dangerous  plague,  which  daily  more  and  more 
spreds  it  selfe  in  your  Courts,  this  preservative  will  in  any 
extreame  necessity  be  a  let,  that  the  contagion  of  this 
venome,  shall  neither  offend  you  nor  your  assistance.  The 
liberty  then,  and  the  jollity  of  their  ancient  spirits  brought 
forth  many  different  Sects  of  opinions,  in  Philosophy  and 
humane  Sciences  :  every  one  undertaking  to  judge  and  chuse, 
so  he  might  raise  a  faction.  But  now  that  men  walke  all 
one  way  :  Qui  certis  quibusdam  destinatisque  sententys  addlcti  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
et  consecrati  sunt,  ut  etiam,  quce  non  probant,  cogantur  "• 
defendere :  '  Who  are  addicted  and  consecrated  to  certaine 
'  set  and  fore-decreed  opinions,  so  as  they  are  enforced  to 
'  maintaine  those  things  which  they  prove'or  approve  not' : 
And  that  wee  receive  Arts  by  civill  authority  and  appoint 
ment  :  So  that  Schooles  have  but  one  patterne,  alike  circum 
scribed  discipline  and  institution  ;  no  man  regardeth  more 
what  coines  weigh  and  are  worth  ;  but  every  man  in  his 

277 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  turne  receiveth  them  according  to  the  value,  that  common 
XII     .     approbation   and  succession   allotteth  them :    Men  dispute 

of  Raymond  n°  longer  °f  the  aU°y>  but  of  the  use'  So  are  a11  tbings 
Sebond  spent  and  vented  alike.  Physike  is  received  as  Geometry  : 
and  jugling  tricks,  enchantments,  bonds,  the  commerce  of 
deceased  spirits,  prognostications,  domifications,  yea  even 
this  ridiculous,  wit  and  wealth-consuming  persuite  of  the 
Philosophers  stone,  all  is  emploied  and  uttered  without  con 
tradiction.  It  sufficeth  to  know,  that  Mars  his  place  lodgeth 
in  the  middle  of  the  hands  triangle  ;  that  of  Venus  in  the 
Thumme  ;  and  Mercuries  in  the  little  finger  :  and  when  the 
table-line  cutteth  the  teachers  rising,  it  is  a  signe  of  cruelty  : 
When  it  faileth  under  the  middle  finger,  and  that  the 
naturall  Median-line  makes  an  angle  with  the  vitall,  under 
the  same  side,  it  is  a  signe  of  a  miserable  death  :  And  when 
a  wonians  naturall  line  is  open,  and  closes  not  at  angle  with 
the  vitall,  it  evidently  denotes  that  she  will  not  be  very 
chast.  I  call  your  selfe  to  witnesse,  if  with  this  Science 
onely,  a  man  may  not  passe  with  reputation  and  favour 
among  all  companies.  Theophrastus  was  wont  to  say,  that 
mans  knowledge,  directed  by  the  sense,  might  judge  of  the 
causes  of  things,  unto  a  certain  measure,  but  being  come  to 
the  extream  and  first  causes,  it  must  necessarily  stay,  and  be 
blunted  or  abated  ;  either  by  reason  of  it's  weaknesse,  or  of 
the  things  difficulty.  It  is  an  indifferent  and  pleasing  kind 
of  opinion,  to  thinke,  that  our  sufficiency  may  bring  us  to 
the  knowledge  of  some  things,  and  hath  certaine  measures 
of  power,  beyond  which  it's  temerity  to  employ  it.  This 
opinion  is  plausible,  and  brought  in  by  way  of  composition  : 
but  it  is  hard  to  give  our  spirit  any  limits,  being  very 
curious  and  greedy,  and  not  tied  to  stay  rather  at  a  thousand, 
then  at  fifty  spaces.  Having  found  by  experience,  that  if 
one  had  mist  to  attaine  unto  some  one  thing,  another  hath 
come  unto  it,  and  that  which  one  age  never  knew,  the  age 
succeeding  hath  found  out  :  and  that  Sciences  and  Arts  are 
not  cast  in  a  mold,  but  rather  by  little  and  little  formed  and 
shaped  by  often  handling  and  pollishing  them  over  :  even  as 
beares  fashion  their  yong  whelps  by  often  licking  them  : 
what  my  strength  cannot  discover,  I  cease  not  to  sound  and 
try  :  and  in  handling  and  kneading  this  new  matter,  and 
'278 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

with  removing  and  chafing  it,  I  open  some  faculty  for  him  CHAPTER 

that  shall  follow  me,  that  with  more  ease    he   may  enjoy 

the  same,  and  make  it  more  facile,  more  supple  and  more 

pliable :  Sebond 

— ut  hymettia  sole  OVID.  Metam. 

Cera  remollescit,  tractataque  pollice,  multas  x.  284. 

Vertitur  in  fades,  ipsoquefit  utills  usu. 

As  the  best  Bees  wax  melteth  by  the  Sun, 
And  handling,  into  many  formes  doth  run, 
And  is  made  aptly  fit, 
For  use,  by  using  it. 

As  much  will  the  second  do  for  the  third,  which  is  a  cause 
that  difficulty  doth  not  make  me  despaire,  much  lesse  my 
unability :  for  it  is  but  mine  owne.  Man  is  as  well  capable 
of  all  things,  as  of  some.  And  if  (as  Theophrastus  saith) 
he  avow  the  ignorance  of  the  first  causes  and  beginnings, 
let  him  hardly  quit  all  the  rest  of  his  knowledge.  If  his 
foundation  faile  him,  his  discourse  is  overthrowne.  The 
dispute  hath  no  other  scope,  and  to  enquire,  no  other  end, 
but  the  principles :  If  this  end  stay  not  his  course,  he 
casteth  himselfe  into  an  infinite  irresolution.  Nonpotest  aliud 
alio  magis  mm'Asque  comprehend^  quoniam  omnium  rerum 
una  est  dejimtio  comprehendendi.  '  One  thing  can  neither  more 
'  nor  lesse  be  comprehended  then  another,  since  of  all  things 
4  there  is  one  definition  of  comprehending.1  Now  it  is  likely, 
that  if  the  soule  knew  any  thing,  shee  first  knew  her  selfe : 
and  if  she  knew  any  without  and  besides  her  selfe,  it  must 
be  her  vaile  and  body  before  any  thing  else.  If  even  at  this 
day  the  Gods  of  Physicke  are  scene  to  wrangle  about  our 
Anatomic, 

Mulciber  in  Troiam,  pro  Troia  stabat  Apollo,  OVID.  Trist. 

Apollo  stood  for  Troy,  *•  El-  "•  5- 

Vulcan  Troy  to  destroy, 

when  shall  we  expect  that  they  will  be  agreed  ?  We  are 
neerer,  unto  our  selves,  then  is  whitenesse  unto  snow,  or 
weight  unto  a  stone.  If  man  know  not  himselfe,  how  can 
hee  know  his  functions  and  forces  ?  It  is  not  by  fortune  that 
some  true  notice  doth  not  lodge  with  us,  but  by  hazard. 
And  forasmuch  as  by  the  same  way,  fashion  and  conduct, 
errours  are  received  into  our  soule,  she  hath  not  where- 

279 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  withall  to  distinguish  them,  nor  whereby  to  chuse  the  truth 
XII  from  falshood.  The  Academikes  received  some  inclination 

ofnRaPmond  °f  judgment,  and  found  it  over  raw,  to  say,  it  was  no  more 
Sebond  likely  snow  should  be  white  then  blacke,  and  that  wee 
should  be  no  more  assured  of  the  moving  of  a  stone,  which 
goeth  from  our  hand,  then  of  that  of  the  eighth  Spheare. 
And  to  avoid  this  difficultie  and  strangenesse,  which  in  truth 
cannot  but  hardly  lodge  in  our  imagination,  howbeit  they 
establish,  that  we  were  no  way  capable  of  knowledge,  and 
that  truth  is  engulfed  in  the  deepest  Abysses,  where  mans 
sight  can  no  way  enter  ;  yet  avowed  they  some  things  to 
be  more  likely  and  possible  then  others,  and  received  this 
faculty  in  their  judgement,  that  they  might  rather  incline 
to  one  apparance  then  to  another.  They  allowed  her  this 
propension,  interdicting  her  all  resolution.  The  Tyrrhenians 
advise  is  more  hardy,  and  there  withall  more  likely.  For 
this  Academicall  inclination,  and  this  propension  rather  to 
one  then  another  proposition,  what  else  is  it,  then  a  re- 
acknowledging  of  some  apparant  truth,  in  this  than  in  that  ? 
If  our  understanding  be  capable  of  the  forme,  of  the  linea 
ments,  of  the  behaviour  and  face  of  truth  ;  it  might  as  well 
see  it  all  compleat ;  as  but  halfe,  growing  and  imperfect. 
For  this  apparance  of  verisimilitude,  which  makes  them 
rather  take  the  left  then  the  right  hand,  doe  you  augment 
it ;  this  one  ounce  of  likelihood,  which  turnes  the  ballance, 
doe  you  multiply  it,  by  a  hundred,  nay  by  a  thousand 
ounces ;  it  will  in  the  end  come  to  passe,  that  the  ballance 
will  absolutely  resolve  and  conclude  one  choice  and  perfect 
truth.  But  how  doe  they  suffer  themselves  to  be  made 
tractable  by  liklihood,  if  they  know  not  truth  ?  How 
know  they  the  semblance  of  that,  whereof  they  understand 
not  the  essence?  Either  we  are  able  to  judge  absolutely, 
or  absolutely  we  cannot.  If  our  intellectuall  and  sensible 
faculties  are  without  ground  or  footing,  if  they  but  hull  up 
and  downe  and  drive  with  the  wind,  for  nothing  suffer  we 
our  judgment  to  be  caried  away  to  any  part  of  their  opera 
tion,  what  apparance  soever  it  seemeth  to  present  us  with. 
And  the  surest  and  most  happy  situation  of  our  under 
standing  should  be  that,  where  without  any  totterring  or 
agitation  it  might  maintaine  it  selfe  setled,  upright  and  in- 
280 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

flexible.     Inter  visa,  vera,  autfalsa,  ad  animi  assensum,  nihil  CHAPTER 
interest.      '  There  is  no  difference  betwixt   true  and   false         XI1 

4  visions,  concerning  the  mindes  assent.1     That  things  lodge  An  Apologie 
.•.•.i_«      e  t>  i  1*1         & ,    of  Raymond 

not  in  us  in  their  proper  tonne  and  essence,  and  make  not       Second 

their  entrance  into  us,  of  their  owne  power  and  authority,  Cic.Acad.  Qu. 
we  see  it  most  evidently.  For  if  it  were  so,  we  would  iv. 
receive  them  all  alike :  wine  should  be  such  in  a  sicke  mans 
mouth,  as  in  a  healthy  mans.  He  whose  fingers  are  chopt 
through  cold,  and  stiffe  or  benummed  with  frost,  should 
find  the  same  hardnesse  in  the  wood  or  iron  he  might 
handle,  which  another  doth.  Then  strange  subjects  yeeld 
unto  our  mercy,  and  lodge  with  us  according  to  our  pleasure. 
Now  if  on  our  part  we  receive  any  thing  without  alteration, 
if  mans  holdfasts  were  capable  and  sufficiently  powerfull,  by 
our  proper  meanes  to  seize  on  truth,  those  meanes  being 
common  to  all ;  this  truth  would  successively  remove  it  selfe 
from  one  to  another.  And  of  so  many  things  as  are  in  the 
world,  at  least  one  should  be  found,  that  by  an  universall 
consent  should  be  beleeved  of  all.  But  that  no  proposition 
is  scene,  which  is  not  controversied  and  debated  amongst 
us,  or  that  may  not  be,  declareth  plainly,  that  our  judgment 
doth  not  absolutly  and  clearly  seize  on  that  which  it  seizeth  : 
for  my  judgment  cannot  make  my  fellowes  judgment  to 
receive  the  same  :  which  is  a  signe,  that  I  have  seized  upon 
it  by  some  other  meane  then  by  a  naturall  power  in  me 
or  other  men.  Leave  we  apart  this  infinite  confusion  of 
opinions,  which  is  seene  amongst  Philosophers  themselves, 
and  this  universall  and  perpetuall  disputation,  in  and  con 
cerning  the  knowledge  of  things. 

For  it  is  most  truly  presupposed,  that  men  (I  meane  the 
wisest,  the  best  borne,  yea  and  the  most  sufficient)  do  never 
agree  ;  no  not  so  much  that  heaven  is  over  our  heads  :  For 
they  who  doubt  of  all,  doe  also  doubt  of  this :  and  such  as 
affirme,  that  we  cannot  conceive  any  thing,  say,  we  have 
not  conceivd  whether  heaven  be  over  our  heads  :  which  two 
opinions  are  in  number  (without  any  comparison)  the  most 
forcible.  Besides  this  diversity  and  infinite  division,  by 
reason  of  the  trouble  which  our  owne  judgement  layeth  upon 
our  selves,  and  the  uncertainty  which  every  man  findes  in 
himselfe,  it  may  manifestly  be  perceived,  that  this  situation 

2N  281 


MONTAIGNES    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  is  very  uncertaine  and  unstaid.     How  diversly  judge  we  of 
things  ?     How  often  change  we  our  phantasies  ?     What  I 

hold  and  beleeve  this  da,y>  l  beleeve  and  hold  with  all  my 
l)eleefe  :  all  mv  implements,  springs  and  motions,  embrace 
and  claspe  this  opinion,  and  to  the  utmost  of  their  power 
warrant  the  same :  I  could  not  possibly  embrace  any  verity, 
nor  with  more  assurance  keepe  it,  then  I  doe  this.  I  am 
wholy  and  absolutely  given  to  it :  but  hath  it  not  beene  my 
fortune,  not  once,  but  a  hundred,  nay  a  thousand  times,  nay 
daily,  to  have  embraced  some  other  thing,  with  the  very 
same  instruments  and  condition,  which  upon  better  advise  I 
have  afterward  judged  false?  A  man  should  at  the  least 
become  wise,  at  his  owne  cost,  and  learne  by  others  harmes. 
If  under  this  colour  I  have  often  found  my  selfe  deceived,  if 
my  Touch-stone  be  commonly  found  false  and  my  ballance 
un-even  and  unjust;  What  assurance  may  I  more  take  of  it 
at  this  time,  then  at  others  ?  Is  it  not  folly  in  me,  to  suffer 
my  selfe  so  often  to  be  beguiled  and  couzened  by  one  guide  ? 
Neverthelesse,  let  fortune  remove  us  five  hundred  times 
from  our  place,  let  her  doe  nothing  but  uncessantly  empty 
and  fill,  as  in  a  vessell,  other  and  other  opinions  in  our  mind, 
the  present  and  last  is  alwaies  supposed  certaine  and  in 
fallible.  For  this  must  a  man  leave  goods,  honour,  life, 
state,  health  and  all : 

LUCR.  v.  1424.  — posterior  res  ilia  reperta 

Perdit ;  et  immutat  semus  ad  pristina  quceque. 

The  latter  thing  destroies  all  found  before  ; 
And  alters  sense  at  all  things  lik'd  of  yore. 

Whatsoever  is  told  us,  and  what  ever  we  learne,  we  should 
ever  remember,  it  is  man,  who  delivereth,  and  man  that 
receiveth  :  It  is  a  mortall  hand,  that  presents  it,  and  a 
mortall  hand,  that  receives  it.  Onely  things  which  come  to 
us  from  heaven,  have  right  and  authority  of  perswasion,  and 
markes  of  truth :  Which  we  neither  see  with  our  eyes,  nor 
receive  by  our  meanes  :  this  sacred  and  great  image  would 
be  of  no  force  in  so  wretched  a  Mansion,  except  God  prepare 
it  to  that  use  and  purpose,  unlesse  God  by  his  particular 
grace  and  supernaturall  favor,  reforme  and  strengthen  the 
same.  Our  fraile  and  defective  condition  ought  at  least 

282 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

make  us  demeane  our  selves  more  moderately,  and  more  CHAPTER 
circumspectly  in  our  changes.  We  should  remember,  that  XJI 
whatsoever  we  receive  in  our  understanding,  we  often  receive  Aj1  Apologie 
false  things,  and  that  it  is  by  the  same  instruments,  which  Seboud 
many  times  contradict  and  deceive  themselves.  And  no 
marvell  if  they  contradict  themselves,  being  so  easie  to 
encline,  and  upon  very  slight  occasions  subject  to  waver  and 
turne.  Certaine  it  is,  that  our  apprehension,  our  judgement, 
and  our  soules  faculties  in  generall,  doe  suffer  according  to 
the  bodies  motions  and  alterations,  which  are  continuall. 
Have  we  not  our  spirits  more  vigilant,  our  memorie  more 
ready,  and  our  discourses  more  lively  in  time  of  health, 
then  in  sickenesse  ?  Doth  not  joy  and  blithnesse  make  us 
receive  the  subjects,  that  present  themselves  unto  our  soule, 
with  another  kind  of  countenance,  then  lowring  vexation, 
and  drooping  melancholy  doth  ?  Doe  you  imagine,  that 
Catullus  or  Saphoes  verses,  delight  and  please  an  old  covet 
ous  Chuff-penny  wretch,  as  they  do  a  lusty  and  vigorous 
yong-man  ?  Cleomenes  the  sonne  of  Anaxandridas  being 
sick,  his  friends  reproved  him,  saying,  he  had  new  strange 
humors,  and  unusuall  phantasies :  It  is  not  unlikely 
(answered  he)  for,  I  am  not  the  man  I  was  wont  to  be  in  the 
time  of  health  :  But  being  other,  so  are  my  fantasies  and 
my  humors.  In  the  rabble  case-canvasing  of  our  plea-courts 
this  by- word,  Gaudeat  de  bona  fortuna,  'Let  him  joy  in  his 
'  good  fortune,"  is  much  in  use,  and  is  spoken  of  criminall 
offenders,  who  happen  to  meete  with  ludges  in  some  milde 
temper,  or  well-pleased  mood.  For  it  is  most  certaine  that 
in  times  of  condemnation,  the  ludges  doome  or  sentence  is 
sometimes  perceived  to  be  more  sharpe,  mercilesse  and  for 
ward,  and  at  other  times  more  tractable,  facile,  and  enclined 
to  shadow  or  excuse  an  offence,  according  as  he  is  well  or 
ill  pleased  in  mind.  A  man  that  commeth  out  of  his  house 
troubled  with  the  paine  of  the  gout,  vexed  with  jealousy,  or 
angry  that  his  servant  hath  robbed  him,  and  whose  mind 
is  overcome  with  griefe,  and  plunged  with  vexation,  and 
distracted  with  anger,  there  is  not  question  to  be  made  but 
his  judgement  is  at  that  instant  much  distempred,  and 
much  transported  that  way.  That  venerable  Senate  of  the 
Areopagites,  was  wont  to  judge  and  sentence  by  night,  for 

283 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  feare  the  sight  of  the  suters  might  corrupt  justice.  The  ayre 
it  selfe,  and  the  clearenes  of  the  firmament,  doth  forebode 
QS  some  cnange  an(l  alteration  of  weather,  as  saith  that 
Greeke  verse  in  Cicero, 


Cic.  ex  incert.  Tales  sunt  hominum  mentes,  quali  pater  ipse 

lupiter  auctifera  lustravit  lampade  terras. 

Such  are  mens  mindes,  as  with  increasefull  light 
Our  father  love  survaies  the  world  in  sight. 

It  is  not  onely  fevers,  drinkes  and  great  accidents,  that 
over-whelme  our  judgement:  The  least  things  in  the  world 
wil  turne  it  topsieturvie.  And  although  we  feele  it  not,  it 
is  not  to  bee  doubted,  if  a  continuall  ague  may  in  the  end 
suppresse  our  mind,  a  tertian  will  also  (according  to  her 
measure  and  proportion)  breed  some  alteration  in  it.  If 
an  Apoplexie  doth  altogether  stupifie,  and  extinguish  the 
sight  of  our  understanding,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted  but  a 
cold  and  rhume  will  likewise  dazle  the  same.  And  by  con 
sequence,  hardly  shall  a  man  in  all  his  life  find  one  houre, 
wherein  our  judgement  may  alwaies  be  found  in  his  right 
byase,  our  body  being  subject  to  so  many  continuall  altera 
tions,  and  stuft  with  so  divers  sorts  of  ginnes  and  motions, 
that,  giving  credit  to  Physitions,  it  is  very  hard  to  find  one 
in  perfect  plight,  and  that  doth  not  alwaies  mistake  his 
marke  and  shute  wide.  As  for  the  rest,  this  disease  is  not 
so  easily  discovered,  except  it  be  altogether  extreame  and 
remedilesse  ;  forasmuch  as  reason  marcheth  ever  crooked, 
halting  and  broken-hipt  ;  and  with  falshood  as  with  truth  ; 
And  therefore  it  is  very  hard  to  discover  her  mistaking,  and 
disorder.  I  alwaies  call  reason,  that  apparance  or  shew  of 
discourses,  which  every  man  deviseth  or  forgeth  in  himselfe  : 
That  reason,  of  whose  condition,  there  may  be  a  hundred, 
one  contrary  to  another,  about  one  selfe  same  subject  :  It  is 
an  instrument  of  lead  and  Wax,  stretching,  pliable,  and  that 
may  be  fitted  to  all  byases,  and  squared  to  all  measures  : 
There  remaines  nothing  but  the  skill  and  sufficiency  to  know 
how  to  turne  and  winde  the  same.  How  well  soever  a  ludge 
meaneth  and  what  good  mind  so  ever  he  beareth,  if  diligent 
eare  be  not  given  unto  him  (to  which  few  ammuse  themselves) 
his  inclination  unto  freindship,  unto  kindred,  unto  beauty, 

284 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

and  unto  revenge,  and  not  onely  matters  of  so  weighty  conse-  CHAPTER 
quence,  but  this  innated  and  casuall  instinct,  which  makes  us          XII 
to  favour  one  thing  more  then  another,  and  encline  to  one  man  of*I^  m'ond 
more  then  to  another,  and  which  without  any  leave  of  reason,       Sebond 
giveth  us  the  choise,  in  two  like  subjects,  or  some  shadow  of 
like  vanity,  may  insensibly  insinuate  in  his  judgment  the 
commendation  and  applause,  or  disfavour  and  disallowance 
of  a  cause,  and  give  the  ballance  a  twitch.     I  that  nearest 
prie  into  my  selfe  and  who  have  mine  eyes  uncessantly  fixt 
upon  me,  as  one  that  hath  not  much  else  to  doe  else  where, 

— quis  sub  Arcto  HOR.  i.  Od. 

Rex  gelidce  metuatur  ores,  xxvi.  3. 

Quid  Tyridatem  terreat,  unice 
Securus, 

Onely  secure,  who  in  cold  coast 
Under  the  North-pole  rules  the  rost, 
And  there  is  fear'd  ;  or  what  would  fright, 
And  Tyridates  put  to  flight, 

dare  very  hardly  report  the  vanity  and  weaknesse  I  feele  in 
my  selfe.  My  foot  is  so  staggering  and  unstable,  and  I  finde  it 
so  ready  to  trip,  and  so  easie  to  stumble;  and  my  sight  is  so 
dimme  and  uncertaine,  that  fasting  I  finde  my  selfe  other  than 
full  fed  :  If  my  health  applaud  me,  or  but  the  calmenesse  of 
one  faire  day  smile  upon  me,  then  am  I  a  lusty  gallant ; 
but  if  a  corne  wring  my  toe,  then  am  I  pouting,  unpleasant 
and  hard  to  be  pleased.  One  same  pace  of  a  horse  is  some 
times  hard,  and  sometimes  easie  unto  me  ;  and  one  same  way, 
one  time  short,  another  time  long  and  wearisome ;  and  one 
same  forme,  now  more,  now  lesse  agreeable  and  pleasing  to 
me  :  Sometimes  I  am  apt  to  doe  any  thing  ;  and  other  times 
fit  to  doe  nothing :  What  now  is  pleasing  to  me,  within  a 
while  after  will  be  paineful.  There  are  a  thousand  indiscreet 
and  casuall  agitations  in  me.  Either  a  melancholy  humour 
possesseth  me,  or  a  cholericke  passion  swaieth  me,  which 
having  shaken  off,  sometimes  frowardnesse  and  peevishnesse 
hath  predominancy,  and  other  times  gladnes  and  blithnesse 
overrule  me.  If  I  chance  to  take  a  booke  in  hand,  I  shall  in 
some  passages  perceive  some  excellent  graces,  and  which  ever 
wound  me  to  the  soule  with  delight ;  but  let  me  lay  it  by, 
and  read  him  another  time ;  let  me  turne  and  tosse  him  as 

285 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  I  list,  let  me  apply  and  manage  him  as  I  will,  I  shall  finde 
XII     •     ^  an  unknowne  and  shapelesse  masse.     Even  in  my  writings, 

ofRavmond  ?  sha11  not  at  a11  times  finde  the  tracke>  or  ajre  of  mj  nrst 
Sebond  imaginations ;  I  wot  not  my  selfe  what  I  would  have  said, 
and  shall  vexe  and  fret  my  selfe  in  correcting  and  giving  a 
new  sense  to  them,  because  I  have  peradventure  forgotten  or 
lost  the  former,  which  happily  was  better.  I  doe  but  come 
and  goe ;  my  j  udgement  doth  not  alwaies  goe  forward,  but 
is  ever  floting,  and  wandering, 

CATUL.  Lyr.  — veiut  minuta  magno 

Epig.  xxii.  12.  Deprensa  navis  in  mari  vesanientc  vento. 

Much  like  a  pettie  skiffe,  that 's  taken  short 

In  a  grand  Sea,  when  winds  doe  make  mad  sport. 

Many  times  (as  commonly  it  is  my  hap  to  doe)  having  for 
exercise  and  sport-sake  undertaken  to  maintaine  an  opinion 
contrarie  to  mine,  my  minde  applying  and  turning  it  selfe  that 
way,  doth  so  tie  me  unto  it,  as  I  finde  no  more  the  reason  of 
my  former  conceit,  and  so  I  leave  it.  Where  I  encline,  there 
I  entertaine  my  selfe,  how  soever  it  be,  and  am  caried  away 
by  mine  owne  weight.  Every  man  could  neer-hand  say  as 
much  of  himselfe,  would  he  but  looke  into  himselfe  as  I  doe. 
Preachers  know,  that  the  emotion,  which  surpriseth  them, 
whilst  they  are  in  their  earnest  speech,  doth  animate  them 
towards  beliefe,  and  that  being  angrie  we  more  violently 
give  our  selves  to  defend  our  proposition,  emprint  it  in  our 
selves,  and  embrace  the  same  with  more  vehemencie  and 
approbation,  then  we  did,  being  in  our  temperate  and  reposed 
sense.  You  relate  simply  your  case  unto  a  Lawyer  ;  he 
answers  faltring  and  doubtfully  unto  it,  whereby  you  perceive 
it  is  indifferent  unto  him  to  defend  either  this  or  that  side, 
all  is  one  to  him :  Have  you  paid  him  well,  have  you  given 
him  a  good  baite  or  fee,  to  make  him  earnestly  apprehend  it, 
beginnes  he  to  be  enteressed  in  the  matter,  is  his  will  moved, 
or  his  minde  enflamed  ?  Then  will  his  reason  be  moved, 
and  his  knowledge  enflamed  with  all.  See  then  an  apparant 
and  undoubted  truth  presents  it  selfe  to  his  understanding, 
wherein  he  discovers  a  new  light,  and  beleeves  it  in  good 
sooth,  and  so  perswades  himselfe.  Shall  I  tell  you  ?  I  wot 
not  whether  the  heate  proceeding  of  spight  and  obstinacie, 

286 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

against  the  impression  and  violence  of  a  magistrate,  and  of  CHAPTER 
danger :  or  the  interest  of  reputation,  have  induced  some 
man,  to  mainetaine,  even  in  the  fiery  flames  the  opinion,  for 
which  amongst  his  friends,  and  at  libertie,  he  would  never 
have  beene  moved,  nor  have  ventred  his  fingers  end.  The 
motions  and  fits  which  our  soule  receiveth  by  corporall 
passions,  doe  greatly  prevaile  in  her,  but  more  her  owne ; 
with  which  it  is  so  fully  possest,  as  happily  it  may  be  main 
tained,  she  hath  no  other  way,  or  motion,  then  by  the  blast 
of  her  windes,  and  that  without  their  agitation,  she  should 
remaine  without  action,  as  a  ship  at  Sea,  which  the  winds 
have  utterly  forsaken.  And  he  who  should  maintaine  that, 
following  the  Peripatetike  faction,  should  offer  us  no  great 
wrong,  since  it  is  knowne,  that  the  greatest  number  of  the 
soules  actions,  proceede  and  have  neede  of  this  impulsion  of 
passion ;  valor  (say  they)  cannot  be  perfected  without  the 
assistance  of  choler. 

Semper  Aiax  fortis ,  fortissimus  tamen  in  furore.  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 

Ajax  every  valor  had, 

Most  then,  when  he  was  most  mad. 

Nor  doth  any  man  run  violently  enough  upon  the  wicked, 
or  his  enemies,  except  he  be  throughly  angrie ;  and  they 
are  of  opinion,  that  an  Advocate  or  Counseller  at  the  barre, 
to  have  the  cause  goe  on  his  side,  and  to  have  Justice  at  the 
Judges  hands,  doth  first  endevor  to  provoke  him  to  anger. 
Longing-desires  moved  Themistocles,  and  urged  Demosthenes, 
and  have  provoked  Philosophers,  to  long  travels,  to  tedious 
watchings,  and  to  lingring  peregrinations  :  and  leade  us  to 
honours,  to  doctrine,  and  to  health  ;  all  profitable  respects. 
And  this  demissenes  of  the  soule,  in  suffering  molestation 
and  tediousnes,  serveth  to  no  other  purpose,  but  to  breed 
repentance,  and  cause  penitence  in  our  consciences  ;  and  for 
our  punishment  to  feele  the  scourge  of  God,  and  the  rod  of 
politicke  correction.  Compassion  serveth  as  a  sting  unto 
clemencie,  and  wisdome  to  preserve  and  governe  our  selves,  is 
by  our  owne  feare  rouzed  up ;  and  how  many  noble  actions, 
by  ambition,  how  many  by  presumption  ?  To  conclude,  no 
eminent  or  glorious  vertue,  can  be  without  some  immoderate 
and  irregular  agitation.  May  not  this  be  one  of  the  reasons, 

287 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which  moved  the  Epicurians,  to  discharge  God  of  all  care 
XII  and  thought  of  our  affaires  :  Forsomuch  as  the  very  effects 

An  Apologie  Qf  j^  gOOCJnes?  cannot  exercise  themselves  towards  us,  with- 
Selumd11  OL1t  disturbing  his  rest,  by  meanes  of  the  passions,  which  are 
as  motives  and  solicitations,  directing  the  soule  to  vertuous 
actions  ?  Or  have  they  thought  otherwise  and  taken  them 
as  tempests,  which  shamfully  lead  astray  the  soule  from  hir 
rest  and  tranquillitie  ?  Vt  maris  tranquillitas  intelligitur, 

Cic.  Tusc.  Q.U.  nulla,   ne   minima   quidem,    aura  jiuctus   commovente :     Sic 

v-  animi  quietus  et  placatus  status  cernitur,  quum  perturbatio 

nulla  esty  qua  moveri  queat.  'As  we  conceive  the  Seas  calme- 
'  nesse,  when  not  so  much  as  the  least  pirling  wind  doth 
4  stirre  the  waves,  so  is  a  peaceable  reposed  state  of  the 
4  mind  then  scene,  when  there  is  no  perturbation,  whereby 
'  it  may  be  moved/  What  differences  of  sense  and  reason, 
what  contrarietie  of  imaginations,  doth  the  diversitie  of  our 
passions  present  unto  us  ?  What  assurance  may  we  then  take 
of  so  unconstant  and  wavering  a  thing,  subject  by  its  owne 
condition  to  the  power  of  trouble,  never  marching  but  a 
forced  and  borrowed  pace  ?  If  our  judgement  be  in  the  hands 
of  sickenes  itselfe,  and  of  perturbation  ;  if  by  rashnesse 
and  folly  it  be  retained  to  receive  the  impression  of  things, 
what  assurance  may  we  expect  at  his  hands  ?  Dares  not 
Philosophic  thinke  that  men  produce  their  greatest  effects, 
and  neerest  approching  to  divinity,  when  they  are  besides 
themselves,  furious,  and  madde  ?  We  amend  our  selves  by  the 
privation  of  reason,  and  by  her  drooping.  The  two  naturall 
waies,  to  enter  the  cabinet  of  the  Gods,  and  there  to  foresee 
the  course  of  the  destinies,  are  furie  and  sleepe.  This  is 
very  pleasing  to  be  considered.  By  the  dislocation  that 
passions  bring  unto  our  reason,  we  become  vertuous ;  by  the 
extirpation  which  either  fury  or  the  image  of  death  bringeth 
us,  we  become  Prophets  and  Divines.  I  never  beleeved  it 
more  willingly.  It  is  a  meere  divine  inspiration,  that  sacred 
truth  hath  inspired  in  a  Philosophicall  spirit,  which  against 
his  proposition  exacteth  from  him  ;  that  the  quiet  state  of 
our  soule,  the  best-settled  estate,  yea  the  healthfullest  that 
Philosophy  can  acquire  unto  it,  is  not  the  best  estate.  Our 
vigilancie  is  moredrouzie,  then  sleepe  it  selfe  :  Our  wisedome 
lesse  wise,  then  folly ;  our  dreames  of  more  worth  then  our 
288 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

discourses.    The  worst  place  we  can  take,  is  in  our  selves.    But  CHAPTER 
thinks  it  not,  that  we  have  the  foresight  to  marke,  that  the          XIJ 
voice,  which  the  spirit  uttreth,  when  he  is  gone  from  man,  An  Apologie 
i  •    i  •     i  i  e    L          i      i  M   ,  i       •     •      of  Kaymond 

so  cleare  sighted,  so  great,  and  so  perfect,  and  whilst  he  is  in       Sebond 

man,  so  earthly,  so  ignorant,  and  so  overclouded,  is  a  voice 
proceeding  from  the  spirit,  which  is  in  earthly,  ignorant,  and 
overclouded  man ;  and  therefore  a  trusties  and  not  to  be- 
beleeved  voice  ?  I  have  no  great  experience  in  these  violent 
agitations,  being  of  a  soft  and  dull  complexion  ;  the  greatest 
part  of  which,  without  giving  it  leasure  to  acknowledge  her 
selfe,  doe  sodainely  surprise  our  soule.  But  that  passion, 
which  in  yong  mens  harts  is  saied,  to  be  produced  by  idle- 
nes,  although  it  march  but  leasurely,  and  with  a  measured 
progresse,  doth  evidently  present  to  those,  that  have  assaid 
to  oppose  themselves  against  her  endevour,  the  power  of  the 
conversion  and  alteration,  which  our  judgement  suffereth. 
I  have  some  times  enterprised  to  arme  my  selfe  with  a  resolu 
tion  to  abide,  resist,  and  suppresse  the  same.  For,  I  am  so 
farre  from  being  in  their  ranke,  that  call  and  allure  vices, 
that  unlesse  they  entertaine  me,  I  scarcely  follow  them.  I 
felt  it,  mauger  my  resistance,  to  breed,  to  growe,  and  to 
augment ;  and  in  the  end  being  in  perfect  health,  and  cleare 
sighted,  to  seize  upon  and  possesse  me;  in  such  sort,  that,  as 
in  drunkennes,  the  image  of  things  began  to  appeare  unto 
me,  otherwise  then  it  was  wont :  I  saw  the  advantages  of 
the  subject  I  sought  after,  evidently  to  swell  and  growe 
greater,  and  much  to  encrease  by  the  winde  of  my  ima 
gination  ;  and  the  difficulties  of  my  enterprise  to  become 
more  easie  and  plaine ;  and  my  discourse  and  conscience  to 
shrinke  and  draw-backe.  But  that  fire  being  evaporated  all 
on  a  sodaine,  as  by  the  flashing  of  a  lightning,  my  soule  to 
reassume  an  other  sight,  another  state,  and  other  judgement. 
The  difficultie  in  my  retreate  seemed  great  and  invincible,  and 
the  very  same  things,  of  another  taste  and  shew,  than  the 
fervency  of  desire  had  presented  them  unto  me.  And  which 
more,  truely,  Pyrrho  cannot  tell.  We  are  never  without 
some  infirmity.  Fevers  have  their  heat,  and  their  cold  : 
from  the  effects  of  a  burning  passion,  we  fall  into  the  effects 
of  a  chilling  passion.  So  much  as  I  had  cast  my  selfe  forward, 
so  much  do  I  draw  my  selfe  backe. 

20  289 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Qualis  ubi  alterno  procurrens  gurgite  pontus , 

XII  Nunc  ruit  ad  terras,  scopulisque  superjacit  undam, 

An  Apologie  Spumeus,  eootremamque  sinu  perfundit  arenam, 

of  Raymond  Nunc  rapidus  retro,  atque  cBstu  revoluta  resorbens 

Sebond  Saxa,  fugit,  littusque  vado  labente  relinquit. 

VIRG.  ^w.  xi.  As  th'  Ocean  flowing.,  ebbing  in  due  course, 

5°8-  To  land  now  rushes,  foming  throw's  his  source 

On  rocks,  therewith  bedewes  the  utmost  sand, 
Now  swift  return's,  the  stones  rould  backe  from  strand 
By  tide  resuck's,  foord  failing,  leaves  the  land. 

Now  by  the  knowledge  of  my  volubilitie,  I  have  by  acci 
dence  engendred  some  constancy  of  opinions  in  my  selfe ; 
yea  have  not  so  much  altered  my  first  and  naturall  ones. 
For,  what  apparance  soever  there  be  in  novelty,  I  do  not 
easily  change,  for  feare  I  should  lose  by  the  bargaine  :  And 
since  I  am  not  capable  to  chuse,  I  take  the  choise  from 
others;  and  keepe  my  selfe  in  the  seate,  that  God  hath 
placed  me  in.  Else  could  I  hardly  keepe  my  selfe  from 
continuall  rowling.  Thus  have  I  by  the  grace  of  God  pre 
served  my  selfe  whole  (without  agitation  or  trouble  of  con 
science)  in  the  ancient  beliefe  of  our  religion,  in  the  middest 
of  so  many  sects  and  divisions,  which  our  age  hath  brought 
forth.  The  writings  of  the  ancient  fathers  (I  meane  the 
good,  the  solide,  and  the  serious)  doe  tempt,  and  in  a 
manner  remove  me  which  way  they  list.  Him  that  I  heare 
seemeth  ever  the  most  forcible.  I  finde  them  everie  one 
in  his  turne  to  have  reason,  although  they  contrary  one 
another.  That  facility  which  good  witts  have  to  prove  any 
thing  they  please,  likely;  and  that  there  is  nothing  so 
strange,  but  they  will  undertake  to  set  so  good  a  glosse  on 
it,  as  it  shall  easily  deceive  a  simplicity  like  unto  mine,  doth 
manifestly  shew  the  weaknesse  of  their  proofe.  The  heavens 
and  the  planets  have  moved  these  three  thousand  yeares, 
and  all  the  world  beleeved  as  much,  untill  Cleanthes  the 
Samian,  or  else  (according  to  Theophrastus)  Nicetas  the 
Syracusian  tooke  upon  him  to  maintaine,  it  was  the  earth 
that  moved,  by  the  oblique  circle  of  the  Zodiake,  turning 
about  her  axell  tree.  And  in  our  daies  Copernicus  hath  so 
well  grounded  this  doctrine,  that  hee  doth  very  orderly  fit 
it  to  all  Astrologicall  consequences.  What  shall  we  reape 
by  it,  but  only  that  wee  neede  not  care,  which  of  the  two  it 

290 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

be?     And  who  knoweth  whether  a  thousand  yeares  hence  a  CHAPTER 
third  opinion  will  rise,  which  happily  shall  overthrow  these         XII 
two  precedent? 

Sic  volvenda  cetas  commutat  tempora  rerum,  Sebond 

Quodquefu.it  pretio,  fit  nullo  denique  honore,  LUCR.  v.  1286. 

Porro  aliud  succedit,  et  e  contemptibus  exit, 
Inque  dies  magis  appetitur,  floretque  repertum 
Laudibus,  et  miro  est  mortales  inter  honore. 

So  age  to  be  past-over  alter 's  times  of  things  : 

What  earst  was  most  esteem'd, 

At  last  nought-worth  is  deem'd  : 

Another  then  succeeds,  and  from  contempt  upsprings, 

Is  daily  more  desir'd,  flowreth  as  found  but  then 

With  praise  and  wondrous  honor  amongst  mortall  men. 

So  when  any  new  doctrine  is  represented  unto  us,  we  have 
great  cause  to  suspect  it,  and  to  consider,  how,  before  it  was 
invented,  the  contrary  unto  it  was  in  credit;  and  as  that 
hath  beene  reversed  by  this  latter,  a  third  invention  may 
paradventure  succeed  in  after-ages,  which  in  like  sort  shall 
front  the  second.  Before  the  principles,  which  Aristotle 
found  out,  were  in  credit,  other  principles  contented  mans 
reason,  as  his  doe  now  content  us.  What  learning  have 
these  men,  what  particular  priviledge,  that  the  course  of  our 
invention  should  rely  only  upon  them,  and  that  the  posses 
sion  of  our  beleife  shall  for  ever  hereafter  belong  to  them  ? 
They  are  no  more  exempted  from  being  rejected,  then  were 
their  fore-fathers.  If  any  man  urge  me  with  a  new  Argu 
ment,  it  is  in  me  to  imagine,  that  if  I  cannot  answere  it, 
another  can.  For,  to  believe  all  apparences,  which  we 
cannot  resolve,  is  meere  simplicitie.  It  would  then  follow, 
that  all  the  common  sort  (whereof  we  are  all  part)  should 
have  his  beliefe  turning  and  winding  like  a  weather-cocke  : 
For,  his  soule  being  soft,  and  without  resistance,  should 
uncessantly  be  enforced  to  receive  new  and  admit  other  im 
pressions  :  the  latter  ever  defacing  the  precedents  trace.  He 
that  perceiveth  himselfe  weake,  ought  to  answer,  according 
to  law  termes,  that  he  will  conferre  with  his  learned  counsel, 
or  else  referre  himselfe  to  the  wisest,  from  whom  he  hath 
had  his  prentiseship.  How  long  is  it  since  Physicke  came 
first  into  the  World  ?  It  is  reported  that  a  new  start-up 
fellow,  whom  they  call  Paracelsus,  changeth  and  subverteth 

291 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  all  the  order  of  ancient,  and  so  long  time  received  rules,  and 
XII  maintaineth  that  untill  this  day  it  hath  only  served  to  kill 

AfnRaPmcnad  Pe°P^e<  *  thinke  he  will  easily  verify  it.  But  I  suppose  it 
Sebon!  were  no  great  wisedome  to  hazard  my  life  upon  the  triall  of 
his  new-fangled  experience.  '  We  must  not  beleeve  all  men,1 
saith  the  precept,  '  since  every  man  may  say  all  things."1  It  is 
not  long  since,  that  one  of  these  professours  of  novelties,  and 
Physicall  reformations  told  me,  that  all  our  forefathers  had 
notoriously  abused  themselves  in  the  nature  and  motions  of 
the  winds,  which,  if  I  should  listen  unto  him,  he  would 
manifestly  make  me  perceive.  After  I  had  with  some 
patience  given  attendance  to  his  Arguments,  which  were  in 
deed  full  of  likelyhood,  I  demanded  of  him,  whether  they 
that  sailed  according  to  Theophrastus  his  Lawes,  went  west 
ward,  when  they  bent  their  course  Eastward  ?  Or  whether 
they  sailed  sideling,  or  backward  ?  It  is  fortune,  answered 
he  ;  but  so  it  is,  they  tooke  their  marke  amisse  :  To  whom 
I  then  replied,  that  I  had  rather  follow  the  effects,  then  his 
reason.  They  are  things  that  often  shock  together  :  and  it 
hath  beene  told  mee,  that  in  Geometry  (which  supposeth  to 
have  gained  the  high  point  of  certainty  amongst  all  sciences) 
there  are  found  unavoidable  Demonstrations,  and  which  sub 
vert  the  truth  of  all  experience :  As  lames  Peletier  tolde  me 
in  mine  owne  house,  that  he  had  found  out  two  lines,  bend 
ing  their  course  one  towards  another,  as  if  they  would  meet 
and  joyne  together ;  neverthelesse  he  affirmed,  that  even 
unto  infinity,  they  could  never  come  to  touch  one  another. 
And  the  Pyrrhonians  use  their  Arguments,  and  Reason,  but 
to  destroy  the  apparance  of  experience :  And  it  is  a  wonder 
to  see  how  far  the  supplenesse  of  our  reason,  hath  in  this 
designe  followed  them,  to  resist  the  evidence  of  effects  :  For, 
they  affirme,  that  we  move  not,  that  we  speake  not,  that 
there  is  no  weight,  nor  heat,  with  the  same  force  of  arguing, 
that  wee  averre  the  most  likeliest  things.  Ptolomey,  who 
was  an  excellent  man,  had  established  the  bounds  of  the 
world ;  All  ancient  Philosophers  have  thought  they  had  a 
perfect  measure  thereof,  except  it  were  certaine  scattered 
Ilands,  which  might  escape  their  knowledge :  It  had  beene 
to  Pyrrhonize  a  thousand  yeares  agoe,  had  any  man  gone 
about  to  make  a  question  of  the  art  of  Cosmography :  and 
292 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

the  opinions  that  have  beene  received  therof,  of  all  men  in  CHAPTER 
generall:  It  had  beene  flat  heresie  to  avouch,  that  there 
were  Antipodes.  See  how  in  our  age  an  infinite  greatnesse 
of  firme  land  hath  beene  discovered,  not  an  Hand  onely, 
nor  one  particular  country,  but  a  part  in  greatnesse  very 
neere  equall  unto  that  which  we  knew.  Our  moderne  Geo 
graphers  cease  not  to  affirme,  that  now  all  is  found,  and 
all  is  discovered ; 

Nam  quod  adest  prtssto,  placet,  et  pollere  videtur.  LUCR.  v.  1422. 

For,  what  is  present  here, 
Seemes  strong,  is  held  most  deare. 

The  question  is  now,  if  Ptolomey  was  hertofore  deceived  in 
the  grounds  of  his  reason,  whether  it  were  not  folly  in  me, 
to  trust  what  these  late  fellowes  say  of  it,  and  whether  it  be 
not  more  likely,  that  this  huge  body,  which  we  terme  the 
World,  is  another  manner  of  thing,  than  we  judge  it.  Plato 
saith,  that  it  often  changeth  his  countenance,  that  the 
Heaven,  the  Starres,  and  the  Sunne  do  somtimes  re-enverse 
the  motion  we  perceive  in  them,  changing  the  East  into  the 
West.  The  ^Egyptian  priests  told  Herodotus,  that  since 
their  first  King,  which  was  eleaven  thousand  and  odde  yeares 
(when  they  made  him  see  the  pictures  of  all  their  former 
Kings,  drawne  to  the  life  in  statues)  the  Sun  had  changed 
his  course  foure  times :  That  the  sea  and  the  earth  doe 
enterchangeably  change  one  into  another ;  that  the  worlds 
birth  is  undetermined :  The  like  said  Aristotle  and  Cicero. 
And  some  one  amongst  us  averreth,  that  it  is  altogether 
eternall,  mortal,  and  new  reviving  againe,  by  many  vicis 
situdes,  calling  Salomon  and  Esay  to  witnesse :  to  avoid 
these  oppositions,  that  God  hath  sometimes  been  a  Creator 
without  a  creature :  that  he  hath  beene  idle ;  that  he  hath 
unsaid  his  idlenesse,  by  setting  his  hand  to  this  worke,  and 
that  by  consequence  he  is  subject  unto  change.  In  the  most 
famous  Schooles  of  Greece,  the  World  is  reputed  a  God, 
framed  by  another  greater  and  mightier  God,  and  is  com 
posed  of  a  body  and  a  soule,  which  abideth  in  his  centre, 
spreading  it  selfe  by  Musicall  numbers  unto  his  circum 
ference,  divine,  thrise-happy,  very  great,  most  wise  and 
eternall.  In  it  are  other  Gods,  as  the  Sea,  the  Earth,  and 

293 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Planets,  which  mutually  entertaine  one  another  with  an  har- 
XII  monious  and  perpetual!  agitation  and  celestiall  dance  ;  som- 

An  Apologie  time  meeting,  other  times  farre-sundering  themselves ;  now 
Second0  hiding,  then  shewing  themselves ;  and  changing  place,  now 
forward,  now  backward.  Heraclitus  firmly  maintained,  that 
the  World  was  composed  of  fire,  and  by  the  Destinies  order, 
it  should  one  day  burst  forth  into  flames,  and  be  so  con 
sumed  into  cinders,  and  another  day  it  should  be  new  borne 

L.  APUL.  de      againe.     And  Apuleius  of  men  saith  ;  sigillatim  mortales ; 

Deo  Socrat.  cunctim  perpetui :  '  severally  mortall ;  altogether  everlasting." 
Alexander  writ  unto  his  mother  the  narration  of  an  ^Egyp 
tian  Priest,  drawne  from  out  their  monuments,  witnessing 
the  antiquitie  of  that  Nation,  infinite ;  and  comprehending 
the  birth  and  progresse  of  their  countries  to  the  life.  Cicero 
and  Diodorus  said  in  their  daies,  that  the  Chaldeans  kept  a 
register  of  foure  hundred  thousand  and  odde  yeares.  Aris 
totle,  Plinie,  and  others,  that  Zoroastes  lived  sixe  thousand 
yeares  before  Plato.  And  Plato  saith,  that  those  of  the 
citty  of  Sais,  have  memories  in  writing  of  eight  thousand 
yeares,  and  that  the  towne  of  Athens,  was  built  a  thousand 
yeares  before  the  citty  of  Sais.  Epicurus,  that  at  one  same 
time,  all  things  that  are,  looke  how  we  see  them,  they  are 
all  alike,  and  in  the  same  fashion,  in  divers  other  Worlds, 
which  he  would  have  spoken  more  confidently,  had  he  scene 
the  similitudes  and  correspondencies  of  this  new-found  world 
of  the  West  Indiaes,  with  ours,  both  present  and  past,  by  so 
many  strange  examples.  Truly,  when  I  consider  what  hath 
followed  our  learning  by  the  course  of  this  terrestriall  policie, 
I  have  divers  times  wondered  at  my  selfe,  to  see  in  so  great 
a  distance  of  times  and  places,  the  simpathy  or  jumping  of 
so  great  a  number  of  popular  and  wilde  opinions,  and  of 
extravagant  customes  and  beliefes,  and  which  by  no  meanes 
seeme  to  hold  with  our  naturall  discourse.  Mans  spirit  is  a 
wonderfull  worker  of  miracles.  But  this  relation  hath  yet  a 
kind  of  I  wot  not  what  more  Heteroclite :  which  is  found 
both  in  names,  and  in  a  thousand  other  things.  For  there 
were  found  Nations,  which  (as  far  as  we  know)  had  never 
heard  of  us,  where  circumcision  was  held  in  request ;  where 
great  states  and  common  wealths  were  maintained  onely  by 
women,  and  no  men :  Where  our  fasts  and  Lent  was  repre- 
294 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

sen  ted,  adding  therunto  the  abstinence  from  women  ;  where  CHAPTER 
our  crosses  were  severall  waies  in  great  esteeme ;  In  some  XIJ 
places  they  adorned  and  honored  their  sepulchres  with  them,  ^Pjj^0*0^ 
and  elsewher,  especially  that  of  Saint  Andrew,  they  em-  Sebond 
ployed  to  shield  themselves  from  nightly  visions,  and  to  lay 
them  upon  childrens  couches,  as  good  against  enchantments 
and  witch-crafts :  In  another  place,  they  found  one  made  of 
wood,  of  an  exceeding  height,  worshipped  for  the  God  of 
raine :  which  was  thrust  very  deepe  into  the  ground  :  There 
was  found  a  very  expresse  and  lively  image  of  our  Peniten 
tiaries  :  the  use  of  Miters,  the  Priestes  single  life ;  the  Art 
of  Divination  by  the  entrailes  of  sacrificed  beasts  ;  the  absti 
nence  from  all  sorts  of  flesh  and  fish,  for  their  food ;  the 
order  amongst  Priests  in  saying  of  their  divine  service,  to 
use,  a  not  vulgar,  but  a  particular  tongue  ;  and  this  erronious 
and  fond  conceipt,  that  the  first  God  was  expelled  his  throne 
by  a  younger  brother  of  his  :  That  they  were  at  first  created 
with  all  commodities,  which  afterward  by  reason  of  their 
sinnes  were  abridged  them  :  That  their  territory  hath  beene 
changed  ;  that  their  naturall  condition  hath  beene  much  im 
paired  :  That  they  have  heretofore  beene  drowned  by  the 
inundation  of  Waters  come  from  heaven,  that  none  were 
saved  but  a  few  families,  which  cast  themselves  into  the 
cracks  or  hollow  of  high  Mountaines,  which  crackes  they 
stoped  very  close,  so  that  the  Waters  could  not  enter  in, 
having  before  shut  therin  many  kinds  of  beasts  :  That  when 
they  perceived  the  Raine  to  cease,  and  Waters  to  fall,  they 
first  sent  out  certaine  doggs  which  returned  cleane-washt, 
and  wet,  they  judged  that  the  waters  were  not  yet  much 
falne ;  and  that  afterward  sending  out  some  other,  which 
seeing  to  returne  all  muddy  and  foule,  they  issued  forth  of 
the  mountaines,  to  repeople  the  world  againe,  which  they 
found  replenished  onely  with  Serpents.  There  were  places 
found,  where  they  used  the  perswasion  of  the  day  of  judge 
ment,  so  that  they  grew  wondrous  wroth  and  offended  with 
the  Spaniards,  who  in  digging  and  searching  of  riches  in 
their  graves,  scattered  here  and  there  the  bones  of  their 
deceased  friends;  saying,  that  those  dispersed  bones  could 
very  hardly  be  reconjoyned  together  againe.  They  also 
found  where  they  used  traffick  by  exchange,  and  no  other- 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  wise;  and  had  Faires  and  Markets  for  that  purpose:  They 
XI1  found  dwarfes,  and  such  other  deformed  creatures,  used  for 

rf  Ra  c£d  the  ornament  of  Mnces  tables :  They  found  the  use  of 
Sebond  hawking  and  fowling  according  to  the  Nature  of  their 
birdes :  tyrannicall  subsidies,  and  grievances  upon  subjects  ; 
delicate  and  pleasant  gardens;  dancing,  tumbling;  leaping 
and  jugling,  musike  of  instruments,  armories,  dicing-houses, 
tennisse  -  courts,  and  casting  lottes,  or  mumne-chaunce, 
wherein  they  are  often  so  earnest  and  moody,  that  they  will 
play  themselves  and  their  liberty  :  using  no  other  physicke 
but  by  charmes :  the  manner  of  writing  by  figures :  beleev- 
ing  in  one  first  man,  universall  father  of  all  people  :  The 
adoration  of  one  God,  who  heretofore  lived  man,  in  perfect 
Virginitie,  fasting,  and  pennance,  preaching  the  law  of 
Nature,  and  the  ceremonies  of  religion  ;  and  who  vanished 
out  of  the  world,  without  any  naturall  death  :  The  opinion 
of  Giants  ;  the  use  of  drunkennesse,  with  their  manner  of 
drinkes  and  drinking  and  pledging  of  healths ;  religious 
ornaments,  painted  over  with  bones  and  dead  mens  sculs ; 
surplices,  holy- Water,  and  holy- Water  sprinckles,  Women 
and  servants,  which  strivingly  present  themselves,  to  be 
burned  or  enterred  with  their  deceased  husbands  or  masters : 
a  law  that  the  eldest  or  first  borne  child  shall  succeed  and 
inherit  all;  where  nothing  is  reserved  for  Punies,  but 
obedience :  a  custome  to  the  promotion  of  certaine  officers 
of  great  authority,  and  where  he  that  is  promoted  takes 
upon  him  a  new  name,  and  quiteth  his  owne :  Where  they 
use  to  cast  lime  upon  the  knees  of  new  borne  children,  say 
ing  unto  him ;  from  dust  thou  earnest  and  to  dust  thou 
shalt  returne  againe :  the  Arts  of  Augures  or  prediction. 
These  vaine  shadowes  of  our  religion,  which  are  scene  in 
some  of  these  examples,  witnesse  the  dignity  and  divinity 
thereof.  It  hath  not  onely  in  some  sort  insinuated  it  selfe 
among  all  the  infidell  Nations,  on  this  side  by  some  imita 
tions,  but  amongst  those  barbarous  Nations  beyond,  as  it 
were  by  a  common  and  supernaturall  inspiration  :  For 
amongst  them  was  also  found  the  beliefe  of  Purgatory,  but 
after  a  new  forme :  For,  what  we  ascribe  unto  fire,  they 
impute  unto  cold,  and  imagine  that  soules  are  both  purged 
and  punished  by  the  vigor  of  an  extreame  coldnesse.  This 
296 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

example  putteth  me  in  mind  of  another  pleasant  diversity  :  CHAPTER 
For,  as  there  were  some  people  found,  who  tooke  pleasure  XII 
to  unhood  the  end  of  their  yard,  and  to  cut  off  the  fore- 
skinne,  after  the  manner  of  the  Mahometans  and  lewes, 
some  there  were  found,  that  made  so  great  a  conscience  to 
unhood  it,  that  with  little  strings,  they  caried  their  fore 
skin  very  carefully  out-streched  and  fastened  above,  for  feare 
that  end  should  see  the  aire.  And  of  this  other  diversity 
also,  that  as  we  honour  our  Kings,  and  celebrate  our  Holy- 
daies  with  decking  and  trimming  our  selves  with  the  best 
habilliments  we  have ;  in  some  regions  there,  to  shew  all 
disparity  and  submission  to  their  King,  their  subjects  pre 
sent  themselves  unto  him  in  their  basest  and  meanest 
apparrell ;  and  entring  into  his  pallace,  they  take  some  old 
torne  garment  and  put  it  over  their  other  attire,  to  the  end 
all  the  glory  and  ornament  may  shine  in  their  Soveraigne 
and  Maister. 

But  let  us  goe  on :  if  Nature  enclose  within  the  limits  of 
her  ordinary  progresse,  as  all  other  things,  so  the  beliefes, 
the  judgments  and  the  opinions  of  men  ;  if  they  have  their 
revolutions,  their  seasons,  their  birth,  and  their  death,  even 
as  Cabiches :  If  heaven  doth  move,  agitate  and  rowle  them 
at  his  pleasure,  what  powerfull  and  permanent  authority 
doe  we  ascribe  unto  them  ?  If  by  uncontroled  experience  we 
palpably  touch,  that  the  forme  of  our  being  depends  of  the 
aire,  of  the  climate,  and  of  the  soile,  wherein  we  are  borne, 
and  not  onely  the  hew,  the  stature,  the  complexion  and  the 
countenance,  but  also  the  soules  faculties  :  Et  plaga  coeli  non 
solum  ad  robor  corporum,  sed  etiam  animorum  facit.  '  The 
'  climate  helpeth  not  onely  for  strength  of  body,  but  of 
'  minds,1  saith  Vegetius  :  And  that  the  Goddesse  foundresse 
of  the  Citie  of  Athens,  chose  a  temperature  of  a  country  to 
situate  it  in,  that  might  make  the  men  wise,  as  the  ^Egyp 
tian  Priests  taught  Solon  :  Aihenis  tenue  codum  :  ex  quo  etiam  Cic.  de  Fato. 
acutiores  putantur  Attici :  crassum  Tliebis :  itaque  pingues 
Thebani,  et  valentes :  '  About  Athens  is  a  thin  aire,  whereby 
6  those  Country-men  are  esteemed  the  sharper  witted : 
'  About  Thebes  the  aire  is  grosse,  and  therefore  the  Thebans 
'  were  grosse  and  strong  of  constitution.1  In  such  manner 
that  as  fruits  and  beasts  doe  spring  up  diverse  and  different ; 

2P  297 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  So  men  are  borne,  either  more  or  lesse  warlike,  martiall,  just, 
XII     .     temperate  and  docile:  here  subject  to  wine,  there  to  theft, 

ApApologie  an(j  whoredome  ;  here  inclined  to  superstition,  addicted  to 
or  Raymond        .     n     ,.      .         ,  .  ,.,  .  ,r  . ,     , 

Sebond  mis- believing,  here  given  to  liberty,  there  to  servitude  ;  cap 
able  of  some  one  art  or  science ;  grosse-witted  or  ingenious  : 
either  obedient  or  rebellious  ;  good  or  bad,  according  as  the 
inclination  of  the  place  beareth,  where  they  are  seated  ;  and 
being  removed  from  one  soile  to  another  (as  plants  are)  they 
take  a  new  complexion :  which  was  the  cause,  that  Cirus 
would  never  permit  the  Persians  to  leave  their  barren,  rough 
and  craggie  Country,  for  to  transport  themselves  into  an 
other,  more  gentle,  more  fertile,  and  more  plaine :  saying, 
that  fat  and  delicious  countries,  make  men  wanton  and 
effeminate ;  and  fertile  soiles  yeeld  infertile  spirits.  If  som- 
time  wee  see  one  art  to  flourish,  or  a  beliefe,  and  somtimes 
another,  by  some  heavenly  influence ;  some  ages  to  produce 
this  or  that  nature,  and  so  to  encline  mankind  to  this  or 
that  biase :  mens  spirits  one  while  flourishing,  another  while 
barren,  even  as  fields  are  scene  to  be ;  what  become  of  all 
those  goodly  prerogatives,  wherewith  we  still  flatter  our 
selves  ?  Since  a  wise  man  may  mistake  himselfe  ;  yea  many 
men,  and  whole  nations ;  and  as  wee  say,  mans  nature  either 
in  one  thing  or  other,  hath  for  many  ages  together  mistaken 
her  selfe.  What  assurance  have  we  that  at  any  time  she 
leaveth  her  mistaking,  and  that  she  continueth  not  even  at 
this  day,  in  her  error  ?  Me  thinkes  amongst  other  testi 
monies  of  our  imbecilities,  this  one  ought  not  to  be  for 
gotten,  that  by  wishing  it  selfe,  man  cannot  yet  finde  out 
what  he  wanteth  ;  that  not  by  enjoying  or  possession,  but  by 
imagination  and  full  wishing,  we  cannot  all  agree  in  one,  that 
we  most  stand  in  need  of,  and  would  best  content  us.  Let 
our  imagination  have  free  liberty  to  cut  out  and  sew  at 
her  pleasure,  she  cannot  so  much  as  desire  what  is  fittest  to 
please  and  content  her. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  — quid  enim  ratione  timemus 

x-  4-  Aut  cupimus?  quid  tarn  deoctro  pede  condpis,  ut  te 

Conatus  non  pceniteat,  votique  peracti  ? 

By  reason  what  doe  we  feare,  or  desire  ? 

With  such  dexteritie  what  doest  aspire, 

But  thou  eftsoones  repentest  it, 

Though  thy  attempt  and  vow  doe  hit  ? 

298 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

That   is  the    reason  why   Socrates,  never   requested   the  CHAPTER 
gods  to  give  him  any  thing,  but  what  they  knew  to  be  good 
for  him.     And  the  publike  and  private  prayer  of  the  Lace- 
demonians,  did  meerely  implie,  that  good  and  faire  things       Sebond 
might  be  granted  them,  remitting  the  election  and  choise 
of  them  to  the  discretion  of  the  highest  power. 

Coniugium  petimus  partumque  uxoris,  at  illi  IUVEN.  Sat.  x. 

Notum  qui  pueri,  qualisque  futura  sit  uxor.  352. 

We  wish  a  wife,  wifes  breeding :  we  would  know, 
What  children  ;  shall  our  wife  be  sheep  or  shrow. 

And  the  Christian  beseecheth  God,  that  his  will  may  be 
done,  least  he  should  fall  into  that  inconvenience,  which 
Poets  faine  of  King  Midas :  who  requested  of  the  Gods, 
that  whatsoever  he  toucht,  might  be  converted  into  gold : 
his  praiers  were  heard,  his  wine  was  gold,  his  bread  gold, 
the  feathers  of  his  bed,  his  shirt,  and  his  garments  were 
turned  into  gold,  so  that  he  found  himselfe  overwhelmed 
in  the  injoying  of  his  desire,  and  being  enrich't  with  an  in 
tolerable  commoditie,  he  must  now  unpray  his  prayers : 

Attonitus  novitate  mail,  divesque  miser que,  OVID.  Met.  xi. 

Effugere  optat  opes,  et  qucB  modo  voverat,  odit.  128. 

Wretched  and  rich,  amaz'd  at  so  strange  ill, 
His  riches  he  would  flie,  hates  his  owne  will. 

Let  me  speake  of  my  selfe  ;  being  yet  very  yong,  I  be 
sought  fortune  above  all  things,  that  she  would  make  me 
a  knight  of  the  order  of  Saint  Michael,  which  in  those 
daies  was  very  rare,  and  the  highest  tipe  of  honour  the 
French  Nobilitie  aymed  at :  she  very  kindly  granted  my 
request;  I  had  it;  In  lieu  of  raising  and  advancing  me 
from  my  place  for  the  attaining  of  it,  she  hath  much  more 
graciously  entreated  me,  she  hath  debased  and  depressed  it, 
even  unto  my  shoulders  and  under.  Cleobis  and  Biton, 
Trophonius  and  Agamedes,  the  two  first  having  besought 
the  Goddesse,  the  two  latter  their  God,  of  some  recom- 
pence  worthy  their  pietie,  received  death  for  a  reward  :  So 
much  are  heavenly  opinions  different  from  ours,  concern 
ing  what  we  have  need  of.  God  might  grant  us  riches, 
honours,  long  life  and  health,  but  many  times  to  our  owne 
hurt :  For,  whatsoever  is  pleasing  to  us,  is  not  alwaies 

299 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  healthfull  for  us  ;    If  in  lieu  of  former  health,  he  send  us 
XII          death,  or  some  worse  sicknesse :     Virga  tua  et  baculus  tuus 
An  Apologie  ^sa  me  Consolata  sunt :  '  Thy  rod  and  thy  staffe  hath  com- 
Sebyond       '  forted  me;     He  doth  it  by  the  reasons  of  his  providence, 
Psalm,  xxiii.  4.  which    more    certainly   considereth    and    regardeth   what  is 
meet  for  us,  then  we  our  selves  can  doe,  and  we  ought  to 
take  it  in  good  part,  as  from  a  most  wise  and  thrice-friendly- 
hand. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  — si  consilium  vis, 

x'  346'  Permittes  ipsis  expendere  numinibus,  quid 

Conveniat  nobis,  rebusque  sit  utile  nostris : 
Charior  est  illis  homo  quam  sibi — 

If  you  will  counsell  have,  give  the  Gods  leave 
To  weigh,  what  is  most  meet  we  should  receive, 
And  what  for  our  estate  most  profit  were  : 
To  them,  then  to  himselfe  man  is  more  deare. 

For,  to  crave  honours  and  charges  of  them,  is  to  request  them 
to  cast  you  in  some  battle,  or  play  at  hazard,  or  some  such 
thing,  whereof  the  event  is  unknowen  to  you,  and  the  fruit 
uncertaine.  There  is  no  combate  amongst  Philosophers  so 
violent  and  sharpe,  as  that  which  ariseth  upon  the  question 
of  mans  chiefe  felicitie  :  from  which  (according  to  Varroes 
calculation)  arose  two  hundred  and  foure  score  Sects.  Qui 
autem  de  summo  bono  dissentit,  de  tota  Philosopliice  ratione 
disputat.  '  But  he  that  disagrees  about  the  chiefest  felicitie, 
'  cals  in  question  the  whole  course  of  Philosophic." 

HOR.  ii.  Epist.  Tres  mihi  convivce  prope  dissentire  videntur, 

ii.  61.  Poscentes  vario  multum  diversa  palato. 

Quid  dem  ?  quid  non  dem  ?  renuis  tu  quod  iubet  alter : 
Quod  petis,  id  sane  est  invisum  acidumque  duobus. 

Three  guests  of  mine  doe  seeme  allmost  at  ods  to  fall, 
Whilest  they  with  divers  taste  for  divers  things  doe  call : 
What  should  I  give  ?     What  not  ?     You  will  not,  what 

he  will : 
What  you  would,  to  them  twaine  is  hatefull,  sowre  and 

ill. 

Nature  should  thus  answere  their  contestations,  and  de 
bates.  Some  say,  our  felicitie  consisteth,  and  is  in  Vertue  : 
Others  in  voluptuousnesse  :  Others  in  yeelding  unto  Nature  : 
Some  others  in  learning  :  others  in  feeling  no  manner  of 
paine  or  sorrow :  Others  for  a  man  never  to  suffer  himselfe 

300 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

to   be  caried    away   by  apparances :  and    to    this    opinion  CHAPTER 

seemeth  this  other  of  ancient  Pithagoras  to  incline,  XI1 

An  Apologie 

Nil  admirari,  prope  res  est  una,  Numici,  of  Raymond 

Soldque,  qua  possitfacere  et  servare  beatum.  Sebond 

Sir,  nothing  to  admire,  is  th'  only  thing,  *?OR.  *•  EPist- 

That  may  keepe  happy,  and  to  happy  bring ; 

which  is  the  end  and  scope  of  the  Tyrrhenian  Sect.  Aris 
totle  asscribeth  unto  magnanimitie,  to  admire  and  wonder 
at  nothing.  And  Archesilaus  said,  that  sufferance,  and  an 
upright  and  inflexible  state  of  judgement,  were  true  felici 
ties  ;  whereas  consents  and  applications,  were  vices  and  evils. 
True  it  is,  that  where  he  establisheth  it  for  a  certaine 
Axiome,  he  started  from  Pyrrhonisme.  When  the  Pyrr- 
honians  say,  that  ataraxy  is  the  chiefe  felicitie,  which  is  the 
immobilitie  of  judgement,  their  meaning  is  not  to  speake  it 
affirmatively,  but  the  very  wavering  of  their  mind,  which 
makes  them  to  shun  downefalls,  and  to  shrowd  themselves 
under  the  shelter  of  calmenesse,  presents  this  phantasie 
unto  them,  and  makes  them  refuse  another.  Oh  how  much 
doe  I  desire,  that  whilest  I  live,  either  some  other  learned 
men,  or  Justus  Lipsius,  the  most  sufficient  and  learned  man 
now  living;  of  a  most  polished  and  judicious  wit,  true 
Cosin-germane  to  my  Turnebus,  had  both  will,  health  and 
leasure  enough,  sincerely  and  exactly,  according  to  their 
divisions  and  formes,  to  collect  into  one  volume  or  register, 
as  much  as  by  us  might  be  seene,  the  opinions  of  ancient 
Philosophy,  concerning  the  subject  of  our  being  and  cus- 
tomes,  their  controversies,  the  credit,  and  partaking  of  fac 
tions  and  sides,  the  application  of  the  Authors  and  Sectators 
lives,  to  their  precepts,  in  memorable  and  exemplarie  acci 
dents.  O  what  a  worthy  and  profitable  labor  would  it  be  ! 
Besides,  if  it  be  from  our  selves,  that  we  draw  the  regiment 
of  our  customes,  into  what  a  bottomles  confusion  doe  we 
cast  our  selves  ?  For,  what  our  reason  pers wades  us  to  be 
most  likly  for  it,  is  generally  for  every  man  to  obey  the 
lawes  of  his  country,  as  is  the  advise  of  Socrates,  inspired 
(saith  he)  by  a  divine  perswasion.  And  what  else  meaneth 
she  thereby,  but  only  that  our  devoire  or  duety  hath  no 
other  rule,  but  casuall  ?  Truth  ought  to  have  a  like  and 

301 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  universall  visage  throughout  the  world.     Law  and  justice, 
XII          if  man  knew  anv?   that  had  a  body  and  true    essence,  he 

ofRamond  WOuld  not  fasten  {i  l.°  the  condition  of  this  or  tha^  coun- 
11     tries    customes.     It   is   not    according    to    the  Persians    or 

Indians  fantazie,  that  vertue  should  take  her  forme.  Nothing 
is  more  subject  unto  a  continuall  agitation,  then  the  lawes.  I 
have  since  I  was  borne,  scene  those  of  our  neighbours  the 
English-men  changed  and  rechanged  three  or  foure  times, 
not  only  in  politike  subjects,  which  is  that  some  will  dis 
pense  of  constancy,  but  in  the  most  important  subject,  that 
possibly  can  be,  that  is  to  say,  in  religion  ;  whereof  I  am  so 
much  the  more  both  grieved  and  ashamed,  because  it  is  a 
nation,  with  which  my  countriemen  have  heretofore  had  so 
inward  and  familiar  acquaintance,  that  even  to  this  day, 
there  remaine  in  my  house  some  ancient  monuments  of  our 
former  aliance.  Nay  I  have  scene  amongst  our  selves  some 
things  become  lawfull,  which  erst  were  deemed  capitall : 
and  we  that  hold  some  others,  are  likewise  in  possibilitie, 
according  to  the  uncertainty  of  warring  fortune,  one  day 
or  other,  to  be  offenders  against  the  Majestic  both  of  God 
and  man,  if  our  justice  chance  to  fall  under  the  mercy  of 
justice;  and  in  the  space  of  few  yeares  possession,  taking  a 
contrary  essence.  How  could  that  ancient  God  more  evi 
dently  accuse,  in  humane  knowledge,  the  ignorance  of  divine 
essence,  and  teach  men  that  their  religion  was  but  a  peece  of 
their  owne  invention,  fit  to  combine  their  societie,  then  in 
declaring  (as  he  did)  to  those  which  sought  the  instruc 
tion  of  it,  by  his  sacred  Tripos,  that  the  true  worshipping 
of  God,  was  that,  which  he  found  to  be  observed  by  the 
custome  of  the  place,  where  he  lived  ?  Oh  God,  what  bond, 
or  duetie  is  it,  that  we  owe  not  to  our  Soveraigne  Crea 
tors  benignitie,  in  that  he  hath  beene  pleased  to  cleare 
and  enfranchize  our  beliefe  from  those  vagabonding  and 
arbitrary  devotions,  and  fixt  it  upon  the  eternall  Base  of 
his  holy  word  ?  What  will  Philosophic  then  say  to  us  in  this 
necessity  ?  that  we  follow  the  lawes  of  our  country,  that  is 
to  say,  this  waveing  sea  of  a  peoples  or  of  a  Princes  opinions, 
which  shall  paint  me  forth  justice  with  as  many  colours, 
and  reforme  the  same  into  as  many  visages  as  there  are 
changes  and  alterations  of  passions  in  them.  I  cannot 
302 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

have  my  judgement  so  flexible.  What  goodnesse  is  that,  CHAPTER 
which  but  yesterday  I  saw  in  credit  and  esteeme,  and  to 
morrow,  to  have  lost  all  reputation,  and  that  the  crossing 
of  a  River,  is  made  a  crime  ?  What  truth  is  that,  which 
these  Mountaines  bound,  and  is  a  lie  in  the  World  beyond 
them  ?  But  they  are  pleasant,  when  to  allow  the  Laws 
some  certainetie,  they  say,  that  there  be  some  firme,  per- 
petuall  and  immoveable,  which  they  call  naturall,  and  by 
the  condition  of  their  proper  essence,  are  imprinted  in 
man-kind  :  of  which  some  make  three  in  number,  some 
foure,  some  more,  some  lesse :  an  evident  token,  that  it  is 
a  marke  as  doubtfull  as  the  rest.  Now  are  they  so  unfor 
tunate  (for,  how  can  I  terme  that  but  misfortune,  that  of 
so  infinite  a  number  of  lawes,  there  is  not  so  much  as  one  to 
be  found,  which  the  fortune  or  temeritie  of  chance  hath 
graunted  to  be  universally  received,  and  by  the  consent  of 
unanimitie  of  all  Nations  to  be  admitted  ?)  they  are  (I  say) 
so  miserable,  that  of  these  three  or  foure  choise-selected  lawes, 
there  is  not  one  alone,  that  is  not  impugned  or  disallowed, 
not  by  one  nation,  but  by  many.  Now  is  the  generalitie  of 
approbation,  the  onely  likely  ensigne,  by  which  they  may 
argue  some  lawes  to  naturall :  For,  what  nature  had  indeed 
ordained  us,  that  should  we  doubtlesse  follow  with  one  com 
mon  consent ;  and  not  one  onely  nation,  but  every  man  in 
particular,  should  have  a  feeling  of  the  force  and  violence, 
which  he  should  urge  him  with,  that  would  incite  him  to 
contrarie  and  resist  that  law.  Let  them  all  (for  examples 
sake)  shew  me  but  one  of  this  condition.  Protagoras  and 
Ariston  gave  the  justice  of  the  lawes  no  other  essence,  but 
the  authoritie  and  opinion  of  the  law-giver,  and  that  ex- 
cepted,  both  Good  and  Honest  lost  their  qualities,  and  re 
mained  but  vaine  and  idle  names,  of  indifferent  things. 
Thrasymachus  in  Plato,  thinkes  there  is  no  other  right, 
but  the  commoditie  of  the  superiour.  There  is  nothing 
wherein  the  world  differeth  so  much,  as  in  customes  and 
lawes.  Some  things  are  here  accompted  abominable,  which 
in  another  place  are  esteemed  commendable:  as  in  Lace- 
demonia,  the  slight  and  subtlety  in  stealing.  Manages  in 
proximity  of  blood  are  amongst  us  forbidden  as  capitall, 
elsewhere  they  are  allowed  and  esteemed  ; 

303 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  —gentes  esse  feruntur, 

XII  In  quibus  et  nato  genitricc,  et  nata  parenti 

An  Apologie  lungitur,  et  pietas  geminato  crescit  amore. 

of  Raymond  There  are  some  people,  where  the  mother  weddeth 

Her  sonne,  the  daughter  her  owne  father  beddeth, 
And  so  by  doubling  love,  their  kindnesse  spreddeth. 

The  murthering  of  children  and  of  parents  ;  the  communica 
tion  with  women;  traffick  of  robbing  and  stealing;  free  licence 
to  all  manner  of  sensuality  :  to  conclude,  there  is  nothing  so 
extreame  and  horrible,  but  is  found  to  be  received  and 
allowed  by  the  custome  of  some  nation.  It  is  credible  that 
there  be  naturall  lawes ;  as  may  be  scene  in  other  creatures, 
but  in  us  they  are  lost :  this  goodly  humane  reason  engraft 
ing  it  selfe  among  all  men,  to  sway  and  command,  con 
founding  and  topsi-turving  the  visage  of  all  things,  according 
to  her  inconstant  vanitie  and  vaine  inconstancy.  Nihil 
itaque  amplius  nostrum  est,  quod  nostrum  dico,  artis  est. 
'  Therefore  nothing  more  is  ours :  all  that  I  call  ours, 
4  belongs  to  Art.'  Subjects  have  divers  lustres,  and  several! 
considerations,  whence  the  diversity  of  opinions  is  chiefly 
engendred.  One  nation  vieweth  a  subject  with  one  visage, 
and  thereon  it  staies ;  an  other  with  an  other.  Nothing 
can  be  imagined  so  horrible,  as  for  one  to  eate  and  devoure 
his  owne  father.  Those  people,  which  anciently  kept  this 
custome,  hold  it  neverthelesse  for  a  testimonie  of  pietie  and 
good  affection  :  seeking  by  that  meane  to  give  their  fathers 
the  worthiest  and  most  honorable  sepulchre,  harboring  their 
fathers  bodies  and  reliques  in  themselves  and  in  their 
marrow  ;  in  some  sort  reviving  and  regenerating  them  by 
the  transmutation  made  in  their  quicke  flesh,  by  digestion 
and  nourishment.  It  is  easie  to  be  considered  what  abomi 
nation  and  cruelty  it  had  beene,  in  men  accustomed  and 
trained  in  this  inhumane  superstition,  to  cast  the  carcases  of 
their  parents  into  the  corruption  of  the  earth,  as  food  for 
beasts  and  wormes.  Licurgus  wisely  considereth  in  theft, 
the  vivacitie,  diligence,  courage,  and  nimblenesse,  that  is 
required  in  surprising  or  taking  any  thing  from  ones  neigh 
bour,  and  the  commoditie  which  thereby  redoundeth  to  the 
common  wealth,  that  every  man  heedeth  more  curiously  the 
keeping  of  that  which  is  his  owne  :  and  judged,  that  by  this 
304 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

twofold  institution  to  assaile  and  to  defend,  much  good  was  CHAPTER 
drawne  for  military  discipline  (which  was  the  principall  XII  . 
Science  and  chiefe  vertue,  wherin  he  would  enable  that  Q^j^^ond 
nation)  of  greater  respect  and  more  consideration,  then  was  Seboiid 
the  disorder  and  injustice  of  prevailing  and  taking  other 
mens  goods.  Dionysius  the  tyrant  offered  Plato  a  robe 
made  after  the  Persian  fashion,  long,  damasked  and  per 
fumed  :  But  he  refused  the  same,  saying,  that  being  borne  a 
man,  he  would  not  willingly  put-on  a  womans  garment: 
But  Aristippus  tooke  it,  with  this  answere,  that  no  garment 
could  corrupt  a  chaste  minde.  His  Friends  reproved  his 
demissenesse,  in  being  so  little  offended,  that  Dionysius  had 
spitten  in  his  face.  '  Tut '  (said  he)  c  Fishers  suffer  them- 
'  selves  to  be  washed  over  head  and  eares,  to  get  a  gudgion.' 
Diogenes  washing  of  coleworts  for  his  dinner,  seeing  him 
passe  by,  said  unto  him,  '  If  thou  couldest  live  with  coleworts, 
'  thou  wouldest  not  court  and  faune  upon  a  tyrant ';  to  whom 
Aristippus  replied  ;  '  If  thou  couldest  live  among  men,  thou 
4  wouldest  not  wash  coleworts/  See  here  how  reason  yeeldeth 
apparance  to  divers  effects.  It  is  a  pitcher  with  two  eares, 
which  a  man  may  take  hold  on,  either  by  the  right  or  left 
hand. 

— bellum  6  terra  hospita  portas,  VIRG.  &n.  iii. 

Bella  armantur  equi,  bellum  h&c  armenta  minantur :  559- 

Sed  tamen  ijdem  olim  curru  succedere  sueti 

Quadrupedes,  etfrcsna  jugo  concordia  ferre, 

Spes  est  pads — 

O  stranger-harb'ring  land,  thou  bringst  us  warre  ; 

Steeds  serve  for  warre  ; 

These  heards  doe  threaten  jarre. 

Yet  horses  erst  were  wont  to  draw  our  waines, 

And  harnest  matches  beare  agreeing  raines, 

Hope  is  hereby  that  wee, 

In  peace  shall  well  agree. 

Solon  being  importuned  not  to  shed  vaine  and  booties 
teares  for  the  death  of  his  sonne ;  '  That  "s  the  reason  "* 
(answered  hee)  4 1  may  more  justly  shed  them,  because  they 
'  are  bootlesse  and  vaine.1  Socrates  his  wife,  exasperated  her 
griefe  by  this  circumstance ;  '  Good  Lord "*  (said  she)  '  how 
'  unjustly  doe  these  bad  judges  put  him  to  death  ! '  '  What  ? 
'  Wouldest  thou  rather  they  should  execute  me  justly  ? n 

2Q  305 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  replide  he  to  her.     It  is  a  fashion  amongst  us  to  have  holes 
XII     .     bored  in   our  eares  :    the   Greekes   held  it  for  a  badge  of 

n    po  ogie  bon(jaopei     \ye  hide  our  selves  when  we  will  enioy  our  wives  : 
of  Kaymond  »  .  .  J  y  . 

Sebond       The  Indians  doe  it  in  open  view  of  all  men.     Ihe  Scithians 

were  wont  to  sacrifice  strangers  in  their  Temples,  whereas  in 
other  places  Churches  are  Sanctuaries  for  them. 

IUVE.  Sat.  xv.  Inde  furor  vulgi,  quod  numina  vicinorum 

36.  Odit  quisque  locus,  cum  solos  credat  habendos 

Esse  Deos  quos  ipse  colit — 

The  vulgar  hereupon  doth  rage,  because 

Each   place  doth   hate  their   neighbours   soveraigne 

lawes. 

And  onely  Gods  doth  deeme, 
Those  Gods,,  themselves  esteeme. 

I  have  heard  it  reported  of  a  ludge,  who  when  he  met 
with  any  sharp  conflict  bet  wee  ne  Bartolus  and  Baldus,  or 
with  any  case  admitting  contrarietie,  was  wont  to  write  in 
the  margin  of  his  book,  'A  question  for  a  friend,"  which  is  to 
say,  that  the  truth  was  so  entangled,  and  disputable,  that  in 
such  a  case  he  might  favour  which  party  he  should  think 
good.  There  was  no  want  but  of  spirit  and  sufficiency,  if  he 
set  not  every  where  through  his  books,  'A  Question  for  a 
'  friend.'  The  Advocates  and  ludges  of  our  time  find  in  all 
cases  byases  too-too-many,  to  fit  them  where  they  think  good. 
To  so  infinite  a  science,  depending  on  the  authority  of  so 
many  opinions,  and  of  so  arbitrary  a  subject,  it  cannot  be, 
but  that  an  exceeding  confusion  of  judgements  must  arise. 
There  are  very  few  processes  so  cleare,  but  the  Lawiers  advises 
upon  them  will  be  found  to  differ :  What  one  company  hath 
judged,  another  will  adjudge  the  contrary,  and  the  very  same 
will  another  time  change  opinion.  Whereof  we  see  ordinarie 
examples  by  this  licence,  which  wonderfully  blemisheth  the 
authoritie  and  lustre  of  our  law,  never  to  stay  upon  one 
sentence,  but  to  run  from  one  to  another  ludge,  to  decide 
one  same  case.  Touching  the  libertie  of  Philosophicall 
opinions,  concerning  vice  and  vertue,  it  is  a  thing  needing  no 
great  extension,  and  wherein  are  found  many  advises,  which 
were  better  unspoken,  then  published  to  weake  capacities. 
Arcesilaus  was  wont  to  say,  that  in  pailliardize,  it  was  not 
worthy  consideration,  where,  on  what  side,  and  how  it  was 

306 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

done.    Et  obsccenas  voluptates,  si  natura  requirit,  non  genere,  CHAPTER 
aut  loco,  aut  ordine,  sedjbrma,  cetate^Jigura  metiendas  Epicurus          XII 

putat.    Ne  amores  quidem  sanctos  a  sapiente  alienos  esse  arbi-  An  Apologie 
\  ^  *       ,  r,  .  ,.   of  Raymond 

trantur.     Quceramus  ad  quam  vsque  cetatem  luvenes  amandi       Sebond 

sint.  '  Obscene  pleasures,  if  nature  require  them,  the  Epicure 
'  esteemeth  not  to  be  measured  by  kind,  place,  or  order ; 
'  but  by  forme,  age,  and  fashion.  Nor  doth  he  thinke  that 
'  holy  loves  should  be  strange  from  a  wiseman.  Let  us  then 
'  question  to  what  yeares  yong  folke  may  be  beloved.1  These 
two  last  Stoicke-places,  and  upon  this  purpose,  the  reproch 
of  Diogarchus  to  Plato  himselfe,  shew  how  many  excessive 
licenses,  and  out  of  common  use,  soundest  Philosophy  doth 
tolerate.  Lawes  take  their  authoritie  from  possession  and 
custome.  It  is  dangerous  to  reduce  them  to  their  beginning  : 
In  rowling  on,  they  swell,  and  grow  greater  and  greater,  as 
doe  our  rivers  :  follow  them  upward,  unto  their  source,  and 
you  shall  find  them  but  a  bubble  of  water,  scarse  to  be  dis 
cerned,  which  in  gliding  on  swelleth  so  proud,  and  gathers 
so  much  strength.  Behold  the  ancient  considerations,  which 
have  given  the  first  motion  to  this  famous  torrent,  so  full  of 
dignitie,  of  honour  and  reverence,  you  shall  find  them  so 
light  and  weake,  that  these  men  which  will  weigh  all,  and 
complaine  of  reason,  and  who  receive  nothing  upon  trust  and 
authoritie,  it  is  no  wonder  if  their  judgments  are  often  far- 
distant  from  common  judgement.  Men  that  take  Natures 
first  image  for  a  patterne,  it  is  no  marvaile,  if  in  most  of 
their  opinions,  they  misse  the  common-beaten  path.  As  for 
example  ;  few  amongst  them  would  have  approved  the  forced 
conditions  of  our  manages  and  most  of  them  would  have 
had  women  in  community,  and  without  any  private  respect. 
They  refused  our  ceremonies  :  Chrysippus  said,  that  some 
Philosophers  would  in  open  view  of  all  men  shew  a  dozen  of 
tumbling-tricks,  yea,  without  any  slops  or  breeches,  for  a 
dozen  of  olives.  He  would  hardly  have  pers waded  Calis- 
thenes  to  refuse  his  faire  daughter  Agarista  to  Hippoclides, 
because  he  had  scene  him  graft  the  forked  tree  in  her  upon 
a  table.  Metrocles  somewhat  indiscreetly,  as  he  was  disput 
ing  in  his  Schole,  in  presence  of  his  Auditorie  let  a  fart,  for 
shame  whereof  he  afterwards  kept  his  house,  and  could  not 
be  drawen  abroad,  untill  such  time  as  Crates  went  to  visit 

307 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  him,  who  to  his  perswasions  and  reasons,  adding  the  example 
XII  of  his  liberty,  began  to  fart  a  vie  with  him,  and  to  remove 

An  Apologie  j.jj-g  scrup}e  from  off  his  conscience  ;  and  moreover  won  him 
Seborid1"  ^°  n*s  Stoicall  (the  more  free)  Sect,  from  the  Peripateticall 
(and  more  civill)  one,  which  thetherunto  he  had  followed. 
That  which  we  call  civility,  not  to  dare  to  doe  that  openly, 
which  amongst  us  is  both  lawfull  and  honest,  being  done  in 
secret,  they  termed  folly  :  And  to  play  the  wilie  Foxe,  in 
concealing  and  disclaming  what  nature,  custome,  and  our 
desire  publish  and  proclame  of  our  actions,  they  deemed  to 
be  a  vice.  And  thought  it  a  suppressing  of  Venus  her 
mysteries,  to  remove  them  from  out  the  private  vestry  of  her 
temple,  and  expose  them  to  the  open  view  of  the  people, 
And  that  to  draw  her  sports  from  out  the  curtines,  was  to 
loose  them.  Shame  is  matter  of  some  consequence.  Conceal 
ing,  reservation,  and  circumspection,  are  parts  of  estimation. 
That,  sensuality  under  the  maske  of  Vertu  did  very  inge 
niously  procure  not  to  be  prostituted  in  the  midst  of  high- 
waies,  not  trodden  upon,  and  seen  by  the  common  sort ; 
alledging  the  dignity  and  commodity  of  her  wonted  Cabinets. 
Wherupon  some  say,  that  to  forbid  and  remove  the  common 
brothel-houses,  is  not  only  to  spread  whoredome  every  where, 
which  only  was  allotted  to  those  places,  but  also  to  incite 
idle  and  vagabond  men  to  that  vice,  by  reason  of  the 
difficultie. 

MART.  iii.  Mtschus  es  Aufidice  qui  vir  Corvine  fuisti, 

Epig.  Ixx.  Rivalis  fuerat  qui  tuus,  ille  vir  est. 

Cur  aliena  placet  tibi,  qua  tua  non  placet  uxor  ? 
Nunquid  securus  non  potes  arrigere  ? 

This  experience  is  diversified  by  a  thousand  examples. 

Ib.  i.  Epig.  Nullus  in  urbefuit  tota,  qui  tangere  vellet 

Ixxiv.  Uocorem  gratis  Cceciliane  tuam, 

Dum  licuit :  sed  nunc  positis  custodibus,  ing  ens 
Turba  fututorum  est,  ingeniosus  homo  es. 

A  Philosopher  being  taken  with  the  deed,  was  demaunded, 
what  he  did  :  answered  very  mildly,  4 1  plant  man,1  blushing 
no  more  being  found  so  napping,  then  if  he  had  bin  taken 
setting  of  Garlike.  It  is  (as  I  suppose)  of  a  tender  and 
respective  opinion,  that  a  notable  and  religious  Author,  holds 

308 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

this  action  so  necessarily-bound  to  secrecy  and  shame,  that  CHAPTER 
in  Cynike  embracements  and  dalliances,  he  could  not  be  per-  XII  . 
swaded  that  the  worke  should  come  to  her  end  ;  but  rather,  0fD  Raymond 
that  it  lingred  and  staid,  only  to  represent  wanton  gestures,  Sebond 
and  lascivious  motions,  to  maintaine  the  impudency  of  their 
schooles-profession  :  and  that  to  powre  forth  what  shame 
had  forced  and  bashfullnesse  restrained,  they  had  also  after 
ward  need  to  seeke  some  secret  place.  He  had  not  scene 
far-enough  into  their  licenciousnesse  :  For,  Diogenes  in 
sight  of  all,  exercising  his  Masturbation,  bred  a  longing 
desire,  in  the  by-standers,  that  in  such  sort  they  might  fill 
their  bellies  by  rubbing  or  clawing  the  same.  To  those  that 
asked  him,  why  he  sought  for  no  fitter  place  to  feed  in,  then 
in  the  open  frequented  high-way,  he  made  answere,  'It  is 
'  because  I  am  hungry  in  the  open  frequented  high -way." 
The  Philosophers  Women,  which  medled  with  their  Sects,  did 
likewise  in  all  places,  and  without  any  discretion  meddle  with 
their  bodies  :  And  Crates  had  never  received  Hipparchia  into 
his  fellowship,  but  upon  condition,  to  follow  all  the  customes 
and  fashions  of  his  order.  These  Philosophers  set  an  extreme 
rate  on  vertue  ;  and  rejected  al  other  disciplins,  except  the 
morall ;  hence  is  it,  that  in  all  actions,  they  ascribed  the 
Soveraigne  authority  to  the  election  of  their  wise,  yea,  and 
above  al  lawes :  and  appointed  no  other  restraint  unto 
voluptuousnes,  but  the  moderation,  and  preservation  of 
others  liberty.  Heraclitus  and  Protagoras,  forsomuch  as 
wine  seemeth  biter  unto  the  sick,  and  pleasing  to  the 
healthy  ;  and  an  Oare  crooked  in  the  water,  and  straight  to 
them  that  see  it  above  water,  and  such-like  contrary  appar- 
ances,  which  are  found  in  some  subjects  ;  argued  that  all 
subjects  had  the  causes  of  these  apparances  in  them,  and  that 
there  was  som  kind  of  bitternes  in  the  wine,  which  had  a  re 
ference  unto  the  sickmans  tast ;  in  the  Oare  a  certain  crooked 
quality,  having  relation  to  him  that  seeth  it  in  the  water. 
And  so  of  all  things  else.  Which  implieth,  that  all  is  in 
all  things,  and  by  consequence  nothing  in  any :  for  either 
nothing  is,  or  all  is.  This  opinion  put  me  in  mind  of  the 
experience  we  have,  that  there  is  not  any  one  sense  or  visage, 
either  straight  or  crooked,  bitter  or  sweet,  but  mans  wit 
shall  find  in  the  writings,  which  he  undertaketh  to  runne- 

309 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  over.     In  the  purest,  most  unspotted,  and  most  absolutely- 
perfect-word,  that  possibly  can  be,  how  many  errors,  fals- 

ofnifcP  moSl  hoods'  and  lies  have  beene  made  to  Proceede  from-it  ?  What 
Sebond  heresie  hath  not  found  testimonies  and  ground  sufficient, 
both  to  undertake  and  to  maintaine  it  selfe  ?  It  is  therefore, 
that  the  Authors  of  such  errors  will  never  goe  from  this 
proofe  of  the  Testimony  of  words  interpretation.  A  man 
of  worth,  going  about  by  authority  to  approve  the  search 
of  the  Philosophers  stone,  (wherein  he  was  overwhelmd) 
alleadged  at  least  five  or  six  severall  passages  out  of  the 
holy  bible  unto  me,  upon  which  (he  said)  he  had  at  first 
grounded  himselfe,  for  the  discharge  of  his  conscience  (for 
he  is  a  man  of  the  Ecclesiasticall  profession)  and  truly  the 
invention  of  them,  was  not  only  pleasant,  but  also  very  fitly 
applied  to  the  defence  of  this  goodly  and  mind-inchanting 
science.  This  way  is  the  credit  of  divining  fables  attained 
to.  There  is  no  prognosticate^  if  he  have  but  this  authority, 
that  any  one  wil  but  vouchsafe  to  read  him  over,  and 
curiously  to  search  al  the  infoldings  and  lustres  of  his  words, 
but  a  man  shall  make  him  say  what  he  pleaseth,  as  the 
Sibils.  There  are  so  many  meanes  of  interpretation,  that  it 
is  hard,  be  it  flat-long,  side-long,  or  edge-long,  but  an  in 
genious  and  pregnant  wit,  shal  in  all  subjects  meet  with 
some  aire  that  wil  fit  his  turn.  Therfore  is  a  clowdy,  darke, 
and  ambiguous  stile  found  in  so  frequent  and  ancient 
custome.  That  the  Author  may  gaine,  to  draw,  allure,  and 
busie  posterity  to  himselfe,  which  not  only  the  sufficiency, 
but  the  casuall  favour  of  the  matter,  may  gaine  as  much  or 
more.  As  for  other  matters,  let  him,  be  it  either  through 
foolishnes  or  subtilty,  shew  himself  somwhat  obscure  and 
divers,  it  is  no  matter,  care  not  he  for  that.  A  number  of 
spirits  sifting,  and  tossing  him  over,  will  find  and  expresse 
sundry  formes,  either  according,  or  collaterally,  or  contrary 
to  his  owne,  all  which  shall  do  him  credit.  He  shall  see  him 
selfe  enriched  by  the  meanes  of  his  Disciples,  as  the  Gram- 
mer  Schoole  Maisters.  It  is  that,  which  hath  made  many 
things  of  nothing,  to  passe  very  currant,  that  hath  brought 
divers  books  in  credit,  and  charged  with  all  sorts  of  matter, 
that  any  hath  but  desired  :  one  selfesame  thing,  admitting 
a  thousand  and  a  thousand,  and  as  many  severall  images,  and 
310 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

divers  considerations,  as  it  best  pleaseth  us.     Is  it  possible,  CHAPTER 
that  ever  Homer  meant  all  that,  which  some  make  him  to          XII 

have  meant :  And  that  he  prostrated  himselfe  to  so  many,  An  Apologie 

*Vl.   .  -r        .  „      ,    .     •7'    oi  Kaymond 

and    so    severall    shapes,    as,   Divines,    Lawiers,    Captames,       Sebond 

Philosophers  and  all  sort  of  people  else,  which,  how  diversly 
and  contrary  soever  it  be  they  treat  of  sciences,  do  notwith 
standing  wholy  rely  upon  him,  and  refer  themselves  unto 
him  ;  as  a  Generall  Maister  for  all  offices,  workes,  sciences, 
and  tradsmen  and  an  universall  counsellor  in  all  enterprises  ? 
whosoever  hath  had  need  of  Oracles  or  Predictions,  and 
would  apply  them  to  himselfe,  hath  found  them  in  him  for  his 
purpose.  A  notable  man,  and  a  good  friend  of  mine,  would 
make  one  marvel  to  heare  what  strange  far-fetcht  conceits, 
and  admirable  affinities,  in  favor  of  our  religion,  he  maketh 
to  derive  from  him  ;  And  can  hardly  be  drawne  from  this 
opinion,  but  that  such  was  Homers  intent  and  meaning  (yet 
is  Homer  so  familiar  unto  him,  as  I  thinke  no  man  of  our 
age  is  better  acquainted  with  him).  And  what  he  finds  in 
favour  of  our  religion,  many  ancient  learned  men,  have 
found  in  favour  of  theirs.  See  how  Plato  is  tossed  and 
turned  over,  every  man  endevoring  to  apply  him  to  his 
purpose,  giveth  him  what  construction  he  list.  He  is 
wrested  and  inserted  to  all  new-fangled  opinions,  that  the 
world  receiveth  or  alloweth  of,  and  according  to  the  different 
course  of  subjects  is  made  to  be  repugnant  unto  himselfe. 
Every  one  according  to  his  sense  makes  him  to  disavow  the 
customes  that  were  lawfull  in  his  daies,  in  asmuch  as  they 
are  unlawfull  in  these  times.  All  which  is  very  lively  and 
strongly  maintained,  according  as  the  wit  and  learning  of 
the  interpreter  is  strong  and  quicke.  Upon  the  ground 
which  Heraclitus  had,  and  that  sentence  of  his  ;  that  all 
things  had  those  shapes  in  them,  which  men  found  in  them. 
And  Democritus  out  of  the  very  same  drew  a  clean  contrarie 
conclusion,  id  est,  that  subjects  had  nothing  at  all  in  them 
of  that  which  we  found  in  them  ;  And  forasmuch  as  honny 
was  sweet  to  one  man,  and  bitter  to  another,  he  argued  that 
honny  was  neither  sweet  nor  bitter.  The  Pyrrhonians  would 
say,  they  know  not  whether  it  be  sweet  or  bitter,  or  both,  or 
neither  :  for,  they  ever  gain  the  highest  point  of  doubting. 
The  Cyrenaicks  held,  that  nothing  was  perceptible  outwardly, 

311* 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  only  that  was  perceivable,  which  by  the  inward  touch  or 
feeling,  touched  or  concerned  us,  as  griefe  and  sensuality, 
distinguishing  neither  tune,  nor  collours,  but  onely  certaine 
Sebond  affections,  that  came  to  us  of  them  ;  and  that  man  had  no  other 
seate  of  his  judgement.  Protagoras  deemed,  that  to  be  true 
to  all  men,  which  to  all  men  seemeth  so.  The  Epicurians 
place  all  judgement  in  the  senses,  and  in  the  notice  of  things, 
and  in  voluptuousnesse.  Platoes  mind  was,  that  the  judg 
ment  of  truth,  and  truth  it  selfe  drawne  from  opinions  and 
senses,  belonged  to  the  spirit,  and  to  cogitation.  This  dis 
course  hath  drawne  me  to  the  consideration  of  the  senses, 
wherein  consisteth  the  greatest  foundation  and  triall  of  our 
ignorance.  Whatsoever  is  knowne,  is  without  peradventure 
knowne  by  the  faculty  of  the  knower  :  For,  since  the  judge 
ment  commeth  from  the  operation  of  him  that  judgeth, 
reason  requireth,  that  he  performe  and  act  this  operation  by 
his  meanes  and  will,  and  not  by  others  compulsion  :  as  it 
would  follow  if  wee  knew  things  by  the  force,  and  according 
to  the  law  of  their  essence.  Now  all  knowledge  is  addressed 
unto  us  by  the  senses,  they  are  our  maisters  : 

LUCR.  v.  102.  — via  qua  munitafidei 

Proximo,  fert  humanum  in pectus,  templaque  mentis: 

Whereby  a  way  for  credit  lead's  well-linde 
Into  mans  breast  arid  temple  of  his  minde. 

Science  begins  by  them  and  in  them  is  resolved.  After  all,  we 
should  know  no  more  then  a  stone,  unlesse  we  know,  that  here 
is,  sound,  smell,  light,  savor,  measure,  weight,  softnesse,  hard- 
nesse,  sharpnesse,  colour,  smoothnesse,  breadth  and  depth. 
Behold  here  the  platforme  of  all  the  frame,  and  principles  of 
the  building  of  all  our  knowledge.  And  according  to  some, 
science  is  nothing  else,  but  what  is  knowne  by  the  senses. 
Whosoever  can  force  me  to  contradict  my  senses,  hath  me 
fast  by  the  throate,  and  cannot  make  me  recoyle  one  foote 
backward.  The  senses  are  the  beginning  and  end  of  humane 
knowledge. 

Ib.  iv.  480.  Invenies  primis  ab  sensibus  esse  creatam 

Notitiam  veri,  neque  census  posse  refelli, 
Quid  maiorefide  porro  quam  sensus  haberi 
484-  Debet?— 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

You  shall  finde  knowledge  of  the  truth  at  first  was  bred  CHAPTER 
From  our  first  senses,  nor  can  senses  be  misse-led.  XII 

What,  then  our  senses,  should  An  Apologie 

With  us  more  credit  hold  ?  of  Raymond 

C     lT         A 

Attribute  as  little  as  may  be  unto  them,  yet  must  this 
ever  be  graunted  them,  that  all  our  instruction  is  addressed 
by  their  meanes  and  intermission.  Cicero  saith,  that  Chrysip- 
pus  having  assaid  to  abate  the  power  of  his  senses,  and  of 
their  vertue,  presented  contrary  arguments  unto  himselfe, 
and  so  vehement  oppositions,  that  he  could  not  satisfie  him 
selfe.  Wherupon  Carneades  (who  defended  the  contrary 
part)  boasted,  that  he  used  the  very  same  weapons  and  words 
of  Chrysippus  to  combate  against  him  ;  and  therefore  cried 
out  upon  him,  '  Oh  miserable  man  !  thine  owne  strength  hath 
'  foiled  thee.'  There  is  no  greater  absurditie  in  our  judgment, 
then  to  maintaine,  that  fire  heateth  not,  that  light  shineth 
not,  that  in  iron  there  is  neither  weight  nor  firmenesse,  which 
are  notices  our  senses  bring  unto  us :  Nor  beliefe  or  science 
in  man,  that  may  be  compared  unto  that,  in  certaintie.  The 
first  consideration  I  have  upon  the  senses  subject,  is,  that  I 
make  a  question,  whether  man  be  provided  of  all  naturall 
senses,  or  no.  I  see  divers  creatures,  that  live  an  entire  and 
perfect  life,  some  without  sight,  and  some  without  hearing ; 
who  knoweth  whether  we  also  want  either  one,  two,  three, 
or  many  senses  more  :  For,  if  we  want  any  one,  our  discourse 
cannot  discover  the  want  or  defect  thereof.  It  is  the  senses 
priviledge,  to  be  the  extreame  bounds  of  our  perceiving. 
There  is  nothing  beyond  them,  that  may  stead  us  to  discover 
them :  No  one  sense  can  discover  another. 

An  poterunt  oculos  aures  reprehendere,  an  aures  LUCR.  iv.  48$ 

Tactus,  an  hunc  porro  tactum  sapor  arguet  oris, 

An  confutabunt  nares,  oculive  revincent  ? 

Can  eares  the  eyes,  or  can  touch  reprehend 

The  eares,  or  shall  mouthes-taste  that  touch  amend  ? 

Shall  our  nose  it  confute, 

Or  eyes  gainst  it  dispute  ? 

They  all  make  the  extreamest  line  of  our  facultie. 

— seorsum  cuique  potestas  49 l  • 

Divisa  est,  sua  vis  cuique  est — 

To  teach  distinctly  might 

Is  shar'de  ;  each  hath  its  right. 

2R  313 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  It  is  impossible  to  make  a  man  naturally  blind,  to  conceive 
XII  that  he  seeth  not ;  impossible  to  make  him  desire  to  see, 

^iUPOl°cSd  and  sorrow  his  defect-  Therefore  ought  we  not  to  take 
Sebomi  assurance,  that  our  mind  is  contented  and  satisfied  with 
those  we  have,  seeing  it  hath  not  wherewith  to  feel  her 
owne  malady,  and  perceive  her  imperfection,  if  it  be  in 
any.  It  is  impossible  to  tell  that  blind  man  any  thing, 
either  by  discourse,  argument,  or  similitude,  that  lodgeth  any 
apprehension  of  light,  colour,  or  sight  in  his  imagination. 
There  is  nothing  more  backward,  that  may  push  the  senses 
to  any  evidence.  The  blind-borne,  which  we  perceive  desire 
to  se,  it  is  not  to  understand  what  they  require ;  they  have 
learn't  of  us,  that  something  they  want,  and  something 
they  desire,  that  is  in  us,  with  the  effects  and  conse 
quences  thereof,  which  they  call  good  :  Yet  wot  not  they 
what  it  is,  nor  apprehend  they  it  neere  or  far.  I  have 
seene  a  Gentleman  of  a  good  house,  borne  blind,  at  least 
blind  in  such  an  age,  that  he  knowes  not  what  sight  is ;  he 
understandeth  so  little  what  he  wanteth,  that  as  we  doe,  he 
useth  words  fitting  sight,  and  applieth  them  after  a  manner 
onely  proper  and  peculiar  to  himselfe.  A  child  being  brought 
before  him  to  whom  he  was  god-father,  taking  him  in  his 
armes,  he  said,  Good  Lord  what  a  fine  child  this  is  !  it  is  a 
goodly  thing  to  see  him  :  What  a  cherefull  countenance  he 
hath,  how  prettily  he  looketh.  He  will  say  as  one  of  us, 
This  hall  hath  a  faire  prospect  :  It  is  very  faire  weather : 
The  Sunne  shines  cleare.  Nay,  which  is  more :  because  hunt 
ing,  hawking,  tennis-play,  and  shuting  at  buts  are  our 
common  sports  and  exercises  (for  so  he  hath  heard)  his  mind 
will  be  so  affected  unto  them,  and  he  wil  so  busie  himselfe 
about  them,  that  he  will  thinke  to  have  as  great  an  interest 
in  them,  as  any  of  us,  and  shew  himselfe  as  earnestly  passion 
ate,  both  in  liking  and  disliking  them  as  any  else ;  yet  doth 
he  conceive  and  receive  them  but  by  hearing.  If  he  be  in  a 
faire  champain  ground,  where  he  may  ride,  they  will  tell  him, 
yonder  is  a  Hare  started,  or  the  Hare  is  killed,  he  is  as  busily 
earnest  of  his  game,  as  he  heareth  others  to  be,  that  have 
perfect  sight.  Give  him  a  ball,  he  takes  it  in  the  left  hand, 
and  with  the  right  strikes  it  away  with  his  racket ;  In  a 
piece  he  shutes  at  randome ;  and  is  well  pleased  with  what 
314 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

his  men  tell  him,  be  it  high  or  wide.  Who  knowes  whether  CHAPTER 
mankind  commit  as  great  a  folly,  for  want  of  some  sense,  and  XII 
that  by  this  default,  the  greater  part  of  the  visage  of  things  ^j^^J 
be  concealed  from  us  ?  Who  knowes  whether  the  difficulties  Sebon! 
we  find  in  sundry  of  Natures  workes,  proceede  thence  ?  And 
whether  divers  effects  of  beasts,  which  exceed  our  capacitie, 
are  produced  by  the  facultie  of  some  sense,  that  we  want  ? 
And  whether  some  of  them,  have  by  that  meane  a  fuller  and 
more  perfect  life  then  ours  ?  We  seize  on  an  apple  wel  nigh 
with  all  our  senses ;  We  find  rednesse,  smoothnesse,  odor 
and  sweetnesse  in  it ;  besides  which,  it  may  have  other 
vertues,  either  drying  or  binding,  to  which  we  have  no  sense 
to  be  referred.  The  proprieties  which  in  many  things  we 
call  secret,  as  in  the  Adamant  to  draw  iron,  is  it  not  likely 
there  should  be  sensitive  faculties  in  nature  able  to  judge 
and  perceive  them,  the  want  whereof  breedeth  in  us  the 
ignorance  of  the  true  essence  of  such  things  ?  It  is  happily 
some  particular  sense  that  unto  Cockes  or  Chanticleares  dis- 
covereth  the  morning  and  midnight  houre,  and  moveth  them 
to  crow :  That  teacheth  a  Hen,  before  any  use  or  experience, 
to  feare  a  Hawke,  and  not  a  Goose  or  a  Peacocke,  farre 
greater  birds  :  That  warneth  yong  chickins  of  the  hostile 
qualitie  which  the  Cat  hath  against  them,  and  not  to  dis 
trust  a  Dog ;  to  strut  and  arme  themselves  against  the  mew 
ing  of  the  one  (in  some  sort  a  flattering  and  milde  voice)  and 
not  against  the  barking  of  the  other  (a  snarling  and  quarrelous 
voice  :)  that  instructeth  Rats,  Wasps,  and  Emmets,  ever  to 
chuse  the  best  cheese  and  fruit,  having  never  tasted  them 
before :  And  that  addresseth  the  Stag,  the  Elephant,  and 
the  Serpent,  to  the  knowledge  of  certaine  herbs  and  simples, 
which,  being  either  wounded  or  sicke,  have  the  vertue  to  cure 
them.  There  is  no  sense  but  hath  some  great  domination, 
and  which  by  his  meane  affordeth  not  an  infinite  number  of 
knowledges.  If  we  were  to  report  the  intelligence  of  soundes, 
of  harmony  and  of  the  voice,  it  would  bring  an  imaginable 
confusion  to  all  the  rest  of  our  learning  and  science.  For, 
besides  what  is  tyed  to  the  proper  effect  of  every  sense,  how 
many  arguments,  consequences  and  conclusions  draw  we  unto 
other  things,  by  comparing  one  sense  to  another  ?  Let  a  skil- 
full  wise  man  but  imagine  humane  nature  to  be  originally 

315 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  produced  without  sight  and  discourse,  how  much  ignorance 
XII          and  trouble  such  a  defect  would  bring  unto  him,  and  what 

An  Apologie  obscurity  and  blindnesse   in  our  mind  :    By  that  shall  wee 
of  Raymond  J  ,  1,1  •.•  /»  ii 

Sebond       perceive,  how  much  the  privation  or  one,  or  two,  or  three 

such  senses,  (if  there  be  any  in  us)  doth  import  us  about 
the  knowledge  of  truth.  We  have  by  the  consultation  and 
concurrence  of  our  five  senses  formed  one  Verity,  whereas 
perad venture  there  was  required  the  accord  and  consent  of 
eight  or  ten  senses,  and  their  contribution,  to  attaine  a  per 
spicuous  insight  of  her,  and  see  her  in  her  true  essence. 
Those  Sects  which  combate  mans  science,  doe  principally 
combate  the  same  by  the  uncertainety  and  feeblenesse  of 
our  senses :  For,  since  by  their  meane  and  intermission  all 
knowledge  comes  unto  us,  if  they  chaunce  to  misse  in  the 
report  they  make  unto  us,  if  either  they  corrupt  or  alter  that, 
which  from  abroad  they  bring  unto  us,  if  the  light  which  by 
them  is  transported  into  our  soule  be  obscured  in  the  passage, 
we  have  nothing  else  to  hold  by.  From  this  extreame 
difficultie  are  sprung  all  these  phantazies,  which  everie  subject 
containeth,  whatsoever  we  find  in  it :  That  it  hath  not  what 
we  suppose  to  find  in  it.  And  that  of  the  Epicurians,  which 
is,  that  the  Sunne  is  no  greater  than  our  sight  doth  judge  it ; 

LUCR.  v.  576.  Quicquid  id  est,  nihilofertur  maiore  figurci, 

Quam  nostris  oculis  quam  cernimus  esse  videtur. 

What'ere  it  be,  it  in  no  greater  forme  doth  passe, 
Then  to  our  eyes,  which  it  behold,  it  seeming  was  ; 

that  the  apparances,  which  represent  a  great  body,  to  him 
that  is  neare  unto  it,  and  a  much  lesser  to  him  that  is 
further  from  it,  are  both  true  ; 

Ib.  iv.  380,  Nec  tamen  hie  oculis  f alii  concedimus  hilum: 

3^7-  Proinde  animi  vitium  hoc  oculis  adfingere  noli. 

Yet  graunt  we  not,  in  this,  our  eyes  deceived  or  blind, 
Impute  not  then  to  eyes  this  error  of  the  mind  ; 

and  resolutely,  that  there  is  no  deceit  in  the  senses  :  That  a 
man  must  stand  to  their  mercy,  and  elsewhere  seek  reasons 
to  excuse  the  difference  and  contradiction  we  find  in  them  ; 
yea  invent  all  other  untruthes,  and  raving  conceits  (so  farre 
come  they)  rather  then  excuse  the  causes.  Timagoras  swore, 
that  howsoever  he  winked  or  turned  his  eyes,  he  could  never 
316 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

perceive  the  light  of  the  candle  to  double:  And  that  this  CHAPTER 
seeming  proceeded  from  the  vice  of  opinion,  and  not  from          XII 
the  instrument.     Of  all  absurdities,  the  most  absurd  amongst 
the  Epicurians,  is,  to  disavow  the  force  and  effect  of  the 
senses. 

Proinde  quod  in  quoque  est  his  visum  tempore,  verum  est:  LucR.iv.  502. 

Et  si  non  potuit  ratio  dissolvere  causam, 

Cur  ea  qucefuerint  iuxtim  quadrata,  procul  sint 

Visa  rotunda :  tamen  prcestat  rationis  egentem 

Reddere  mendose  causas  utriusquejiyurce, 

Quam  manibus  manifesta  suis  emittere  quoquam, 

Et  violarefidem  primam,  et  convellere  tota 

Fundamenta,  qaibus  nixatur  vita  salusque. 

Non  modo  enim  ratio  ruat  omnis,  vita  quoque  ipsa 

Concidat  extemplo,  nisi  credere  sensibus  ausis, 

PrtBcipitesque  locos  vitare,  et  ccetera  quce  sint 

In  genere  hoc  fugienda. — 

What  by  the  eyes  is  scene  at  any  time,,  is  true, 
Though  the  cause  Reason  could  not  render  of  the  view, 
Why,  what  was  square  at  hand,  a  farre  off  seemed  round, 
Yet  it  much  better  were,  that  wanting  reasons  ground 
The  causes  of  both  formes  we  harp-on,  but  not  hit, 
Then  let  slip  from  our  hands  things  cleare,  and  them 

omit, 

And  violate  our  first  beliefe,  and  rashly  rend 
All  those  ground-workes,  whereon  both  life  and  health 

depend, 

For  not  alone  all  reason  falls,  life  likewise  must 
Faile  out  of  hand,  unlesse  your  senses  you  dare  trust, 
And  breake-necke  places,  and  all  other  errours  shunne, 
From  which  we  in  this  kinde  most  carefully  should  runne. 

This  desperate  and  so  little  Philosophicall  counsell,  repre 
sents  no  other  thing,  but  that  humane  science  cannot  be 
maintained  but  by  unreasonable,  fond  and  mad  reason  ; 
yet  is  it  better,  that  man  use  it  to  prevaile,  yea  and  of  all 
other  remedies  else  how  phantasticall  soever  they  be,  rather 
then  avow  his  necessarie  foolishnesse :  So  prejudiciall  and 
disadvantageous  a  veritie  he  cannot  avoide,  but  senses  must 
necessarily  be  the  Soveraigne  maisters  of  his  knowledge : 
But  they  are  uncertaine  and  falsifiable  to  all  circumstances  : 
There  must  a  man  strike  to  the  utmost  of  his  power,  and  if 
his  just  forces  faile  him  (as  they  are  wont)  to  use  and  employ 
obstinacie,  temeritie  and  impudencie.  If  that  which  the 

317 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Epicurians  affirme  be  true,  that  is  to  say,  we  have  no  science, 

XII         if  the  apparances  of  the  senses  be  false  :  and  that  which  the 

An  Apologie  gtoicks  say,  if  it  is  also  true  that  the  senses  apparences  are 

>f  Sebondnd  so  ^se  as  tne^  can  Proc^uce  us  no  science  :  We  will  conclude 
at  the  charges  of  these  two  great  Dogmatist  Sects,  that 
there  is  no  science.  Touching  the  error  and  uncertaintie 
of  the  senses  operation,  a  man  may  store  himselfe  with  as 
many  examples  as  he  pleaseth,  so  ordinary  are  the  faults  and 
deceits  they  use  towards  us.  And  the  ecchoing  or  report 
ing  of  a  valley,  the  sound  of  a  Trumpet  seemeth  to  sound 
before  us,  which  commeth  a  mile  behind  us. 

LUCR.  iv.  398.  Extantesque  procul  medio  de  gurgite  mantes 

lidem  apparent  longe  diver  si  licet. — 
390.  Etfugere  ad  puppim  colles  campique  videntur 

Quos  agimus  propter  navim. — 
423.  — ubi  in  medio  nobis  equus  acer  obhcesit 

Flumine,  equi  corpus  transversum  ferre  videtur 

Vis,  et  in  adversum  flumen  contrudere  raptim. 

And  hills,  which  from  the  maine  far-off  to  kenning  stand, 

Appeare  all  one,  though  they  farre  distant  be,  at  hand. 

And  Miles  and  fields  doe  seeme  unto  our  boate  to  flie, 

Which  we  drive  by  our  boate  as  we  doe  passe  thereby. 

When  in  midst  of  a  streame  a  stately  Horse  doth  stay, 

The  streamers  orethwarting  seemes  his  body  crosse  to 

sway, 

And  swiftly  'gainst  the  streame  to  thrust  him  th'  other 
way. 

To  roule  a  bullet  under  the  fore-finger,  the  midlemost  being 
put  over  it,  a  man  must  very  much  enforce  himselfe,  to 
affirme  there  is  but  one,  so  assuredly  doth  our  sense  present 
us  two.  That  the  senses  do  often  maister  our  discourse,  and 
force  it  to  receive  impressions,  which  he  knoweth  and  judgeth 
to  be  false,  it  is  daily  scene.  I  leave  the  sense  of  feeling, 
which  hath  his  functions  neerer,  more  quicke  and  substantial!, 
and  which  by  the  effect  of  the  griefe  or  paine  it  brings  to 
the  body  doth  so  often  confound  and  re-enverse  all  these 
goodly  Stoicall  resolutions,  and  enforceth  to  cry  out  of  the 
belly-ache  him,  who  hath  with  all  resolution  established  in 
his  mind  this  Doctrine,  that  the  cholike,  as  every  other  sick- 
nesse  or  paine,  is  a  thing  indifferent,  wanting  power  to  abate 
any  thing  of  Soveraigne  good  or  chiefe  felicity,  wherein  the 
318 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

wise  man  is  placed  by  his  owne  vertue :  there  is  no  heart  CHAPTER 
so  demisse,  but  the  ratling  sound  of  a  drum,  or  the  clang 
of  a  Trumpet,  will  rowze  and  inflame  ;  nor  mind  so  harsh 
and  sterne,  but  the  sweetnesse  and  harmony  of  musicke,  will  Sebond 
move  and  tickle  ;  nor  any  soule  so  skittish  and  stubborne, 
that  hath  not  a  feeling  of  some  reverence,  in  considering 
the  clowdy  vastitie  and  gloomie  canapies  of  our  churches, 
the  eye-pleasing  diversitie  of  ornaments,  and  orderly  order 
of  our  ceremonies,  and  hearing  the  devout  and  religious 
sound  of  our  Organs,  the  moderate,  symphonicall,  and 
heavenly  harmonic  of  our  voices :  Even  those  that  enter 
into  them  with  an  obstinate  will  and  contemning  minde, 
have  in  their  heart  a  feeling  of  remorse,  of  chilnesse,  and 
horrour,  that  puts  them  into  a  certaine  diffidence  of  their 
former  opinions.  As  for  me,  I  distrust  mine  owne  strength, 
to  heare  with  a  settled  minde  some  of  Horace  or  Catullus 
verses  sung  with  a  sufficiently  well  tuned  voice,  uttered  by, 
and  proceeding  from  a  faire,  yong  and  hart-alluring  mouth. 
And  Zeno  had  reason  to  say,  that  the  voice  was  the  flowre 
of  beauty.  Some  have  gone  about  to  make  me  beleeve,  that 
a  man,  who  most  of  us  French  men  know,  in  repeating 
certaine  verses  he  had  made,  had  imposed  upon  me,  that 
they  were  not  such  in  writing,  as  in  the  aire,  and  that  mine 
eyes  would  judge  of  them  otherwise  then  mine  eares :  so 
much  credit  hath  pronunciation  to  give  price  and  fashion  to 
those  workes  that  passe  her  mercy :  Whereupon  Philoxenus 
was  not  to  be  blamed,  when  hearing  one  to  give  an  ill  accent  to 
some  composition  of  his,  he  tooke  in  a  rage  some  of  his  pots 
or  bricks,  and  breaking  them,  trode  and  trampled  them  under 
his  feet,  saying  unto  him,  'I  breake  and  trample  what  is  thine, 
'  even  as  thou  mangiest  and  marrest  what  is  mine."1  Wherefore 
did  they,  who  with  an  undanted  resolve  have  procured  their 
owne  death  (because  they  would  not  see  the  blow  or  stroke 
comming)  turne  their  face  away  ?  And  those  who  for  their 
healths  sake  cause  themselves  to  be  cut  and  cauterized, 
cannot  endure  the  sight  of  the  preparations,  tooles,  instru 
ments  and  workes  of  the  Chirurgion,  but  because  the  sight 
should  have  no  part  of  the  paine  or  smart  ?  Are  not  these 
fit  examples  to  verifie  the  authoritie,  which  senses  have  over 
discourse  ?  We  may  long-enough  know  that  such  a  ones 

319 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  lockes  or  flaring-tresses  are  borrowed  of  a  Page,  or  taken  from 

XII     t     some  Lacky,  that  this  faire  ruby-red  came  from  Spaine,  and 

Ap  Apologie  ^s  whitenes  or  smoothnes  from  the  Ocean  sea  :*  yet  must 

oi  Raymond     •    i  .    r-  PI  11  T-  ^      ,        , 

Sebond       sight  torce  us  to  nnd,  and  deeme  the  subject  more  lovely 

and  more  pleasing,  against  all  reason.  For,  in  that  there 
is  nothing  of  its  owne. 

OVID.  Rent.  Auferimur  cultu  ;  gemmis,  auroque  teguntur 

Am.  i.  343.  Crimina,  pars  minima  est  ipsa  puella  sui. 

Scepe  ubi  sit  quod  ames  inter  tarn  multa  requiras : 
Decipit  hdc  oculos  JEgide  dives  amor. 

We  are  misse-led  by  ornaments  :  what  is  amisse 

Gold  and  gemmes  cover,  least  part  of  her  selfe  the 

maiden  is. 
'Mongst  things  so  many  you  may  aske,  where  your  love 

lies, 
Rich  love  by  this  Gorgonian  shield  deceives  thine  eyes. 

How  much  doe  Poets  asscribe  unto  the  vertue  of  the  senses, 
which  makes  Narcissus  to  have  even  fondly  lost  himselfe  for 
the  love  of  his  shadow  ? 

OVID.  Metam.  Cunctaque  miratur,  quibus  est  mirabilis  ipse, 

iii.  424.  Se  cupit  imprudens,  et  qui  probat,  ipse  probatur, 

Dumque  petit,  petitur  :  pariterque  accendit  et  ardet. 

He  all  admires,  whereby  himselfe  is  admirable, 
Fond  he,  fond  of  himselfe,  to  himselfe  amiable  ; 
He,  that  doth  like,  is  lik'd,  and  while  he  doth  desire, 
He  is  desired,  at  once  he  burnes  and  sets  on  fire  ; 

and  Pigmalions  wit  's  so  troubled  by  the  impression  of  the 
sight  of  his  ivory  statue,  that  hee  loveth  and  serves  it,  as  if 
it  had  life  : 

lb.  x.  256.  Oscula  dat,  reddique  putat,  sequiturque,  tenetque, 

Et  credit  tactis  digitos  insidere  membris, 
Et  metuit  presses  veniat  ne  livor  in  artus. 

He  kisses,  and  thinks  kisses  come  againe, 
He  sues,  pursues,  and  holds,  beleeves  in  vaine 
His  fingers  sinke  where  he  doth  touch  the  place, 
And  feares  least  black  and  blew  toucht-lims  deface. 

Let  a  Philosopher  be  put  in  a  Cage  made  of  small  and  thin- 
set  iron  wire,  and  hanged  on  the  top  of  our  Ladies  Church 
steeple  in  Paris ;  he  shall,  by  evident  reason,  perceive  that  it 
is  impossible  he  should  fall  downe  out  of  it ;  yet  can  he  not 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

chuse  (except  he  have  beene  brought  up  in  the  trade  of  CHAPTER 
Tilers  or  Thatchers)  but  the  sight  of  that  exceeding  height  XI1 
must  needs  dazle  his  sight,  and  amaze  or  turne  his  senses.  A*1  Apologie 
For,  we  have  much  ado  to  warrant  our  selves  in  the  walks  or  °  Sebond" 
battlements  of  an  high  tower  or  steeple,  if  they  be  battle- 
mented  and  wrought  with  pillers,  and  somewhat  wide  one 
from  another,  although  of  stone,  and  never  so  strong.  Nay, 
some  there  are,  that  can  scarcely  thinke  or  heare  of  such 
hights.  Let  a  beame  or  planke  be  laid  acrosse  from  one 
of  those  two  Steeples  to  the  other,  as  big,  as  thick,  as 
strong,  and  as  broad,  as  would  suffice  any  man  to  walke 
safely  upon  it,  there  is  no  Philosophicall  wisedome  of  so 
great  resolution  and  constancie,  that  is  able  to  encourage 
and  perswade  us  to  march  upon  it,  as  we  would,  were  it  be 
low  on  the  ground.  I  have  sometimes  made  triall  of  it  upon 
our  mountaines  on  this  side  of  Italic,  yet  am  I  one  of  those 
that  will  not  easily  be  affrighted  with  such  things,  and  I 
could  not  without  horror  to  my  minde  and  trembling  of  leggs 
and  thighes  endure  to  looke  on  those  infinite  precipices  and 
steepy  downe-fals,  though  I  were  not  neere  the  brim,  nor 
any  danger  within  my  length,  and  more  ;  and  unlesse  I  had 
willingly  gone  to  the  perill,  I  could  not  possibly  have  falne. 
Where  I  also  noted,  that  how  deep  soever  the  bottome  were, 
if  but  a  tree,  a  shrub,  or  any  out-butting  crag  of  a  Rock 
presented  it  selfe  unto  our  eyes,  upon  those  steepie  and  high 
Alpes,  somewhat  to  uphold  the  sight,  and  divide  the  same, 
it  doth  somewhat  ease  and  assure  us  from  feare,  as  if  it  were 
a  thing,  which  in  our  fall  might  either  helpe  or  uphold 
us  :  And  that  we  cannot  without  some  dread  and  giddi- 
nesse  in  the  head,  so  much  as  abide  to  looke  upon  one 
of  those  even  and  downe-right  precipices :  Ut  despici  sine 
vertigine  simul  oculorum  animique  non  possit.  '  So  as  they 
4  can  not  looke  downe  without  giddinesse  both  of  eyes  and 
'  mindes ' :  Which  is  an  evident  deception  of  the  sight. 
Therefore  was  it,  that  a  worthy  Philosopher  pulled  out  his 
eyes,  that  so  he  might  discharge  his  soule  of  the  seducing 
and  diverting  he  received  by  them,  and  the  better  and 
more  freely  apply  himselfe  unto  Philosophy.  But  by  this 
accompt,  he  should  also  have  stopped  his  eares,  which  (as 
Theophrastus  said)  are  the  most  dangerous  instruments  we 
2S  321 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  have  to  receve  violent  and  sodaine  impressions  to  trouble 
XI*     •     anc^  a^er  us>  and  should,  in  the  end,  have  deprived  him- 

ofRaymon'd  Selfe  °f    a11    his    °ther  senses>   that    is  to  saj>    both   of  hi» 
Sebond       being,  and  life.     For,  they  have  the  power  to  command  our 

Cic.  Divin.  i.  discourses  and  sway  our  mind  :  Fit  etiam  scepe  specie  quadam, 
scepe  vocum  gravitate  et  cantibus,  ut  pellantur  animi  vehemen- 
tius :  scepe  etiam  curd  et  timore.     '  It  comes  to  passe,  that 
4  many  times  our  minds  are  much  moved  with  some  shadow, 
'  many  times  with  deep  sounding,  or  singing  of  voices,  many 
6  times  with  care  and  feare.1     Physitions  hold,  that  there  are 
certaine  complexions,  which  by  some  sounds  and  instruments 
are  agitated  even  unto  furie.     I  have  scene  some,  who  with 
out  infringing  their  patience,  could  not  well  heare  a  bone 
gnawne  under  their  table  :  and  we  see  few  men,  but  are 
much  troubled  at  that  sharp,  harsh,  and  teeth-edging  noise 
that  Smiths  make  in  filing  of  brasse,  or  scraping  of  iron  and 
steele  together  :  others  will  be  offended,  if  they  but  heare 
one  chew  his    meat    somwhat    aloude ;    nay,   some  will  be 
angrie  with,  or  hate  a  man,  that  either  speaks  in  the  nose, 
or  rattles  in  the  throat.     That  piping  prompter  of  Gracchus, 
who  mollified,  raised,  and  wound  his  masters  voice,  whilest 
he  was  making  Orations  at  Rome ;  what  good  did  he,  if  the 
motion  and  qualitie  of  the  sound,  had  not  the  force  to  move, 
and  efficacie  to  alter  the  auditories  judgment  ?    Verily,  there 
is  great  cause  to  make  so  much  adoe,  and  keepe  such  a  coyle 
about  the  constancie    and  firmnesse  of  this   goodly  piece, 
which  suffers  it  selfe  to  be  handled,   changed,  and  turned 
by  the  motion  and  accident  of  so  light  a  winde.     The  very 
same  cheating  and  cozening,  that  senses  bring  to  our  under 
standing,  themselves  receive  it  in  their  turnes.     Our  mind 
doth  like  wise  take  revenge  of  it,  they  lie,  they  cog,  and 
deceive  one  another  a  vie.     What  we  see  and  heare,  being 
passionately  transported  by  anger,  we  neither  see  nor  heare 
it  as  it  is. 

VIRG.  ^£'«.  iv.  Et  solem  geminum,  et  duplices  se  ostendere  Thebas. 

470. 

That  two  Sunnes  doe  appeare 

And  double  Thebes  are  there. 

The  object  which  we  love,  seemeth  much  more  fairer  unto 
us,  then  it  is  ; 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Lu  c  R.  i v.          Muttimodis  igitur  pravos  turpesque  videmus  CHAPTER 

1 147-  Esse  in  delitijs,  summoque  in  honore  vigere.  XII 

We  therefore  see  that  those,  who  many  waies  are  bad,       An  Apologie 
And  fowle,  are  yet  belov'd,  and  in  chiefe  honour  had  ;        " 

and  that  much  fowler,  which  we  loath.  To  a  pensive  and 
heart-grieved  man,  a  cleare  day  seemes  gloomie  and  duskie. 
Our  senses  are  not  onely  altered,  but  many  times  dulled,  by 
the  passions  of  the  mind.  How  many  things  see  we,  which 
we  perceive  not,  if  our  mind  be  either  busied  or  distracted 
else  where  ? 

— in  rebus  quoque  apertis  noscere  possis,  Ib.  808. 

Si  non  advertas  animum,  proinde  esse,  quasi  omni 
Tempore  semotafuerint,  longeque  remotce. 

Ev'n  in  things  manifest  it  may  be  scene, 

If  you  marke  not,  they  are,  as  they  had  beene 

At  all  times  sever'd  farre,  remooved  cleane. 

The  soule  seemeth  to  retire  her  selfe  into  the  inmost  parts, 
and  ammuseth  the  senses  faculties  :  So  that  both  the  in 
ward  and  outward  parts  of  man  are  full  of  weaknes  and 
falshood.  Those  which  have  compared  our  life  unto  a 
dreame,  have  happily  had  more  reason  so  to  doe,  then  they 
were  aware.  When  we  dreame,  our  soule  liveth,  worketh 
and  exerciseth  all  her  faculties,  even,  and  as  much,  as  when 
it  waketh  ;  and  if  more  softly,  and  obscurely,  yet  verily  not 
so,  as  that  it  may  admit  so  great  a  difference,  as  there  is 
betweene  a  darke  night,  and  a  cleare  day  :  Yea  as  betweene 
a  night  and  a  shadow  :  There  it  sleepeth,  here  it  slumbreth  : 
More  or  lesse,  they  are  ever  darknesses,  yea  Cimmerian  dark 
nesses.  We  wake  sleeping,  and  sleep  waking.  In  my  sleep 
I  see  not  so  cleare  ;  yet  can  I  never  find  my  waking  cleare 
enough,  or  without  dimnesse.  Sleepe  also  in  his  deepest 
rest,  doth  sometimes  bring  dreames  asleepe  :  But  our  waking 
is  never  so  vigilant,  as  it  may  clearely  purge  and  dissipate  the 
ravings  or  idle  phantasies,  which  are  the  dreames  of  the 
waking,  and  worse  then  dreames.  Our  reason  and  soule, 
receiving  the  phantasies  and  opinions,  which  sleeping  seize 
on  them,  and  authorising  our  dreames  actions,  with  like 
approbation,  as  it  doth  the  daies.  Why  make  we  not  a 
doubt,  whether  our  thinking,  and  our  working  be  another 

323 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  dreaming,  and  our  waking  some  kind  of  sleeping  ?  If  the 
senses  be  our  first  Judges,  it  is  not  ours  that  must  only  be 
Called  t0  counse11 :  For>  in  this  facultie  feasts  have  as  much 
Sebond  (or  more)  right,  as  we.  It  is  most  certaine,  that  some  have 
their  hearing  more  sharpe  then  man  ;  others  their  sight ; 
others  their  smelling  ;  others  their  feeling,  or  taste.  Demo- 
critus  said,  that  Gods  and  beasts  had  the  sensitive  faculties 
much  more  perfect  then  man.  Now  betweene  the  effects  of 
their  senses  and  ours,  the  difference  is  extreame.  Our  spettle 
cleanseth  and  drieth  our  sores,  and  killeth  Serpents. 

LUCR.  iv.  640.  Tantaque  in  his  rebus  distantia  differitasque  est, 

Ut  quod  alijs  cibus  est,  alijsfuat  acre  venenum. 
SfBpe  etenim  serpens,  hominis  contact  a  saliva, 
Disperit,  ac  sese  mandendo  conficit  ipsa. 

There  is  such  distance,  and  such  difference  in  these 

things, 

As  what  to  one  is  meate,  t'  another  poison  brings. 
For  oft  a  Serpent  toucht  with  spettle  of  a  man 
Doth  die,  and  gnaw  it  selfe  with  fretting  all  he  can. 

What  qualitie  shall  we  give  unto  spettle,  either  according 
to  us,  or  according  to  the  Serpent  ?  by  which  two  senses 
shall  we  verifie  its  true  essence,  which  we  seeke  for  ?  Pliny 
saith,  that  there  are  certaine  Sea-hares  in  India,  that  to  us 
are  poison,  and  we  bane  to  them  ;  so  that  we  die,  if  we  but 
touch  them  ;  now  whether  is  man  or  the  Sea-hare  poison  ? 
Whom  shall  we  beleeve,  either  the  fish  of  man,  or  the  man  of 
fish  ?  Some  quality  of  the  ayre  infecteth  man,  which  nothing 
at  all  hurteth  the  Oxe  :  Some  other  the  Oxe,  and  not  man  : 
Which  of  the  two  is  either  in  truth,  or  nature  the  pestilent 
quality  ?  Such  as  are  troubled  with  the  yellow  jandise,  deeme 
all  things  they  looke  upon  to  be  yellowish,  which  seeme  more 
pale  and  wan  to  them  then  to  us. 

Ib.  333.  Lurida  prceterea  fiunt  qucecunque  tuentur 

Arquati. 


i 

And  all  that  jaundis'd  men  behold, 
They  yellow  straight  or  palish  hold. 


Those  which  are  sicke  of  the  disease  which  Phisitions  call 
Hyposphagma,  which  is  a  suffusion  of  blood  under  the  skin, 
imagine  that  all  things  they  see  are  bloodie  and  red.  Those 

324 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

humors  that  so  change  the  sights  operation,  what  know  we  CHAPTER 

whether  they  are  predominant  and  ordinarie  in  beasts  ?    For, 

we  see  some,  whose  eyes  are  as  yellow  as  theirs  that  have  the 

jandise,  others,  that  have  them  all  blood- shotten  with  red-       Sebond 

nesse  :  It  is  likely  that  the  objects-collour  they  looke  upon, 

seemeth  otherwise  to  them  then  to  us  :  Which  of  the  two 

judgements  shall  be  true  ?     For,   it  is  not  said,   that  the 

essence  of  things,  hath  reference  to  man  alone.     Hardnesse, 

whitenesse,  depth  and  sharpnesse,  touch  the  service  and  con- 

cerne  the  knowledge  of  beasts  as  well  as  ours :  Nature  hath 

given  the  use  of  them  to  them,  as  well  as  to  us.     When  we 

winke  a  little  with  our  eye,  wee  perceive  the  bodies  we  looke 

upon  to  seeme  longer  and  out-stretched.    Many  beasts  have 

their  eye  as  winking  as  we.     This  length  is  then  happily  the 

true  forme  of  that  body,  and  not  that  which  our  eyes  give 

it,  being  in  their  ordinarie  seate.     If  we  close  our  eye  above, 

things  seeme  double  unto  us. 

Bina  lucernarum  florentia  luminaflammis,  LUCR.  iv.  452, 

Et  duplices  hominum  fades,  et  corpora  Una.  454- 

The  lights  of  candels  double  flaming  then  ; 
And  faces  twaine,  and  bodies  twaine  of  men. 

If  our  eares  chance  to  be  hindred  by  any  thing,  or  that 
the  passage  of  our  hearing  bee  stop^t,  we  receive  the  sound 
otherwise,  then  we  were  ordinarily  wont.  Such  beasts  as 
have  hairie  eares,  or  that  in  lieu  of  an  eare  have  but  a  little 
hole,  doe  not  by  consequence  heare  that  we  heare,  and 
receive  the  sound  other  then  it  is.  We  see  at  solemne 
shewes  or  in  Theaters,  that  opposing  any  collourd  glasse 
betweene  our  eyes  and  the  torches  light,  whatsoever  is  in  the 
roome  seemes  or  greene,  or  yellow,  or  red  unto  us,  according 
to  the  collour  of  the  glasse. 

Et  vulgbfaciunt  id  lutea  russaque  vela,  ^73- 

Et  ferriginea,  cum  magnis  intenta  theatris 

Per  malos  volgata  trabesque  trementia  pendent : 

Namque  ibi  concessum  caveai  subter,  et  omnem 

Scenai  speciem,  patrum  matrumque  deorumque 

Inficiunt  coguntque  suo  volitare  colore. 

And  yellow,  russet,  rustic  curtaines  worke  this  feate 
In  common  sights  abroade,  where  over  skaffolds  great 

325 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Stretched  on  masts,  spred  over  beames,  they  hang  still  waving. 

XII  All  the  seates  circuit  there,  and  all  the  stages  braving, 

An  Apologie  Of  fathers,  mothers,  Gods,  and  all  the  circled  showe 

of  Raymond  They  double-die  and  in  their  collours  make  to  flowe. 

Sebond 

It  is  likely,  that  those  beasts  eyes,  which  we  see  to  be  of 

divers  collours,  produce  the  apparances  of  those  bodies  they 
looke  upon,  to  be  like  their  eyes.  To  judge  the  senses 
operation,  it  were  then  necessary  we  were  first  agreed  with 
beasts,  and  then  betweene  our  selves,  which  we  are  not,  but 
ever-and-anon  disputing  about  that  one  seeth,  heareth  or 
tasteth  something  to  be  other,  then  indeed  it  is  ;  and  con 
tend  as  much  as  about  any  thing  else,  of  the  diversity  of 
those  images,  our  senses  report  unto  us.  A  yong  child 
heareth,  seeth,  and  tasteth  otherwise  by  natures  ordinary 
rule,  then  a  man  of  thirtie  yeares  ;  and  he  otherwise  then 
another  of  threescore.  The  senses  are  to  some  more  obscure 
and  dimme,  and  to  some  more  open  and  quicke.  We  receive 
things  differently,  according  as  they  are,  and  seeme  unto  us. 
Things  being  then  so  uncertaine,  and  full  of  controversie,  it 
is  no  longer  a  wonder  if  it  be  told  us,  that  we  may  avouch 
snow  to  seeme  white  unto  us  ;  but  to  affirme  that  its  such 
in  essence  and  in  truth,  we  cannot  warrant  our  selves  :  which 
foundation  being  so  shaken,  all  the  Science  in  the  world 
must  necessarily  goe  to  wracke.  What  ?  doe  our  senses 
themselves  hinder  one  another  ?  To  the  sight  a  picture 
seemeth  to  be  raised  aloft,  and  in  the  handling  flat :  Shall 
we  say  that  muske  is  pleasing  or  no,  which  comforteth  our 
smelling  and  offendeth  our  taste  ;  There  are  Hearbs  and 
Ointments,  which  to  some  parts  of  the  body  are  good,  and 
to  othersome  hurtfull.  Honie  is  pleasing  to  the  taste,  but 
unpleasing  to  the  sight.  Those  jewels  wrought  and  fashioned 
like  feathers  or  sprigs,  which  in  impreses  are  called,  feathers 
without  ends,  no  eye  can  discerne  the  bredth  of  them,  and  no 
man  warrant  himselfe  from  this  deception,  that  on  the  one 
end  or  side  it  groweth  not  broder  and  broder,  sharper  and 
sharper,  and  on  the  other  more  and  more  narrow,  especially 
being  rouled  about  ones  finger,  when  notwithstanding  in 
handling,  it  seemeth  equal  in  bredth,  and  every  where  alike. 
Those  who  to  encrease  and  aide  their  luxury  were  anciently 
wont  to  use  perspective  or  looking  glasses,  fit  to  make  the 
326 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

object  they  represented,  appeare  very  big  and  great,  that  so  CHAPTER 
the  members  they  were  to  use,  might  by  that  ocular  increase         xn 
please  them  the  more  :  to  whether  of  the  two  senses  yeelded  Aj1  Apologie 
they,  either  to  the  sight  presenting  those  members  as  big  °   Sebond11 
and  great  as  they  wisht  them,  or  to  the  feeling,  that  pre 
sented  them  little  and  to  be  disdained  ?     Is  it  our  senses 
that  lend  these  diverse  conditions  unto  subjects,  when  for  all 
that,  the  subjects  have  but  one  ?  as  we  see  in  the  Bread  we 
eate  :    it  is  but  Bread,  but  one  using  it,  it  maketh  bones, 
blood,  flesh,  haire,  and  nailes  thereof : 

Vt  cibus  in  membra  atque  artus  cum  diditur  omnes  LUCR.  iii.  728. 

Disperit,  atque  aliam  naturam  sufficit  ex  se. 

As  meate  distributed  into  the  members,  dies, 
Another  nature  yet  it  perishing  supplies. 

The  moistnesse  which  the  roote  of  a  tree  suckes,  becomes  a 
trunke,  a  leafe  and  fruite :  And  the  aire  being  but  one  ; 
applied  unto  a  trumpet,  becommeth  diverse  in  a  thousand 
sorts  of  sounds.  Is  it  our  senses  (say  I)  who  likewise  fashion 
of  diverse  qualities  those  subjects,  or  whether  have  they 
them  so  and  such  ?  And  upon  this  doubt,  what  may  wee 
conclude  of  their  true  essence  ?  Moreover,  since  the  acci 
dents  of  sickenesse,  of  madnesse,  or  of  sleepe,  make  things 
appeare  other  unto  us,  then  they  seeme  unto  the  healthie, 
unto  the  wise,  and  to  the  waking :  Is  it  not  likely,  that  our 
right  seate  and  naturall  humors,  have  also  wherewith  to 
give  a  being  unto  things,  having  reference  unto  their  condi 
tion,  and  to  appropriate  them  to  it  selfe,  as  doe  inordinate 
humors ;  and  our  health  as  capable  to  give  them  his  visage, 
as  sickenesse?  Why  hath  not  the  temperate  man  some 
forme  of  the  objects  relative  unto  himselfe,  as  the  intem 
perate  :  and  shall  not  he  likewise  imprint  his  Character  in 
them  ?  The  distasted  impute  wallowishnes  unto  Wine  :  the 
healthie,  good  taste  ;  and  the  thirsty  brisknesse,  rellish  and 
delicacie.  Now  our  condition  appropriating  things  unto  it 
selfe,  and  transforming  them  to  its  owne  humour :  wee  know 
no  more  how  things  are  in  sooth  and  truth ;  For :  nothing 
comes  unto  us  but  falsified  and  altered  by  our  senses. 
Where  the  compasse,  the  quadrant  or  the  ruler  are  crooked  : 
all  proportions  drawne  by  them,  and  all  the  buildings 

327 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  erected  by  their  measure,  are  also  necessarily  defective  and 
imperfect.     The  uncertaintie  of  our  senses  yeelds  what  ever 

they  Produce'  also  "ncertaine. 

Sebond  Denique  ut  infabrica,  si  prava  est  regula  prima, 

LUCR.  iv.  514.  Normdque  sifallax  rectis  regionibus  exit, 

Et  libella  aliqud  si  ex  parte  claudicat  hilum, 
Omnia  mendose  fieri,  atque  obstipa  necessum  est, 
Prava,  cubantia,  prona,  supina,  atque  absona  tecta, 
lam  mere  ut  qucedam  videantur  velle,  rudntque 
Prodita  judicijs  fallacibus  omnia  primis. 
Hie  igitur  ratio  tibi  rerum  prava  necesse  est, 
Falsaque  sitfalsis  quatcunque  d  sensibus  orta  est. 

As  in  building  if  the  first  rule  be  to  blame, 

And  the  deceitfull  squire  erre  from  right  forme  and  frame, 

If  any  instrument  want  any  jot  of  weight, 

All  must  needs  faultie  be,  and  stooping  in  their  height, 

The  building  naught,  absurd,  upward  and  downeward 

bended, 

As  if  they  meant  to  fall,  and  fall,  as  they  intended  ; 
And  all  this  as  betrayde 
By  judgements  formost  laid. 

Of  things  the  reason  therefore  needs  must  faultie  bee 
And  false,  which  from  false  senses  drawes  its  pedegree. 

As  for  the  rest,  who  shall  bee  a  competent  ludge  in  these 
differences  ?  As  wee  said  in  controversies  of  religion,  that 
we  must  have  a  j  udge  enclined  to  neither  party,  and  free 
from  partialitie,  or  affection,  which  is  hardly  to  be  had 
among  Christians ;  so  hapneth  it  in  this :  For  if  he  be  old, 
he  cannot  judge  of  ages  sense  ;  himself  being  a  party  in  this 
controversie  :  and  so  if  he  be  yong,  healthy,  sicke,  sleeping 
or  waking,  it  is  all  one  :  We  had  need  of  some  body  void 
and  exempted  from  all  these  qualities,  that  without  any  pre 
occupation  of  judgement  might  judge  of  these  propositions 
as  indifferent  unto  him :  By  which  accoumpt  we  should  have 
a  ludge,  that  were  no  man.  To  judge  of  the  apparences 
that  we  receive  of  subjects,  we  had  need  have  a  judicatorie 
instrument:  to  verifie  this  instrument,  we  should  have  de 
monstration  ;  and  to  approve  demonstration,  an  instrument : 
thus  are  we  ever  turning  round.  Since  the  senses  cannot 
determine  our  disputation,  themselves  being  so  full  of  un 
certainty,  it  must  then  be  reason :  And  no  reason  can  be 
established  without  another  reason  ;  then  are  we  ever  going 
328 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

backe  unto  infinity.     Our  phantasie  doth  not  apply  it  selfe  CHAPTER 
to  strange  things,  but  is  rather  conceived  by  the  interposition         XI1 
of  senses ;  and  senses  cannot  comprehend  a  strange  subject ;  An  Apologie 
XT  j_  i  j.i     •  •  i  ,1       of  Kaymond 

TSay  not  so  much  as  their  owne  passions ;  and  so,  nor  the       Sebond 

phantasie,  nor  the  apparence  is  the  subjects,  but  rather  the 
passions  only,  and  sufferance  of  the  sense  :  which  passion 
and  subject  are  divers  things:  Therefore  who  judgeth  by 
apparences,  judgeth  by  a  thing  different  from  the  subject. 
And  to  say,  that  the  senses  passions  referre  the  qualitie  of 
strange  subjects  by  resemblance  unto  the  soule :  How  can 
the  soule  and  the  understanding  rest  assured  of  that  re 
semblance,  having  of  it  selfe  no  commerce  with  forraigne 
subjects  ?  Even  as  he  that  knowes  not  Socrates,  seeing  his 
picture,  cannot  say  that  it  resembleth  him.  And  would  a 
man  j  udge  by  apparences,  be  it  by  all,  it  is  impossible ;  for 
by  their  contraries  and  differences  they  hinder  one  another, 
as  we  see  by  experience.  May  it  be  that  some  choice  ap 
parences  rule  and  direct  the  others  ?  This  choice  must  be 
verified  by  another  choice,  the  second  by  a  third  :  and  so 
shal  we  never  make  an  end.  In  few,  there  is  no  constant 
existence,  neither  of  our  being,  nor  of  the  objects.  And  we, 
and  our  judgement,  and  all  mortall  things  else  do  unces- 
santly  rowle,  turne,  and  passe  away.  Thus  can  nothing  be 
certainely  established,  nor  of  the  one,  nor  of  the  other  ; 
both  the  judgeing  and  the  judged  being  in  continuall  altera^l 
tion  and  motion.  We  have  no  communication  with  being ;  j 
for  every  humane  nature  is  ever  in  the  middle  betweene  j 
being  borne  and  dying;  giving  nothing  of  it  selfe  but  an  j 
obscure  apparence  and  shadow,  and  an  uncertaine  and  weake  j 
^opinion.  And  if  perhaps  you  fix  your  thought  to  take  its 
being ;  it  would  be  even,  as  if  one  should  go  about  to  graspe 
the  water :  for,  how  much  the  more  he  shal  close  and  presse 
that,  which  by  its  owne  nature  is  ever  gliding,  so  much  the 
more  he  shall  loose  what  he  would  hold  and  fasten.  Thus, 
seeing  all  things  are  subject  to  passe  from  one  change  to 
another ;  reason,  which  therein  seeketh  a  reall  subsistence, 
findes  her  selfe  deceived  as  unable  to  apprehend  any  thing 
subsistent  and  permanent:  forsomuch  as  each  thing  either 
commeth  to  a  being,  and  is  not  yet  altogether  ;  or  beginneth 
to  dy  before  it  be  borne.  Plato  said,  that  bodies  had  never 
2T  329 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  an  existence  but  indeed  a  birth,  supposing  that  Homer  made 

XII          the  Ocean  Father,  and  Thetis  Mother  of  the  Gods,  thereby 

An  Apologie  ^0  snew  lls   that  all  things  are  in  continuall  motion,  change 

of  Raymond         i          •    ,  •  A     i  n  •    •  ,     n 

Sebond       an(*  variation.     As  he  sayth,  a  common  opinion  amongst  all 

the  Philosophers  before  his  time  ;  Only  Parmenides  excepted, 
who  denied  any  motion  to  be  in  things  of  whose  power  he 
maketh  no  small  accoumpt.  Pithagoras,  that  each  thing  or 
matter  was  ever  gliding,  and  labile.  The  Stoicks  affirme, 
there  is  no  present  time,  and  that  which  we  call  present,  is 
but  conjoyning  and  assembling  of  future  time  and  past. 
Heraclitus  averreth  that  no  man  ever  entered  twise  one  same 
river.  Epicarmus  avoucheth,  that  who  ere  while  borowed 
any  mony,  doth  not  now  owe  it ;  and  that  he  who  yester 
night  was  bidden  to  dinner  this  day,  commeth  to  day  un 
bidden  ;  since  they  are  no  more  themselves,  but  are  become 
others :  and  that  one  mortall  substance  could  not  twise  be 
found  in  one  self  estate :  for  by  the  sodainesse  and  lightnesse 
of  change,  sometimes  it  wasteth,  and  other  times  it  assem- 
bleth  ;  now  it  comes  and  now  it  goes ;  in  such  sort,  that  he 
who  beginneth  to  be  borne,  never  comes  to  the  perfection  of 
being.  For,  this  being  borne  commeth  never  to  an  end,  nor 
ever  stayeth  as  being  at  an  end;  but  after  the  seed  pro- 
ceedeth  continually  in  change  and  alteration  from  one  to 
another.  As  of  mans  seed,  there  is  first  made  a  shapelesse 
fruit  in  the  Mothers  Wombe,  then  a  shapen  Childe,  then 
being  out  of  the  Wombe,  a  sucking  babe,  afterward  he  be- 
cometh  a  ladde,  then  consequently  a  stripling,  then  a  full 
growne  man,  then  an  old  man,  and  in  the  end  an  aged 
decrepite  man.  So  that  age  and  subsequent  generation 
goeth  ever  undoing  and  wasting  the  precedent. 

LUCR.  v.  837.  Mutat  enim  mundi  naturam  totius  cetas, 

Ex  alioque  alius  status  excipere  omnia  debet, 
Nee  manet  ulla  sui  similis  res,  omnia  migrant, 
Omnia  commutat  natura  et  vertere  coyit. 

Of  th'  universall  world,  age  doth  the  nature  change, 
And  all  things  from  one  state  must  to  another  range, 
No  one  thing  like  it  selfe  remaines,  all  things  doe  passe, 
Nature  doth  change,  and  drive  to  change,  each  thing 
that  was. 

And  when  we  doe  foolishly  feare  a  kind  of  death,  when  as 
330 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

we  have  already  past,  and  dayly  passe  so  many  others.     For,  CHAPTER 
not  only  (as  Heraclitus  said)  the  death  of  fire  is  a  gene-          XII 
ration    of  ayre  ;    and    the  death  of  ayre,  a   generation    of  A"  Apologie 
TXT   L  -r>  "•       I  '"j     j_i  •,  °*  Kaymond 

Water:    But   also   we    may  most  evidently  see    it   in   our       Sebond 

selves.  The  flower  of  age  dieth,  fadeth  and  fleeteth,  when 
age  comes  upon  us,  and  youth  endeth  in  the  flower  of  a  full 
growne  mans  age :  Child-hood  in  youth,  and  the  first  age, 
dieth  in  infancie  :  and  yesterday  endeth  in  this  day,  and  to 
day  shall  die  in  to  morrow.  And  nothing  remaineth  or  ever 
continueth  in  one  state.  For  to  prove  it,  if  we  should  ever 
continue  one  and  the  same,  how  is  it  then,  that  now  we 
rejoyce  at  one  thing,  and  now  at  another  ?  How  comes  it  to 
passe,  we  love  things  contrary,  or  we  hate  them,  or  we 
love  them,  or  we  blame  them  ?  How  is  it,  that  we  have 
different  affections,  holding  no  more  the  same  sense  in  the 
same  thought  ?  For  it  is  not  likely,  that  without  alteration 
we  should  take  other  passions,  and  what  admitteth  altera 
tions,  continueth  not  the  same :  and  if  it  be  not  one  selfe 
same,  than  is  it  not :  but  rather  with  being  all  one,  the 
simple  being  doth  also  change,  ever  becomming  other  from 
other.  And  by  consequence  Natures  senses  are  deceived 
and  lie  falsly ;  taking  what  appeareth  for  what  is ;  for 
want  of  truly  knowing  what  it  is  that  is.  But  then  what 
is  it,  that  is  indeed  ?  That  which  is  eternall,  that  is  to  say, 
that  which  never  had  birth,  nor  ever  shall  have  end  ;  and 
to  which  no  time  can  bring  change  or  cause  alteration. 
For  time  is  a  fleeting  thing,  and  which  appeareth  as  in  a 
shadow,  with  the  matter  ever  gliding,  alwaies  fluent,  with 
out  ever  being  stable  or  permanent ;  to  whom  rightly  be 
long  these  termes,  Before  and  After:  and,  it  Hath  beene, 
or  Shall  be.  Which  at  first  sight  doth  manifestly  shew, 
that  it  is  not  a  thing,  which  is ;  for,  it  were  great  sottish- 
nesse,  and  apparent  false-hood,  to  say,  that  that  is  which 
is  not  yet  in  being,  or  that  already  hath  ceased  from 
being.  And  concerning  these  words,  Present,  Instant,  Even 
now,  by  which  it  seemes,  that  especially  we  uphold  and 
principally  ground  the  intelligence  of  time  ;  reason  discover 
ing  the  same,  doth  forthwith  destroy  it :  for  presently  it 
severeth  it  a  sunder  and  divideth  it  into  future  and  past 
time,  as  willing  to  see  it  necessarily  parted  in  two.  As 

331 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  much  happeneth  unto  nature,  which  is  measured  according 
XII          unto  time,  which  measureth  her :  for  no  more  is  there  any 

^Ra^^d  ^ing  in  her,  that  remaineth  or  is  subsistent :  rather  all 
Sebond  things  in  her  are  either  borne  or  ready  to  be  borne,  or 
dying.  By  meanes  whereof,  it  were  a  sinne  to  say  of  God, 
who  is  the  only  that  is,  that  he  was  or  shall  be  :  for  these 
words  are  declinations,  passages,  or  Vicissitudes  of  that, 
which  cannot  last,  nor  continue  in  being.  Wherefore  we 
must  conclude ;  that  only  God  is,  not  according  to  any 
measure  of  time,  but  according  to  an  immoveable  and  im 
mutable  eternity,  not  measured  by  time,  nor  subject  to  any 
declination,  before  whom  nothing  is,  nor  nothing  shall  be 
after,  nor  more  new  nor  more  recent,  but  one  really  being  : 
which  by  one  onely  Now  or  Present,  filleth  the  Ever,  and 
there  is  nothing  that  truly  is,  but  he  alone  :  Without  say 
ing,  he  hath  bin,  or  he  shall  be,  without  beginning,  and  sans 
ending.  To  this  so  religious  conclusion  of  a  heathen  man, 
I  will  only  adde  this  word,  taken  from  a  testimony  of  the 
same  condition,  for  an  end  of  this  long  and  tedious  discourse 
which  might  well  furnish  me  with  endlesse  matter.  '  Oh  what 
'  a  vile  and  abject  thing  is  man '  (saith  he)  '  unlesse  he  raise 
6  himselfe  above  humanity  ! '  Observe  here  a  notable  speech, 
and  a  profitable  desire ;  but  likewise  absurd.  For  to  make 
the  handfull  greater  then  the  hand,  and  the  embraced  greater 
then  the  arme ;  and  to  hope  to  straddle  more  then  our  legs 
length  ;  is  impossible  and  monstrous  :  nor  that  man  should 
mount  over  and  above  himselfe  or  humanity ;  for,  he  cannot 
see  but  with  his  owne  eyes,  nor  take  hold  but  with  his  owne 
armes.  He  shall  raise  himselfe  up,  if  it  please  God  ex 
traordinarily  to  lend  him  his  helping  hand.  He  may  ele 
vate  himselfe  by  forsaking  and  renouncing  his  owne  meanes, 
and  suffering  himselfe  to  be  elevated  and  raised  by  meere 
heavenly  meanes.  It  is  for  our  Christian  faith,  not 
for  his  Stoicke  vertue  to  pretend  or  aspire  to 
this  divine  Metamorphosis,  or  miraculous 
transmutation. 


332 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

THE    THIRTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  judging  of  others  death. 


HEN  we  judge  of  others  assurance  or  bold- 
nesse  in  death,  which  without  all  perad- 
venture,  is  the  most  remarkeable  action 
of  humane  life,  great  heed  is  to  be  taken 
of  one  thing,  which  is,  that  a  man  will 
hardly  beleeve  he  is  come  to  that  point. 
Few  men  die  with  a  resolution,  that  it  is 
their  last  houre  :  And  no  wher  doth  hopes 
deceit  ammuse  us  more.  She  never  ceaseth  to  ring  in  our 
eares,  that  others  have  beene  sicker,  and  yet  have  not 
died  ;  the  cause  is  not  so  desperate  as  it  is  taken ;  and  if 
the  worst  happen,  God  hath  done  greater  wonders.  The 
reason  is,  that  we  make  too  much  account  of  our  selves. 
It  seemeth,  that  the  generality  of  things  doth  in  some 
sort  suffer  for  our  anriullation,  and  takes  compassion  of  our 
state.  Forsomuch  as  our  sight  being  altered,  represents 
unto  it  selfe  things  alike  ;  and  we  imagine,  that  things  faile 
it,  as  it  doth  to  them  :  As  they  who  travell  by  Sea,  to  whom 
mountaines,  fields,  townes,  heaven  and  earth,  seeme  to  goe 
the  same  motion,  and  keepe  the  same  course,  they  doe  : 

Provehimur  portu,  terrceque  urbesque  recedunt.  VIRG.  s£n.  iii. 

We  sayling  launch  from  harbour,  and  ' 2' 

Behinde  our  backes  leave  townes,  leave  land. 

Who  ever  saw  old  age,  that  commended  not  times  past, 
and  blamed  not  the  present,  charging  the  world  and  mens 
customes  with  her  misery,  and  lowring  discontent  ? 

Idmque  caput  quassans  grandis  suspirat  arator,  LUCR.  ii.  1 13. 

Et  cam  tempora  temporibus  prcesentia  confert 
Prceteritis,  laudat  fortunas  scepe  parentis 
Et  crepat  antiquum  genus  ut  pietate  repletum. 

The  gray-beard  Plow-man   sighes,  shaking  his    hoarie 

head, 

Compares  times  that  are  now,  with  times  past  heretofore, 
Praises  the  fortunes  of  his  father  long  since  dead, 
And  crackes  of  ancient  men,  whose  honesty  was  more. 

333 


MONTAIGNE'S   ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  We  entertaine  and  carry  all  with  us  :  Whence  it  fol- 
XIII  loweth,  that  we  deeme  our  death  to  be  some  great  matter, 

Of  judging  of  anj  wnicn  passeth  not  so  easily,  nor  without  a  solemne  con 
sultation  of  the  Starres  ;  Tot  circa  unum  caput  tumultu- 
antes  Deos.  '  So  many  Gods  keeping  a  stirre  about  one  mans 
'  life."  And  so  much  the  more  we  thinke  it,  by  how  much 
the  more  we  praise  our  selves.  What  ?  should  so  much  learn 
ing  and  knowledge  be  lost  with  so  great  dammage,  without  the 
Destinies  particular  care  ?  A  soule  so  rare  and  exemplar, 
costs  it  no  more  to  be  killed,  then  a  popular  and  unpro 
fitable  soule  ?  This  life,  that  covereth  so  many  others,  of 
whom  so  many  other  lives  depend,  that,  for  his  use  possesseth 
so  great  a  part  of  the  world  and  filleth  so  many  places,  is  it 
displaced  as  that  which  holdeth  by  its  owne  simple  string  ? 
No  one  of  us  thinkes  it  sufficient,  to  be  but  one.  Thence 
came  those  words  of  Caesar  to  his  pilot,  more  proudly 
swolne,  then  the  Sea  that  threatned  him  : 

LUCAN.  iii.  — Italiam  si  calo  authore  recusas, 

579.  Me  pete  :  sola  tibi  causa  hcec  est  iusta  timoris, 

Vectorem  non  nosse  tuum ;  perrumpe  procellas 

Tuteld  secure  mei: — 

If  Italie  thou  doe  refuse  with  heaven  thy  guide, 
Turne  thee  to  me  :  to  thee  only  just  cause  of  feare 
Is  that  thy  passinger  thou  know'st  not :  stormie  tide 
Breake  through,  secure  by  guard  of  me,  whom  thou  dost 

beare. 

And  these  : 
Ib.  653.  — credit  jam  digna  pericula  Ccesar 

Fatis  esse  suis :  tantusque  evertere  (diocit) 

Me  superis  labor  est,  parvd  quern  puppe  sedentem, 

Tarn  magno  petiere  mart. 

Caesar  doth  now  beleeve  those  dangers  worthie  are 
Of  his  set  fate  ;  and  saies,  Doe  Gods  take  so  much  pain 
Me  to  undoe,  whom  they  thus  to  assault  prepare 
Set  in  so  small  a  skiffe,  in  such  a  surging  maine  ? 

And  this  common  foppery,  that  Phrebus  for  one  whole 
yeare,  bare  mourning  weedes  on  his  forehead  for  the  death 
of  him : 

VIRG.  Georg.  Ille  etiam  extincto  miser atus  Ccesare  Romam, 

i.  466.  Cum  caput  obscura  nitidum  ferrugine  texit. 

The  Sunne  did  pitty  take  of  Rome  when  Ctesar  dide, 
When  he  his  radiant  head  in  obscure  rust  did  hide. 
334 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

And  a  thousand  such,  wherewith  the  world  suffers  it  selfe  CHAPTER 
to  be  so  easily  conicatcht,  deeming  that  our  owne  interests         XIII 
disturbe  heaven,   and   his  infinitie   is   moved    at    our    least  Of  judging  of 
actions.     Non  tanta  ccelo  societas  nobiscum  est,  ut  nostrofato  ^     ^Ty6//- 
mortalis  sit  ilk  quoque  siderum  fulgor.     '  There  is  no  such  ii.  c.  8. 
4  societie  betweene  heaven  and  us,  that  by  our  destinie  the 
'  shining  of  the  starres  should  be  mortall  as  we  are.1    And  to 
judge  a  resolution  and  constancie  in  him,  who  though  he  be 
in  manifest  danger,  doth  not  yet  beleeve  it,  it  is  no  reason : 
And  it  sufficeth  not,  that  he  die  in  that  ward,  unlesse  he 
have  directly,  and  for  that  purpose  put  himselfe  into  it :  It 
hapneth,  that  most  men  set  a  sterne   countenance   on  the 
matter,  looke  big,  and  speake   stoutly,  thereby  to  acquire 
reputation,  which  if  they  chance  to  live,  they  hope  to  enjoy. 
Of  all  I  have  scene  die,  fortune  hath  disposed  their  counte 
nances,  but  not  their  desseignes.     And   of  those  which  in 
ancient   times   have  put  themselves  to  death,  the  choise  is 
great,  whether  it  were  a  sodaine  death,  or  a  death  having 
time  and  leasure.     That  cruell  Romane  Emperor  said  of  his 
prisoners,  that  he  would  make  them  feele  death  :  And  if  any 
fortuned  to  kill  himselfe  in  prison,  That  fellow  hath  escaped 
me  (would  he  say).     He  would  extend  and  linger  death,  and 
cause  it  be  felt  by  torments. 

Vidimus  et  toto  quamuis  in  corpore  cceso,  LUCAN.  ii.  179. 

Nil  animce  lethale  datum,  moremque  nefandce 
Durum  scevitice,  pereuntis  parcere  morti. 

And  we  have  scene,  when  all  the  body  tortur'd  lay, 
Yet  no  stroke  deadly  giv'n,  and  that  in  humane  way 
Of  tyranny,  to  spare  his  death  that  sought  to  die. 

Verily,  it  is  not  so  great  a  matter,  being  in  perfect  health, 
and  well  setled  in  mind,  for  one  to  resolve  to  kill  himselfe  : 
It  is  an  easie  thing  to  shew  stoutnesse  and  play  the  wag 
before  one  come  to  the  pinch.  So  that  Heliogabalus  the 
most  dissolute  man  of  the  world,  amidst  his  most  riotous 
sensualities,  intended,  whensoever  occasion  should  force  him 
to  it,  to  have  a  daintie  death.  Which,  that  it  might  not 
degenerate  from  the  rest  of  his  life,  he  had  purposely  caused 
a  stately  towre  to  be  built,  the  nether  part  and  fore-court 
whereof  was  floored  with  boardes  richly  set  and  enchased 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  with  gold  and  precious  stones,  from-off  which  he  might 
.  XIH  headlong  throwe  himselfe  downe :  He  had  also  caused  cordes 

Ofjudg-mg  of  j.0  j^  ma(je  Of  goij  an(j  Crims0n  silke,  therewith  to  strangle 
himselfe :  and  a  rich  golden  rapier,  to  thrust  himselfe 
through :  and  kept  poison  in  boxes  of  Emeraldes  and 
Topases,  to  poison  himselfe  with,  according  to  the  humor 
he  might  have,  to  chuse  which  of  these  deaths  should  please 
him. 

LucAN.iv.  797.  Impiger  etfortis  virtute  coactd. 

Gurio'  A  ready  minded  gallant, 

And  in  forst  valour  valiant. 

Notwithstanding,  touching  this  man,  the  wantonnesse  of 
his  preparation  makes  it  more  likely  that  he  would  have 
fainted,  had  he  beene  put  to  his  triall.  But  even  of  those, 
who  most  undantedly  have  resolved  themselves  to  the  execu 
tion,  we  must  consider  (I  say)  whether  it  were  with  a  life 
ending  stroke,  and  that  tooke  away  any  leasure  to  feele  the 
effect  thereof.  For  it  is  hard  to  guesse,  seeing  life  droope 
away  by  little  and  little,  the  bodies-feeling  entermingling 
it  self  with  the  soules,  meanes  of  repentance  being  offered, 
whether  in  so  dangerous  an  intent,  constancie  or  obstinacie 
were  found  in  him.  In  Caesars  civill  warres,  Lutius  Domitius 
taken  in  Prussia,  having  empoysoned  himselfe,  did  afterward 
rue  and  repent  his  deede.  It  hath  hapned  in  our  daies,  that 
some  having  resolved  to  die,  and  at  first  not  stricken  deepe 
enough,  the  smarting  of  his  flesh,  thrusting  his  arme  backe, 
twice  or  thrice  more  wounded  himselfe  anew,  and  yet  could 
never  strike  sufficiently  deepe.  Whilst  the  arraignement  of 
Plautius  Silvanus  was  preparing,  Vrgulania  his  grandmother, 
sent  him  a  poignard,  wherewith  not  able  to  kill  himselfe 
throughly,  he  caused  his  owne  servants  to  cutte  his  veines. 
Albucilla  in  Tiberius  time,  purposing  to  kill  her  selfe,  but 
striking  over  faintly,  gave  her  enemies  leasure  to  apprehend 
and  imprison  her,  and  appoint  her  what  death  they  pleased. 
So  did  Captaine  Demosthenes  after  his  discomfiture  in  Sicilie. 
And  C.  Fimbria  having  over  feeblie  wounded  himselfe,  be 
came  a  sutor  to  his  boy,  to  make  an  end  of  him.  On  the 
other  side,  Ostorius,  who  forsomuch  as  he  could  not  use  his 
owne  arme,  disdained  to  employ  his  servants  in  any  other 
thing  but  to  hold  his  dagger  stiffe  and  strongly ;  and  taking 

336 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

his  running,  himselfe  caried  his  throate  to  its  point,  and  so  CHAPTER 

was  thrust  through.     To  say  truth,  it  is  a  meate  a  man  must 

swallow  without  chewing,  unlesse  his  throate  bee  frostshod. 

And  therefore  Adrianus  the  Emperour  made  his  Physition 

to  marke  and  take  the  just  compasse  of  the  mortall  place 

about  his  pap,  that  so  his  aime  might  not  faile  him,  to 

whom   he  had  given  charge  to  kill  him.     Loe  why  Caesar 

being   demanded,  which  was   the    death  he  most   allowed, 

answered,  the  least  premeditated,  and  the  shortest.    If  Caesar 

said  it,  it  is  no  faintnesse  in  me  to  believe  it.    '  A  short  death ' 

(saith  Plinie)  '  is  the  chiefe  happe  of  humane  life.'   It  grieveth 

them  to  acknowledge  it.    No  man  can  be  said,  to  be  resolved 

to  die,  that  feareth  to  purchase  it,  and  that  cannot  abide  to 

looke  upon,  and  out-stare  it  with  open  eies.     Those  which 

in  times  of  execution  are  scene  to  runne  to  their  end,  and 

hasten  the  execution,  doe  it  not  with  resolution,  but  because 

they  will  take  away  time  to  consider  the  same ;  it  grieves 

them  not  to  be  dead,  but  to  die. 

Emori  nolo,  sed  me  esse  mortuum,  nihil  cestimo.  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 

I  would  not  die  too  soone.  "'   EPlcha< 

But  care  not,,  when  tis  doone. 

It  is  a  degree  of  constancie,  unto  which  I  have  experienced 
to  arive,  as  those  that  cast  themselves  into  danger,  or  into 
the  Sea,  with  closed  eies.  In  mine  opinion,  there  is  nothing 
more  worthy  the  noting  in  Socrates  life,  then  to  have  had 
thirty  whole  daies  to  ruminate  his  deaths-decree,  to  have 
digested  it  all  that  while,  with  an  assured  hope,  without 
dismay  or  alteration,  and  with  a  course  of  actions  and  words, 
rather  supprest,  and  loose-hanging,  then  out-stretched  and 
raised  by  the  weight  of  such  a  cogitation.  That  Pomponius 
Atticus,  to  whom  Cicero  writeth,  being  sicke,  caused  Agrippa 
his  sonne  in  law,  and  two  or  three  of  his  other  friends  to  be 
called  for,  to  whom  he  said ;  that  having  assaid,  how  he  got 
nothing  in  going  about  to  be  cured,  and  what  he  did  to  pro 
long  his  life  did  also  lengthen  and  augment  his  griefe,  he 
was  now  determined  to  make  an  end  of  one  and  other ;  in- 
treating  them  to  allow  of  his  determination,  and  that  by  no 
meanes,  they  would  lose  their  labour  to  disswade  him  from 
it.  And  having  chosen  to  end  his  life  by  abstinence,  his 

2U  337 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  sicknes  was  cured  by  accident;  The  remedy  he  had  em- 
XIII  ployed  to  make  himselfe  away,  brought  him  to  health  againe. 
others^death  ^ne  Physitions,  an^  his  friends,  glad  of  so  happy  a  successe, 
and  rejoycing  thereof  with  him,  were  in  the  end  greatly 
deceived  ;  for,  with  all  they  could  doe,  they  were  never  able 
to  make  him  alter  his  former  opinion,  saying,  that  as  he 
must  one  day  passe  that  careire,  and  being  now  so  forward, 
he  would  remove  the  care,  another  time  to  beginne  againe. 
This  man  having  with  great  leasure  apprehended  death,  is 
not  only  no  whit  discouraged,  when  he  comes  to  front  it, 
but  resolutely  falls  upon  it :  for  being  satisfied  of  that,  for 
which  ''he  was  entred  the  combate,  in  a  braverie  he  thrust 
himselfe  into  it,  to  see  the  end  of  it.  It  is  farre  from  fearing 
death,  to  goe  about  to  taste  and  savour  the  same.  The 
historic  of  Cleanthes  the  Philosopher  is  much  like  to  this. 
His  gummes  being  swolne,  his  Physitions  perswaded  him  to 
use  great  abstinence  ;  having  fasted  two  daies,  he  was  so  well 
amended,  as  they  told  him  he  was  well,  and  might  returne 
to  his  wonted  course  of  life.  He  contrarily,  having  already 
tasted  some  sweetnes  in  this  fainting,  resolveth  not  to  draw 
backe,  but  finish  what  he  had  so  well  begunne,  and  was  so 
farre  waded  into.  Tullius  Marcellinus,  a  yong  Romane 
Gentleman,  willing  to  prevent  the  houre  of  his  destiny,  to 
ridde  himselfe  of  a  disease,  which  tormented  him  more  than 
he  would  endure,  although  Physitions  promised  certainely 
to  cure  him,  howbeit  not  sodainely ;  called  his  friends  unto 
him  to  determine  about  it :  some  (saith  Seneca)  gave  him 
that  counsell,  which  for  weaknesse  of  heart,  themselves  would 
have  taken :  others  for  flatterie,  that  which  they  imagined 
would  be  most  pleasing  unto  him  :  but  a  certaine  Stoike 
standing  by,  said  thus  unto  him.  4  Toile  not  thy  selfe  Marcel 
linus,  as  if  thou  determinedst  some  weightie  matter  ;  to  live 
is  no  such  great  thing,  thy  base  groomes  and  bruit  beasts 
live  also,  but  it  is  a  matter  of  consequence  to  die  honestly, 
wisely  and  constantly.  Remember  how  long  it  is  thou  doest 
one  same  thing,  to  eate,  to  drinke,  and  sleepe,  to  drinke,  to 
sleepe,  to  eate.  Wee  are  ever  uncessantly  wheeling  in  this 
endlesse  circled  Not  only  bad  and  intolerable  accidents,  but 
the  very  saciety  to  live,  brings  a  desire  of  death.  Marcellinus 
had  no  need  of  a  man  to  counsell,  but  of  one  to  helpe  him  : 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

his  servants  were  afraid  to  meddle  with  him ;  but  this  Philo-  CHAPTER 
sopher  made  them  to  understand,    that  familiars   are   sus-       .XII.I 
pected,  onely  when  the  question    is,  whether  the  maisters  Of  judging  of 
death  have  beene  voluntary :  otherwise  it  would  bee  as  bad  c 
an  example  to  hinder  him,  as  to  kill  him,  forasmuch  as, 

Inuitum  qui  servat,  idemfacit  occidenti.  HOR.  Art. 

Who  saves  a  man  against  his  will,  Poet"  46;> 

Doth  ev'n  as  much  as  he  should  kill. 

Then  he  advertized  Marcellinus,  that  it  would  not  be  un- 
seemely,  as  fruit  or  comfets  at  our  tables,  when  our  bellies 
be  full,  are  given  unto  by-standers,  so  the  life  ended,  to  dis 
tribute  something  to  such  as  have  beene  the  ministers  of  it. 
Marcellinus  being  of  a  frank  and  liberal  disposition,  caused 
certaine  summes  of  mony  to  be  divided  amongst  his  servants, 
and  comforted  them.  And  for  the  rest  there  needed  neither 
yron  nor  blood,  he  undertooke  to  depart  from  this  life,  not 
by  running  from  it :  Not  to  escape  from  death,  but  to  taste 
it.  And  to  have  leisure  to  condition  or  bargaine  with  death, 
having  quit  all  manner  of  nourishment,  the  third  day  en 
suing,  after  he  had  caused  himselfe  to  be  sprinkled  over 
with  luke-warme  water,  by  little  and  litle  he  consumed 
away  ;  and  (as  he  said)  not  without  some  voluptuousnesse 
and  pleasure.  Verily,  such  as  have  had  these  faintings  and 
swownings  of  the  heart,  which  proceed  from  weaknesse,  say, 
that  they  feele  no  paine  at  all  in  them,  but  rather  some 
pleasure,  as  of  a  passage  to  sleepe  and  rest.  These  are  pre 
meditated,  and  digested  deaths.  But  that  Cato  alone,  may 
serve  to  all  examples  of  vertue,  it  seemeth,  his  good  destiny 
caused  that  hand  wherewith  he  gave  himselfe  the  fatall 
blow,  to  be  sicke  and  sore :  that  so  hee  might  have  leisure 
to  affront  death  and  to  embrace  it,  reenforcing  his  courage 
in  that  danger,  in  lieu  of  mollifieing  the  same.  And  should 
I  have  represented  him  in  his  proudest  state,  it  should  have 
beene  all  bloody-gored,  tearing  his  entrailes,  and  rending  his 

gutts,  rather  then  with  a  sword  in  his  hand,  as  did  the 

statuaries  of  his  time.     For,  this  second  murther, 

was  much  more  furious,  then  the  first. 


339 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE     FOURTEENTH    CHAPTER 

How  that  our  spirit  hindereth  it  selfe. 

T  is  a  pleasant  imagination,  to  conceive  a 
spirit  justly  ballanced  betweene  two  equall 
desires.  For,  it  is  not  to  be  doubted,  that 
he  shall  never  be  resolved  upon  any  match : 
Forsomuch  as  the  application  and  choise 
brings  an  inequality  of  prise :  And  who 
should  place  us  betweene  a  Bottle  of  wine, 
and  a  Gammon  of  Bacon,  with  an  equall 
appetite  to  eat  and  drinke,  doubtlesse  there  were  noe  remedy, 
but  to  die  of  thirst  and  of  hunger.  To  provide  against  this 
inconvenient,  when  the  Stoikes  were  demanded,  whence  the 
^election  of  two  indifferent  things  commeth  into  our  soule 
(and  which  causeth,  that  from  out  a  great  number  of 
Crownes  or  Angells  we  rather  take  one  then  another,  when 
there  is  no  reason  to  induce  us  to  preferre  any  one  before 
others)  they  answer,  that  this  motion  of  the  soule  is  extra- 
ordinarie  and  irregular,  comming  into  us  by  a  strange,  acci- 
dentall  and  casuall  impulsion.  In  my  opinion,  it  might 
rather  be  said,  that  nothing  is  presented  unto  us,  wherein 
there  is  not  some  difference,  how  light  so  ever  it  bee :  And 
that  either  to  the  sight,  or  to  the  feeling,  there  is  ever  some 
choise,  which  tempteth  and  drawes  us  to  it,  though  imper 
ceptible  and  not  to  bee  distinguished.  In  like  manner, 
hee  that  shall  presuppose  a  twine-thrid  equally  strong  all- 
through,  it  is  impossible  by  all  impossibilitie  that  it  breake, 
for,  where  would  you  have  the  flaw  or  breaking  to  beginne  ? 
And  at  once  to  breake  in  all  places  together,  it  is  not  in 
nature.  Who  should  also  adde  to  this,  the  Geometricall  pro 
positions,  which  by  the  certainety  of  their  demonstrations, 
conclude,  the  contained  greater  then  the  containing,  and  the 
centre  as  great  as  his  circumference :  And  that  finde  two 
lines  uncessantly  approaching  one  unto  another,  and  yet  can 
never  meete  and  joyne  together:  And  the  Philosophers 
stone,  and  quadrature  of  the  circle,  where  the  reason  and 
the  effects  are  so  opposite  :  might  peradventure  draw  thence 
340 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

some   argument    to    salve   and    helpe    this   bold    speech    of  CHAPTER 

Pliny;  Solum  cerium,  nihil  esse  certi,  et  homine  nihil  mise- 

rius  aut  superbius.     'This   onely  is  sure,  that  there  is     How  that  our 

'  nothing   sure ;    and   nothing   more   miserable,  and        ^elh  it  selfT 

'  yet  more  arrogant  then  man.1  PLIN  N  fff.yf 

ii.  c.  7. 

THE    FIFTEENTH    CHAPTER 

That  our  desires  are  encreased  by  difficultie. 

HERE  is  no  reason  but  hath  another  con 
trary  unto  it,  saith  the  wisest  party  of 
Philosophers.  I  did  erewhile  ruminate 
upon  this  notable  saying,  which  an  ancient 
writer  alleageth  for  the  contempt  of  life. 
No  good  can  bring  us  any  pleasure,  except 
that,  against  whose  losse  we  are  prepared : 
In  cequo  est,  dolor  amisscc  rei,  et  timor  SEN.  Epist. 
amittendce.  '  Sorrow  for  a  thing  lost,  and  feare  of  losing  it,  xcvi»- 
'  are  on  an  even  ground."  Meaning  to  gaine  thereby,  that  the 
fruition  of  life  cannot  perfectly  be  pleasing  unto  us,  if  we 
stand  in  any  feare  to  lose  it.  A  man  might  nevertheles  say 
on  the  contrary  part,  that  we  embrace  and  claspe  this  good 
so  much  the  harder,  and  with  more  affection,  as  we  perceive 
it  to  be  lesse  sure,  and  feare  it  should  be  taken  from  us. 
For,  it  is  manifestly  found,  that  as  fire  is  rouzed  up  by  the 
assistance  of  cold,  even  so  our  will  is  whetted  on  by  that 
which  doth  resist  it. 

Si  nunquam  Danaen  habuisset  ahenea  turris,  OVID.  Am.  ii. 

Non  esset  Danae  de  Tovefacta  parens.  EL  xix.  27. 

If  Danae  had  not  beene  clos'd  in  brazen  Tower, 
love  had  not  clos'd  with  Danae  in  golden  shower. 

And  that  there  is  nothing  so  naturally  opposite  to  our 
taste,  as  satiety,  which  comes  from  ease  and  facility,  nor 
nothing  that  so  much  sharpeneth  it,  as  rarenesse  and  diffi 
culty.  Omnium  rerum  voluptas  ipso  quo  debetfugare  periculo 
crescit.  'The  delight  of  all  things  encreaseth  by  the  danger, 
'  whereby  it  rather  should  terrific  them  that  affect  it.1 

341 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Gallanega;  satiatur  amor,  nisi  gaudia  torquent.    MART. iv.  Ep. 

XV  Good  wench,,  deny,,  my  love  is  cloied,  xxxviii.  i. 

That  our  de-  Vnlesse  joy es  grieve.,  before  enjoyed. 

^cr^ased.6  bv  ^  keepe  l°ve  i*1  breath  and  longing,  Lycurgus  ordained, 
difficultie  that  the  maried  men  of  Lacedemonia  might  never  converse 
with  their  wives,  but  by  stealth,  and  that  it  should  be  as 
great  an  imputation  and  shame  to  finde  them  laid  together, 
as  if  they  were  found  lying  with  others.  The  difficulty  of 
assignations  or  matches  appointed,  the  danger  of  being  sur 
prised,  and  the  shame  of  ensuing  to  morrow, 

HOR.  Epo,  xi.  — et  languor,  et  silentium, 

13-  Et  latere  petitus  imo  spiritus. 

And  whispering  voice,  and  languishment, 
And  breath  in  sighes  from  deepe  sides  sent, 

are  the  things  that  give  relish  and  tartnesse  to  the  sawce. 
How  many  most  laciviously-pleasant  sports,  proceed  from 
modest  and  shamefast  manner  of  speech,  of  the  daliances  and 
workes  of  love  ?  Even  voluptuousnesse  seekes  to  provoke 
and  stirre  it  selfe  up  by  smarting.  It  is  much  sweeter  when 
it  itcheth,  and  endeared  when  it  gauleth.  The  curtezan 
Flora  was  wont  to  say,  that  she  never  lay  with  Pompey,  but 
she  made  him  carry  away  the  markes  of  her  teeth. 

LUCR.  iv.  1070.  Quod  petiere,  premunt  arete,  faciuntque  dolor  em 

Corporis,  et  denies  inlidunt  scepe  labellis : 
Et  stimuli  subsunt,  qui  instigant  Icedere  id  ipsum 
Quodcumque  est,  rabies  unde  illi  germina  surgunt. 

So  goes  it  every  where :  Rarenesse  and  difficulty  giveth 
esteeme  unto  things.  Those  of  Marca  d'Ancona  in  Italy, 
make  their  vowes,  and  goe  on  pilgrimage  rather  unto  lames 
in  Galicia,  and  those  of  Galicia  rather  unto  our  Lady  of 
Loreto.  In  the  Country  of  Liege,  they  make  more  account 
of  the  Bathes  of  Luca;  and  they  of  Tuscany  esteeme  the 
Baths  of  Spawe  more  then  their  owne :  In  Rome  the  Fence- 
schooles  are  ever  full  of  French-men,  when  few  Romans 
come  unto  them.  Great  Cato,  as  well  as  any  else,  was  even 
cloied  and  distasted  with  his  wife,  so  long  as  she  was  his 
owne,  but  when  another  mans,  thenwished  he  for  her,  and 
would  faine  have  lickt  his  fingers  at  her.  I  have  heretofore 
put  forth  an  old  stalion  to  soile,  who  before  did  no  sooner 
see  or  smell  a  Mare,  but  was  so  lusty,  that  no  man  could 
342 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

rule  him,  nor  no  ground  hold   him ;  ease  and  facilitie,  to  CHAPTER 
come  to  his  owne  when  he  list,  hath  presently  quailed  his         XV 
stomacke,  and  so  cloyed  him,  that  he  is  weary  of  them  :  But  T.hat  our  de~ 
toward   strange   Mares,  and  the  first   that   passeth  by  his  ^ased.6  ^ 
pasture,  there  is  no  hoe  with  him,  but  suddenly  he  returnes     difficultie 
to  his  old  wonted  neighings,  and  furious  heate.     Our  appe 
tite  doth  contemne  and  passe  over  what  he  hath  in  his  free 
choise  and  owne  possession,  to  runne  after  and  pursue  what 
he  hath  not. 

Transuolat  in  medio  posita,  etfugientia  captat.  HOR.  Ser.  i. 

It  over  flies  what  open  lies,  Saf-  "•  I07- 

Pursuing  onely  that  which  flies. 

To  forbid  us  any  thing,  is  the  ready  way  to  make  us  long 
for  it. 

— nisi  tu  servare  puellam  OVID.  Am.  ii. 

Incipis,  incipiet  desinere  esse  mea.  &?•  xix«  47- 

If  you  begin  not  your  wench  to  enshrine,, 
She  will  begin  to  leave  off  to  be  mine. 

And  to  leave  it  altogether  to  our  will,  is  but  to  breede 
dislike  and  contempt  in  us ;  So  that  to  want,  and  to  have 
store,  breedeth  one  selfe  same  inconvenience. 

Tibi  quod  super  est,  mihi  quod  desit,  dolet.  TER.  Phor. 

You  grieve  because  you  have  to  much  ;  act>  K  sc>  3- 

It  griev's  me  that  I  have  none  such. 

Wishing  and  injoying  trouble  us  both  alike.  The  rigor 
of  a  mistris  is  yrkesome,  but  ease  and  facility  (to  say  true) 
much  more  ;  forasmuch  as  discontent  and  vexation  proceed 
of  the  estimation  we  have  of  the  thing  desired,  which 
sharpen  love,  and  set  it  afire :  Whereas  Satiety  begets  dis 
taste  :  It  is  a  dull,  blunt,  weary,  and  drouzy  passion. 

Siqua  volet  regnare  diu,  contemnat  amantem.  OVID.  Am.  ii. 

If  any  list  long  to  beare  sway, 
Scorne  she  her  lover,  ere  she  play. 

— contemnite  amantes,  PROP.  ii.  El. 

Sic  hodie  veniet,  siqua  negavit  heri.  X1V*  X9- 

Lovers,  your  lovers  scorne,  contemne,  delude,  deride ; 
So  will  shee  come  to  day,  that  yesterday  denied. 

Why  did  Poppea  devise  to  maske  the  beauties  of  her  face, 

343 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  but  to  endeare  them  to  her  lovers  ?    Why  are  those  beauties 

xv          vailed  downe  to  the  heeles,  which  all  desire  to  shew,  which 

That  our  de-  ajj  w^  j.Q  gee  p     why  Joe  they  cover  with  so  many  lets, 

sires   are    en-  ,,      J  •71  ^  •  n  •   .    /i 

creased    by    one  over  another,  those  parts,  where  chiefly  consisteth  our 

difficultie  pleasure  and  theirs?  And  to  what  purpose  serve  those 
baricadoes,  and  verdugalles,  wherewith  our  women  arme 
their  flankes,  but  to  allure  our  appetite,  and  enveagie  us  to 
them  by  putting  us  off? 

VIRG.  Buco.  Etfugit  ad  salices,  et  fie  cupit  ante  videri. 

EcL  "*•  65-  She  to  the  willow's  runs  to  hide, 

Yet  gladly  would  she  first  be  spide. 

PROP.  ii.  EL  Interdum  tunica  duxit  operta  moram. 

She  cover'd  with  her  cote  in  play, 
Did  sometime  make  a  short  delay. 

Whereto  serves  this  mayden-like  bashfulnesse,  this  wilfull 
quaintnesse,  this  severe  countenance,  this  seeming  ignorance 
of  those  things,  which  they  know  better  than  our  selves, 
that  goe  about  to  instruct  them,  but  to  encrease  a  desire, 
and  endeare  a  longing  in  us,  to  vanquish,  to  gourmandize, 
and  at  our  pleasure,  to  dispose  all  this  squeamish  ceremonie, 
and  all  these  peevish  obstacles  ?  For,  it  is  not  only  a 
delight,  but  a  glory  to  besot  and  debauch  this  dainty  and 
nice  sweetnesse,  and  this  infantine  bashfullnesse,  and  to 
subject  a  marble  and  sterne  gravity  to  the  mercy  of  our 
flame.  It  is  a  glory  (say  they)  to  triumph  over  modesty, 
chastity  and  temperance :  and  who  disswadeth  Ladies  from 
these  parts,  betraieth  both  them  and  himselfe.  It  is  to 
be  supposed,  that  their  heart  yerneth  for  feare,  that  the 
sound  of  our  wordes  woundeth  the  purity  of  their  eares, 
for  which  they  hate  us,  and  with  a  forced  constraint,  agree 
to  withstand  our  importunitie.  Beauty  with  all  her  might, 
hath  not  wherewith  to  give  a  taste  of  her  selfe  without  these 
interpositions.  See  in  Italic,  wher  most,  and  of  the  finest 
beauty  is  to  be  sold,  how  it  is  forced  to  seek  other  strange 
meanes  and  suttle  devises,  arts  and  tricks,  to  yeeld  her  selfe 
pleasing  and  acceptable :  and  yet  in  good  sooth,  doe  what  it 
can,  being  venal  and  common,  it  remaineth  feeble,  and  is 
even  languishing.  Even  as  in  vertue,  of  two  equall  effects, 
we  hold  that  the  fairest,  and  worthiest,  wherein  are  proposed 
344 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

more  lets,  and  which  affordeth  greater  hazards.     It  is  an  effect  CHAPTER 

of  Gods  providence,  to  suffer  his  holy  Church,  to  be  vexed          xv 

and  turmoyled  as  we  see,  with  so  many  troubles  and  stormes,  gir  **  ™*  e^~ 

to  rouze,  and  awaken  by  this  opposition  and  strife  the  godly    crease(i  by 

and  religious  soules,  and  raise  them  from  out  a  lethall  secu-     difficultie 

rity,  and  stupified  slumber,  wherein  so  long  tranquillity  had 

plunged  them.     If  we  shall  counterpoize  the  losse  we  have 

had,  by  the  number  of  those,  that  have  strayed  out  of  the 

right  way,  and  the  profit  that  acrueth  unto  us,  by  having 

taken  hart  of  grace,  and  by  reason  of  combate  raised  our  zeale, 

and  forces ;  I  wot  not  whether  the  profit  doth  surmount  the 

losse.       We  thought  to  tie  the  bond  of  our  manages  the 

faster,  by  removing  all  meanes  to  dissolve  them  ;  but  by  how 

much  faster,  that  of  constraint  hath  bin  tied,  so  much  more 

hath  that  of  our  will  and  affection  bin  slacked  and  loosed  : 

Whereas  on  the  contrary  side,  that,  which  so  long  time  held 

mariages  in  honour  and  safty  in  Rome,  was  the  liberty  to 

breake  them  who  list.     They  kept  their  wives  the  better, 

forsomuch   as  they  might  leave  them  ;    and  when  divorces 

might  freely  be  had,  there  past  five  hundred  years  and  more, 

before  any  would  ever  make  use  of  them. 

Quod  licet,  ingratum  est,  quod  non  licet,  acrius  urit.  OVID.  Am.  ii. 

What  we  may  doe,  doth  little  please  :  EL  xlx<  3' 

It  woormes  us  more,,  that  hath  lesse  ease. 

To  this  purpose  might  the  opinion  of  an  ancient  Writer 
be  adjoyned  ;  that  torments  do  rather  encourage  vices,  than 
suppresse  them  ;  that  they  beget  not  a  care  of  well-doing, 
which  is  the  worke  of  reason  and  discipline,  but  only  a  care 
not  to  be  surprized  in  doing  evill. 

Latins  excisce  pestis  contagia  serpunt. 

ThJ  infection  of  the  plague  nigh  spent 
And  rooted  out,,  yet  further  went. 

I  wot  not  whether  it  be  true,  but  this  I  know  by  experience, 
that  policie  was  never  found  to  be  reformed  that  way.  The 
order  and  regiment  of  manners  dependeth  of  some  other 
meane.  The  Greeke  stories  make  mention  of  the  Agrippi- 
ans,  neighbouring  upon  Scithia,  who  live  without  any  rod  or 
staffe  of  offence,  where  not  onely,  no  man  undertakes  to  buckle 

2X 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  with  any  other  man,  but  whosoever  can  but  save  himselfe, 

xv          there  (by  reason  of  their  vertue  and  sanctity  of  life)  is  as  it 

lhat  our  de-  were  jn  a  Sanctuary  :  And  no  man  dares  so  much  as  touch 

sires   are    en-  ,  .  -^          ,          J  1,1 

creased   bv    him.     Many  have  recourse  to  them,  to  attone  and  take  up 

difficultie     quarrels  and  differences,  which  arise  amongst  men  else  where. 
There  is  a  Nation,  where   the  inclosures    of  Gardens  and 
Fields  they  intend  to  keep  severall,  are  made  with  a  seely 
twine  of  cotten,  which  amongst  them  is  found  to  be  more 
SEN.^/W/.       safe  and  fast,  then   are    our   ditches    and    hedges.     Furem 
Ixix.  signata    sollititant,  Aperta    effractarius  prceterit.      6  Things 

'  sealed  up  solicite  a  thiefe  to  breake  them  open :  Whereas 
6  a  common  burglayer  will  passe  by  quietly  things  that  lie 
4  open.'  Amongst  other  meanes,  ease  and  facility  doth 
haply  cover  and  fence  my  house  from  the  violence  of  civill 
wares :  Inclosure  and  fencing  drawe  on  the  enterprise ;  and 
distrust,  the  offence ;  I  have  abated  and  weakned  the  soul- 
diers  designe,  by  taking  hazard  and  all  meanes  of  military 
glory  from  their  exploite,  which  is  wont  to  serve  them  for  a 
title,  and  stead  them  for  an  excuse.  What  is  performed 
couragiously,  at  what  time  justice  lieth  dead,  and  law  hath 
not  her  due  course,  is  ever  done  honorably.  I  yeeld  them 
the  conquest  of  my  house  dastardly  and  trecherous.  It  is 
never  shut  to  any  that  knocketh.  It  hath  no  other  guardian 
or  provision  but  a  Porter,  as  an  ancient  custome,  and  used 
ceremony,  who  serveth  not  so  much  to  defend  my  gate,  as 
to  offer  it  more  decently  and  courteously  to  all  commers.  I 
have  nor  watch  nor  sentinell,  but  what  the  Starres  keepe  for 
mee.  That  Gentleman  is  much  to  blame,  who  makes  a  shew 
to  stand  upon  his  guarde,  except  he  be  very  strong  indeed. 
Who  so  is  open  on  one  side,  is  so  every  where.  Our  Fore 
fathers  never  dreamed  on  building  of  frontire  Townes  or 
Castles. 

The  meanes  to  assaile  (I  meane  without  battery,  and 
troopes  of  armed  men)  and  to  surprise  our  houses  encrease 
daily  beyond  the  meanes  of  garding  or  defending.  Mens 
wits  are  generally  exasperated  and  whetted  on  that  way.  An 
invasion  concerneth  all,  the  defence  none  but  the  rich.  Mine 
was  sufficiently  strong,  according  to  the  times  when  it  was 
made.  I  have  since  added  nothing  unto  it  that  way  ;  and 
I  would  feare,  the  strength  of  it  should  turne  against  my 
346 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

selfe.    Seeing  a  peaceable  time  will  require  we  shall  unfortifie  CHAPTER 
them.      It  is  dangerous  not  to  be  able  to   recover   them          xv 

againe,  and  it  is  hard  for  one  to  be  assured  of  them.     For,  T.hat  our  de~ 
•    ,     , .        i      .1  i     sires  are   en- 

concerning   intestine   broiles,   your    owne    servant    may  be    crease(j  by 

of  that  faction  you  stand  in  feare  of.  And  where  religion  difficultie 
serveth  for  a  pretence,  even  alliances  and  consanguinitie 
become  mistrustfull  under  colour  of  justice.  Common  rents 
cannot  entertaine  our  private  garisons.  They  should  all  be 
consumed.  We  have  not  wherewith,  nor  are  wee  able  to  doe 
it,  without  our  apparent  ruine,  or  more  incommodiously,  and 
therewithall  injuriously,  without  the  common  peoples  de 
struction.  The  state  of  my  losse  should  not  bee  much  worse. 
And  if  you  chance  to  be  a  looser,  your  owne  friends  are 
readier  to  accuse  your  improvidence  and  unhedinesse  then 
to  moane  you,  and  excuse  your  ignorance  and  carelesse- 
nesse,  concerning  the  offices  belonging  to  your  profession. 
That  so  many  strongly-garded  houses  have  beene  lost, 
whereas  mine  continueth  still,  makes  me  suspect  they  were 
overthrowne,  onely  because  they  were  so  diligently  garded.  It 
is  that  which  affoordeth  a  desire,  and  ministreth  a  pretence 
to  the  assailant.  All  gards  beare  a  shew  of  warre  ;  which  if 
God  be  so  pleased  may  light  upon  me.  But  so  it  is,  I  will 
never  call  for  it.  It  is  my  sanctuary  or  retreate  to  rest  my 
selfe  from  warres.  I  endevour  to  free  this  corner  from  the 
publicke  storme,  as  I  doe  another  corner  in  my  soule.  Our 
warre  may  change  forme,  and  multiply  and  diversifie  how  and 
as  long  as  it  list ;  but  for  my  selfe  I  never  stirre.  Amongst  so 
many  baricaded  and  armed  houses,  none  but  my  selfe  (as 
farre  as  I  know)  of  my  quality,  hath  meerely  trusted  the 
protection  of  his  unto  the  heavens :  For  I  never  removed 
neither  plate,  nor  hangings,  nor  my  evidences.  I  will  neither 
feare,  nor  save  my  selfe  by  halfes.  If  a  full  acknowledgement 
purchaseth  the  favour  of  God,  it  shall  last  me  for  ever 
unto  the  end:  If  not,  I  have  continued  long  enough, 
to  make  my  continuance  remarkeable,  and  worthy 
the  registring.  What?  Is  not  thirtie  yeares 
a  goodly  time  ? 


347 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    SIXTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Glory. 

HERE  is  both  name,  and  the  thing  :  the 
name,  is  a  voice  which  noteth,  and  sig- 
nifieth  the  thing  :  the  name,  is  neither 
part  of  thing  nor  of  substance :  it  is  a 
stranger-piece  joyned  to  the  thing,  and 
from  it.  God  who  in  and  by  himselfe  is 
all  fulnesse,  and  the  type  of  all  perfec 
tion,  cannot  inwardly  be  augmented  or 
encreased  :  yet  may  his  name  be  encreased  and  augmented, 
by  the  blessing  and  praise,  which  we  give  unto  his  exteriour 
workes ;  which  praise  and  blessing  since  we  cannot  incor 
porate  into  him,  forsomuch  as  no  accession  of  good  can  be 
had  unto  him,  we  ascribe  it  unto  his  name,  which  is  a  part 
without  him,  and  the  neerest  unto  him.  And  that  is  the 
reason  why  glory  and  honour  appertaineth  to  God  only. 
And  there  is  nothing  so  repugnant  unto  reason,  as  for  us  to 
goe  about  to  purchase  any  for  our  selves  :  For,  being  in 
wardly  needy  and  defective,  and  our  essence  imperfect,  and 
ever  wanting  amendment,  we  ought  only  labour  about  that. 
We  are  all  hollow  and  empty,  and  it  is  not  with  breath  and 
words  we  should  fill  our  selves.  We  have  need  of  a  more 
solide  substance  to  repaire  our  selves.  An  hunger  starved 
man  might  be  thought  most  simple,  rather  to  provide  him 
selfe  of  a  faire  garment,  then  of  a  good  meales-meate : 
Luke  ii.  14.  We  must  runne  to  that,  which  most  concerneth  us.  Gloria 
in  excelsis  Deo,  et  in  terra  pax  hominibus  :  '  Glory  be  to  God 
'  on  high,  and  peace  in  earth  amongst  men ' ;  As  say  our 
ordinary  prayers.  We  are  in  great  want  of  beautie,  health, 
wisedome,  vertue  and  such  like  essentiall  parts.  Exteriour 
ornaments  may  be  sought  for  when  we  are  once  provided 
of  necessary  things.  Divinitie  doth  very  amply  and  per 
tinently  treate  of  this  subject,  but  I  am  not  very  con 
versant  with  it.  Chrysippus  and  Diogenes  have  beene  the 
first,  and  most  constant  authors  of  the  contempt  of  glory. 
And  amongst  all  sensualities,  they  said,  there  was  none 
348 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

so  dangerous,  nor  so  much   to  be  avoided,  as  that  which  CHAPTER 
commeth  unto  us  by  the   approbation  of  others.      Verily     o?^1 
experience    makes    us   thereby    feele,    and    undergoe    many 
damageable  treasons.    Nothing  so  much  empoisoneth  Princes 
as  flattery  :  Nor  nothing  whereby  the  wicked  minded  gaine 
so  easie  credit  about  them  ;  nor  any  enticement  so  fit,  nor 
pandership  so  ordinary  to  corrupt  the  chastity  of  women, 
then  to  feed  and  entertaine  them  with  their  praises.     The 
first  enchantment  the  Syrens  employed  to  deceive  Vlisses,  is 
of  this  nature. 

Deca  vers  nous,  deca,  o  treslovable  Vlisse, 

Et  le  plus  grand  honnetur  dont  la  Grece  fleurisse. 

Turne  to  us,  to  us  turne,  Vlisses  thrice-renowned, 

The  principall  renowne  wherewith  all  Greece  is  crowned. 

Philosophers  said,  that  all  the  worlds  glory  deserved  not, 
that  a  man  of  wisedome  should  so  much  as  stretch  forth  his 
finger  to  acquire  it. 

Gloria  quantalibet  quid  erit,  si  gloria  tantum  est  ?  JUVEN.  Sat. 

Never  so  glorious  name,  vll<     r* 

What  ist,  be  it  but  fame  ? 


I  say  for  it  alone  :  for  it  drawes  many  commodities  after  it, 
by  which  it  may  yeeld  it  selfe  desirable :  It  purchaseth  us 
good  will :  It  makes  us  lesse  exposed  to  others  injuries 
and  offences,  and  such  like  things.  It  was  also  one  of  the 
principall  decrees  of  Epicurus:  for,  that  precept  of  his 
Sect,  HIDE  THY  LIFE,  which  forbideth  men  to  meddle  with 
publike  charges  and  negotiations,  doth  also  necessarily  pre 
suppose  that  a  man  should  despise  glory :  which  is  an 
approbation  the  world  makes  of  those  actions  we  give 
evidence  of.  He  that  bids  us  to  hide  our  life,  and  care 
but  for  our  selves,  and  would  not  have  us  know  of  others, 
would  also  have  us  not  to  be  honoured  and  glorified  therby. 
So  doth  he  counsel  Idomeneus,  by  no  meanes  to  order  his 
actions,  by  the  vulgar  opinion  and  publike  reputation : 
unlesse  it  be  to  avoide  other  accidentall  incommodities, 
which  the  contempt  of  men  might  bring  unto  him.  Those 
discourses  are  (in  mine  advise)  very  true  and  reasonable : 
But  I  wot  not  how,  we  are  double  in  our  selves,  which  is 

349 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  cause,  that  what  we  beleeve,  we  beleeve  it  not,  and 
XVI  cannot  rid  our  selves  of  that,  which  we  condemne.  Let 
y  us  consider  the  last  words  of  Epicurus,  and  which  he 
speaketh  as  he  is  dying :  they  are  notable  and  worthy 
such  a  Philosopher  :  but  yet  they  have  some  badge  of  his 
names  commendations,  and  of  the  humour  which  by  his  pre 
cepts  he  had  disavowed.  Behold  here  a  letter,  which  he  en- 
dited  a  little  before  he  yeelded  up  the  ghost.  '  Epicurus  to 
'  Hermachus  health  and  greeting  :  Whilst  I  passed  the  happy, 
4  and  even  the  last  day  of  my  life  I  writ  this,  accompanied 
c  neverthelesse  with  such  paine  in  my  bladder  and  anguish  in 
'  my  entrails,  that  nothing  can  be  added  to  the  greatnesse 
4  of  it ;  yet  was  it  recompenced  with  the  pleasure,  which  the 
'  remembrance  of  my  inventions  and  discourses  brought  unto 
'  my  soule.  Now  as  requireth  the  affection,  which  even  from 
'  the  infancie  thou  hast  borne  me  and  Philosophy,  embrace 
'  the  protection  of  Metrodorus  his  children ' :  Loe  here  his 
letter.  And  which  makes  .me  interpret,  that  the  pleasure 
which  in  his  soule  he  saith  to  feele  of  his  inventions,  doth 
in  some  sort  respect  the  reputation,  which  after  his  death 
hee  thereby  hoped  to  attaine,  is  the  ordinance  of  his  last 
will  and  testament,  by  which  he  willeth,  that  Aminoma- 
chus  and  Timocrates  his  heires,  should  for  the  celebration 
of  his  birth-day  every  month  of  January  supply  all  such 
charges  as  Hermachus  should  appoint :  And  also  for  the 
expence  he  might  be  at  upon  the  twentieth  of  every  Moone 
for  the  feasting  and  entertainment  of  the  Philosophers  his 
familiar  friends,  who  in  the  honour  of  his  memorie  and  of 
Metrodorus  should  meete  together.  Carneades  hath  beene 
chiefe  of  the  contrary  opinion,  and  hath  maintained,  that 
glory  was  in  it  selfe  to  bee  desired,  even  as  we  embrace  our 
posthumes  for  themselves,  having  neither  knowledge  nor 
jovissance  of  them.  This  opinion  hath  not  missed  to  be 
more  commonly  followed,  as  are  ordinarily  those,  that  fit 
most  and  come  nearest  our  inclinations.  Aristotle  amongst 
externall  goods  yeeldeth  the  first  ranke  unto  it :  And 
avoideth  as  two  extreame  vices,  the  immoderation,  either 
in  seeking,  or  avoiding  it.  I  beleeve,  that  had  we  the 
bookes  which  Cicero  writ  upon  this  subject,  we  should  heare 
strange  matters  of  him  :  for  he  was  so  fond  in  this  passion, 
350 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

as  had  he  dared,  he  would  (as  I  thinke)  have  easily  falne  into  CHAPTER 
the  excesse,  that  others  fell  in ;  which  is,  that  even  vertue      OfXyj 
was  not  to  be  desired,  but  for  the  honour,  which  ever  waited 
on  it : 

Paulum  sepultfB  distat  inertia  HOR.  Car.  iv. 

Celata  virtus. —  Od.  ix.  29. 

There  is  but  little  difference  betweene, 
Vertue  conceald,  unskilfulnesse  unseene. 

Which  is  so  false  an  opinion,  as  I  am  vexed  it  could  ever 
enter  a  mans  understanding  that  had  the  honour  to  beare 
the  name  of  a  Philosopher.  If  that  were  true,  a  man  needed 
not  to  be  vertuous  but  in  publike  :  and  we  should  never 
need  to  keepe  the  soules  operations  in  order  and  rule,  which 
is  the  true  seate  of  vertue,  but  only  so  much  as  they  might 
come  to  the  knowledge  of  others.  Doth  then  nothing  else 
belong  unto  it,  but  craftily  to  faile,  and  subtilly  to  cozen  ? 
If  thou  knowest  a  Serpent  to  be  hidden  in  any  place  (saith 
Carneades)  to  which,  he  by  whose  death  thou  hopest  to  reape 
commodity,  goeth  unawares  to  sit  upon,  thou  committest  a 
wicked  act  if  thou  warne  him  not  of  it :  and  so  much  the 
more,  because  thy  action  should  be  knowne  but  to  thy  selfe. 
If  we  take  not  the  law  of  wel-doing  from  our  selves  :  If  im 
punity  be  justice  in  us  ;  to  how  many  kindes  of  trecherie  are 
we  daily  to  abandon  our  selves  ?  That  which  Sp.  Peduceus 
did,  faithfully  to  restore  the  riches  which  C.  Plotius  had 
committed  to  his  only  trust  and  secrecie,  and  as  my  selfe 
have  done  often,  I  thinke  not  so  commendable,  as  I  would 
deeme  it  execrable,  if  we  had  not  done  it.  And  I  thinke  it 
beneficiall  we  should  in  our  daies  be  mindfull  of  Publius 
Sextilius  Rufus  his  example,  whom  Cicero  accuseth  that 
he  had  received  a  great  inheritance  against  his  conscience  : 
Not  only  repugnant,  but  agreeing  with  the  lawes.  And  M. 
Crassus,  and  Q.  Hortensius,  who  by  reason  of  their  authority 
and  might,  having  for  certaine  Quidities  been  called  by  a 
stranger  to  the  succession  of  a  forged  will,  that  so  he  might 
make  his  share  good  :  they  were  pleased  not  to  be  partakers 
of  his  forgery,  yet  refused  not  to  take  some  profit  of  it  : 
Very  closely  had  they  kept  themselves  under  the  countenance 
of  the  accusations,  witnesses  and  lawes.  Memlnerint  Deum 
se  habere  testem,  id  est  (ut  ego  arbitror)  mentem  suam.  '  Let 

351 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  them  remember  they  have  God  to  witnesse,  that  is,  (as  I 
XVI  '  construe  it)  their  owne  minde.1  Vertue  is  a  vaine  and 
ory  frivolous  thing,  if  it  draw  her  commendation  from  glory. 
In  vaine  should  we  attempt  to  make  her  keepe  her  rancke 
apart,  and  so  should  we  disjoyne  it  from  fortune  :  for,  What 
is  more  casuall  then  reputation  ?  Prqfectofortuna  in  omni  re 
dominatur :  Ea  res  cunctas  ex  libidine  magis  quam  ex  vero 
celebrat  obscuratque.  '  Fortune  governeth  in  all  things,  and 
'  either  advanceth  or  abaseth  them  rather  by  froward  dis- 
'  position,  then  upright  judgement.1  To  make  actions  to 
be  knowne  and  seene,  is  the  meere  worke  of  fortune.  It 
is  chance  that  applieth  glory  unto  us,  according  to  her 
temeritie.  I  have  often  seene  it  to  goe  before  desert ;  yea 
and  many  times  to  out-goe  merit  by  very  much.  He  that 
first  bethought  himselfe  of  the  resemblance  betweene  shadow 
and  glory,  did  better  then  he  thought  of.  They  are  exceed 
ing  vaine  things.  It  also  often  goeth  before  her  body,  and 
sometimes  exceeds  by  much  in  length.  Those  who  teach 
Nobility  to  seeke  in  valour  nothing  but  honour  :  Quasi  non 
sit  honestum  quod  nobilitatum  non  sit ,-  '  As  though  it  were 
'  not  honest,  except  it  were  ennobled  "* :  What  gaine  they  by 
it  ?  But  to  instruct  them  never  to  hazard  themselves,  un- 
lesse  they  be  seene  of  others  ;  and  to  be  very  heedy,  whether 
such  witnesses  are  by,  that  may  report  newes  of  their  valour, 
whereas  a  thousand  occasions,  to  doe  well  are  daily  offered, 
and  no  man  by  to  marke  them  ?  How  many  notable  par 
ticular  actions,  are  buried  in  the  throng  of  a  Battell  ?  Who 
soever  ammuseth  himselfe  to  controle  others,  in  so  confused 
a  hurly-burly,  is  not  greatly  busied  about  it :  and  produceth 
the  testimony  which  he  giveth  of  his  fellowes  proceedings 
or  exploits  against  himselfe.  Vera  et  sapiens  animi  magni- 
tudo,  honestum  illud  quod  maxime  naturam  sequitur,  in  factis 
positum,  non  in  gloria  iudicat.  c  A  true  and  wise  magna- 
c  nimitie  esteemeth  that  honesty,  which  especially  followeth 
6  Nature,  to  consist  in  good  actions,  and  not  in  glory.1  All 
the  glory  I  pretend  in  my  life,  is,  that  I  have  lived  quietly. 
Quietly  not  according  to  Metrodorius,  Arcesilas,  or  Aristippus, 
but  acording  to  my  selfe.  Since  Philosophie  could  never 
find  any  way  for  tranquility,  that  might  be  generally  good, 
let  every  man  in  his  particular  seeke  for  it.  To  whom  are 
352 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Caesar  and  Alexander  beholding  for  that  infinite  greatnes  of  CHAPTER 
their  renowne,  but  to  fortune  ?    How  many  men  hath  she         XVI 
suppressed  in  the  beginning  of  their  progresse,  of  whom  we  Glory 

have  no  knowledge  at  all,  who  bare  the  same  courage  that 
others  did,  if  the  ill  fortune  of  their  chance  had  not  staid 
them  even  in  the  building  of  their  enterprises  ?  Amongst  so 
many  and  so  extreame  dangers  (to  my  remembrance)  I  never 
read,  that  Caesar  received  any  hurt.  A  thousand  have  dyed 
in  lesse  danger,  than  the  least  of  those  he  escaped.  Many 
worthy  exploits  and  excellent  deedes  must  be  lost,  before  one 
can  come  to  any  good.  A  man  is  not  alwaies  upon  the  top 
of  the  breach,  nor  in  the  front  of  an  army,  in  the  sight  of 
his  Generall,  as  upon  a  stage.  A  man  may  be  surprised 
betweene  a  hedge  and  a  ditch.  A  man  is  sometimes  put  to 
his  sodaine  shifts,  as  to  try  his  fortune  against  a  Hens-roost, 
to  ferret  out  foure  seely  shotte  out  of  some  barne,  yea  and 
sometimes  straggle  alone  from  his  troupes  ;  and  enterprise, 
according  as  necessity  and  occasion  offereth  it  selfe.  And 
if  it  be  well  noted  (in  mine  advice)  it  will  be  found,  and 
experience  doth  teach  it,  that  the  least  blazoned  occasions, 
are  the  most  dangerous,  and  that  in  our  late  home-warres, 
more  good  men  have  perished  in  slight  and  little  importing 
occasions,  and  in  contention  about  a  small  cottage,  than  in 
worthy  achievements,  and  honourable  places.  Who  so 
thinketh  his  death  ill  emploied,  except  it  be  in  some  glori 
ous  exploit,  or  famous  attempt,  in  lieu  of  dignifying  his 
death,  he  happily  obscureth  his  life  :  Suffering  in  the  meane 
time  many  just  and  honor-affoording  oportunities  to  escape, 
wherein  he  might  and  ought  adventure  himselfe.  And  all 
just  occasions  are  glorious  enough ;  his  owne  conscience 
publishing  them  sufficiently  to  all  men.  Gloria  nostra  est  2  Cor.  i.  12, 
testimonium  conscientice  nostrce :  'Our  glory  is  the  testimony  ^^  Hom- 
'  of  our  conscience."  He  that  is  not  an  honest  man,  but  by 
that  which  other  men  know  by  him,  and  because  he  shall 
the  better  be  esteemed  ;  being  knowne  to  be  so,  that  will 
not  do  well  but  upon  condition  his  vertue  may  come  to  the 
knowledge  of  men  ;  such  a  one  is  no  man  from  whom  any 
great  service  may  be  drawne,  or  good  expected. 

Credo  ch'  il  resto  di  quel  verno,  cose  ARIOST.  Or  I. 

Facesse  degne  di  tenerne  conto,  can.  xi.  st.  81. 

2  Y  353 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Ma  fur  fin  a  quel  tempo  si  nascose, 

XVI  Che  non  0  colpa  mia  s'  hor'  non  le  conto, 

Of  Glory  Per  che  Orlando  afar  opre  virtuose 

Piu  ch'  a  narrale  poi  sempre  era  pronto ; 
Ne  maifu  alcun  de  li  suoifatti  espresso, 
Senon  quando  hebbe  i  testimony  appresso. 

I  guesse,  he  of  that  winter  all  the  rest 
Atchiev'd  exploits,,  whereof  to  keepe  account, 
But  they  untill  that  time  were  so  supprest, 
As  now  my  fault  'tis  not,  them  not  to  count, 
Because  Orlando  ever  was  more  prest 
To  doe,  than  tell  deeds  that  might  all  surmount. 
Nor  was  there  any  of  his  deeds  related 
Unlesse  some  witnesse  were  associated. 

A  man  must  goe  to  warres  for  his  devoirs  sake,  and  expect 
this  recompence  of  it,  which  cannot  faile  all  worthy  actions, 
how  secret  soever  ;  no  not  to  vertuous  thoughts  :  It  is  the 
contentment  that  a  well  disposed  conscience  receiveth  in  it 
selfe,  by  well  doing.  A  man  must  be  valiant  for  himselfe 
and  for  the  advantage  he  hath  to  have  his  courage  placed 
in  a  constant  and  assured  seate,  to  withstand  all  assaults  of 
fortune. 

HOR.  Car.  iii.  Virtus  repulses  nescia  sordidte, 

Od.'ii.  17.  Intaminatis  fulget  honoribus : 

Nee  sumit  aut  ponit  secures 

Arbitrio  popularis  aurcB. 

Vertue  unskilled  to  take  repulse  that's  base, 

In  undefiled  honors  clearely  shines, 

At  the  dispose  of  peoples  airy  grace 

She  signes  of  honor  tak's  not,  nor  resignes. 

It  is  not  only  for  an  exterior  shew  or  ostentation,  that  our 
soule  must  play  her  part,  but  inwardly  within  our  selves, 
where  no  eyes  shine  but  ours  :  There  it  doth  shroud  us  from 
the  feare  of  death,  of  sorrowes  and  of  shame  :  There  it 
assureth  us,  from  the  losse  of  our  children,  friends  and 
fortunes  ;  and  when  oportunitie  is  offerd,  it  also  leades  us 
Cic.  Fin.  i.  to  the  dangers  of  warre.  Non  emolumento  aliquo,  sed  ipsitis 
lionestatis  decore :  '  Not  for  any  advantage,  but  for  the  grace- 
'  fulnes  of  honestie  it  selfe/  This  benefit  is  much  greater, 
and  more  worthie  to  be  wished  and  hoped,  then  honor  and 
glory,  which  is  nought  but  a  favorable  judgement  that  is 
made  of  us.  We  are  often  driven  to  empanell  and  select  a 
354 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

jury  of  twelve  men  out  of  a  whole  countrie  to  determine  of  CHAPTER 
an  acre  of  land  :  And  the  judgement  of  our  inclinations  and  XVI 
actions  (the  waightiest  and  hardest  matter  that  is)  we  referre 
it  to  the  idle  breath  of  the  vaine  voice  of  the  common  sort 
and  base  raskalitie,  which  is  the  mother  of  ignorance,  of 
injustice,  and  inconstancie.  Is  it  reason  to  make  the  life  of 
a  wise  man  depend  on  the  judgement  of  fooles  ?  An  quid-  /ELIAN.  Var. 
quam  stultius,  quam  quos  singulos  contemnas,  eos  aliquid  ******  "•  c'  *• 
putare  esse  universes  ?  4  Is  there  any  thing  more  foolish,  then 
4  to  thinke  that  al  together  they  are  oughts,  whom  every  one 
4  single  you  would  set  at  noughts  ? "  Whosoever  aimeth  to 
please  them,  hath  never  done  :  It  is  a  But,  that  hath  neither 
forme  nor  holdfast.  Nil  tarn  incestimabile  est,  quam  animi 
multitudinis :  'Nothing  is  so  incomprehensible  to  be  just- 
4  waied,  as  the  mindes  of  the  multitude.'  Demetrius  said 
merrily  of  the  common  peoples  voice,  that  he  made  no  more 
reckoning  of  that  which  issued  from  out  his  mouth  above, 
then  of  that  which  came  from  a  homely  place  below  ;  and 
saith  moreover  :  Ego  hoc  judico,  si  quando  turpe  non  sit,  Cic.  Fin.  Bon. 
tamen  non  esse  non  turpe,  quum  id  a  multitudine  laudetur :  "• 
4  Thus  I  esteeme  of  it,  if  of  it  selfe  it  be  not  dishonest,  yet 
4  can  it  not  but  be  dishonest,  when  it  is  applauded  be  the 
6  many/  No  art,  no  mildnesse  of  spirit  might  direct  our 
steps  to  follow  so  stragling  and  disordered  a  guide.  In  this 
breathie  confusion  of  bruites,  and  frothy  Chaos  of  reports 
and  of  vulgar  opinions,  which  still  push  us  on,  no  good 
course  can  be  established.  Let  us  not  propose  so  fleeing 
and  so/  wavering  an  end  unto  our  selves.  Let  us  constantly 
follow  reason  :  And  let  the  vulgar  approbation  follow  us 
that  way,  if  it  please  :  And  as  it  depends  all  on  fortune, 
we  have  no  law  to  hope  for  it,  rather  by  any  other  way 
then  by  that.  Should  I  not  follow  a  strait  path  for  its 
straightnesse,  yet  would  I  do  it  because  experience  hath 
taught  me,  that  in  the  end,  it  is  the  happiest  and  most 
profitable.  Dedit  hoc  providentia  hominibus  munus,  ut 
honesta  magis  juvarent.  4  Mans  providence  hath  given  him 
4  this  gift,  that  honest  things  should  more  delight  and  availe 
4  him.1  The  ancient  Sailer  said  thus  to  Neptune  in  a  great 
storme,  4  Oh  God,  thou  shalt  save  me  if  thou  please,  if  not, 
4  thou  shalt  lose  me  ;  yet  will  I  keepe  my  helme  still  fast.1  I 

355 


OVID.  Epist. 
Penel.v.  18. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  have,  in  my  dales,  scene  a  thousand  middle,  mungrell  and 
XVI         ambiguous  men,  and  whom  no  man   thought  to  be  more 
Of  Glory      worldly-wise  than  my  selfe,  loase  themselves,  where  I  have 
saved  my  selfe. 

Risi  snccessu  posse  carere  doles. 

I  smild  to  see  that  wily  plots 

Might  want  successe  (and  leave  men  sots). 

Paulus  JEmilius  going  to  the  glorious  expedition  of 
Macedon,  advertized  the  people  of  Rome  during  his  absence, 
not  to  speake  of  his  actions  :  For  the  licence  of  Judgements 
is  an  especiall  let  in  great  affaires.  Forasmuch  as  all  men 
have  not  the  constancy  of  Fabius  against  common,  con 
trary  and  detracting  voices  :  who  loved  better  to  have  his 
authority  dismembred  by  mens  vaine  fantasies,  then  not  to 
performe  his  charge  so  well,  with  favourable  and  popular 
applause.  There  is  a  kind  of  I  know  not  what  naturall 
delight,  that  man  hath  to  heare  himselfe  commended,  but 
wee  yeeld  too  too  much  unto  it. 

Laudari  haud  metuam,  neque  enim  mihi  cornea fibra  est, 
Sed  recti  finemque  extremumque  esse  recuso 
Euge  tuum  et  belle — 

Nor  feare  I  to  be  prais'd,  for  my  guttes  are  not  home, 
But  that  the  utmost  end  of  good  should  be,  I  scorne, 
Thy  O  well  said,  well  done,  well  plaid. 

I  care  not  so  much  what  I  am  with  others,  as  I  respect 
what  I  am  in  my  selfe.  I  will  bee  rich  by  my  selfe,  and  not 
by  borrowing.  Strangers  see  but  externall  apparances  and 
events  :  every  man  can  set  a  good  face  upon  the  matter, 
when  within  he  is  full  of  care,  griefe  and  infirmities.  They 
see  not  my  heart,  when  they  looke  upon  my  outward  coun 
tenance.  There  is  great  reason  the  hypocrisie  that  is  found 
in  war  should  be  discovered  :  For,  what  is  more  easie  in  a 
man  of  practise,  then  to  flinch  in  dangers  and  to  counterfeit 
a  gallant  and  a  boaster  when  his  heart  is  full  of  faintnesse, 
and  ready  to  droope  for  feare  ?  There  are  so  many  waies  to 
shunne  occasions  for  a  man  to  hazard  himselfe  in  particular, 
that  wee  shall  have  deceived  the  world  a  thousand  times, 
before  we  need  engage  our  selves  into  any  perillous  attempt; 
and  even  when  wee  find  our  selves  entangled  in  it,  wee  shall 

356 


PERS.  Sat.  i. 
47- 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

not  want  skill  how  to  cloake  our  sport  with  a  good  face,  CHAPTER 
stearne  countenance,  and  bold  speeches  ;  although  our  heart         XVI 
doe  quake  within  us.      And  hee  that  had  the  use  of  the     Of  Glory 
Platonicall  Ring,  whose  vertue  was  to  make  him  invisible 
that  wore  it  upon  his  finger,  if  it  were  turned  toward  the 
flat  of  the  hand  ;  many  would  hide  themselves,  when  they 
should  most  make  shewe  of  their  worth,  and  would  be  sorie 
to  be  placed  in  so  honorable  a  place,  where  necessity  may  be 
their  warrant  of  safetie. 

Falsus  honor  iuvat,  et  mendax  infamia  ferret  HOR.  i.  Epi. 

Quern  nisi  mendomm  et  mendacem  ? —  xvi.  39. 

False  honour  tickles  ;  false  defame  affrights, 
Whom,  but  the  faulty,  and  false-nerd  sprights  ? 

See  how  all  those  judgements,  that  men  make  of  outward 
apparances,  are  wonderfully  uncertaine  and  doubtfull,  and 
there  is  no  man  so  sure  a  testimony,  as  every  man  is  to  him- 
selfe  :  How  many  horse-boyes  have  we  in  them  as  parteners 
and  companions  of  our  glory  ?  He  that  keepes  his  stand  in 
an  open  trench,  what  doth  he  more,  but  divers  poore  pioners 
doe  as  much  before  him,  who  open  the  way  for  him,  and 
with  their  bodies  shelter  him,  for  poore  six- pence  a  day,  and 
happily  for  lesse  ? 

— non  quicquid  turbida  Roma  PERS.  Sat.  i.  5. 

Elevet,  accedas,  examenque  improbum  in  ilia 
Castiges  trutind,  nee  te  qucesiveris  extra. 

If  troublous  Rome  set  ought  at  naught,  make  you  not 

one, 

Nor  chastise  you  unjust  examination 
In  balance  of  their  lode  : 
Nor  seeke  your  selfe  abrode. 

We  call  that  a  magnifying  of  our  name,  to  extend  and 
disperse  the  same  in  many  mouthes,  we  will  have  it  to  be 
received  in  good  part,  and  that  it's  increase  redound  to  his 
benefit :  This  is  al  that  is  most  excusable  in  it's  desseigne  : 
But  the  infirmity  of  it's  excesse  proceeds  so  farre,  that  many 
labour  to  have  the  world  speake  of  them,  howsoever  it  be. 
Tregus  Pempeius  saith  of  Herostratus,  and  Titus  Livius  of 
Manlius  Capitolinus,  that  they  were  more  desirous  of  great, 
then  good  reputation.  It  is  an  ordinary  fault ;  we  endevour 
more  that  men  should  speake  of  us,  then  how  and  what  they 

357  * 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  speake,  and  it  sufficeth  us,  that  our  name  run  in  mens 
XVI  mouthes,  in  what  manner  soever.  It  seemeth  that  to  be 
Of  Glory  knowen,  is  in  some  sort,  to  have  life  and  continuance  in 
other  mens  keeping.  As  for  me,  I  hold  that  I  am  but  in  my 
selfe  ;  and  of  this  other  life  of  mine,  which  consisteth  in  the 
knowledge  of  my  friends,  being  simply  and  barely  considered 
in  my  selfe,  well  I  wot,  I  neither  feele  fruite  or  jovissance  of 
it,  but  by  the  vanity  of  fantasticall  opinion.  And  when  I 
shall  be  dead,  I  shall  much  lesse  have  a  feeling  of  it :  And 
shall  absolutely  lose  the  use  of  true  utilities,  which  some 
times  accidentally  follow  it :  I  shall  have  no  more  fastnesse  to 
take  hold  on  reputation,  nor  whereby  it  may  either  concerne 
or  come  unto  mee.  For,  to  expect  my  name  should  receive 
it :  First  I  have  no  name  that  is  sufficiently  mine  :  Of  two  I 
have,  the  one  is  common  to  all  my  race,  yea  and  also  to 
others.  There  is  a  family  at  Paris,  and  another  at  Mont- 
pellier,  called  Montaigne,  another  in  Britany,  and  one  in 
Xaintogne,  surnamed  dela-Montaigne.  The  removing  of 
one  onely  syllable  may  so  confound  our  webbe,  as  I  shall 
have  a  share  in  their  glory,  and  they  perhaps  a  part  of  my 
shame.  And  my  Ancestors  have  here-to-fore  beene  sur 
named  Higham,  or  Eyquem,  a  surname  which  also  belongs 
to  a  house  well  knowen  in  England.  As  for  my  other  name, 
it  is  any  bodies  that  shall  have  a  minde  to  it.  So  shall  I 
happily  honour  a  Porter  in  my  stead.  And  suppose  I  had  a 
particular  marke  or  badge  for  my  selfe,  what  can  it  marke 
when  I  am  no  more  extant  ?  May  it  desseigne  or  favour 
inanity  ? 

PERS.  Sat.  i.  — nunc  levior  cippus  non  imprimit  ossa  ? 

37.  Laudat  posteritas,  nunc  non  e  manibus  illis, 

Nunc  non  e  tumulo  fortundque  favilld 

Nascuntur  violcs  ? 

Doth  not  the  grave-stone  on  such  bones  sit  light  ? 
Posterity  applaudes  :  from  such  a  spright, 
From  such  a  tombe,  from  ashes  blessed  so, 
Shall  there  not  violets  (in  Cart-lodes)  grow  ? 

But  of  this  I  have  spoken  elsewhere.  As  for  the  rest,  in 
a  whole  battell,  where  ten  thousand  are  either  maymed  or 
slaine,  there  are  not  peradventure  fifteene  that  shall  be  much 
spoken  off.  It  must  be  some  eminent  greatnes,  or  important 

358 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

consequence,  that  fortune  hath  joyned  unto  it,  to  make  a  CHAPTER 
private  action  prevaile,  not  of  a  meane  shot  alone,  but  of  a     p^^X1 
chieftaine  :    For,  to  kill  a  man,  or  two,  or  tenne  ;  for  one  to 
present  himselfe  undantedly  to  death,  is  indeed  something 
to  every  one  of  us  in  particular  ;  for,  a  mans  free-hold  goes 
on  it :  But  in  regarde  of  the  world,  they  are  such  ordinary 
things,  so  many  are  daily  scene,  and  so  sundry  alike  must 
concurre  together  to  produce  a  notable  effect,  that  wee  can 
looke  for  no  particular  commendation  by  them. 

— casus  multis  hie  cognitus,  ac  iam  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Tritm,  et  e  medio  fortuna  ductus  acervo.  xiii.  9. 

This  case  is  knowne  of  many,  worne  with  nothing, 
Drawne  from  the  midle  heape  of  fortunes  doting. 

Of  so  many  thousands  of  worthie-valiant  men,  which  fifteene 
hundred  yeares  since  have  died  in  France,  with  their  weapons 
in  hand,  not  one  hundred  have  come  to  our  knowledge  : 
The  memory  not  onely  of  the  Generals  and  Leaders,  but  also 
of  the  battels  and  victories  lieth  now  low-buried  in  oblivion. 
The  fortunes  of  more  then  halfe  the  world,  for  want  of  a 
register,  stirre  not  from  their  place,  and  vanish  away  with 
out  continuance.  Had  I  all  the  unknowne  events  in  my  pos 
session,  I  am  perswaded  I  might  easily  supplant  those  that 
are  knowne  in  all  kindes  of  examples.  What?  Of  the 
Romanes  themselves,  and  of  the  Grecians,  amongst  so  many 
writers  and  testimonies,  and  so  infinit  rare  exploites  and 
matchles  examples  ?  How  are  so  few  of  them  come  to  our 
notice  ? 

Ad  nos  wx  tennis  famce  per labitur  aura.  ViRG.s&n.  vii. 

Scarcely  to  us  doth  passe  4 

Fames  thin  breath,  how  it  was. 

It  shall  be  much,  if  a  hundred  yeares  hence,  the  civill 
warres  which  lately  we  have  had  in  France,  be  but  remem- 
bred  in  grosse.  The  Lacedemonians  as  they  were  going  to 
their  battles,  were  wont  to  sacrifice  unto  the  Muses,  to  the 
end  their  deedes  might  be  well  written,  and  worthily  re- 
gistred ;  deeming  it  a  divine  favor,  and  unusuall  grace, 
that  noble  actions  might  finde  testimonies  able  to  give  them 
life  and  memory.  Thinke  we  that  at  every  shot  that  hits 
us,  or  at  every  dangerous  attempt  we  runne  into,  to  have 

359 


XVI 

Of  Glory 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  a  Clarke  present  to  enrole  it:  And  besides,  it  may  be,  that 
a  hundred  Clarkes  shall  write  them,  whose  Commentaries 
shall  not  continue  three  daies,  and  shall  never  come  to  any 
bodies  sight.  We  have  but  the  thousanth  part  of  ancient 
writings  :  It  is  Fortune,  which  according  to  her  favor  gives 
them  either  shorter  or  longer  life;  and  what  we  have,  we 
may  lawfully  doubt-of,  whether  it  be  the  worse,  since  we 
never  saw  the  rest.  Histories  are  not  written  upon  every 
small  trifle  :  It  is  requisite  that  a  man  have  beene  con 
queror  of  an  Empire,  or  of  a  Kingdome ;  a  man  must  have 
obtained  two  and  fiftie  set  battles,  and  ever  with  a  lesser 
number,  as  Caesar  was  and  did.  Tenne  thousand  good- 
fellowes,  and  many  great  Captaines  have  died  most  vali 
antly  and  coragiously  in  pursuite  of  her,  whose  names  have 
continued  no  longer  then  their  wives  and  children  lived : 


VIRG. 

292. 


— quosfama  obscura  recondit. 

Whom  fame  obscure  before 
Layes  up  in  unknowne  store. 


Even  of  those,  whom  we  see  to  doe  excellently  well,  if  they 
have  but  once  continued  so  three  months,  or  so  many  yeares, 
there  is  no  more  speech  of  them,  then  if  they  had  never  bin. 
Whosoever  shall  in  due  measure  proportion,  and  impartially 
consider,  of  what  kinde  of  people,  and  of  what  deedes  the 
glory  is  kept  in  the  memory  of  bookes,  he  shall  finde, 
there  are  few  actions,  and  very  few  persons,  that  may 
justly  pretend  any  right  in  them.  How  many  vertuous 
men  have  we  scene  to  survive  their  owne  reputation,  who 
even  in  their  presence  have  seen  the  honor  and  glorie,  which 
in  their  young  daies,  they  had  right-justly  purchased,  to  be 
cleane  extinguished  ?  And  doe  we  for  three  yeares  of  this 
fantasticall  and  imaginarie  life,  lose  and  forgoe  our  right 
and  essentiall  life,  and  engage  our  selves  in  a  perpetuall 
death  ?  The  wiser  sort  propose  a  right-fairer,  and  much 
more  just  end  unto  themselves,  to  so  urgent  and  weighty 
SENEC.  Epist.  an  enterprise.  RecU  facti,fecisse  merces  est :  Offitij  fructus^ 
ipsum  offldum  est.  4  The  reward  of  well  doing,  is  the  doing, 
'  and  the  fruit  of  our  duty,  is  our  duty."*  It  might  peradven- 
ture  be  excusable  in  a  Painter,  or  other  artificer,  or  also  in 
a  Rhetorician,  or  Gramarian,  by  his  labours  to  endevor  to 

360 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

purchase  a  name:  But  the  actions  of  vertue  are  themselves  CHAPTER 
too-too  noble,  to  seeke  any  other  reward,  then  by  their  own  XVI 
worth  and  merit,  and  especially  to  seeke  it  in  the  vanity  of  <jlory 
mans  judgement.  If  this  false-fond  opinion  doe  notwith 
standing  serve  and  stead  a  common  wealth  to  hold  men  in 
their  dutie :  If  the  people  be  thereby  stirred  up  to  vertue  : 
If  Princes  be  any  way  touched,  to  see  the  world  blesse  and 
commend  the  memorie  of  Trajan,  and  detest  the  remem 
brance  of  Nero :  If  that  doth  moove  them,  to  see  the  name 
of  that  arch-villaine,  heretofore  so  dreadfull  and  so  much  re 
doubted  of  all,  so  boldly  cursed,  and  so  freely  outraged,  by 
the  first  scholer  that  undertakes  him.  Let  it  hardly  be  in 
creased,  and  let  us  (as  much  as  in  us  lieth)  still  foster  the 
same  amongst  ourselves.  And  Plato  employing  all  meanes 
to  make  his  Citizens  vertuous,  doth  also  perswade  them,  not 
to  contemn e  the  peoples  good  estimation.  And  saith  that 
through  some  divine  inspiration  it  commeth  to  passe,  that 
even  the  wicked  know  often,  as  well  by  word,  as  by  opinion, 
how  to  distinguish  justly  the  good  from  the  bad.  This  man 
together  with  his  master,  are  woonderfull  and  bold  worke- 
men,  to  joyne  divine  operations  and  revelations,  wheresoever 
humane  force  faileth.  And  therefore  did  perventure  Timon 
(deeming  thereby  to  wrong  him)  surname  him  the  great 
forger  of  miracles.  Vt  tragid  poetce  confugiunt  ad  Deum,  Cic.  Nat.  Deor. 
cum  eaplicare  argumenti  exitum  non  possunt.  '  As  Poets  that  »• 
'  write  Tragedies  have  recourse  to  some  God,  when  they  can- 
'  not  unfold  the  end  of  their  argument.1  Since  men  by  reason 
of  their  insufficiencie  cannot  well  pay  themselves  with  good 
lawfull  coine,  let  them  also  employ  false  mony.  This  meane 
hath  beene  practised  by  all  the  law-givers  :  And  there  is 
no  common  wealth  where  there  is  not  some  mixture  either  of 
ceremonious  vanity  or  of  false  opinion,  which  as  a  restraint 
serveth  to  keepe  the  people  in  awe  and  dutie.  It  is  there 
fore,  that  most  of  them  have  such  fabulous  grounds  and 
trifling  beginnings,  and  enriched  with  supernaturall  mistyries. 
It  is  that  which  hath  given  credit  unto  adulterate  and  un- 
lawfull  religions,  and  hath  induced  men  of  understanding 
to  favour  and  countenance  them.  And  therefore  did  Numa 
and  Sertorius,  to  make  their  men  have  a  better  beliefe,  feed 
them  with  this  fopperv ;  the  one,  that  the  Nimph  Egeria, 
2Z  361 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  the  other  that  his  white  Hinde,  brought  him  all  the  councels 
XVI  he  tooke  from  the  Gods.  And  the  same  authoritie,  which 
riory  Numa  gave  his  lawes  under  the  title  of  this  Goddesses 
patronage,  Zoroastres  Law-giver  to  the  Bactrians  and 
Persians,  gave  it  to  his,  under  the  name  of  the  God  Oro- 
mazis :  Trismegistus  of  the  ^Egyptians,  of  Mercury : 
Zamolzis  of  the  Scithians,  of  Vesta :  Charondas  of  the 
Chalcedonians,  of  Saturne  :  Minos  of  the  Candiots,  of 
lupiter :  Licurgus  of  the  Lacedemonians,  of  Apollo  :  Dra- 
con  and  Solon  of  the  Athenians,  of  Minerva.  And  every 
common  wealth  hath  a  God  to  her  chiefe :  al  others  falsly, 
but  that  truly,  which  Moses  instituted  for  the  people  of 
lewry  descended  from  JEgypt.  The  Bedoins  religion  (as 
saith  the  Lord  of  lovinuile)  held  among  other  things  that 
his  soule  which  among  them  all  died  for  his  Prince  went 
directly  into  another  more  happy  body,  much  fairer  and 
stronger  than  the  first :  by  means  wherof,  they  much  more 
willingly  hazarded  their  lives  for  his  sake. 

LUCAN.  i.  461.  Inferrum  mens  prona  viris,  animaque  capaces 

Mortis:  et  ignavum  est  reditura  parcere  vita. 

Those  men  sword  minded.,  can  death  entertaine, 
Thinke  base  to  spare  the  life  that  turnes  againe. 

Loe  here,  although  very  vaine,  a  most  needfull  doctrine, 
and  profitable  beliefe.  Everie  Nation  hath  store  of  such 
examples  in  it  selfe.  But  this  subject  would  require  a 
severall  discourse.  Yet  to  say  a  word  more  concerning  my 
former  purpose  :  I  doe  not  counsell  Ladies  any  longer  to  call 

C[c.  Fin.  ii.  their  duty,  honour :  Vt  enim  consuetude  loquitur ,  id  solum 
dicitur  honestum,  quod  est  populari  famd  gloriosum :  '  For 
4  as  custome  speakes,  that  only  is  called  honest  which  is 
'  glorious  by  popular  report.'  Their  duty  is  the  marke  ;  their 
honour  but  the  barke  of  it.  Nor  doe  I  perswade  them  to 
give  us  this  excuse  of  their  refusall,  in  payment ;  for  I  sup 
pose,  their  intentions,  their  desire,  and  their  will,  which  are 
parts  wherein  honour  can  see  nothing,  forasmuch  as  nothing 
appeareth  outwardly  there,  are  yet  more  ordered  then  the 
effects. 

OVID.  Am.  iii.  Qua,  quia  non  liceat,  nonfacit,  lllafacit. 

El'  lv>  4>  She  doth  it,  though  she  do  it  not,, 

Because  she  may  not  doe 't  (God  wot). 

362 


Q 


THE  SECOND    BOOKE 

The  offence  both  toward  God,  and  in  conscience,  would  be  CHAPTER 

as  great  to  desire  it,  as  to  effect  the  same.     Besides  they  are 

in  themselves  actions  secret  and  hid  ;    it  might  easily  be, 

they  would  steale  some  one  from  others  knowledge,  whence 

honour   dependeth,    had    they   no    other    respect    to    their 

duty,  and  affection,  which  they  beare  unto  chastity,  in 

regard  of  it  selfe.     Each  honorable  person  chuseth 

rather    to   lose   his   honour,   then   to   forgoe 

his  conscience. 


THE    SEVENTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Presumption. 

HERE  is  another  kind  of  glory,  which  is 
an  over-good  opinion  we  conceive  of  our 
worth.  It  is  an  inconsiderate  affection, 
wherewith  wee  cherish  our  selves,  which 
presents  us  unto  our  selves  other  then 
we  are.  As  an  amorous  passion  addeth 
beauties,  and  lendeth  graces  to  the  sub 
ject  it  embraceth,  and  maketh  such  as 
are  therewith  possessed,  with  a  troubled  conceit,  and 
distracted  Judgement,  to  deeme  what  they  love,  and  finde 
what  they  affect,  to  bee  other,  and  seeme  more  perfect, 
then  in  trueth  it  is.  Yet  would  I  not  have  a  man,  for 
feare  of  offending  in  that  point,  to  misacknowledge  him- 
selfe,  nor  thinke  to  bee  lesse  then  hee  is :  A  true  Judgement 
should  wholly  and  in  every  respect  mainetaine  his  right.  It 
is  reason,  that  as  in  other  things,  so  in  this  subject  he  see 
what  truth  presenteth  unto  him.  If  he  be  Caesar,  let  him 
hardly  deeme  himselfe  the  greatest  Captain e  of  the  world. 
We  are  nought  but  ceremonie  ;  ceremonie  doth  transport  us, 
and  wee  leave  the  substance  of  things ;  we  hold-fast  by  the 
boughs,  and  leave  the  trunke  or  body.  Wee  have  taught 
Ladies  to  blush,  onely  by  hearing  that  named,  which  they 
nothing  feare  to  doe.  Wee  dare  not  call  our  members  by 
their  proper  names,  and  feare  not  to  employ  them  in  all  kind 
of  dissolutenesse.  Ceremonie  forbids  us  by  words  to  expresse 

363 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTERlawfull  and  naturall  things;  and  we  beleeve  it.  Reason 
^  XVII  willeth  us  to  doe  no  bad  or  unlawful!  things,  and  no  man 

Of  Presump-  giveth  credit  unto  it.  Here  I  find  my  selfe  entangled  in 
the  lawes  of  Ceremonie,  for  it  neither  allowes  a  man  to  speake 
ill  or  good  of  himselfe.  Therefore  will  wee  leave  her  at  this 
time.  Those  whom  fortune  (whether  we  shall  name  her 
good  or  bad)  hath  made  to  passe  their  life  in  some  eminent 
or  conspicuous  degree,  may  by  their  publike  actions  witnesse 
what  they  are ;  but  those  whom  she  never  emploied,  but  in 
base  things,  and  of  whom  no  man  shall  ever  speake,  except 
themselves  doe  it,  they  are  excusable,  if  they  dare  speake  of 
themselves  to  such  as  have  interest  in  their  acquaintance, 
after  the  example  of  Lucilius  : 

HOR.  Ser.  ii.  Hie  velutfidis  arcana  sodalibus  olim 

Sat.  i.  30.  Credebat  libris :  neque  si  male,  cesserat  usquam, 

Decurrens  alib,  neque  si  bene:  quo  Jit,  ut  omnis 

Votivd  pateat  veluti  descripta  tabelld 

Vita  senis. — 

He  trusted  to  his  booke,  as  to  his  trusty  friend 
His  secrets,  nor  did  he  to  other  refuge  bend, 
However  well,  or  ill,  with  him  his  fortune  went. 
Hence  is  it,  all  the  life  is  scene  the  old  man  spent,' 
As  it  were  in  a  Table  noted, 
Which  were  unto  some  God  devoted. 

This  man  committed  his  actions  and  imaginations  to  his 
CORN.  TACIT,  paper,  and  as  he  felt,  so  he  pourtraied  himselfe.  Nee  idRutilio 
Vit.  lul.Agric.  et  Scauro  citrafidem^  aut  obtrectationi  fuit.  '  Nor  was  that 
'  without  credit,  or  any  imputation  to  Rutilius  or  Scaurus." 
I  remember  then,  that  even  from  my  tenderest  infancy,  some 
noted  in  me  a  kind  of  I  know  not  what  fashion  in  carrying 
of  my  body  and  gestures,  witnessing  a  certaine  vaine  and 
foolish  fiercenesse.  This  I  will  first  say  of  it,  that  it  is  not 
inconvenient  to  have  conditions  so  peculiar,  and  propensions 
so  incorporated  in  us,  that  we  have  no  meane  to  feele,  or  way 
to  know  them.  And  of  such  naturall  inclinations,  unknowne 
to  us,  and  without  our  consent,  the  body  doth  easily  retaine 
some  signe  or  impression.  It  was  an  affectation  witting  of  his 
beauty,  which  made  Alexander  to  bend  his  head  a  little  on 
one  side,  and  Alcibiades,  his  speech  somewhat  effeminate  and 
lisping :  lulius  Caesar  was  wont  to  scratch  his  head  with  one 
finger,  which  is  the  countenance  of  a  man  surcharged  with 
364 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

painefull  imaginations  :  And  Cicero  (as  I  remember)  had  CHAPTER 
gotten  a  custome  to  wryth  his  Nose,  which  signifieth  a  XVII 
naturall  scoffer.  Such  motions  may  unawares  and  imper-  (  Presu 
ceptibly  possesse  us.  Others  there  be  which  are  artificiall, 
whereof  I  will  not  speake.  As  salutations,  reverences,  or 
conges,  by  which  some  doe  often  purchase  the  honour,  (but 
wrongfully)  to  be  humble,  lowly,  and  courteous  :  A  man  may 
be  humble  through  glory.  I  am  very  prodigall  of  cappings, 
namely  in  Summer,  and  I  never  receive  any  from  what 
quality  of  men  soever,  but  I  give  them  as  good  and  as  many 
as  they  bring,  except  he  be  some  servant  of  mine.  I  wish 
that  some  Princes  whom  I  know,  would  be  more  sparing,  and 
impartiall  dispencers  of  them,  for,  being  so  indiscreetly 
employed,  they  have  no  force  at  all :  If  they  be  without 
regard,  then  are  they  without  effect.  Amongst  disordered 
countenances,  let  us  not  forget  the  sterne  looke  of  Constan- 
tius  the  Emperour,  who  in  publike  held  ever  his  head  bolt- 
upright,  without  turning  or  bending  the  same  on  any  side, 
no  not  so  much  as  to  looke  on  them  that  saluted  him  sideling, 
holding  his  body  so  fixt  and  unmoveable,  that  let  his  Coche 
shake  never  so  much,  he  kept  still  up-right :  he  durst  never 
spit  nor  wipe  his  Nose  nor  drie  his  face  before  the  people. 
I  wot  not  whether  those  gestures,  which  were  noted  in  me 
were  of  this  first  condition,  and  whether  in  truth  I  had  any 
secret  propension  to  this  fault,  as  it  may  well  be :  and  I 
cannot  answer  for  the  motions  of  my  body.  But  concerning 
those  of  the  soule,  I  will  here  ingenuously  confesse  what  I 
thinke  of  them.  There  are  two  parts  in  this  glory  :  Which 
is  to  say,  for  a  man  to  esteeme  himselfe  overmuch,  the  other, 
not  sufficiently  to  esteeme  of  others.  For  the  one,  first 
me  thinkes,  these  considerations  ought  somewhat  to  be 
accompted  of.  I  feele  my  selfe  surcharged  with  one  errour 
of  the  mind,  which  both  as  bad,  and  much  more  as  impor 
tunate,  I  utterly  dislike.  I  endevour  to  correct  it ;  but  I 
cannot  displace  it.  It  is,  because  I  abate  the  just  value  of 
those  things,  which  I  possesse ;  and  enhance  the  worth  of 
things,  by  how  much  they  are  more  strange,  absent  and  not 
mine  owne.  This  humor  extends  it  selfe  very  farre,  as  doth 
the  prerogative  of  the  authority,  wherewith  husbands  looke 
upon  their  owne  wives  with  a  vicious  disdaine,  and  many 

365 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  fathers  upon  their  children:  So  doe  I,  and  between  two  like 
^VI1  workes  would  I  ever  weigh  against  mine.  Not  so  much  that 
resiimp-  ^e  jealousie  of  my  preferment,  and  amendment  troubleth 
my  judgement,  and  hindereth  me  from  pleasing  my  selfe,  as 
that  mastery  her  self  begets  a  contempt  of  that  which  a  man 
possesseth  and  oweth.  Policies,  far  customes  and  tongues 
flatter  me  ;  and  I  perceive  the  Latine  tongue  by  the  favour 
of  her  dignity  to  deceive  me,  beyond  what  belongs  unto  her, 
as  children  and  the  vulgar  sort.  My  neighbours  ceconomie  ; 
his  house,  and  his  horse,  though  but  of  equall  value,  is  more 
worth  then  mine,  by  how  much  more  it  is  not  mine  owne. 
Besides,  because  I  am  most  ignorant  in  mine  owne  matters : 
I  admire  the  assurance,  and  wonder  at  the  promise,  that 
every  man  hath  of  himselfe :  whereas  there  is  almost  nothing, 
that  I  wot  I  know,  nor  that  I  dare  warrant  my  selfe  to  be 
able  to  doe.  I  have  not  my  faculties  in  proposition,  or  by 
estate,  and  am  not  instructed  in  them  but  after  the  effect : 
As  doubtfull  of  mine  owne  strength,  as  uncertaine  of  an- 
others  force.  Whence  it  folio weth,  if  commendably  I  chance 
upon  any  one  piece  of  worke,  I  rather  impute  it  to  my 
fortune,  then  ascribe  it  to  mine  industry ;  forasmuch  as  I 
designe  them  all  to  hazard,  and  in  feare.  Likewise  I  have 
this  in  generall,  that  of  all  the  opinions,  which  Antiquity 
hath  had  of  men  in  grose,  those  which  I  most  willingly 
embrace,  and  whereon  I  take  most  hold,  are  such  as  most 
vilifie,  contemne,  and  annihilate  us.  Me  thinks  Philosophy 
hath  never  better  cardes  to  shew,  then  when  she  checketh 
our  presumption,  and  crosseth  our  vanity ;  when  in  good 
sooth  she  acknowledgeth  her  irresolution,  her  weakenesse 
and  her  ignorance.  Me  seemeth  the  over  good  conceit, 
and  selfe-weening  opinion  man  hath  of  himselfe,  is  the 
nurse-mother  of  the  falsest  opinions,  both  publike  and 
particular.  Those  which  a  cocke-horse  will  pearch  them 
selves  upon  the  Epicicle  of  Mercury,  and  see  so  farre  into 
heaven,  they  even  pull  out  my  teeth.  For  in  the  study 
which  I  professe,  the  subject  whereof  is  Man,  finding  so 
extreme  a  varietie  of  j  udgements,  so  inextricable  a  labyrinth 
of  difficulties  one  upon  the  necke  of  another,  so  great 
diversitie,  and  so  much  uncertaintie,  yea  even  in  the  Schoole 
of  wisedome  it  selfe :  you  may  imagine  since  those  men 
366 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

could  never  be  resolved  of  the  knowledge  of  themselves  and  CHAPTER 
of  their  owne  condition,  which  is  continually  before  their 
eyes,  which  is  ever  within  them ;  since  they  know  not  how 
that  moveth,  which  themselves  cause  to  move,  nor  how  to 
set  forth  the  springs,  and  decipher  the  wards,  which  them 
selves  hold  and  handle,  how  should  I  thinke  of  the  true 
cause  of  the  flux  and  reflux  of  the  river  Nilus  ?  The  curio 
sity  to  know  things  hath  beene  given  to  men  (as  saith  the 
holy  Scripture)  for  a  scourge.  But  to  come  to  my  particular, 
it  is  very  hard  (mee  seemeth)  that  some  other  regardeth  him- 
selfe  lesse,  yea  and  some  other  esteemeth  me  lesse  then  I 
esteeme  my  selfe.  I  accompt  my  selfe  of  the  common  sort 
except  in  that  I  deeme  my  selfe  guiltie  of  the  basest, 
and  culpable  most  popular  defects  :  but  not  disavowed  nor 
excused.  And  I  only  prise  my  selfe,  wherein  I  know  my 
worth.  If  any  glory  be  in  me,  it  is  but  superficially  infused 
into  me  ;  by  the  treason  of  my  complexion  :  and  hath  no 
solide  body  appearing  to  the  sight  of  my  j  udgement.  I  am 
but  sprinckled  over,  but  not  throughly  dyed.  For  in  truth, 
touching  the  effects  of  the  spirit,  in  what  manner  soever, 
there  never  came  any  thing  from  me,  that  contented  me.  And 
others  approbation  is  no  currant  payment  for  me.  My  judge 
ment  is  tender  and  hard  especially  in  mine  owne  behalf.  I 
feele  my  self  to  waver  and  bend  through  weaknesse :  I  have 
nothing  of  mine  owne  to  satisfie  my  judgement.  My  sight  is 
indifferently  cleare  and  regular;  but  if  I  take  any  serious 
worke  in  hand,  it  is  troubled  and  dimmed:  as  I  perceive mosb 
evidently  in  Poesie  :  I  love  it  exceedingly :  I  have  some  in 
sight  or  knowledge  in  other  mens  Labours,  but  in  truth  I 
play  the  Novice  when  I  set  my  hand  unto  it :  Then  can  I 
not  abide  my  selfe.  A  man  may  play  the  foole  every  where 
else,  but  not  in  Poesie. 

— mediocribus  esse  poetis  HOR.  Art. Poet. 

Non  dij,  non  homines,  non  concessere  columnee.  372. 

Nor  Gods,  nor  men,  nor  pillers  gave  the  graunt, 
That  Poets  in  a  meane,  should  meanely  chaunt. 

I  would  to  God  this  sentence  were  found  in  the  front  of  our 
Printers  or  Stationers  shops,  to  hinder  the  entrance  of  so 
many  bald-rimers. 

367 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


CHAPTER 
XVII 

Of  Presump 
tion 

MART.  xii. 
Epig.  Ixiv. 


— verum 
Nil  securius  est  malo  Poeta. 

Nothing  securer  may  be  had, 
Then  is  a  Poet  bold  and  bad. 

Why  have  we  no  such  people  ?  Dionysius  the  father 
esteemed  nothing  in  himselfe  so  much  as  his  poesie.  In  the 
times  of  the  Olimpike  games,  with  chariots  exceeding  all 
other  in  magnificence,  he  also  sent  Poets  and  Musitians  to 
present  his  verses,  with  tents  and  pavilions  gilt  and  most 
sumptuously  tapistred.  When  they  first  beganne  to  rehearse 
them,  the  favour  and  excellencie  of  the  pronunciation  did 
greatly  allure  the  peoples  attention  :  but  when  they  beganne 
to  consider  the  fondnesse  of  the  composition,  they  fell  as 
soone  to  conternne  them  :  and  being  more  and  more  exaspe 
rated  fell  furiously  into  an  uprore,  and  headlong  ranne  in 
most  spitefull  manner  to  teare  and  cast  downe  all  his  pa- 
villions.  And  forasmuch  as  his  rich  chariots  did  no  good 
at  all  in  their  course,  and  the  ship  which  carried  his  men, 
returning  homeward  missed  the  shore  of  Sicilie,  and  was  by 
violent  stormes  driven  and  spilt  upon  the  coast  of  Tarentum, 
they  certainely  beleeved,  the  wrath  of  the  Gods  to  have 
beene  the  cause  of  it,  as  being  greatly  offended,  both  against 
him,  and  his  vile  and  wicked  Poeme :  yea  and  the  Mariners 
themselves  that  escaped  the  shipwracke  did  much  second 
the  peoples  opinion :  to  which  the  Oracle  that  foretold  his 
death  seemed  in  some  sort  to  subscribe :  which  implied,  that 
Dionysius  should  be  neare  his  end,  at  what  time  he  had  van 
quished  those  that  should  be  of  more  worth  than  himselfe : 
AVhich  he  interpreted  to  be  the  Carthaginians,  who  exceeded 
him  in  might.  And  having  at  any  time  occasion  to  fight  or 
grapple  with  them,  that  he  might  not  incurre  the  meaning 
of  his  prediction,  he  would  often  temper  and  avoide  the 
victorie.  But  he  mis-understood  the  matter,  for  the  God 
observed  the  time  of  advantage,  when  as  through  partiall 
favour  and  injustice  he  obtained  the  victory  over  the  tra- 
gicall  Poets  at  Athens,  who  were  much  better  than  he  was, 
where  he  caused  in  contention  of  them,  his  Tragedie,  entitled 
the  Leneiens,  to  be  publikely  acted.  After  which  usurped 
victorie,  he  presently  deceased :  And  partly  through  the 
excessive  joy,  he  thereby  conceived.  What  I  finde  excusable 

368 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

in  mine,  is  not  of  it  selfe  and  according  to  truth  :  but  in  CHAPTER 
comparison  of  other  compositions,  worse  then  mine,  to  XVII 
which  I  see  some  credit  given.  I  envie  the  good  happe  of  (  Presump- 
those,  which  can  applaude  and  gratifie  themselves  by  their 
owne  labours ;  for  it  is  an  easie  matter  for  one  to  please 
himselfe,  since  he  drawes  his  pleasure  from  himselfe :  Espe 
cially  if  one  be  somewhat  constant  in  his  owne  wilfulnesse. 
I  know  a  Poetaster,  gainst  whom  both  weake  and  strong,  in 
company  and  at  home,  both  heaven  and  earth,  affirme  and 
say,  he  hath  no  skill  or  judgement  in  Poesie,  who  for  all 
that  is  nothing  dismaied,  nor  will  not  abate  one  jote  of  that 
measure  whereunto  he  hath  fitted  himselfe;  but  is  ever 
beginning  againe,  ever  consulting  anew,  and  alwaies  persist 
ing  ;  by  so  much  the  more  fixed  in  his  opinion,  by  how  much 
the  more  it  concerneth  him  alone,  and  he  only  is  to  main- 
taine  it.  My  compositions  are  so  farre  from  applauding  me, 
that  as  many  times  as  I  looke  them  over  so  often  am  I  vexed 
at  them. 

Cum  relego,  scripsisse  pudet,  quia  plurima  cerno,  OVID.  Pont. 

Me  quoque  quifeci,  judice,  digna  lini.  i.  c.  vi.  15. 

When  I  re-read,  I  shame  I  write ;  for  much  I  see, 
My  selfe,  who  made  them,  being  judge,  blotted  to  be. 

I  have  ever  an  Idea  in  my  mind,  which  presents  me  with 
a  better  forme,  then  that  I  have  alreadie  framed,  but  I  can 
neither  lay  hold  on  it,  nor  effect  it.  Yet  is  that  Idea  but  of 
the  meaner  stamp.  I  thereby  conclude,  that  the  productions 
of  those  rich  and  great  mindes  of  former  ages,  are  farre 
beyond  the  extreame  extention  of  my  wish  and  imagination. 
Their  compositions  doe  not  only  satisfie  and  fill  me,  but  they 
astonish  and  wrap  me  into  admiration.  I  judge  of  their 
beauty,  I  see  it,  if  not  to  the  end,  at  least  so  farre  as  it  is 
impossible  for  me  to  aspire  unto  it.  Whatsoever  I  under 
take  (as  Plutarke  saith  of  one)  I  owe  a  sacrifice  to  the  Graces, 
hoping  thereby  to  gaine  their  favour. 

— si  quid  enim  placet, 
Si  quid  dulce  hominum,  sensibus  influit, 
Debentur  lepidis  omnia  gratijs. 

If  ought  doe  please,if  any  sweet 

The  sense  of  men  with  pleasures  greet, 

To  thanke  the  Graces  it  is  meet. 

3  A  369 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  They  altogether  forsake  me:  What  I  doe,  it  is  but 
XVII  bunglingly,  and  wants  both  polishing  and  beauty.  I  can 

°f  PtionimP"  rate  t*iem  at  no  higher  value,  then  they  are  worth.  My 
workmanship  addeth  no  grace  unto  the  matter.  And  that's 
the  reason  I  must  have  it  strong,  with  good  holdfast,  and 
shining  of  it  selfe.  If  I  chance  to  seize  on  any  popular  and 
more  gay,  it  is  to  follow  me,  who  love  not  a  ceremonious 
prudence  and  gloomy  wisedome,  as  doth  the  world ;  and  to 
glad  my  selfe,  not  my  stile,  who  would  rather  have  it  grave 
and  severe :  If  at  least  I  may  call  that  a  stile,  which  is  a 
formelesse  and  abrupt  speech ;  A  popular  gibrish,  and  a 
proceeding  without  definition,  without  partition,  and  sans 
conclusion,  troubled  as  that  of  Amafanius,  and  Rabirius.  I 
can  neither  please,  nor  glad,  nor  tickle.  The  best  tale  in 
the  world  comming  into  my  hands,  becomes  withered  and 
tarnished.  I  cannot  speake  but  in  good  earnest,  and  am 
altogether  barren  of  that  facility  which  I  see  in  many  of 
my  companions,  to  entertaine  commers,  to  keep  a  whole 
troup  in  talk,  to  am  muse  a  Princes  eares  with  all  manner  of 
discourses  and  never  to  be  weary,  and  never  to  want  matter, 
by  reason  of  the  graces  they  have  in  applying  their  first 
approches,  and  fitting  them  to  the  humour  and  capacity  of 
those  they  have  to  do  withall.  Princes  love  not  greatly 
serious  and  long  discourses,  nor  I  to  tell  tales.  The  first 
and  easiest  reasons  (which  are  commonly  the  best  taken)  I 
can  neither  employ  nor  make  use  of  them.  I  am  an  ill 
Orator  to  the  common  sort.  I  speake  the  utmost  I  know  of 
all  matters.  Cicero  thinks,  in  discourses  of  Philosophy,  the 
exordium  to  be  the  hardest  part :  If  it  be  so,  I  wisely  lay 
hold  on  the  conclusion.  Yet  should  a  man  know  how  to 
turne  his  strings  to  all  aires :  And  the  sharpest  comes  ever 
last  in  play.  There  is  at  least  as  much  perfection  in  raising 
up  an  empty,  as  to  uphold  a  weighty  thing :  A  man  must 
sometimes  handle  matters  but  superficially,  and  at  other 
times  dive  into  them.  I  wot  well  that  most  men  keep  them 
selves  on  this  low  stage,  because  they  conceive  not  of  things 
but  by  the  outward  shew.  I  also  know,  that  the  greatest 
Clarkes,  yea  Xenophon  and  Plato,  are  often  scene  to  yeeld 
to  this  low  and  popular  fashion,  in  speaking  of  matters, 
upholding  it  with  those  graces,  which  they  never  want.  As 
370 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

for  the  rest,  my  language  hath  neither  facility  nor  fluency  CHAPTER 
in  it,  but  is  harsh  and  sharpe,  having  free  and  unsinnowy        XVII 
dispositions.     And  so  it  liketh  me,  if  not  by  my  judgement,  Of  Presump- 
yet  by  my  inclination.     But  yet  I  perceive  that  sometimes  I 
wade  too  farre  into  it,  and  that  forcing  my  selfe  to  avoide 
art  and  affectation,  I  fall  into  it  another  way. 

— brevis  esse  labor e :  HOR.  Art.  Poet. 

Obscurusfio. —  25. 

To  be  short  labour  I  ? 
I  darker  grow  thereby. 

Plato  saith,  that  either  long  or  short,  are  not  properties, 
that  either  diminish  or  give  price  unto  speech.  If  I  should 
undertake  to  follow  this  other  smoothe,  even  and  regular 
stile,  I  should  never  attaine  unto  it.  And  although  the 
cadences,  and  breakings  of  Salust,  doe  best  agree  with  my 
humour,  yet  doe  I  finde  Caesar  both  greater,  and  lesse  easie 
to  be  represented.  And  if  my  inclination  doth  rather  carrie 
mee  to  the  imitation  of  Senecaes  stile,  I  omit  not  to  esteeme 
Plutark  much  more.  As  well  in  silence  as  in  speech,  I  am 
simply  my  naturall  forme,  whence  happily  ensueth,  that  I 
am  more  in  speaking  than  in  writing.  The  motions  and 
actions  of  the  body,  give  life  unto  words,  namely  in  them 
that  move  roundly  and  without  affectation,  as  I  doe,  and 
that  will  be  earnest.  Behaviour,  the  face,  the  voice,  the 
gowne,  and  the  place,  may  somewhat  endeare  those  things, 
which  in  themselves  are  but  meane,  as  prating.  Messala 
complaineth  in  Tacitus  of  certaine  strait  garments  used  in 
his  time,  and  discommendeth  the  fashion  of  the  benches 
whereon  the  Orators  were  to  speak,  saying,  they  weakened 
their  eloquence.  My  French  tongue  is  corrupted  both  in 
the  pronuntiation,  and  else-where  by  the  barbarisme  of  my 
country.  I  never  saw  man  of  these  hither-countries,  that 
did  not  evidently  taste  of  his  home-speech,  and  who  often 
did  not  wound  those  eares,  that  are  purely  French.  Yet  is 
it  not  because  I  am  so  cunning  in  my  Perigordin  :  For  I 
have  no  more  use  of  it,  than  of  the  Dutch,  nor  doe  I  greatly 
care.  It  is  a  language  (as  are  many  others  round  about  me) 
like  to  that  of  Poitou,  Xaintogne,  Angoulesme,  Limosin, 
and  Avergne,  squattering,  dragling,  and  filthie.  There  is 

371 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  about  us,  toward  the  mountaines,  a  Gascoine  tongue,  which 
^  muc^  commend  and  like,  sinnowie,  pithie,  short,  signi- 
ficant?  an^  m  truth  man-like  and  military,  more  than  any 
other  I  understand.  As  compendious,  powerfull,  and  per 
tinent  as  the  French  is  gracious,  delicate,  and  copious.  As 
for  the  Latine,  which  was  given  me  for  my  mother-tongue, 
by  reason  of  discontinuance,  I  have  so  lost  the  promptitude 
of  it,  as  I  cannot  well  make  use  of  it  in  speech,  and  scarcely 
in  writing,  in  which  I  have  heeretofore  beene  so  ready,  that 
I  was  called  a  master  in  it.  Loe  heere  my  little  sufficiencie 
in  that  behalfe.  Beauty  is  a  part  of  great  commendation  in 
the  commerce  and  societie  of  men.  It  is  the  chiefe  meane 
of  reconciliation  betweene  one  and  other.  Nor  is  there  any 
man  so  barbarous,  and  so  hard-hearted,  that  in  some  sort 
feeleth  not  himselfe  strucken  with  her  sweetnes.  The  body 
hath  a  great  part  in  our  being,  and  therein  keepes  a  speciall 
rancke :  For,  his  structure  and  composition  are  worthy  due 
consideration.  Such  as  goe  about  to  sunder  our  two  prin- 
cipall  parts,  and  separat  them  one  from  another,  are  much 
to  blame  :  They  ought  rather  to  be  coupled  arid  joyned  fast 
together.  The  soule  must  be  enjoined  not  to  retire  her 
selfe  to  her  quarter,  nor  to  entertaine  her  selfe  apart,  nor 
to  despise  and  leave  the  body  (which  she  cannot  well  doe, 
except  it  be  by  some  counterfeited,  apish  tricke)  but  ought 
to  combine  and  cling  fast  unto  him,  to  embrace,  to  cherish, 
assist,  correct,  perswade  and  advise  him,  and  if  hee  chance 
to  swarve  or  stray,  then  to  leade  and  direct  him :  In  fine, 
she  should  wed  and  serve  him  in  stead  of  a  husband,  that 
so  their  effects  may  not  seeme  contrary  and  divers,  but 
agreeing  and  uniforme.  Christians  have  a  particular  instruc 
tion  concerning  this  bond,  for  they  know  that  Gods  justice 
alloweth  this  society,  and  embraceth  this  conjunction  of  the 
body  and  soule,  yea  so  farre  as  to  make  the  body  capable  of 
everlasting  rewards.  And  that  God  beholds  the  whole  man 
to  worke,  and  will  have  him  entirely  to  receive  either  the 
punishment,  or  the  recompence,  according  to  his  demerits. 
The  Peripatetike  Sect  (of  all  Sects  the  most  sociable)  attri- 
buteth  this  onely  care  unto  wisedome,  in  common  to  procure 
and  provide,  the  good  of  these  two  associated  parts  :  And 
declareth  other  Sects  to  have  partialized  overmuch,  because 
372 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

they  had  given  themselves  to  the  full  consideration  of  this  CHAPTER 
commixture  ;  this  one  for  the  body,  this  other  for  the  soule,        XVII 
with  one  like  error  and  oversight,  and  had  mistaken  their  Of  Presump- 
subject,  which  is  Man;  and  their  guide,  which  in  generall 
they  avouched   to  be  Nature.     The  first  distinction,  that 
hath  beene  amongst  men,  and  the  first  consideration,  that 
gave  preheminences  to  some  over  others,  it  is  very  likely  it 
was  the  advantage  of  beauty. 

— agros  divisere  atque  dedere  LUCR.  v.  11 

Pro  facie  cuiusque  et  viribus  ingenioque:  20. 

Nam  fades  multum  valuit,  viresque  vigebant. 

They  lands  divided  and  to  each  man  shared 
As  was  his  face,  his  strength,  his  wit  compared. 
For  face  and  strength  were  then 
Much  prized  amongst  men. 

I  am  of  a  stature  somewhat  under  the  meane.  This 
default  hath  not  only  uncomlinesse  in  it,  but  also  incom- 
moditie  :  Yea  even  in  those  which  have  charge  and  com- 
mandement  over  others  ;  For,  the  authoritie  which  a  faire 
presence  and  corporall  majestic  endoweth  a  man  withal 
is  wanting.  Caius  Marius  did  not  willingly  admit  any 
Souldiers  in  his  bands,  that  were  not  six  foot  high.  The 
Courtier  hath  reason  to  require  an  ordinary  stature  in  the 
Gentleman  he  frameth,  rather,  than  any  other  :  and  to  avoid 
all  strangenesse  that  may  make  him  to  be  pointed-at  :  But 
if  he  misse  of  this  mediocritie,  to  chuse  that  he  rather  offend 
in  lownes,  then  in  tallnes.  I  would  not  do  it  in  a  militarie 
man.  Little  men  (saith  Aristotle)  are  indeed  pretie,  but  not 
beauteous,  nor  goodly  :  and  in  greatnes,  is  a  great  soule 
knowne,  as  is  beautie  in  a  great  and  high  body.  The 
Ethiopians  and  Indians  (saith  he)  in  chusing  of  their  Kings 
and  Magistrates,  had  an  especiall  regard  to  the  beautie  and 
tallnes  of  the  persons.  They  had  reason,  for  it  breedeth  an 
awfull  respect  in  those  that  follow  him,  and  a  kind  of  feare  in 
his  enemies,  to  see  a  goodly,  tall  and  handsome  man  march 
as  chiefe  and  Generall  in  the  head  of  any  armie,  or  front  of 
a  troup  : 

Ipse  inter  primos  prcestanti  corpore  Turnus  VIRG.  sEn.  vii. 

Vertitur,  arma  tenens,  et  toto  vertice  suprct  est.  725. 

Turnus,  a  goodly  man,  mongst  them  that  led, 
Stood  arm'd,  then  all  they  higher  by  the  head. 

373 


CHAPTER 

XVII 

Of  Presump 
tion 
Psal.  xlv.  3. 


MART.  vi. 
Epig.  Ivi.  ] 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

Our  great,  divine  and  heavenly  King,  al  whose  circum 
stances  ought  with  much  care,  religion  and  reverence  to  be 
noted  and  observed,  hath  not  refused  the  bodies  commenda 
tion.  Speciosusforin&prcejilijs  hominum.  '  In  favor  beauti- 
6  ful  above  the  sonnes  of  men/  And  Plato  wisheth  beautie  to 
be  joyned  unto  temperance  and  fortitude  in  the  preservers  of 
his  Commonwealth.  Is  it  not  a  great  spite,  if  being  amongst 
your  owne  servants,  a  stranger  commeth  to  your  selfe  to 
aske  you  where  your  Lord  or  Master  is  ?  And  that  you  have 
nothing  but  the  remainder  of  a  capping,  which  is  as  well  put 
off  to  your  Barber,  or  to  your  Secretarie  ?  As  it  happened 
to  poore  Philopaemen,  who  having  left  his  company  behind, 
and  comming  alone  into  a  house  where  he  was  expresly 
looked-for,  his  hostes  who  knew  him  not,  and  saw  him  to  be 
so  il-favored  a  fellow,  employed  him  to  helpe  her  maides 
draw  water,  and  to  mend  the  fire  for  the  service  of  Philopse- 
men.  The  Gentlemen  of  his  traine  being  come  and  finding 
him  so  busily  at  worke  (for  he  failed  not  to  fulfil  his  hostesses 
commandement)  enquired  of  him  what  he  did,  who  answered, 
6  I  pay  the  penaltie  of  my  unhandsomnesse.'  Other  beauties 
are  for  women.  The  beautie  of  a  handsome  comely  tallnesse 
is  the  only  beautie  of  men.  Where  lownesse  and  littlenesse 
is,  neither  the  largenesse  or  roundnesse  of  a  forehead  nor 
the  whitenes  or  lovelinesse  of  the  eyes,  nor  the  pretty  fashion 
of  a  nose,  nor  the  slendernes  of  the  eare,  littlenesse  of  the 
mouth,  order  and  whitenesse  of  teeth,  smooth  thicknesse  of 
a  beard,  browne  like  a  chesse-nut,  well-curled  and  upstanding 
haire,  just  proportion  of  the  head,  freshnes  of  colour,  the 
cheereful  aspect  of  a  pleasing  face,  the  sweet-smelling  of  a 
body,  nor  the  well  decorated  composition  of  all  limmes,  can 
make  a  handsome  beautious  man.  As  for  me,  I  am  of  a 
strong  and  well  compacted  stature,  my  face  is  not  fat  but  full, 
my  complexion  betweene  joviall  and  melancholy,  indifferently 
sanguine  and  hot. 

Vnde  rigent  setis  mihi  crura,  et  pectora  villis : 

Whereby  my  legs  and  brest, 
With  rough  haire  are  opprest. 

My  health  is  blith  and  lustie,  though  well-stroken  in  age, 
seldome  troubled  with  diseases  :    Such  I  was,  for  I  am  now 
374 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

engaged  in  the  approches  of  age,  having  long  since  past  over  CHAPTER 
forty  yeares.  Of£Isump- 

— minutatim  vires  et  robur  adultum  tion 

Frangit,  et  in  partem  pejorem  liquitur  cetas.  LUCR.  ii.  1140. 

By  little  and  a  little  age  breakes  strength, 
To  worse  and  worse  declining  melt  at  length. 

What  hereafter  I  shall  be,  will  be  but  halfe  a  being,  I 
shall  be  no  more  my  selfe.  I  daily  escape,  and  still  steale 
my  selfe  from  my  selfe  : 

Singula  de  nobis  anni  prcedantur  euntes.  HOR.  ii.  Epist. 

Yeares  as  they  passe  away,  "'  55- 

Of  all  our  things  make  pray. 

Of  addressing,  dexteritie,  and  disposition,  I  never  had  any, 
yet  am  I  the  son  of  a  well  disposed  father,  and  of  so  blithe 
and  merry  a  disposition,  that  it  continued  with  him  even  to 
his  extreamest  age.  He  seldome  found  any  man  of  his  con 
dition,  and  that  could  match  him  in  all  exercises  of  the 
body  ;  As  I  have  found  few,  that  have  not  out-gon  me, 
except  it  were  in  running,  wherein  I  was  of  the  middle  sort. 
As  for  musicke,  were  it  either  in  voice,  which  I  have  most 
harsh,  and  very  unapt,  or  in  instruments,  I  could  never  be 
taught  any  part  of  it.  As  for  dancing,  playing  at  tennis,  or 
wrestling,  I  could  never  attaine  to  any  indifferent  sufficiencie ; 
but  none  at  all  in  swimming,  in  fencing,  in  vauting,  or  in 
leaping.  My  hands  are  so  stiffe  and  nummie,  that  I  can 
hardly  write  for  my  selfe,  so  that  what  I  have  once  scribled, 
I  had  rather  frame  it  a  new,  than  take  the  paines  to  cor 
rect  it ;  and  I  reade  but  little  better.  I  perceive  how  the 
auditorie  censureth  me  :  Otherwise  I  am  no  bad  clarke.  I 
cannot  very  wel  close  up  a  letter ;  nor  could  I  ever  make  a 
pen.  I  was  never  good  carver  at  the  table.  I  could  never 
make  readie  nor  arme  a  Horse  :  Nor  handsomely  array  a 
Hawke  upon  my  fist,  nor  cast  her  off,  or  let  her  flie,  nor 
could  I  ever  speake  to  Dogges,  to  Birds,  or  to  Horses.  The 
conditions  of  my  body  are,  in  fine,  very  well  agreeing  with 
those  of  my  minde,  wherein  is  nothing  lively,  but  onely  a 
compleate  and  constant  vigor.  I  endure  labour  and  paine, 
yet  not  very  well,  unlesse  I  carry  my  selfe  unto  it,  and  no 
longer  than  my  desire  leadeth  and  directeth  me. 

375 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  HOR.  Ser.'ii.    Mottiter  austerum  studio fallente  laborem. 

XVII         Sat.  11.  12.        while  earnestnesse  for  sport  or  gaine, 
Of  Presump-  Sweetly  deceiv's  the  sowrest  paine. 

tion 

Otherwise,  if  by  any  pleasure  I  be  not  allured,  and  if  I 
have  other  direction,  than  my  genuine  and  free  will,  I  am 
nothing  worth,  and  I  can  never  fadge  well :  For  I  am  at  such 
a  stay,  that  except  for  health  and  life,  there  is  nothing  I  will 
take  the  paines  to  fret  my  selfe  about,  or  will  purchase  at  so 
high  a  rate,  as  to  trouble  my  wits  for  it,  or  be  constrained 
thereunto. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  iii.  —Tanti  mihi  non  sit  opaci 

54-  Omnis  arena  Tagi,  quodque  in  mare  voluitur  aurum  : 

So  much  I  weigh  not  shadow  Tagus  sande, 
Nor  gold  that  roules  into  the  sea  from  land. 

I  am  extreamele  lazie  and  idle,  and  exceedingly  free,  both 
by  nature  and  art.  I  would  as  willingly  lend  my  blood  as 
my  care.  I  have  a  minde  free  and  altogether  her  owne  ; 
accustomed  to  follow  her  owne  humor.  And  to  this  day 
never  had  nor  commanding  nor  forced  master.  I  have  gon 
as  farre,  and  kept  what  pace  pleased  me  best.  Which  hath 
enfeebled  and  made  me  unprofitable  to  serve  others,  and 
made  me  fit  and  apt  but  onely  for  my  selfe.  And  as  for  me, 
no  man  ever  needed  to  force  this  heavie,  lither,  and  idle 
nature  of  mine  :  For,  having  even  from  my  birth  found  my 
selfe  in  such  a  degree  of  fortune,  I  have  found  occasion  to 
stay  there :  (An  occasion  notwithstanding,  that  a  thousand 
others  of  mine  acquaintance  would  have  taken  as  a  plancke 
to  passe  over  to  search,  to  agitation  and  to  unquietnes).  And 
as  I  have  sought  for  nothing,  so  have  I  taken  nothing. 

HOR.  ii.  Epist.  jVitm  agimur  tumidis  ventis  Aquilone  secundo, 

n-  2OI<  Non  tamen  adversis  fstatem  ducimus  austris : 

Viribus,  ingenio,  specie,  virtute,  loco,  re, 
Extremi  primorum,  extremis  usque  priores. 

With  full  sailes,  prosp'rous  winde,  we  do  not  drive, 
Nor  yet  with  winde  full  in  our  teeth  doe  live. 
In  strength,,  in  wit,  in  vertue,  shape,,  goods,  place, 
Last  of  the  first,  before  the  last  we  pace. 

I  have  had  no  need  but  of  sufficiencie  to  content  my  selfe  : 
Which  being  well  taken  is  ever  a  regiment  for  the  mind, 
376 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

equally  difficult  in  all  sorts  of  condition  ;  and  which  by  use,  CHAPTER 
we  see  more  easily  found  in  want,  than  in  plenty ;  peradven-  XVIi 
ture,  because  that  according  to  the  course  of  our  other  pas-  tUrn1™** 
sions,  the  greedinesse  of  riches  is  more  sharpned  by  their 
uses  than  by  their  need  :  and  the  vertue  of  moderation  more 
rare,  than  that  of  patience.  And  I  have  had  no  need,  but 
to  enjoy  those  goods  quietly,  which  God  of  his  bounty  had 
bestowed  upon  me.  I  have  tasted  no  kinde  of  tedious 
trouble.  I  have  seldome  mannaged  other  than  mine  owne 
businesse :  Or  if  I  have,  it  hath  been  upon  condition,  I 
might  do  it  at  my  leisure,  and  according  to  my  will,  com 
mitted  unto  me,  by  such  as  trusted  me,  and  knew  me  well, 
and  would  not  importune  me  ;  For,  the  skilfull  rider,  wil 
reape  some  service  of  a  restie  and  wind-broken  jade.  My 
very  Childe-hood  hath  beene  directed  by  a  soft,  milde,  gentle 
and  free  fashion,  and  ever  exempted  from  rigorous  subjection. 
Al  which  hath  endowed  me  with  a  delicate  kinde  of  com 
plexion,  and  made  me  incapable  of  any  care :  So  that  I  love, 
men  should  conceale  my  losses  from  me,  and  the  disorders 
which  concerne  me.  In  the  Chapter  of  my  charges  and 
expences,  I  have  set  downe  what  my  negligence  or  carelesnessc 
costs  me,  both  to  feed  and  entertaine  my  selfe. 

— htsc  nempe  supersunt,  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Qufs  dominumfallant,  qua  prosint  furibus.  vi.  45. 

This  remnant  of  accompts  I  have,, 
Which  may  deceive  Lords,  help  a  Knave. 

I  love  not  to  know  an  accompt  of  what  I  have,  that  I  may 
lesse  exactly  feele  my  losses  :  I  desire  those  that  live  with 
me,  where  they  want  affection,  or  good  effects,  to  cozen  and 
pay  me  with  good  apparances.  For  want  of  sufficient  con 
stancy  to  endure  the  importunity  of  contrary  or  crosse  acci 
dents,  whereunto  we  are  subject  ;  and  because  I  cannot 
alwaies  keepe  my  selfe  prepared  to  governe  and  order  my 
affaires,  as  much  as  I  am  able,  I  foster  this  opinion  in  me, 
relying  wholly  upon  fortune,  and  ready  to  take  every  thing 
at  the  worst,  and  resolve  to  beare  that  worst,  mildely  and 
patiently.  About  that  only  doe  I  busie  my  selfe,  and  to 
that  end  do  I  direct  all  my  discourses.  In  any  dangerous 
matter,  I  care  not  so  much  how  I  may  avoide  it,  and  how 
little  it  importeth  whether  I  avoide  it  or  no  ;  And  what  were 

3B  377 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  it  if  I  would  continue  in  it  ?  Being  unable  to  direct  events, 
XVII  I  governe  my  selfe  ;  and  if  they  apply  not  themselves  to  me, 
Presump-  j  apply  my  selfe  to  them  :  I  have  no  great  art  to  shunne 
fortune,  and  how  to  scape  or  force  it,  and  with  wisedome  to 
addresse  matters  to  my  liking :  I  have  also  lesse  sufferance 
to  endure  the  sharpe  and  painefull  care,  which  belongeth  to 
that.  And  the  most  toilesome  state  for  me,  is  to  be  doubt 
ful  in  matters  of  weight,  and  agitated  between  feare  and 
hope.  To  deliberate,  be  it  but  in  slight  matters,  doth  impor 
tune  me.  And  I  feel  my  spirit  more  perplexed  to  suffer  the 
motions  of  doubt,  and  shakings  of  consultation,  than  to  be 
settled  and  resolved  about  any  accident  whatsoever,  after  the 
chance  is  once  cast.  Fewe  passions  have  troubled  my  sleepe, 
but  of  deliberations  the  least  doth  trouble  it.  Even  as  of 
high-waies,  I  willingly  seeke  to  avoid  the  downe-hanging, 
and  slippery,  and  take  the  beaten-path,  though  myrie,  and 
deepe,  so  I  may  go  no  lower,  and  there  seeke  I  safety :  So 
love  I  pure  mishapes,  and  which  exercise  and  turmoile  me  no 
more,  after  the  uncertaintie  of  their  mending  :  And  which 
even  at  the  first  cast,  drive  me  directly  into  sufferance. 

SEN.  Agam.  — dubia  plus  torquent  mala. 

act.  iii.  sc.  i.  ^  .-. 

29  .Lvils  yet  in  suspence, 

Doe  give  us  more  offence. 

In  events,  I  carry  my  selfe  man-like  ;  in  the  conduct 
childishly.  The  horror  of  a  fall  doth  more  hurt  me,  than 
the  blow.  The  play  is  not  worth  the  candle.  The  covetous 
man  hath  a  worse  reckoning  of  his  passion,  than  the  poore  ; 
and  the  jealous  man,  than  the  cuckold.  And  it  is  often 
lesse  harme  for  one  to  loose  his  farme,  than  pleade  and 
wrangle  for  it :  The  slowest  march,  is  the  safest.  It  is  the 
seate  of  constancie.  Therein  you  have  no  need  but  of  your 
selfe.  There  she  takes  her  footing  and  wholly  resteth  upon 
her  selfe.  This  example  of  a  Gentleman,  whom  many  have 
knowne,  hath  it  not  some  Philosophicall  shew  ?  This  man 
having  passed  all  his  youth  like  a  good  fellow,  a  jollie  com 
panion,  a  great  talker,  and  a  merry  ladd,  being  now  well  in 
yeares,  would  needes  be  married.  Remembring  himselfe  how 
much  the  subject  of  cuckoldry  had  given  him  cause  to  speake, 
and  scoffe  at  others  ;  to  put  himselfe  under  covert-baron,  he 

378 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

tooke  him  a  wife  from  out  that  place,  where  all  men  may  CHAPTER 
have  them  for  mony,  and  with  her  made  his  aliance :  Good        XVIJ 
morrow  Whoore,  Good   morrow  Cuckold.      And  there   is  C  PPt™snump~ 
nothing  wherewith  he  oftner  and  more   openly  entertained 
such  as  came  unto  him,  than  with  this  tale ;  Whereby  he 
brideled  the  secret  pratlings  of  mockers,  and  blunted  the 
point  of  their  reproch.     Concerning  ambition,  which  is  next 
neighbor  or  rather  daughter  to  presumption,  it  had  beene 
needfull  (to  advance  me)  that  fortune  had  come  to  take  me 
by  the  hand  :  For  to  put  my  selfe  into  any  care  for  an  uncer- 
taine  hope,  and  to  submit  my  selfe  to  all  difficulties,  waiting 
on  such  as  seeke  to  thrust  themselfe  into  credite  and  reputa 
tion,  in  the  beginning  of  their  progresse,  I  could  never  have 
done  it. 

— Spem  pretio  non  emo.  TER.  Adel. 

Expence  of  present  pay  actt  u*  sc<  2> 

For  hope,  I  do  not  lay. 

I  fasten  my  selfe  on  that  which  I  see  and  hold  and  go  not  far 
from  the  shore : 

Alter  remus  aquas,  alter  tibi  rudat  arenas.  PROP.  iii.  El. 

Keepe  water  with  one  Oare,  m>  23- 

With  th'  other  grate  the  shore. 

Besides,  a  man  seldome  comes  to  these  preferments,  but  in 
hazarding  first  his  own  :  And  I  am  of  opinion,  if  that  which 
a  man  hath,  sufficeth  to  maintaine  the  condition,  wherein  he 
was  borne  and  brought  up,  it  is  folly  to  let  it  goe  upon  the 
uncertainety  of  encreasing  the  same.  He  to  whom  fortune 
refuseth  meanes  to  settle  his  estate  and  establish  a  quiet  and 
reposed  being,  is  excusable,  if  he  cast  what  he  hath  at  hazard, 
since  thus  as  well  as  thus,  necessitie  sends  him  to  shift  and 
search  out. 

Capienda  rebus  in  malis  preceps  via  est.  SEN.  A  gam. 

A  headlong  course  is  best,  act-  iL  sc-  L 

When  mischiefes  are  addrest. 

And  I  rather  excuse  a  yonger  brother,  to  make  sale  of  his 
inheritance,  than  him,  who  hath  the  honor  of  his  house  in 
charge,  who  cannot  fall  into  wants  but  through  his  de 
fault  :  I  have  by  the  counsell  of  my  good  frinds  of  former 

379 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  times,  found  the  way  shorter  and  easier  to  rid  my  selfe  of 

XVII  this  desire  and  keepe  my  selfe  husht : 
Of  Presump 
tion  Cui  sit  conditio  dulcis,  sine  pulvere  palmce. 
HOR.  i.  Epist.                   Who  like  it  well  to  beare  the  prise, 
i.  51-                                  But  take  no  toile  in  any  wise. 

Judging  also  rightly  of  my  forces,  that  they  were  not  cap 
able  of  great  matters  :  And  remembring  the  saying  of  Lord 
Oliver,  whilome-Chaunceler  of  France,  who  said,  that  French 
men  might  be  compared  to  Apes,  who  climbing  up  a  tree, 
never  cease  skipping  from  bough  to  bough,  till  they  come 
to  the  highest,  where  they  shew  their  bare  tailes. 

PROP.  iii.  El.  Turpe  est  quod  nequeat  capiti  committere  pondus, 

viii.  5.  Et  pressum  inflexo  mox  dare  terga  genu. 

'Tis  shame,  more  than  it  can  well  beare,  on  head  to 

packe, 
And  thereby  soone  oppress't  with  bended  knee  flie  backe. 

Such  qualities  as  are  now  in  me  void  of  reproch,  in  that  age 
I  deemed  unprofitable.  The  facilitie  of  my  maners  had  been 
named  faintnesse  and  weaknes ;  faith  and  conscience  wold 
have  beene  thought  scrupulous  and  superstitious  :  liberty 
and  freedome,  importunate,  inconsiderate  and  rash.  Misfor 
tune  serveth  to  some  purpose.  It  is  not  amisse  to  be  borne 
in  a  much  depraved  age  :  for  in  comparison  of  others,  you  are 
judged  vertuous,  very  cheape.  In  our  dayes,  he  that  is  but 
a  parricide,  or  a  sacrilegious  person,  is  a  man  of  honesty  and 
honor. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  Nunc  si  depositum  non  inficiatur  amicus, 

xiii.  60.  Si  reddat  veterem  cum  tola  ceruginefollem, 

Prodigiosa  fides ,  et  Thuscis  digna  libellis, 
Quteque  coronata  lustrari  debeat  agnd. 

If  now  a  friend  deny  not  what  was  laid  in  trust, 
If  wholly  he  restore  th'  old  bellowes  with  their  rust : 
A  wondrous  trust,  to  be  in  Chronicles  related, 
And  should  with  sacrifice,  as  strange,  be  expiated. 

And  never  was  there  time  or  place,  wherein  more  assured 
and  great  reward  was  proposed  unto  Princes  for  goodnesse 
and  justice.  The  first  that  shall  be  advised,  by  these  meanes 
to  thrust  himselfe  into  favour  and  credit,  I  am  much  deceived 
if  in  part  of  paiment,  he  get  not  the  start  of  his  fellowes. 

380 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Force  and  violence  can  do  very  much  ;  but  never  all.  Wee  CHAPTER 
see  Merchants,  countrey-Iustices,  and  Artificers  to  march 
cheeke  by  joll  with  our  Nobilitie,  in  valour,  and  militarie 
discipline.  They  performe  honourable  combates,  both  pub- 
like  and  private.  They  batter  and  defend  Townes  and  Cities 
in  our  present  warres.  A  Prince  smoothereth  his  com 
mendation  amid  this  throng.  Let  him  shine  over  others 
with  humanitie,  with  truth,  loyal  tie,  temperance  and  above 
all  with  justice;  markes  now  adaies  rare,  unknowne  and 
exiled.  It  is  only  the  peoples  will,  wherewith  he  may 
effect  what  he  pleaseth  :  And  no  other  qualities  can  allure 
their  will  so  much  as  they,  as  being  the  profitablest  for 
them.  Nihil  est  tarn  populare  quam  bonitas :  '  Nothing  is 
'  so  popular  as  goodnesse  is."  By  this  proportion  I  had  beene 
a  rare  great  man  :  As  by  that  of  certaine  ages  past,  I  am  now 
a  pigmey  and  popular  man ;  In  which  it  was  common,  if 
stronger  qualities  did  not  concurre  with  all,  to  see  a  man 
temperate  in  his  revenges,  milde  in  revenging  of  offences, 
religious  in  keeping  of  his  word,  neither  double,  nor  over 
tractable,  nor  applying  his  faith  to  others  will,  or  to  every 
occasion.  I  would  rather  let  all  affaires  go  to  wracke,  than 
breake  my  word  for  their  availe.  For,  touching  this  new 
found  vertue  of  faining  and  dissimulation,  which  now  is  so 
much  in  credit,  I  hate  it  to  the  death  :  and  of  all  vices,  I 
finde  none  that  so  much  witnesseth  demissenesse  and  base- 
nesse  of  heart.  It  is  a  coward  and  servile  humour,  for  a 
man  to  disguise  and  hide  himselfe  under  a  maske,  and  not 
dare  to  shew  himselfe  as  he  is.  Thereby  our  men  addresse 
themselves  to  trecherie  :  Being  trained  to  utter  false  words, 
they  make  no  conscience  to  breake  them.  A  generous  minde 
ought  not  to  belie  his  thoughts,  but  make  shew  of  his  inmost 
parts  :  There  al  is  good,  or  at  least  all  is  humane.  Aristotle 
thinkes  it  an  office  of  magnanimitie  to  hate  and  love  openly,  to 
judge  and  speake  with  all  libertie  ;  and  never  (though  the  prise 
of  truth  goe  on  it)  to  make  esteeme  either  of  the  approbation 
or  reprobation  of  others.  Apollonius  said,  it  was  for  servants 
to  lie,  and  for  freemen  to  speake  truth.  It  is  the  chiefe  and 
fundamentall  part  of  vertue.  Shee  must  be  loved  for  her  owne 
sake.  He  that  speaketh  truth,  because  he  is  bound  to  doe 
so,  and  for  that  he  serveth :  and  that  feares  not  to  tell  a  lie, 

381 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  when  it  little  importeth  another  man,  is  not  sufficiently  true. 

XVII        My  mind  of  her  own   complexion  detesteth  falshood,  and 

Presump-  hateth  to  ^^  on  it     j  feele  an  jnward  bashfulnes,  and  a 

tion  ,••  •  c    ,  ,  •        • ,  ,••, 

stinging  remorse,  it  at  any  time  it  scape  me  ;  as  sometimes  it 

doth,  if  unpremeditated  occasions  surprise  me.  A  man  must 
not  alwaies  say  all  he  knowes,  for  that  were  follie :  But  what 
a  man  speakes  ought  to  be  agreeing  to  his  thoughts,  other 
wise  it  is  impiety.  I  know  not  what  benefit  they  expect, 
that  ever  faine,  and  so  uncessantly  dissemble  ;  except  it  be 
not  to  be  beleeved,  even  when  they  speak  truly.  That  may 
deceive  men  once  or  twice,  but  to  make  a  profession  to  cary 
it  away  smoothly,  and  as  some  of  our  Princes  have  done,  to 
boast,  that  if  their  shirt  were  privie  to  their  secret  and  true 
cogitations,  they  wold  burne  it :  which  was  the  saying  of 
ancient  Metellus  Macedonicus  ;  And  that  he  who  cannot  dis 
semble,  cannot  raign,  serves  but  only  to  warne  those  who 
have  to  deale  with  them,  that  what  they  say  is  but  untruth 
Cic.  Off.  i.  and  dissimulation.  Quo  qu\s  versutior  et  callidior  est,  hoc  in- 
visior  et  suspectior,  detracta  opmione  probitatis.  *  The  finer- 
6  headed,  and  more  subtle-brained  a  man  is,  the  more  is  he 
6  hated  and  suspected,  if  once  the  opinion  of  honesty  be 
'  taken  from  him.1  It  were  great  simplicity  for  a  man  to  suffer 
himself  to  be  miss-led  either  by  the  lookes  or  words  of  him, 
that  outwardly  professeth  what  he  is  not  inwardly,  as  did 
Tiberius.  And  I  know  not  what  share  such  people  may 
challenge  in  the  commerce  of  men,  never  producing  any  thing, 
that  may  be  taken  for  good  paiment.  He  who  is  disloyall  to 
truth,  is  likewise  false  against  lying.  Such  as  in  our  daies, 
in  the  establishing  of  a  Princes  dutie,  have  only  considered 
the  good  and  felicitie  of  his  affaires,  and  preferred  the  same 
before  the  respect  of  his  faith  and  conscience,  would  say 
something  to  a  Prince,  whose  affaires  fortune  hath  so  dis 
posed,  that  with  once  breaking  and  falsifying  of  his  word,  he 
might  for  ever  confirme  and  establish  them.  But  it  goeth 
otherwise.  A  man  may  more  than  once  come  to  such  a  bar- 
gaine.  A  man  during  his  life  concludeth  more  than  one 
peace  or  treatie.  The  commodity  or  profit  that  inviteth  them 
to  the  first  disloyalty  (and  daily  some  offer  themselves  ;  as 
to  all  other  trecheries)  sacrileges,  murders,  rebellions,  trea 
sons,  are  undertaken  for  some  kinde  of  profit.  But  this  first 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

gaine  brings  ever  infinite  losses  and  dangers  with  it:  cast-  CHAPTER 
ing  this  Prince  from-out  all  commerce  and  meanes  of  nego-  XVII 
tiation,  by  the  example  of  this  infidelitie.  Soliman  of  the  C  f  ^n1111^" 
Ottomans  race  (a  race  little  regarding  the  keeping  of 
promises  or  performance  of  covenants)  at  what  time  he 
caused  his  Armie  to  land  at  Otranto  (I  being  then  but  a 
childe)  having  knowne  that  Mercurin  of  Gratinara,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  Castro,  were  detained  prisoners,  after  the  towne 
was  yeelded,  contrary  to  that  which  by  his  Captaines  had 
beene  capitulated  with  them,  he  sent  word  they  should  be 
released,  and  that  having  other  weighty  enterprises  in  hand 
in  that  countrey,  such  disloyalty,  although  it  had  apparance 
of  great  and  present  benefit,  yet  in  time  to  come  it  would 
bring  a  distrust  and  reproch  of  infinite  prejudice.  As  for 
me,  I  had  rather  be  importunate  and  indiscreet,  than  a  flat 
terer  and  a  dissembler.  I  allow,  a  man  may  entermingle 
some  point  of  fiercenesse  and  wilfulnesse,  to  keepe  himselfe 
so  entire  and  open  as  I  am,  without  consideration  of  others. 
And  mee  seemeth  I  become  a  little  more  free,  where  I  should 
be  lesse,  and  that  by  the  opposition  of  respect  I  grow 
earnest.  It  may  also  be,  that  for  want  of  Art  I  follow  mine 
owne  nature.  Presenting  to  the  greater  sort  the  very  same 
licence  of  speech  and  boldnes  of  countenance,  that  I  bring 
from  my  house :  I  perceive  how  much  it  inclineth  towards 
indiscretion  and  incivilitie.  But  although  I  be  so  fashioned, 
my  spirit  is  not  sufficiently  yeelding  to  avoid  a  sudden  ques 
tion,  or  to  scape  it  by  some  winding,  nor  to  dissemble  a  truth, 
nor  have  I  memory  able  to  continue  it  so  fained,  nor  assur 
ance  sufficient  to  maintaine  it ;  and  I  play  the  Braggard 
through  feeblenesse.  And  therefore  I  apply  my  selfe  to  in- 
genuitie,  and  ever  to  speake  truth  and  what  I  think,  both  by 
complexion  and  by  intention  ;  leaving  the  successe  thereof 
unto  fortune.  Aristippus  said,  that  the  chiefest  commoditie 
he  reaped  by  Philosophy,  was,  that  he  spake  freely  and  sin 
cerely  to  all  men  :  Memory  is  an  instrument  of  great  service, 
and  without  which,  judgement  wil  hardly  discharge  his  duty, 
wherof  I  have  great  want.  What  a  man  will  propose  unto 
me,  he  must  doe  it  by  peece-meales :  For,  to  answer  to  a 
discourse  that  hath  many  heads,  lieth  not  in  my  power. 
I  cannot  receive  a  charge,  except  I  have  my  writing  tables 

383 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  about  me :  and  if  I  must  remember  a  discourse  of  any 
consequence,  be  it  of  any  length,  I  am  driven  to  this  vile  and 
miserable  necessitie,  to  learrie  every  word  I  must  speake  by 
rote  ;  otherwise  I  should  never  do  it  wel  or  assuredly,  for 
feare  my  memory  should  in  my  greatest  need  faile  me ; 
which  is  very  hard  unto  me,  for  I  must  have  three  houres 
to  learne  three  verses.  Moreover  in  any  long  discourse, 
the  libertie  or  authoritie  to  remoove  the  order,  to  change 
a  word,  uncessantly  altering  the  matter,  makes  it  more 
difficult  to  be  confirmed  in  the  authors  memory.  And  the 
more  I  distrust  it,  the  more  it  troubleth  me.  It  serveth 
me  better  by  chance,  and  I  must  carelesly  sollicite  her,  for 
if  I  urge  her,  she  is  astonished  ;  and  if  it  once  beginne  to 
waver,  the  more  I  sound  her,  the  more  entangled  and  intri 
cate  she  proveth.  She  wil  wait  upon  me  when  she  list,  not 
when  I  please.  And  what  I  feele  in  my  memorie,  I  feele 
in  many  other  parts  of  mine.  I  eschew  commandement, 
duty,  and  compulsion.  What  I  doe  easily  and  naturally,  if 
I  resolve  to  doe  it  by  expresse  and  prescribed  appointment, 
I  can  then  doe  it  no  more.  Even  in  my  body,  those  parts, 
that  have  some  liberty,  and  more  particular  jurisdiction, 
doe  sometimes  refuse  to  obey  me,  if  at  any  time  I  appoint 
and  enjoine  them  to  doe  me  some  necessarie  services.  This 
forced  and  tyrannicall  preordinance  doth  reject  them,  and 
they  either  for  spight  or  feare  shrinke  and  are  quailed.  Being 
once  in  a  place,  where  it  is  reputed  a  barbarous  discourtesie 
not  to  pledge  those  that  drinke  to  you,  where  although  I 
were  used  with  al  libertie,  in  favor  of  certain  Ladies  that  were 
in  company,  according  to  the  fashion  of  the  country,  I  would 
needs  play  the  good  fellow.  But  it  made  us  all  mery ;  for 
the  threats  and  preparation,  that  I  should  force  my  selfe  be 
yond  my  natural!  custome,  did  in  such  sort  stop,  and  stuffe 
my  throat,  that  I  was  not  able  to  swallow  one  drop,  and  was 
barr'd  of  drinking  all  the  repast.  I  found  my  selfe  glutted 
and  ful  of  drink  by  the  overmuch  swilling  that  my  imagi 
nation  had  fore-conceived.  This  effect  is  more  apparant  in 
those,  whose  imagination  is  more  vehement  and  strong :  yet 
it  is  naturall :  and  there  is  no  man,  but  shall  sometimes  have 
a  feeling  of  it.  An  excellent  Archer  being  condemned  to 
death,  was  offered  to  have  his  life  saved,  if  he  would  but  shew 
384 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

any  notable  triall  of  his  profession,  refused  to  make  proofeof  CHAPTER 
it ;  fearing  les  the  contention  of  his  will  should  make  him  ^  XVII 
to  misse-direct  his  hand,  and  that  in  lieu  of  saving  his  life,  C  :  Presump- 
he  might  also  lose  the  reputation  he  had  gotten  in  shooting 
in  a  bow.  A  man  whose  thoughts  are  busie  about  other 
matters,  shall  very  neere  within  an  inch  keepe  and  alwaies 
hit  one  selfe  same  number  and  measure  of  paces,  in  a  place 
where  he  walketh  ;  but  if  heedily  he  endevour  to  measure 
and  count  them,  he  shall  finde  that  what  he  did  by  nature 
and  chance,  he  cannot  doe  it  so  exactly  by  desseign.  My 
Library  (which  for  a  countrey  Library,  may  passe  for  a  very 
faire  one)  is  seated  in  a  corner  of  my  house :  if  any  thing 
come  into  my  minde,  that  either  I  must  goe  seeke  or  write  in 
it,  for  feare  I  should  forget  it  in  crossing  of  my  Court,  I  must 
desire  some  other  body  to  remember  the  same  for  me.  If 
speaking,  I  embolden  my  selfe  never  so  little  to  digresse  from 
my  Discourse,  I  doe  ever  lose  it ;  which  makes  me  to  keepe 
my  selfe  in  my  speech,  forced,  neere  and  close.  Those  that 
serve  me,  I  must  ever  call  them,  either  by  their  office  or 
countrey  :  for  I  finde  it  very  hard  to  remember  names.  Well 
may  I  say,  it  hath  three  syllables,  that  it's  sound  is  harsh,  or 
that  it  beginneth  or  endeth  with  such  a  letter.  And  should 
I  live  long,  I  doubt  not  but  I  might  forget  mine  own  name, 
as  some  others  have  done  heretofore.  Messala  Corvinus  lived 
two  yeeres  without  any  memory  at  all,  which  is  also  reported 
of  George  Trapezoncius.  And  for  mine  owne  interest,  I 
doe  often  ruminate  what  manner  of  life  theirs  was,  and 
whether  wanting  that  part,  I  shall  have  sufficient  to  main- 
taine  my  selfe  in  any  good  sort :  which  looking  neere  unto,  I 
feare  that  this  defect,  if  it  be  perfect,  shall  lose  all  the  func 
tions  of  my  soule. 


Plenus  rimarum  sum,  hdc  atque  iliac  perfluo.  TER.  Eun. 

I  am  so  full  of  holes,  I  cannot  hold,  act'  L  sc'  2> 

I  runne  out  ev'ry  way,  when  tales  are  told. 


It  hath  often  befallen  me,  to  forget  the  word,  which  but 
three  houres  before  I  had  either  given  or  received  of  another, 
and  to  forget  where  I  had  laid  my  purse  ;  let  Cicero  say  what 
he  list.  I  helpe  my  selfe  to  loose,  what  I  particularly  locke 
up.  Memoria  certe  non  modo  Philosophiam,  sed  omnis  vitce 

3C  385 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  usum,  omntsque  artes  una  maxime  continet.  'Assuredly 
XVII  '  memorie  alone,  of  all  other  things,  compriseth  not  onely 
PtionUmP~  '  P1?ilos°Phy>  but  fhe  use  of  our  whole  life,  and  all  the 
4  sciences.1  Memorie  is  the  receptacle  and  case  of  knowledge. 
Mine  being  so  weake,  I  have  no  great  cause  to  complaine  if 
I  know  but  little.  I  know  the  names  of  Arts  in  Generall, 
and  what  they  treate  of,  but  nothing  further.  I  turne  and 
tosse  over  bookes,  but  do  not  studie  them  ;  what  of  them 
remaines  in  me,  is  a  thing  which  I  no  longer  acknowledge  to 
be  any  bodies  else.  Onely  by  that  hath  my  j  udgement  pro 
fited:  and  the  discourses  and  imaginations,  wherewith  it  is 
instructed  and  trained  up.  The  authours,  the  place,  the 
words,  and  other  circumstances,  I  sodainly  forget :  and  am 
so  excellent  in  forgetting,  that  as  much  as  any  thing  else  I 
forget  mine  owne  writings  and  compositions.  Yea,  mine 
owne  sayings  are  every  hand-while  alleadged  against  my  selfe, 
when  God  wot  I  perceive  it  not.  He  that  would  know  of 
me,  whence  or  from  whom  the  verses  or  examples,  which 
here  I  have  hudled  up  are  taken,  should  greatly  put  me  to 
my  shifts,  and  I  could  hardly  tell  it  him.  Yet  have  I  not 
begged  them,  but  at  famous  and  very  wel  knowen  gates, 
which  though  they  were  rich  in  themselves,  did  never  please 
me,  unlesse  they  also  came  from  rich  and  honourable  hands, 
and  that  authority  concurre  with  reason.  It  is  no  great 
marvell,  if  my  booke  follow  the  fortune  of  other  bookes  ;  and 
my  memory  forgo  or  forget  as  wel  what  I  write,  as  what  I 
reade  :  and  what  I  give,  as  well  as  what  I  receive.  Besides 
the  defect  of  memory,  I  have  others,  which  much  further  my 
ignorance.  My  wit  is  dull  and  slow,  the  least  cloud  dimmeth 
it,  so  that  (for  example  sake)  I  never  proposed  riddle  unto 
it  (were  it  never  so  easie)  that  it  was  able  to  expound. 
There  is  no  subtilitie  so  vaine,  but  confounds  me.  In  games, 
wherein  wit  may  beare  a  part,  as  of  chesse,  of  cards,  of  tables 
and  others,  I  could  never  conceive  but  the  common  and 
plainest  draughts.  My  apprehension  is  very  sluggish  and 
gloomy  ;  but  what  it  once  holdeth,  the  same  it  keepeth  fast : 
and  for  the  time  it  keepes  it,  the  same  it  embraceth 
generally,  strictly  and  deepely.  My  sight  is  quicke,  sound, 
perfect  and  farre-seeing,  but  easily  wearied,  if  much  charged 
or  emploied.  By  which  occasion  I  can  have  no  great  com- 
386 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

mercewith  books  but  by  others  service  which  reade  unto  me.  CHAPTER 
Plinie  the  yonger  can  instruct  those  that  have  tri'd  it,  how  XVII 
much  this  fore-flowing  importeth  those  that  give  themselves 
to  this  occupation.  There  is  no  spirit  so  wretched  or  so 
brutish,  wherein  some  particular  facultie  is  not  scene  to 
shine  ;  and  none  so  low  buried,  but  at  one  hole  or  other  it 
will  sally  out  sometimes.  And  how  it  commeth  to  passe, 
that  a  minde  blinde  and  slumbering  in  all  other  things,  is  in 
some  particlar  effects,  lively,  cleare  and  excellent,  a  man 
must  inquire  of  cunning  masters.  But  those  are  the  faire 
spirits,  which  are  universall,  open,  and  readie  to  all,  if  not 
instructed,  at  least  to  be  instructed.  Which  I  alleage  to 
accuse  mine :  For,  be  it  either  through  weakenesse,  or  retch- 
lessenesse  (and  to  be  carelesse  of  that  which  lieth  at  our  feet, 
which  wee  have  in  our  hands,  which  neerest  concerneth  the 
use  of  life,  is  a  thing  farre  from  my  Dogma  or  Doctrine) 
there  is  none  so  simple  or  so  ignorant  as  mine,  in  divers 
such  common  matters,  and  of  which  without  imputation  or 
shame  a  man  should  never  be  ignorant ;  whereof  I  must 
needs  tell  some  examples.  I  was  borne  and  brought  up  in 
the  Countrie,  and  amidst  husbandry  :  I  have  since  my  pre- 
decessours  quit  me  the  place  and  possession  of  the  goods  I 
enjoy,  both  businesse  and  husbandry  in  hand.  I  cannot  yet 
cast  account  either  with  penne  or  Counters.  There  are 
divers  of  our  French  Coines,  I  know  not :  nor  can  I  dis 
tinguish  of  one  graine  from  another,  be  it  in  the  field  or  in 
the  barne,  unlesse  it  be  very  apparant :  nor  do  I  scarcely 
know  the  difference  betweene  the  Cabige  or  Lettice  in  my 
Garden.  I  understand  not  the  names  of  the  most  usuall 
tooles  about  husbandrie,  nor  of  the  meanest  principles  of 
tillage,  which  most  children  know.  I  was  never  skilfull  in 
Mechanicall  arts,  nor  in  Traffike  or  knowledge  of  Merchan 
dize,  nor  in  the  diversitie  and  nature  of  fruits,  wines,  or  cates, 
nor  can  I  make  a  Hawke,  physick  a  Horse,  or  teach  a  Dogge. 
And  since  I  must  make  ful  shew  of  my  shame  or  ignorance, 
it  is  not  yet  a  moneth  since,  that  I  was  found  to  be  ignorant, 
wherto  Leven  served  to  make  bread  withal ;  or  what  it  was 
to  cunne  Wine.  The  Athenians  were  anciently  wont  to 
thinke  him  very  apt  for  the  Math  em  at  ikes,  that  could 
cunningly  order  or  make  up  a  faggot  of  brushe  wood.  Verily 

387 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  a  man  might  draw  a  much  contrarie  conclusion  from  me: 
XVII  For  let  me  have  all  that  may  belong  to  a  Kitchin,  yet  shall 
r.esump-  I  be  ready  to  starve  for  hunger.  By  these  partes  of  my  con 
fession,  one  may  imagine  divers  others,  to  my  cost  and 
detriment.  But  howsoever  I  make  my  selfe  knowne,  alwaies 
provided  it  be  as  I  am  indeed,  I  have  my  purpose.  And  I 
excuse  not  my  selfe,  that  I  dare  set  downe  in  writing,  so  base 
and  frivolous  matters  as  these.  The  basenesse  of  the  subject 
forceth  me  thereunto.  Let  who  so  list  accuse  my  project, 
but  not  my  progeresse.  So  it  is  that  without  being  warned 
of  others,  I  see  very  well  how  little  this  weigheth  or  is  worth, 
and  I  perceive  the  fondnesse  of  my  purpose.  It  is  sufficient 
that  my  ludgement  is  not  dismayed  or  distracted,  whereof 
these  be  the  Essaies. 

MART,  xiii.  Nasutus  sis  usque  licet,  sis  denique  nasus 

Epig.  ii.  i.  Quantum  noluerit  ferre  rogatus  Atlas, 

Et  possis  ipsum  tu  deridere  Latinum, 

Non  potes,  in  nugas  dicere  plura  meas, 
Ipse  ego  quam  dixi :  quid  dentem  dente  juvabit 
Rodere  ?  carne  opus  est,  si  satur  esse  velis. 
Ne  per  das  operam,  qui  se  mirantur,  in  illos 
Virus  habe,  nos  UCBC  novimus  esse  nihil. 

Suppose  you  were  long  nos'd,  suppose  such  nose  you 

weare 

As  Atlas,  if  you  should  intreat  him,  would  not  beare, 
That  you  in  flouting  old  Latinus  can  be  fine, 

Yet  can  you  say  no  more  against  these  toyes  of  mine, 
Then  I  have  said  ;  what  boote,  tooth  with  a  tooth  to 

whet  ? 

You  must  have  fleshe,  if  you  to  glut  your  selfe  be  set. 
Loose  not  your  paines  ;  'gainst  them  who  on  themselves 

are  doting 

Keepe  you  your  sting  :  we  know  these  things  of  ours 
are  nothing. 

I  am  not  bound  to  utter  no  follies,  so  I  be  not  deceived  to 
know  them  :  And  wittingly  to  erre,  is  so  ordinarie  in  me, 
that  I  erre  not  much  otherwise  ;  and  seldome  erre  casually. 
It  is  a  small  matter  to  yeeld  the  fond  actions  unto  the  rash- 
nesse  of  my  humors,  since  I  cannot  warrant  my  selfe  ordi 
narily  to  yeeld  them  the  vicious.  Being  at  Barleduc,  I  saw, 
for  the  commendation  of  Renate  the  King  of  Sicilies  memory 
a  picture  which  with  his  owne  hands  he  had  made  of  him- 

388 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

selfe,  presented  unto  our  King  Francis  the  second  :  why  is  it  CHAPTER 
not  as  lawfull  for  every  man  else  to  pourtray  himself  with 
his  pen,  as  it  was  for  him  to  doe  it  with  a  pensell  ?    I  will  C  ' 
not  then  forget  this  blemish,  unfit  to  be  seene  of  all.     That 
is  irresolution  :  a  most  incommodious  defect  in  the  negotia 
tion  of  worldly  affaires  :  I  cannot  resolve  in  matters  admit 
ting  doubtfulnesse : 

Ne  si,  ne  nb,  nel  cuor  mi  suona  intiero.  PETR.  pa.  i. 

Nor  yea,  nor  nay,  sounds  clearely  in  my  heart.  son.  cxxxviii. 

8. 

I  can  maintaine  an  opinion,  but  not  make  choise  of  it : 
For  in  humane  things,  what  side  soever  a  man  leaneth  on, 
many  apparances  present  themselves  unto  us,  which  confirm 
us  in  them  :  and  Chrysippus  the  Philosopher  was  wont  to 
say  ;  that  he  would  learn  nothing  else  of  his  maisters  Zeno 
and  Cleanthes,  but  their  doctrines  simply :  For,  proofes  and 
reasons  he  would  finde  enough  of  himselfe.  Let  me  turne  to 
what  side  I  will,  I  ever  finde  sufficient  matter,  and  likly-hood 
to  keepe  my  selfe  unto  it.  Thus  keepe  I  doubt  and  liberty 
to  my  selfe,  to  chuse,  untill  occasion  urge  me,  and  then  (to 
confesse  the  truth)  as  the  common  saying  is,  I  cast  my  feather 
to  the  wind,  and  yeeld  to  fortunes  mercie.  A  verie  light 
inclination,  and  a  slender  circumstance  caries  me  away. 

Dum  in  dubio  est  animus  paulo  momenta  hue  atque  illuc  TER.  And. 

impellitur.  act.  i.  sc.  3. 

While  mind  is  in  suspence,  with  small  a  doe, 
'Tis  hither,  thither,  driven  fro  and  to. 

The  uncertainty  of  my  judgement,  is  in  many  occurrences 
so  equally  ballanced,  as  I  would  willingly  compromise  it  to 
the  deciding  of  chance  and  of  the  dice.  And  I  note  with 
great  consideration  of  our  humane  imbecillitie,  the  examples, 
which  the  history  of  God  it  selfe  hath  left  us  of  this  use,  to 
remit  the  determination  of  elections  in  doubtfull  matters, 
unto  fortune  and  hazard  :  Sors  cecidit  super  Matthiam.  'The  Act.  i.  26. 
'  lot  fell  upon  Mathias."1  Humane  reason  is  a  two-edged 
dangerous  sword  ;  Even  in  Socrates  his  hand,  her  most  in 
ward  and  familiar  friend,  marke  what  a  many-ended  staffe  it 
is.  So  am  I  only  fit  to  follow,  and  am  easily  caried  away  by 
the  throng.  I  doe  not  greatly  trust  mine  owne  strength,  to 

389 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  undertake  to  command,  or  to  lead.  I  rejoyce  to  see  my  steps 
XVII  traced  by  others.  If  I  must  runne  the  hazard  of  an  un- 

Of  Presump-  cerj-ame  choise,  I  would  rather  have  it  be  under  such  a  one, 
who  is  more  assured  of  his  opinions,  and  more  wedded  to 
them,  then  I  am  of  mine  ;  the  foundation  and  platforme  of 
which,  I  find  to  be  very  slippery  ;  yet  am  I  not  very  easie  to 
change,  forsomuch  as  I  perceive  a  like  weaknesse  in  contrary 

Cic.  Acad.  Qu.  opinions.     Ipsa  consuetude  assentiendi  perlcidosa  esse  videtur, 

1V-  et  lubrica :  c  The  very  custome  of  assenting  seemeth  hazerdous 

'  and  slippery' :  Namely  in  politike  affaires,  wherein  is  a  large 
field  open  to  all  motions,  and  to  contestation. 

TIBULL.  iv.  lusta  pari  premitur  veluti  cum  pondere  libra, 

hero.  v.  41.  Prona  nee  hdc  plus  parts  sedet,  nee  surgit  ab  ilia. 

As  when  an  even  skale  with  equall  weight  is  peizecl, 
Nor  falles  it  downe  this  way,  or  is  it  that  way  raised. 

As  for  example,  Machiavels  discourses,  were  very  solid  for 
the  subject ;  yet  hath  it  been  very  easie  to  impugne  them, 
and  those  that  have  done,  have  left  no  lesse  facilitie  to  im 
pugne  theirs.  A  man  might  ever  find  answeres  enough  to 
such  an  argument,  both  rejoynders,  double,  treble,  quadruple, 
with  this  infinite  contexture  of  debates,  that  our  pettie- 
foggers  have  wrye-drawne,  and  wrested  as  much  as  ever  they 
could  in  favour  of  their  pleas  and  processes  : 

HOR.  ii.  Epist.  Ccedimur,  et  totidem  plagis  consumimus  hostem. 

11 '  91'  Wee  by  our  foes  are  beaten,  if  not  slaine, 

Wee  with  as  many  strokes  waste  them  againe. 

Reasons  having  no  other  good  ground  then  experience,  and 
the  diversity  of  humane  events,  presenting  us  with  infinite 
examples  for  all  manner  of  formes.  A  wise  man  of  our  times, 
saith,  that  where  our  Almanakes  say  warme,  should  a  man 
say  cold,  and  in  lieu  of  drie,  moyst ;  And  ever  set  downe  the 
contrarie  of  what  they  foretell ;  were  he  to  lay  a  wager  of 
one  or  others  successe,  he  would  not  care  what  side  he  tooke, 
except  in  such  things  as  admit  no  uncertaintie  ;  as  to  promise 
extreame  heat  at  Christmas,  and  exceeding  cold  at  Midsomer. 
The  like  I  thinke  of  these  politike  discourses.  What  part 
soever  you  are  put  unto,  you  have  as  good  a  game  as  your 
fellow  :  Provided  you  aifront  not  the  apparant  and  plaine 

390 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

principles.      And    therefore   (according   to    my   humor)    in  CHAPTER 
publike  affaires,  there  is  no  course  so  bad  (so  age  and  con-        XVII 
stancie  be  joyned  unto  it)  that  is  not  better  then  change  and  °    Presump- 
alteration.      Our  manners  are  exceedingly  corrupted,   and 
with  a  marveilous  inclination  bend  toward  worse  and  worse  ; 
Of  our  lawes  and  customes  many  are  barbarous,  and  divers 
monstrous  ;  notwithstanding,  by  reason  of  the  difficultie  to 
reduce  us  to  better  estate,  and  of  the  danger  of  this  subver 
sion,  if  I  could  fixe  a  pegge  into  our  wheele,  and  stay  it  where 
it  now  is,  I  would  willingly  doe  it. 

— nunquam  adeofcedis  adeoque  pudendis  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Vtimur  exemplis,  ut  non  peiora  supersint.  viii.  183. 

Examples  of  so  filthy  shamefull  kinde 
We  never  use,  but  worse  remaines  behind. 

Instabilitie  is  the  worst  I  find  in  our  state,  and  that  our 
lawes,  no  more  then  our  garments,  can  take  no  setled  forme. 
It  is  an  easie  matter  to  accuse  a  state  of  imperfection,  since 
all  mortall  things  are  full  of  it.  As  easie  is  it  to  beget  in  a 
people  a  contempt  of  his  ancient  observances  :  No  man  ever 
undertooke  it,  but  came  to  an  end  :  But  to  establish  a  better 
state  in  place  of  that  which  is  condemned  and  raced  out, 
divers  who  have  attempted  it,  have  shronk  under  the  burthen. 
Touching  my  conduct,  my  wisedome  hath  small  share  therin. 
I  am  very  easily  to  be  directed  by  the  worlds  publike  order. 
Oh  happy  people,  that  doth  what  is  commanded,  better  then 
they  which  command,  without  vexing  themselves  about 
causes ;  which  suffer  themselves  gently  to  be  rowled  on, 
according  to  the  heavens  rowling.  Obedience  is  never  pure 
and  quiet  in  him,  who  talketh,  pleadeth  and  contendeth.  In 
some,  (to  returne  to  my  selfe)  the  only  matter,  for  which  I 
make  some  accompt  of  my  selfe,  is  that,  wherein  never  man 
did  thinke  himselfe  defective.  My  commendation  is  vulgar, 
common  and  popular ;  For,  who  ever  thought  he  wanted  wit? 
It  were  a  proposition,  which  in  it  selfe  would  imply  contra 
diction.  It  is  an  infirmity,  that  is  never  where  it  is  scene, 
it  is  very  strong  and  fast-holding,  but  yet  pierced  and  dis 
sipated  by  the  first  beame  of  the  patients  sight,  as  doth  the 
Sunnes  raies  scatter  and  disperce  a  gloomie  mist.  For  a  man 
to  accuse  himselfe,  were  to  excuse  himselfe  of  that  subject ; 

391 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  to  condemne  himselfe,  an  absolving  of  himselfe.  There 
XVII  was  never  so  base  a  porter,  nor  so  silly  a  woman,  but  thought 
Presump-  ke  jiaj  sufficient  wit  for  his  provision.  We  easily  know  in 
others,  the  advantage  of  courage,  of  bodily  strength,  of 
experience,  of  disposition  and  of  beautie,  but  we  never  yeeld 
the  advantage  of  judgement  to  any  body  :  And  the  reasons, 
which  part  from  the  simple  naturall  discourse  in  others,  wee 
thinke,  that  had  we  but  looked  that  way,  wee  had  surely 
found  them.  The  skill,  the  knowledge,  the  stile  and  such 
like  parts,  which  we  see  in  strange  workes,  we  easily  perceive 
whether  they  exceede  ours  ;  but  the  meere  productions  of  wit 
and  understanding,  every  man  deemeth  it  lyeth  in  him  to 
meete  with  the  very  like,  and  doth  hardly  perceive  the  weight 
and  difficultie  of  it,  except  (and  that  very  scarcely)  in  an 
extreame  and  incomparable  distance.  And  he  that  should 
clearely  see  the  height  of  a  strangers  judgement,  would  come 
and  bring  his  unto  it.  Thus,  is  it  a  kinde  of  exercising, 
whereof  a  man  may  hope  but  for  meane  commendation  and 
small  praise,  and  a  manner  of  composition,  of  little  or  no 
harme  at  all.  And  then,  for  whom  do  you  write  ?  The 
wiser  sort,  unto  whom  belongeth  bookish  jurisdiction,  know 
no  other  price  but  of  doctrine,  and  avow  no  other  proceeding 
in  our  wits,  but  that  of  erudition  and  art.  If  you  have  mis 
taken  one  Scipio  for  an  other,  what  of  any  worth  have  you 
left  to  speake-of  ?  He  that  is  ignorant  of  Aristotle  (accord 
ing  to  them)  he  is  therewithall  ignorant  of  himselfe.  Popular 
and  shallow-headed  mindes,  cannot  perceive  the  grace  or 
comelinesse,  nor  judge  of  a  smooth  and  quaint  discourse. 
Now  these  two  kindes  possesse  the  world.  The  third,  unto 
whose  share  you  fall,  of  regular  wits,  and  that  are  strong  of 
themselves,  is  so  rare,  that  justly  it  hath  neither  name  or 
ranke  amongst  us ;  he  loseth  halfe  his  time,  that  doth  aspire 
or  endevour  to  please  it.  It  is  commonly  said,  that  the 
justest  portion,  nature  hath  given  us  of  the  graces,  is  that 
of  sense  and  understanding  :  for  there  is  no  man,  but  is  con 
tented  with  the  share  she  hath  allotted  him  :  Is  it  not  reason? 
He  who  should  see  beyond  that,  should  see  further  then  his 
sight.  I  perswade  my  selfe  to  have  good  and  sound  opinions; 
but  who  is  not  so  perswaded  of  his  owne  ?  One  of  the  best 
trials  I  have  of  it,  is  the  small  esteeme  I  make  of  my  selfe  : 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

for,  had  they  not  beene  well  assured,  they  would  easily  have  CHAPTER 
suffered  themselves  to  be  deceived,  by  the  affection  I  beare         XVII 
unto  my  selfe,  singular,  as  he  who  brings  it  almost  all  unto          ticn""^" 
my  selfe,  and  that  spill  but  a  little  besides.     All  that,  which 
others  distribute  thereof  unto  an  infinite  number  of  friends 
and  acquaintances,  to  their  glorie  and  greatnesse,  I  referre  to 
the  repose  of  my  spirit  and  to  my  selfe.     What  else-where 
escapes  of  it,  is  not  properly  by  the  appointment  of  my 
discourse  : 

— mihi  nempe  valere  et  vivere  doctus. 

Well  learn'd  in  what  concerneth  me, 

To  live,  and  how  in  health  to  be. 

As  for  my  opinions,  I  finde  them  infinitely  bold  and  con 
stant  to  condemne  mine  insufficiencie.  And  to  say  truth,  it 
is  a  subject,  whereabout  I  exercise  my  judgement,  as  much 
as  about  any  other.  The  world  lookes  ever  for-right,  I  turne 
my  sight  inward,  there  I  fix  it,  there  I  ammuse  it.  Every 
man  lookes  before  himselfe,  I  looke  within  my  selfe  :  I  have 
no  busines  but  with  my  selfe.  I  uncessantly  consider,  con- 
trole  and  taste  my  selfe  :  other  men  goe  ever  else-where,  if 
they  thinke  well  on  it :  they  go  ever  foreward  : 

— nemo  in  sese  tentat  descenders. —  PERS.  Sat.  iv. 

No  man  attempteth  this  Essay,  23- 

Into  himselfe  to  finde  the  way  ; 

as  for  me  I  roule  me  into  my  selfe.  This  capacitie  of  sift 
ing  out  the  truth,  what,  and  howsoever  it  be  in  me,  and  this 
free  humour  I  have,  not  very  easily  to  subject  my  beliefe,  I 
owe  especially  unto  my  selfe,  for  the  most  constant,  and 
generall  imaginations  I  have  are  those,  which  (as  one  would 
say)  were  borne  with  me :  They  are  natural  unto  me,  and 
wholy  mine.  I  produced  them  raw  and  simple,  of  a  hardy 
and  strong  production,  but  somewhat  troubled  and  unper- 
fect :  which  I  have  since  established  and  fortified  by  the 
authoritie  of  others,  and  by  the  sound  examples  of  ancients, 
with  whom  I  have  found  my  selfe  conformable  in  judgment: 
Those  have  assured  me  of  my  hold-fast  of  them,  and  have 
given  me  both  the  enjoying  and  possession  thereof  more 
absolute  and  more  cleare.  The  commendation  which  every 
man  seekes  after,  for  a  vivacitie  and  promptitude  of  wit,  I 
chalenge  the  same  by  the  order  of  a  notable  and  farre-sound- 
3D  393 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ing  action,  or  of  some  particular  sufficiencie ;  I  pretend  it  by 
XVII  the  order,  correspondence,  and  tranquillitie  of  opinions  and 

Of  Presump-  customes.  Omnino  si  quidquam  est  decorum,  nihil  est  pro- 
Cic  l°Off.  i  J'ecto  magw  quam  cequabilitas  universal  vitce,  turn  smgularum 
actionum :  quam  conservare  non  possis,  si  aliorum  naturam 
imitans,  omittas  tuam.  '  Clearely  if  any  thing  bee  decent  for 
'  a  man,  nothing  is  more  than  an  even  carriage  and  equability 
4  of  his  whole  life,  and  every  action  therein  :  which  you  can- 
'  not  uphold,  if  following  the  nature  of  others,  you  let  passe 
6  your  owne."1  Behold  here  then  how  far  forth  I  finde  my 
selfe  guilty  of  that  first  part,  I  said  to  be  in  the  vice  of  pre 
sumption.  Concerning  the  second,  which  consisteth  in  not 
esteeming  sufficiently  of  others,  I  wot  not  whether  I  can  so 
well  excuse  my  selfe ;  for,  whatsoever  it  cost  mee,  I  intend 
to  speake  what  is  of  it.  It  may  be,  the  continuall  commerce 
I  have  with  ancient  humours,  and  the  Idea  of  those  rich  mindes 
of  former  ages  doth  bring  me  out  of  liking  and  distaste  both 
of  others  and  of  my  selfe,  or  that  in  truth  we  live  in  an  age, 
which  produceth  things  but  meane  and  indifferent.  So  it  is, 
that  I  know  nothing  worthy  any  great  admiration.  Also  1 
know  not  many  men  so  familiarly  as  I  should,  to  be  able  to 
judge  of  them  :  and  those  with  whom  the  quality  of  my 
condition  doth  ordinarily  make  me  conversant,  are  for  the 
most  part,  such  as  have  little  care  for  the  manuring  of  the 
soule,  and  to  whom  nothing  is  proposed  for  chiefe  felicitie, 
but  honour ;  and  for  absolute  perfection,  but  valour.  What 
soever  I  see  or  beauteous  or  worthy  in  any  other  man,  I 
willingly  commend  and  regard ;  yea  and  I  often  endeare  my 
selfe  with  what  I  thinke  of  it,  and  allow  my  selfe  to  lie  so 
farre  forth  :  For,  I  cannot  invent  a  false  subject.  I  willingly 
witnesse  with  my  friends  what  I  finde  praise-worthy  in  them. 
And  of  an  inch  of  valour,  I  willingly  make  an  inch  and  a 
halfe ;  but  to  lend  them  qualities  they  have  not,  I  cannot ; 
and  openly  to  defend  their  imperfections,  I  may  not:  yea,  bee 
they  mine  enemies,  I  shall  sincerely  give  them  their  due, 
in  witnessing  their  worth  or  honour.  My  affection  may 
change;  my  judgement  never.  And  I  confound  not  my 
quarell  with  other  circumstances,  that  are  impertinent  and 
belong  not  unto  it.  And  I  am  so  jealous  of  the  liberty  of 
my  judgement,  that  for  what  passion  soever,  I  can  hardly 
* 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

quit  it.  I  wrong  my  selfe  more  in  lying,  than  him  of  whom  CHAPTER 
I  lie.  This  commendable  and  generous  custome  of  the  XVII 
Persian  nation,  is  much  noted  ;  They  speake  very  honour-  C  Presump- 
ably  and  justly  of  their  mortall  enemies,  and  with  those  with 
whom  they  were  at  deadly  fude  and  warre,  so  farre  forth  as 
the  merit  of  their  vertue  deserved.  I  know  divers  men  who 
have  sundry  noble  and  worthy  parts  ;  some  wit,  some  cour 
age,  some  dexteritie,  some  conscience,  some  a  readinesse  in 
speech,  some  one  Science,  and  some  another ;  but  of  a  great 
man  in  generall,  and  that  hath  so  many  excellent  parts 
together,  or  but  one,  in  such  a  degree  of  excellencie,  as  hee 
may  thereby  be  admired,  or  but  compared  to  those  of  former 
ages  whom  we  honour,  my  fortune  hath  not  permitted  me  to 
see  one.  And  the  greatest  I  ever  knew  living  (I  meane  of 
naturall  parts  of  the  minde,  and  the  best  borne)  was  Ste- 
phanus  de  la  Boitie :  Verily  it  was  a  compleat  minde,  and 
who  set  a  good  face,  and  shewed  a  faire  countenance  upon  all 
matters :  A  minde  after  the  old  stampe,  and  which,  had  for 
tune  therewith  beene  pleased,  would  no  doubt  have  brought 
forth  wondrous  effects  ;  having  by  skil  and  study  added  very 
much  to  his  rich  naturall  gifts.  But  I  know  not  how  it 
comes  to  passe,  and  surely  it  doth  so,  there  is  as  much 
vanitie  and  weakenesse  of  understanding  found  in  those,  that 
professe  to  have  most  sufficiencie,  that  will  entermeddle  with 
learned  vacations,  and  with  the  charges  that  depend  of 
books,  than  in  any  sort  of  people ;  whether  it  be  because 
there  is  more  required,  and  expected  at  their  hands,  and 
common  faults  cannot  be  excused  in  them,  or  that  the 
selfe-opinion  of  knowledge  emboldeneth  them  the  more  to 
produce  and  discover  themselves  over-forward,  whereby  they 
loose  and  betray  themselves.  As  an  Artificer  doeth  more 
manifest  his  sottishnesse  in  a  rich  piece  of  worke,  which  he 
hath  in  hand,  if  foolishly  and  against  the  rules  of  his  trade 
he  seeke  to  apply  it  and  entermeddle,  than  in  a  vile  and 
base  one ;  and  men  are  more  offended  at  a  fault  or  over 
sight  in  a  statue  of  gold,  than  in  one  of  clay.  These  doe 
as  much,  when  they  set  foorth  things,  which  in  themselves 
and  in  their  place,  would  be  good ;  for,  they  employ  them 
without  discretion,  honouring  their  memory  at  the  cost  and 
charge  of  their  understanding  :  and  doing  honour  to  Cicero, 

395 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  Galen,  to  Vlpian,  and  to  Saint  lerome,  to  make  them- 
XVII  selves  ridiculous.  I  willingly  returne  to  this  discourse  of  the 
Presump-  fondnesse  of  our  institution  :  whose  aime  hath  beene  to  make 
us  not  good  and  wittie,  but  wise  and  learned ;  She  hath 
attained  her  propose.  It  hath  not  taught  us  to  follow  vertue 
and  embrace  wisedome  ;  but  made  an  impression  in  us  of  its 
Etymologic  and  derivation.  We  can  decline  vertue,  yet  can 
we  not  love  it.  If  wee  know  not  what  wisedome  is  by  effect 
and  experience,  wee  know  it  by  prattling  and  by  rote.  We 
are  not  satisfied  to  know  the  race,  the  alliances,  and  the 
pedegrees  of  our  neighbours,  but  we  wil  have  them  to  be 
our  friends,  and  contract  both  conversation  and  intelligence 
with  them  :  It  hath  taught  us  the  definitions,  the  divisions, 
and  distinctions  of  vertue,  as  of  the  surnames  and  branches 
of  a  genealogie,  without  having  other  care  to  contract 
practise  of  familiaritie  or  private  acquaintance  betweene  us 
and  it.  She  hath  appointed  us  for  our  learning,  not  bookes 
that  have  sounder  and  truer  opinions,  but  volumes  that 
speake  the  best  Greeke  or  Latine :  and  amongst  her  choise 
words,  hath  made  the  vainest  humours  of  antiquitie  to  glide 
into  our  conceits.  A  good  institution  changeth  judgement 
and  manners,  as  it  hapned  to  Polemon.  This  dissolute 
yong  Grecian,  going  on  day  by  chance  to  heare  a  Lecture  of 
Xenocrates,  where  he  not  onely  marked  the  eloquence  and 
sufficiencie  of  the  Reader,  and  brought  not  home  the  know 
ledge  of  some  notable  thing,  but  a  more  apparant  and  solide 
fruit,  which  was  the  sodaine  change  and  amendment  of  his 
former  life.  Who  ever  heard  such  an  effect  of  our  discipline  ? 
HOR.  Ser.  ii.  —faciasne  quod  olim 

Sat.  iii.  253.  Mutatus  Polemon,  ponas  insignia  morbi, 

Fasciolus,  cubital,  focalia,  potus  ut  ille 
Dicitur  ex  collofurtim  carpsisse  coronas, 
Postquam  est  impransi  correptus  voce  magistri  ? 
Can  you  doe  as  did  Polemon  reformed, 
Cast-off  your  sicklies  signes,  which  you  deformed, 
Your  bolsters,  mufflers,  swathes  ?     As  he  drink-lin'de, 
His  drunken  garland  covertly  declinde, 
By  speech  of  fasting  reader  disciplinde  ? 

The  least  disdainefull  condition  of  men,  me  thinkes,  is 
that,  which  through  simplicitie  holds  the  last  ranke,  and 
offereth  us  more  regular  commerce.  The  customes  and  dis- 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

courses  of  Countrie-clownish-men,  I  finde  them  commonly  to  CHAPTER 
be  more  conformable  and  better  disposed,  according  to  the  XVI1 
true  prescription  of  Philosophic,  then  are  those  of  our  Philo-  C  Presump- 
sophers.  Plus  sapit  vulgus,  quia  tantum,  quantum  opus  est, 
sapit.  '  The  vulgar  is  the  wiser,  because  it  is  but  as  wise  as 
'  it  must  needes."  The  worthiest  men,  I  have  judged  by 
externall  apparances  (for,  to  judge  them  after  my  fashion, 
they  should  be  sifted  nearer)  concerning  war,  and  military 
sufficiencie,  have  been,  the  Duke  of  Guise,  that  died  before 
Orleans,  and  the  whilom  Marshal  Strozzi :  For  men  extra 
ordinarily  sufficient,  and  endowed  with  no  vulgar  vertue, 
Oliver,  and  FHospitall,  both  great  Chancelors  of  France. 
Poesie  hath  likewise  in  mine  opinion,  had  hir  vogue  and 
credit  in  our  age.  We  have  store  of  cunning  and  able  men 
in  that  profession,  Aurate,  Beza,  Buchanan,  LTHospitall, 
Mont-dore,  and  Turnebus.  As  for  French-men,  I  thinke 
they  have  attained  the  highest  degree  of  perfection  that  can 
or  ever  shall  be,  and  in  those  parts  wherein  Ronsart,  and 
excellent  Bellay  have  written,  I  thinke  they  are  not  farre 
short  of  the  ancient  perfection.  Adrian  us  Turnebus  knew 
more  and  better,  what  he  knew,  then  any  man  in  his  age  or 
of  many  ages  past.  The  lives  of  the  late  Duke  of  Alva,  and 
of  our  Constable  Mommorancie  have  beene  very  noble,  and 
have  had  sundrie  rare  resemblances  of  fortune.  But  the 
worthily-faire  and  glorious  death  of  the  last,  in  the  full 
sight  of  Paris,  and  of  his  King,  for  their  service,  against 
his  nearest  friends  and  alliance,  in  the  front  of  an  armie, 
victorious  through  his  conduct  of  it,  and  with  an  hand- 
stroke,  in  that  old  age  of  his,  deserveth  in  mine  opinion, 
to  be  placed  and  registred  amongst  the  most  renoumed  and 
famous  accidents  of  my  times.  As  also  the  constant  good- 
nes,  the  mildnes  in  behaviour,  and  conscionable  facility  of 
Monsieur  la  Noue,  in  such  an  injustice  of  armed  factions  (a 
very  schoole  of  treason,  of  inhumanitie  and  brigandage) 
wherein  he  was  ever  brought  up,  a  worthie  and  famous  man 
of  warre,  and  most  experienced  in  his  profession.  I  have 
greatly  pleased  my  selfe  in  publishing  in  sundrie  places,  the 
good  hope  I  have  of  Marie  Gournay  le  lars  my  daughter  in 
alliance,  and  truely  of  me  beloved  with  more  then  a  fatherly 
love,  and  as  one  of  the  best  parts  of  my  being,  enfeofed  in 

397 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  my  home  and  solitarines.     There  is  nothing  in  the  world  I 
^P^         esteeme  more  then  hir.     If  childe-hoode  may  presage  any 
resump-  fu^ure  successe,  hir  minde  shall  one  day  be  capable  of  many 
notable  things,  and  amongst  other  of  the  perfection  of  this 
thrice-sacred  amitie,  whereunto  we  read  not,  hir  sexe  could 
yet  attaine ;  the  sinceritie  and   soliditie  of  her  demeanors 
are  therein  alreadie  sufficient ;    hir  kinde  affection  towards 
me    is    more   then    superabounding  and  such  in    deede    as 
nothing  more  can  be  wished  unto  it,  so  that  the  apprehen 
sion,  which  she  hath  of  my  aproching  end,  by  reason  of  the 
fifty  five  yeares,  wherein  her  hap  hath  beene  to  know  me, 
would  somewhat  lesse  cruelly  trouble  hir.     The  judgement 
she  made  of  my  first  Essayes,  being  a  woman,  of  this  age, 
so   yong,    alone   where    shee    dwelleth,    and    the    exceeding 
vehemencie  wherewith  she  loved  me,  and  long  time,  by  the 
onely   esteeme,   which  before  ever  she  saw  me,  she  had  by 
them  conceived  of  me,  she  desired  me ;  is  an  accident  most 
worthy  consideration.     Other  vertues  have  had  little  or  no 
currantnesse  at  all  in  this  age  :  But  valour  is  become  popular 
by  reason  of  our  civill  warres,  and  in  this  part,  there  are 
minds  found  amongst  us  very  constant,  even  to  perfection, 
and  in  great  number,  so  that  the  choise  is  impossible 
to  be  made.     Loe  heere  what  hitherto  I  have 
knowen  of  any  extraordinary,  and  not 
common  greatnesse. 


THE    EIGHTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  giving  the  lie. 

EA  but,  will  some  tell  me,  this  desseigne  in 
a  man  to  make  himselfe  a  subject  to  write 
of,  might  be  excused  in  rare  and  famous 
men,   and  who   by  their  reputation,  had 
bred   some  desire   in  others   of  their  ac 
quaintance.     It  is  true,  I  confesse  it,  and 
I    know,    that    a     handi-craftsman     will 
scarcely  looke  off  his  worke,  to  gaze  upon 
an   ordinary  man :  Whereas  to  se  a  notable  great  person 
398 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

come  into  a  towne,  he  will  leave  both  worke  and  shop.     It  CHAPTER 
ill  beseemeth  any  man  to  make  himselfe  knowen,  onely  he        XVIII 
excepted,  that  hath  somewhat  in  him  worthy  imitation,  and  ^g™»g  the 
whose  life  and   opinions   may   stand    as  a  patterne  to  all. 
Caesar  and  Xenophon  have  had  wherewithall  to  ground  and 
establish  their  narration  in  the  greatnesse  of  their  deedes,  as 
on  a  just  and  solid  ground-worke.     So  are  the  lornall  bookes 
of  Alexander  the  great,  the  Commentaries  which  Augustus, 
Cato,  Brutus,  Sylla  and  divers  others  had  left  of  their  gests, 
greatly  to  be  desired.     Such  mens  Images  are  both  beloved 
and  studied,  be  they  either  in  Brasse  or  Stone.     This  ad 
monition  is  most  true,  but  it  concerneth  me  very  little. 

Non  recito  cuiquam :  nisi  amicis,  idque  rogatus.  HOR.  Ser.  i. 

Non  ubivis,  coramve  quibuslibet.     In  medio  qui  Sat.  iv.  73. 

Scriptaforo  recitant  sunt  multi,  quique  lavantes. 

My  writings  I  reade  not,  but  to  my  friends,  to  any, 
Nor  each-where,  nor  to  all,  nor  but  desir'd  :  yet  many 
In  Market-place  read  theirs, 
In  Bathes,  in  Barbers-chaires. 

I  erect  not  here  a  statue  to  be  set  up  in  the  Market-place 
of  a  towne,  or  in  a  Church,  or  in  any  other  publike  place : 

Non  equidem  hoc  studeo  bullatis  ut  mihi  nugis  PERS.  Sat.  v. 

Pagina  turgescat: —  r9- 

I  studie  not,  my  written  leaves  should  grow 
Big-swolne  with  bubled  toyes,  which  vaine  breath's  blow. 
Secretiloquimur —  2 1 

We  speake  alone, 
Or  one  to  one. 

It  is  for  the  corner  of  a  Library,  or  to  ammuse  a  neigh 
bour,  a  kinsman,  or  a  friend  of  mine  withall,  who  by  this 
image  may  happily  take  pleasure  to  renew  acquaintance,  and 
to  reconverse  with  me.  Others  have  beene  emboldned  to 
speake  of  themselves,  because  they  have  found  worthy  and 
rich  subject  in  themselves.  I,  contrariwise,  because  I  have 
found  mine  so  barren,  and  so  shallow,  that  it  cannot  admit 
suspition  of  ostentation.  I  willingly  judge  of  other  mens 
actions ;  of  mine  by  reason  of  their  nullity,  I  give  small 
cause  to  judge.  I  finde  not  so  much  good  in  my  selfe, 
but  I  may  speake  of  it  without  blushing.  Oh  what  con- 

399 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  tentment  were  it  unto  me,  to  heare  some  body  that  would 
Of  -^Y111  relate  the  custome,  the  visage,  the  countenance,  the  most 
gl  He^  *  ^  usua^  words,  and  the  fortunes  of  my  ancestors.  Oh  how 
attentively  would  I  listen  unto  it.  Verily  it  were  an  argu 
ment  of  a  bad  nature,  to  seeme  to  despise  the  very  pictures 
of  our  friends  and  predecessors,  the  fashion  of  their  garments 
and  armes.  I  keepe  the  writing,  the  manuall  seale,  and  a 
peculiar  sword :  And  I  reserve  still  in  my  cabinet  certaine 
long  switches  or  wands,  which  my  father  was  wont  to  carry 
in  his  hand.  Paterna  vestis  et  annulus^  tanto  charior  est 
poster  is  ^  quanta  erga  parentes  maior  affectus :  'The  fathers 
4  garment  and  his  ring  is  so  much  more  esteemed  of  his  sue- 
4  cessors,  as  their  affection  is  greater  towards  their  progeni- 
6  tors/  Notwithstanding  if  my  posteritie  be  of  another 
minde,  I  shall  have  wherewith  to  be  avenged ;  for  they 
cannot  make  so  little  accompt  of  me,  as  then  I  shal  doe  of 
them.  All  the  commerce  I  have  in  this  with  the  world,  is, 
that  I  borrow  the  instruments  of  their  writing,  as  more 
speedy,  and  more  easie :  in  requitall  whereof  I  may  per- 
adventure  hinder  the  melting  of  some  piece  of  butter  in  the 
market,  or  a  Grocer  from  selling  an  ounce  of  pepper. 

Ne  toga  cordyllis,  ne  penula  desit  olivis. 

Lest  Fish-fry  should  a  fit  gowne  want,, 
Lest  cloakes  should  be  for  Olives  scant. 

Et  laxas  scombris  scepe  dabo  tunicas. 

To  long-tail'd  Mackrels  often  I, 
Will  side-wide  (paper)  cotes  apply. 

And  if  it  happen  no  man  read  me,  have  I  lost  my  time,  to 
have  entertained  my  selfe  so  many  idle  houres,  about  so 
pleasing  and  profitable  thoughts  ?  In  framing  this  pourtraite 
by  my  selfe,  I  have  so  often  beene  faine  to  frizle  and  trimme 
me,  that  so  I  might  the  better  extract  my  selfe,  that  the  pat- 
terne  is  thereby  confirmed,  and  in  some  sort  formed.  Draw 
ing  my  selfe  for  others,  I  have  drawne  my  selfe  with  purer 
and  better  colours,  then  were  my  first.  I  have  no  more 
made  my  booke,  then  my  booke  hath  made  me.  A  booke 
consubstantiall  to  his  Author :  Of  a  peculiar  and  fit  oc 
cupation.  A  member  of  my  life.  Not  of  an  occupation 
and  end,  strange  and  forraine,  as  all  other  bookes.  Have  I 

400 


MART.  xiii. 
Epig.  i.  i. 


CATUL.  Epig. 
Eleg.  xxvii.  8. 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

mis-spent  my  time,  to  have  taken  an  account  of  my  selfe  CHAPTER 
so  continually  and  so  curiously  ?  For  those  who  onely  run  XVIH 
themselves  over  by  fantasie,  and  by  speech  for  some  houres,  Of  S1V}US  the 
examine  not  themselves  so  primely  and  exactly,  nor  enter 
they  into  themselves,  as  he  doth,  who  makes  his  study  his 
worke,  and  occupation  of  it  :  Who  with  all  his  might,  and 
with  all  his  credit  engageth  himselfe  to  a  register  of  continu 
ance.  The  most  delicious  pleasures,  though  inwardly  dis- 
gested,  shun  to  leave  any  trace  of  themselves  ;  and  avoide 
the  sight,  not  onely  of  the  people,  but  of  any  other.  How 
often  hath  this  busines  inverted  me  from  tedious  and  yrk- 
some  cogitations  ?  (And  al  frivolous  ones  must  be  deemed 
tedious  and  yrksome.)  Nature  hath  endowed  us  with  a 
large  faculty  to  entertaine  our  selves  apart,  and  often  calleth 
us  unto  it :  To  teach  us,  that  partly  wee  owe  our  selves 
unto  society,  but  in  the  better  part  unto  our  selves.  To 
the  end  I  may  in  some  order  and  project  marshall  my 
fantasie,  even  to  dote,  and  keepe  it  from  loosing,  and  strag 
gling  in'  the  aire,  there  is  nothing  so  good,  as  to  give  it  a 
body,  and  register  so  many  idle  imaginations  as  present 
themselves  unto  it.  I  listen  to  my  humors,  and  harken  to 
my  conceits,  because  I  must  enroule  them.  How  often, 
being  grieved  at  some  action,  which  civility  and  reason  for 
bad  me  to  withstand  openly,  have  I  disgorged  my  selfe  upon 
them  here,  not  without  an  intent  of  publike  instruction  ? 
And  yet  these  Poeticall  rods, 

Zon  dessus  tce.il,  zon  sur  le  groin, 
Zon  sur  le  dos  du  Sagoin, 

are  also  better  imprinted  upon  paper,  than  upon  the  quicke 
flesh ;  What  if  I  lend  mine  ears,  somewhat  more  atten 
tively  unto  bookes,  sith  I  but  watch  if  I  can  filch  somthing 
from  them,  wherewith  to  enammell  and  uphold  mine  ?  I 
never  studie  to  make  a  booke ;  Yet  have  I  somewhat 
studied,  because  I  had  already  made  it  (if  to  nibble  or 
pinch,  by  the  head  or  feet,  now  one  Authour,  and  then 
another  be  in  any  sort  to  study)  but  nothing  at  all  to  forme 
my  opinions  :  Yea  being  long  since  formed,  to  assist,  to  second 
and  to  serve  them.  But  whom  shall  we  believ  speaking  of 
himselfe,  in  this  corrupted  age  ?  since  there  are  few  or  none, 
3E  401 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  whom  we  may  beleeve  speaking  of  others,  where  there  is  lesse 
XVIII  interest  to  lie.  The  first  part  of  customes  corruption,  is, 

)f  giving  the  the  banishment  of  truth  :  For  as  Pindarus  said,  to  be  sin 
cerely  true,  is  the  beginning  of  a  great  vertue ;  and  the  first 
article  Plato  requireth  in  the  Governor  of  his  Common 
wealth.  Now-adaies,  that  is  not  the  truth  which  is  true, 
but  that  which  is  perswaded  to  others.  As  we  cal  money 
not  onely  that  which  is  true  and  good,  but  also  the  false  ; 
so  it  be  currant.  Our  Nation  is  long  since  taxed  with  this 
vice.  For  Salvianus  Massiliensis  who  lived  in  the  time  of 
Valentinian  the  Emperour,  saith,  that  amongst  French-men, 
to  lie  and  forsweare  is  no  vice  but  a  manner  of  speach. 
He  that  would  endeare  this  Testimonie,  might  say,  it  is 
now  rather  deemed  a  vertue  among  them.  Men  frame  and 
fashion  themselves  unto  it,  as  to  an  exercise  of  honour ;  for, 
dissimulation  is  one  of  the  notablest  qualities  of  this  age. 
Thus  have  I  often  considred,  whence  this  custome  might 
arise,  which  we  observe  so  religiously,  that  we  are  more 
sharpely  offended  with  the  reproach  of  this  vice,  so  ordinary 
in  us,  than  with  any  other ;  and  that  it  is  the  extremest  in 
jury,  may  be  done  us  in  words,  to  upbraid  and  reproch  us 
with  a  lie.  Therein  I  find,  that  it  is  naturall,  for  a  man  to 
defend  himselfe  most  from  such  defects  as  we  are  most  tainted 
with.  It  seemeth  that  if  we  but  shew  a  motion  of  revenge, 
or  are  but  moved  at  the  accusation,  we  in  some  sort  dis 
charge  our  selves  of  the  blame  or  imputation  ;  if  we  have 
it  in  effect,  at  least  we  condemne  it  in  apparance.  May  it 
not  also  be,  that  this  reproch  seemes  to  enfold  cowardise  and 
faintnesse  of  hart  ?  Is  there  any  more  manifest,  than  for  a 
man  to  eate  and  deny  his  owne  Word  ?  What  ?  To  deny 
his  Word  wittingly  ?  To  lie  is  a  horrible-filthy  vice ;  and 
which  an  ancient  writer  setteth  forth  very  shamefully,  when 
he  saith,  that  whosoever  lieth,  witnesseth  that  he  contemneth 
God  and  therewithall  feareth  men.  It  is  impossible  more 
richly  to  represent  the  horrour,  the  vilenesse  and  the  dis 
order  of  it :  For,  what  can  be  imagined  so  vile,  and  base,  as 
to  be  a  coward  towards  men,  and  a  boaster  towards  God  ? 
Our  intelligence  being  onely  conducted  by  the  way  of  the 
Word  :  Who  so  falsifieth  the  same,  betraieth  publik  society. 
It  is  the  onely  instrument,  by  meanes  wherof  our  wils  and 
402 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

thoughts  are  communicated:  it  is  the  interpretour  of  our  CHAPTER 
soules :  If  that  faile  us  we  hold  our  selves  no  more,  we  XVIII 
enter-know  one  another  no  longer.  If  it  deceive  us,  it Of  &IV*U8 the 
break eth  al  our  commerce,  and  dissolveth  al  bonds  of  our 
policie.  Certaine  Nations  of  the  new  Indiaes  (whose  names 
we  need  not  declare,  because  they  are  no  more  ;  for  the  deso 
lation  of  this  conquest  hath  extended  it  selfe  to  the  absolute 
abolishing  of  names  and  ancient  knowledge  of  Places,  with  a 
marvellous  and  never  the  like  heard  example)  offered  humane 
bloud  unto  their  Gods,  but  no  other  than  that  which  was 
drawne  from  their  tongues  and  eares,  for  an  expiation  of  the 
sinne  of  lying  as  well  heard  as  pronounced.  That  good- 
fellow-Graecian  said,  children  were  dandled  with  toies,  but 
men  with  words.  Concerning  the  sundry  fashions  of  our 
giving  the  lie,  and  the  lawes  of  our  honour  in  that  and  the 
changes  they  have  received,  I  will  refer  to  another  time  to 
speake  what  I  thinke  and  know  of  it,  and  if  I  can,  I  will  in 
the  meane  time  learne,  at  what  time  this  custome  tooke  his 
beginning,  so  exactly  to  weigh  and  precizely  to  measure 
words,  and  tie  our  honour  to  them :  for  it  is  easie  to  judge, 
that  it  was  not  anciently  amongst  the  Romans  and  Graecians. 
And  I  have  often  thought  it  strange,  to  see  them  wrong  and 
give  one  another  the  lie,  and  yet  never  enter  into  quarrell. 
The  lawes  of  their  duty,  tooke  some  other  course  than  ours. 
Caesar  is  often  called  a  thiefe,  and  sometimes  a  drunkard 
to  his  face.  We  see  the  liberty  of  their  invectives,  which 
they  write  one  against  another :  I  meane  the  greatest 
Chieftaines  and  Generals  in  war,  of  one  and  other 
Nation,  where  words  are  onely  retorted  and  re 
venged  with  words,  and  never  wrested  to 
further  consequence. 


403 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE  NINETEENTH   CHAPTER 

Of  the  liberty  of  Conscience. 


T  is  ordinarily  seene,  how  good  intentions 
being  managed  without  moderation,  thrust 
men  into  most  vicious  effects.  In  this 
controversie,  by  which  France  is  at  this 
instant  molested  with  civill  warres,  the 
best  and  safest  side,  is  no  doubt,  that 
which  maintaineth  both  the  ancient  re 
ligion  and  policy  of  the  Country.  Never- 
thelesse  amongst  the  honest  men  that  follow  it  (for  my  mean 
ing  is  not  to  speake  of  those,  who  use  them  as  a  colour, 
either  to  exercise  their  particular  revenges,  or  to  supply 
their  greedy  avarice,  or  to  follow  the  favour  of  Princes  :  But 
of  such  as  do  it  with  a  true  zeale  toward  their  religion,  and 
an  unfained  holy  affection,  to  maintaine  the  peace  and  uphold 
the  state  of  their  country)  of  those  I  say,  divers  are  seene, 
whome  passion  thrusts  out  of  the  bounds  of  reason,  and  often 
forceth  them  to  take  and  follow  unjust,  violent  and  rash 
counsels.  Certaine  it  is,  that  when  first  our  religion  beganne 
to  gaine  authoritie  with  the  Lawes,  it's  zeale  armed  many 
against  all  sorts  of  Pagane  bookes,  whereof  the  learned  sort 
have  a  great  losse.  My  opinion  is,  that  this  disorder  hath 
done  more  hurt  to  learning,  than  all  the  Barbarian  flames. 
Cornelius  Tacitus  is  a  sufficient  testimonie  of  it :  for,  how- 
beit  the  Emperor  Tacitus  his  kinsman  had  by  expresse  ap 
pointment  stored  all  the  libraries  in  the  World  with  it, 
notwithstanding  one  onely  entire  copy  could  not  escape  the 
curious  search  of  those,  who  sought  to  abolish  it,  by  reason 
of  five  or  sixe  vaine  clauses,  contrary  to  our  beleefe.  They 
have  also  had  this  easily  to  affoord  false  commendations  to 
all  the  Emperours,  that  made  for  us,  and  universally  to  con- 
demne  al  the  actions  of  those,  which  were  our  adversaries,  as 
may  plainly  be  seene  in  lulian  the  Emperor,  surnamed  the 
Apostata  ;  who  in  truth  was  a  notable-rare-man,  as  he  whose 
mind  was  lively  endowed  with  the  discourses  of  Philosophy, 
unto  which  he  professed  to  conforme  all  his  actions ;  and 
404 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

truely  there  is  no  kind  of  vertue,  whereof  he  hath  not  left  most  CHAPTER 
notable  examples.  In  chastity  (whereof  the  whole  course  of  ^^ 
his  life  giveth  apparant  testimony)  a  like  example,  unto  that  of  Conscience 
of  Alexander  and  Scipio  is  read  of  him,  which  is,  that  of 
many  wonderfull  faire  captive  Ladies,  brought  before  him, 
being  even  in  the  very  prime  of  his  age  (for  he  was  slain  by 
the  Parthians  about  the  age  of  one  and  thirty  yeares)  he 
would  not  see  one  of  them.  Touching  justice,  himselfe 
would  take  the  paines  to  heare  al  parties :  And  although 
for  curiosity  sake,  he  would  enquire  of  such  as  came  before 
him,  what  religion  they  were  of,  nevertheles  the  enmitie  he 
bare  to  ours,  did  no  whit  weigh  downe  the  ballance.  Himselfe 
made  sundrie  good  Lawes,  and  revoked  diverse  subsidies  and 
impositions,  his  predecessours  before  him  had  receaved.  We 
have  two  good  Historians,  as  eye-witnesses  of  his  actions. 
One  of  which  (who  is  Marcellinus)  in  sundry  places  of  his 
Historic  bitterly  reprooveth  this  ordinance  of  his,  by  which 
he  forbade  schooles,  and  interdicted  al  Christian  Rnethori- 
cians,  and  Grammarians  to  teach  :  Saying,  he  wished  this  his 
action  might  be  buried  under  silence.  It  is  very  likely,  if  he 
had  done  any  thing  else  more  sharpe  or  severe  against  us,  he 
would  not  have  forgot  it,  as  he  that  was  well  affected  to  our 
side.  Hee  was  indeede  very  severe  against  us,  yet  not  a 
cruell  enemy.  For,  our  people  themselves  report  this  His 
toric  of  him,  that  walking  one  day  about  the  Citty  of 
Calcedon,  Maris  Bishop  thereof,  durst  call  him  wicked  and 
traitor  to  Christ,  to  whom  he  did  no  other  thing,  but 
answered  thus :  Goe  wretched  man,  weepe  and  deplore  the 
losse  of  thine  eyes  ;  to  whom  the  Bishop  replied,  I  thank 
lesus  Christ,  that  he  hath  deprived  me  of  my  sight,  that  so  I 
might  not  view  thy  impudent  face  ;  affecting  therby  (as  they 
say)  a  kind  of  Philosophicall  patience.  So  it  is,  this  part 
cannot  be  referred  to  the  cruelties,  which  he  is  said  to  have 
exercised  against  us.  He  was  (saith  Eutropius  my  other 
testimony)  an  enemy  unto  Christianity,  but  without  shedding 
of  bloud.  But  to  returne  to  his  justice,  he  can  be  accused  of 
nothing  but  of  the  rigors  he  used  in  the  beginning  of  his 
Empire,  against  such  as  had  followed  the  faction  of  Con- 
stantius  his  Predecessour.  Concerning  sobriety,  he  never 
lived  a  Souldiers  kinde  of  life,  and  in  time  of  peace,  would 

405 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  feed  no  otherwise,  than  one  who  prepared  and  enured  him- 
XIX  selfe  to  the  austeritie  of  war.  Such  was  his  vigilancie,  that 

Of  the  liberty  ^e  divided  the  night  into  three  or  foure  parts,  the  least  of 
'e  which  he  allotted  unto  sleepe ;  the  rest  he  employed  in  visit 
ing  the  state  of  his  army,  and  his  guardes,  or  in  study ;  for, 
amongst  other  his  rare  qualities,  he  was  most  excellent  in 
al  sorts  of  learning.  It  is  reported  of  Alexander  the  Great, 
that  being  laid  downe  to  rest,  fearing  lest  sleep  should 
divert  him  from  his  thoughts  and  studies,  he  caused  a  bason 
to  be  set  neere  his  bed  side,  and  holding  one  of  his  hands 
out,  with  a  brazen  ball  in  it,  that  if  sleepe  should  surprize 
him,  loosing  his  fingers  ends,  the  ball  falling  into  the  bason, 
might  with  the  noyse  rouze  him  from  out  his  sleep.  This 
man  had  a  mind  so  bent  to  what  he  undertook,  and  by  reason 
of  his  singular  abstinence  so  little  troubled  with  vapours, 
that  he  might  well  have  past  this  devise.  Touching  military 
sufficiencie,  he  was  admirable  in  all  parts  belonging  to  a  great 
Captaine.  So  was  he  almost  al  his  life  time  in  continual 
exercise  of  war,  and  the  greater  part  with  us  in  France 
against  the  Alemans  and  French.  Wee  have  no  great 
memory  of  any  man,  that  either  hath  scene  more  dangers, 
nor  that  more  often  hath  made  triall  of  his  person.  His 
death  hath  some  affinitie  with  that  of  Epaminondas,  for 
being  strucken  with  an  arrow,  and  attempting  to  pull  it 
out,  he  had  surely  done  it,  but  that  being  sharpe-cutting,  it 
hurt  and  weakened  his  hand.  In  that  plight  he  earnestly 
requested  to  be  carryed  forth  in  the  middest  of  his  army, 
that  so  he  might  encourage  his  souldiers,  who  without  him 
couragiously  maintained  the  battel,  until  such  time  as  darke 
night  severed  the  Armies.  He  was  beholding  to  Philosophic 
for  a  singular  contempt,  both  of  himselfe  and  of  all  humane 
things.  He  assuredly  believed  the  eternitie  of  soules.  In 
matters  of  religion,  he  was  vicious  every-where.  He  was 
surnamed  Apostata,  because  he  had  forsaken  ours ;  notwith 
standing  this  opinion  seemes  to  mee  more  likely,  that  he 
never  took  it  to  heart,  but  that  for  the  obedience  which  he 
bare  to  the  law,  he  dissembled  til  he  had  gotten  the  Empire 
into  his  hands.  He  was  so  superstitious  in  his,  that  even 
such  as  lived  in  his  time,  and  were  of  his  owne  religion, 
mocked  him  for  it ;  and  it  was  said,  that  if  he  had  gained  the 
406 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Victory  of  the  Parthians,  he  would  have  consumed  the  race  CHAPTER 
or  breede  of  Oxen,  to  satisfie  his  sacrifices.  He  was  also  XIX 
besotted  with  the  Art  of  sooth-saying,  and  gave  authoritie 
to  all  manner  of  prognostikes.  Amongst  other  things  hee 
spake  at  his  death,  he  said,  he  was  much  beholding  to  the 
Gods,  and  greatly  thanked  them,  that  they  had  not  suffered 
him  to  be  slain  sodainly  or  by  surprize,  as  having  long 
before  warned  him  both  of  the  place  and  houre  of  his  end ; 
nor  to  die  of  a  base  and  easie  death,  more  beseeming  idle  and 
effeminate  Persons,  nor  of  a  lingring,  languishing,  and  dolor 
ous  death  ;  and  that  they  had  deemed  him  worthy  to  end  his 
life  so  nobly  in  the  cours  of  his  victories  and  in  the  flower  of 
his  glory.  There  had  before  appeared  a  vision  unto  him, 
like  unto  that  of  Marcus  Brutus,  which  first  threatned  him 
in  Gaule,  and  afterward  even  at  the  point  of  his  death,  pre 
sented  it  selfe  to  him  in  Persia.  The  speach  he  is  made  to 
speak  when  he  felt  himselfe  hurt,  '  Thou  hast  vanquished  oh 
'  Nazaraean ' ;  or  as  some  wil  have  it,  '  Content  thy  selfe  oh 
'  Nazaraean,1  would  scarce  have  beene  forgotten,  had  it  beene 
believed  of  my  testimonies,  who  being  present  in  the  army, 
have  noted  even  the  least  motions,  and  words  at  his  death,  no 
more  than  certaine  other  wonders,  which  they  annex  unto  it. 
But  to  return  to  my  theame,  he  had  long  before  (as  saith 
Marcellinus)  hatched  Paganisme  in  his  hart,  but  forsomuch 
as  he  saw  al  those  of  his  armie  to  be  Christians,  he  durst 
not  discover  himselfe.  In  the  end,  when  he  found  himselfe 
to  be  sufficiently  strong,  and  durst  publish  his  minde,  he 
caused  the  Temples  of  his  Gods  to  be  opened,  and  by  all 
meanes  endevoured  to  advance  idolatrie.  And  to  attaine  his 
purpose,  having  found  in  Constantinople  the  people  very 
loose,  and  at  ods  with  the  Prelates  of  the  Christian  Church, 
and  caused  them  to  appeare  before  him  in  his  pallace,  he 
instantly  admonished  them  to  appease  all  their  civill  dis- 
sentions,  and  every  one  without  hinderance  or  feare  apply 
themselves  to  follow  and  serve  religion.  Which  he  very 
carefully  sollicited,  hoping  this  licence  might  encrease  the 
factions,  and  controversies  of  the  division,  and  hinder  the 
people,  from  growing  to  any  unity,  and  by  consequence  from 
fortifying  themselves  against  him,  by  reason  of  their  concord 
and  in  one  mind-agreeing  intelligence  :  having  by  the  cruelty 

407  " 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER   of  some  Christians  found,  that  there  is  no  beast  in  the  world 

Of  th^Th         S°  mu°k   °f  man  t°  be  feared,  as  man ;  Loe  here  his  very 

of  Conscience  words>  or  verJ  neare  :  Wherein  this  is  worthy  consideration, 

that  the  Emperor  Julian,  useth  the  same  receipt  of  libertie 

of  conscience,  to  enkindle  the  trouble  of  civill  dissention, 

which  our  Kings  employ  to  extinguish.     It  may  be  said  on 

one  side,  that,  to  give  faction  the  bridle  to  entertaine  their 

opinion,  is  to  scatter  contention  and  sow  division,  and  as  it 

were  to  lend  it  a  hand  to  augment  and  encrease  the  same  : 

There  beeing  no  Barre  or  Obstacle  of  Lawes  to  bridle  or 

hinder  his  course.     But  on  the  other  side,  it  might  also  be 

urged,  that   to    give    factions    the   bridle    to    uphold  their 

opinion,  is    by  that    facilitie    and    ease,  the    readie   way  to 

mollifie  and  release  them  ;   and  to  blunt  the  edge,  which  is 

sharpned  by  rarenesse,  noveltie,  and  difficultie.     And  if  for 

the  honour  of  our  Kings  devotion,  I  believe  better  ;  it  is 

that  since  they  could  not  doe  as  they  would,  they 

have  fained  to  will  what  they  could  not. 


LUCR.  iv.  12, 
24. 


THE     TWENTIETH    CHAPTER 

We  taste  nothing  purely. 

HE  weaknes  of  our  condition,  causeth, 
that  things  in  their  naturall  simplicitie 
and  puritie  cannot  fall  into  our  use.  The 
elements  we  enjoy  are  altered :  Metals 
likewise,  yea  golde  must  be  em  paired  with 
some  other  stuffe  to  make  it  fit  for  our 
service.  Nor  vertue  so  simple,  which 
Ariston,  Pirrho,  and  the  Stoikes,  made 
the  end  of  their  life,  hath  beene  able  to  doe  no  good  with 
out  composition :  Nor  the  Cirenaike  sensualitie  or  Aristip- 
pian  voluptuousnes.  Of  the  pleasures  and  goods  we  have, 
there  is  none  exempted  from  some  mixture  of  evill,  and 
incommoditie. 

— medio  defonte  leporum 

Sargit  amari  illiquid,  quod  in  ipsis  floribus  angut. 
From  middle  spring  of  sweetes  some  bitter  springs, 
Which  in  the  very  flower  smartly  stings. 
408 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Our  exceeding  voluptuousnesse  hath  some  aire  of  groning  CHAPTER 
and  wailing :    Would  you  not  say,  it  dieth  with   anguish  ?          XX 
Yea  when  we  forge  ifs  image  in  hir  excellencie,  we  deck  it  with  ^e  taste  no~ 
Epithets  of  sickish  and  dolorous  qualities  :  languor,  effemi-         g  purely 
nacy,  weaknesse,  fainting  and  Morbidezza,  a  great  testimony 
of  their  consanguinity  and  cons ubs tan tiality  :  Excessive  joy 
hath  more  severity,  then  jolity :  Extreame  and  full  content, 
more  settled nes  then  cheerefulnesse.     Ipsa  j'celicitas,  se  nisi  Sest.  quare, 
temper  at,  pr  emit.     '  Felicitie  it  selfe,  unlesse  it  temper  it  selfe,  etc- 
'  distempers  us/     Ease  consumeth  us.     It  is  that,  which  an 
old  Greeke  verse  saith  of  such  a  sense.     The  Gods  sell  us  all 
the  goods  they  give  us ;  that  is  to  say,  they  give  us  not  one 
pure  and  perfect,  and  which  we  buy  not  with  the  price  of 
some  evill.     Travell  and  pleasure,  most  unlike  in  nature,  are 
notwithstanding  followed  together  by  a  kind  of  I  wot  not 
what  natural  conjunction ;    Socrates  saith,  that  some  God 
attempted    to    huddle    up    together,  and    confound  sorrow 
and  voluptuousnesse :  but  being  unable  to  effect  it,  he  be 
thought  himselfe  to  couple  them  together,  at  least  by  the 
taile.    Metrodorus  said,  that  in  sadnesse  there  is  some  aloy  of 
pleasure.     I  know  not  whether  he  meant  any  thing  else,  but 
I  imagine,  that  for  one  to  enure  himselfe  to  melancholy, 
there  is   some    kind    of  purpose,  of  consent   and    mutual! 
delight :  I  meane  besides  ambition,  which  may  also  be  joyned 
unto  it.     There  is  some  shadow  of  delicacy,  and  quaintnesse, 
which  smileth  and  fawneth   upon   us,  even  in  the   lap    of 
melancholy.      Are  there  not  some  complexions,  that  of  it 
make  their  nourishment  ? 

— est  qucedam  flere  voluptas.  OVID.  Trist. 

It  is  some  pleasure  yet,  iv<  EL  m-  37' 

With  teares  our  cheekes  to  wet. 

And  one  Attalus  in  Seneca  saith,  the  remembrance  of  our 
last  friends  is  as  pleasing  to  us,  as  bitternesse  in  wine  that  is 
over  old  ; 

Minister  veteris  puerfalerni  CAT.  Lyr.  Epi. 

Ingere  mi  calices  amariores :  xxiv.  i. 

Sir  boy,,  my  servitor  of  good  old  wine, 
Bring  me  my  cup  thereof  bitter,  but  fine  ; 

and  as  of  sweetly-sower  apples ;  Nature  discovereth  this  con- 
3F  409 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  fusion  unto  us  :    painters  are  of  opinion,  that  the  motions 

XX         and  wrinkles  in  the  face,  which  serve  to  weepe,  serve  also  to 
We  taste  no- 


e    ase  no-  la^g]^     Verely,  before  one  or  other  be  determined  to  expresse 
thins;  purely      i  •  i       i    i     i  j    ,  i          •    ,  -11, 

which  ;  behold  the  pictures  successe,  you  are  in  doubt  to 

ward  which  one  enclineth.  And  the  extreamity  of  laughing 
SEN.  Epig.  entermingles  it  selfe  with  teares.  Nullum  sine  auctoramento 
lxix«  malum  est.  '  There  is  no  evill  without  some  obligation.1 

When  I  imagine  man  fraught  with  all  the  commodities  may 
be  wished,  let  us  suppose,  al  his  severall  members  were 
for  ever  possessed  with  a  pleasure  like  unto  that  of  genera 
tion,  even  in  the  highest  point  that  may  be  :  I  finde  him 
to  sincke  under  the  burthen  of  his  ease,  and  perceive  him 
altogether  unable  to  beare  so  pure,  so  constant,  and  so 
universall  a  sensuality.  Truely  he  flies  when  he  is  even  upon 
the  nicke,  and  naturally  hastneth  to  escape  it,  as  from  a 
step,  whereon  he  cannot  stay  or  containe  himselfe,  and 
feareth  to  sincke  into  it.  When  I  religiously  confesse  my 
selfe  unto  my  selfe,  I  finde  the  best  good  I  have,  hath  some 
vicious  taint.  And  I  feare  that  Plato  in  his  purest  ver- 
tue  (I  that  am  as  sincere  and  loyall  an  esteemer  thereof, 
and  of  the  vertues  of  such  a  stampe,  as  any  other  can 
possibly  be)  if  he  had  neerely  listened  unto  it  (and  sure  he 
listened  very  neere)  he  would  therein  have  heard  some  harsh 
tune,  of  humane  mixture,  but  an  obscure  tune,  and  onely 
sensible  unto  himselfe.  Man  all  in  all,  is  but  a  botching 
and  party-coloured  worke.  The  very  Lawes  of  Justice,  can 
not  subsist  without  some  commixture  of  Injustice  :  And 
Plato  saith,  They  undertake  to  cut  off  Hidraes  heades,  that 
pretend  to  remoove  all  incommodities  and  inconveniences  from 
TACITUS,^««.  the  Lawes.  Omne  magnum  exemplum  habet  aliquid  ex  iniquo, 
xiv.  Cassi.  quodcontrasin^ulosutilitatepublicareprenditur.  'Every  great 
'  example  hath  some  touch  of  injustice,  which  is  requited  by 
c  the  common  good  against  particulars,"  saith  Tacitus.  It  is 
likewise  true,  that  for  the  use  of  life  and  service  of  publike 
society,  there  may  be  excesse  in  the  purity  and  perspicuity 
of  our  spirits.  This  piercing  brightnes  hath  overmuch  sub- 
tility  and  curiositie.  They  should  be  made  heavy  and  dull, 
to  make  them  the  more  obedient  to  example  and  practise  ; 
and  they  must  be  thickned  and  obscured,  to  proportion 
them  to  this  shady  and  terrestriall  life.  Therefore  are 
410 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

vulgar  and  lesse-wire-drawne-wits  found  to  be  more  fit  and  CHAPTER 
happy  in  the  conduct  of  affaires.      And  the  exquisite  and     r    xx 

high-raised    opinions    of  Philosophy,    unapt   and    unfit   to  Y?  taste  ^°~ 
•          mi  •       i  -j.       i?  iu         •  •.          1,1-  i     thing  purely 

exercise.     This  sharp  vivacity  or  the  spirit,  and  this  supple 

and  restlesse  volubility,  troubleth  our  negotiations.  Humane 
enterprises  should  be  managed  more  grosely  and  superfi 
cially,  and  have  a  good  and  great  part  of  them  left  for  the 
rights  of  fortune.  Affaires  neede  not  bee  sifted  so  nicely  and 
so  profoundly.  A  man  looseth  himselfe  about  the  considera 
tions  of  so  many  contrary  lusters  and  diverse  formes.  Volu-  LIV.  dec.  iv. 
tantibus  res  inter  se  pugnantes,  obtorpuerant  animi.  '  Their  lib-  2- 
'  mindes  were  astonished,  while  they  revolved  things  so 
4  different.'  It  is  that  which  our  elders  report  of  Simonides  ; 
because  his  imagination,  concerning  the  question  Hyeron 
the  King  had  made  unto  him  (which  the  better  to  answer 
he  had  diverse  dayes  allowed  him  to  think  of  it)  presented 
sundry  subtill  and  sharpe  considerations  unto  him ;  doubt 
ing  which  might  be  the  likeliest ;  he  altogether  dispaireth  of 
the  truth.  Whosoever  searcheth  al  the  circumstances  and 
embrace th  all  the  consequences  therof,  hindereth  his  elec 
tion.  A  meane  engine  doth  equally  conduct,  and  sufficeth  for 
the  executions  of  great  and  little  weights.  It  is  commonly 
seene,  that  the  best  husbands  and  the  thriftiest,  are  those  who 
cannot  tell  how  they  are  so  ;  and  that  these  cunning  Arith 
meticians  doe  seldome  thrive  by  it.  I  know  a  notable 
pratler,  and  an  excellent  blasoner  of  all  sorts  of  husbandry 
and  thrift,  who  hath  most  pitteously  let  ten  thousand  pound 
sterline  a  yeare  passe  from  him.  I  know  another,  who 
saith,  he  consulteth  better  then  any  man  of  his  counsell, 
and  there  cannot  be  a  properer  man  to  see  unto  or  of 
more  sufficiencie ;  notwithstanding  when  he  commeth 
to  any  execution,  his  own  servants  finde  he  is  far 
otherwise :  This  I  say  without  mentioning  or 
accounting  his  ill  lucke. 


411 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

THE    TWENTY-FIRST    CHAPTER 

Against  idlenesse,  or  doing  nothing. 

HE  Emperor  Vespasian,  lying  sicke  of  the 
disease  whereof  he  died,  omitted  not  to 
endevour  to  understand  the  state  of  the 
Empire  ;  and  lying  in  his  bed,  uncessantly 
dispatched  many  affaires  of  great  conse 
quence  ;  and  his  Physitians  chiding  him, 
as  of  a  thing  hurtfull  to  his  health :  he 
answered,  that  an  Emperour  should  die 
standing  upright.  Loe  heere  a  notable  saying,  fitting  my 
humour,  and  worthy  a  great  Prince.  Adrian  the  Emperour 
used  the  same  afterward  to  like  purpose.  And  Kings  ought 
often  to  be  put  in  minde  of  it,  to  make  them  feele,  that  this 
great  charge,  which  is  given  them  of  the  commandement  over 
so  many  men,  is  no  idle  charge:  and  that  there  is  nothing  may 
so  justly  distaste  a  subject  from  putting  himselfe  in  paine 
and  danger  for  the  service  of  his  Prince,  then  therewhilst  to 
see  him  given  to  lazinesse,  to  base  and  vaine  occupations, 
and  to  have  care  of  his  conservation,  seeing  him  so  carelesse 
of  ours.  If  any  shall  go  about  to  maintaine,  that  it  is 
better  for  a  Prince  to  mannage  his  wars  by  others,  then  by 
himselfe  ;  Fortune  will  store  him  with  sufficient  examples 
of  those,  whose  Lieutenants  have  atchieved  great  enter 
prises  ;  and  also  of  some  whose  presence  would  have  beene 
more  hurtfull,  then  profitable.  But  no  vertuous  and  cora- 
gious  Prince  will  endure  to  be  entertained  with  so  shamefull 
instructions.  Under  colour  of  preserving  his  head  (as  the 
statue  of  a  St.)  for  the  good  fortune  of  his  estate,  they 
degrade  him  of  his  office,  which  is  altogether  in  military 
actions,  and  declare  him  uncapable  of  it.  I  know  one,  would 
rather  chuse  to  be  beaten,  then  sleep  whilst  others  fight  for 
him  ;  and  who  without  jealousie  never  saw  his  men  performe 
any  notable  act  in  his  absence.  And  Selim  the  i.  had  reason 
to  say,  that  he  thought  victories  gotten  in  the  masters  absence, 
not  to  be  complete.  So  much  more  willingly  would  he  have 
said,  that  such  a  master  ought  to  blush  for  shame,  who  onely 
by  his  name  should  pretend  any  share  in  it,  having  there- 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

unto  employed  nothing  but  his  thought  and  verbal  direc-  CHAPTER 
tion  :  Nor  that,  since  in  such  a  busines,  the  advises  and  .XXI 
commandements,  which  bring  honor,  are  only  those  given  nfj^^r doing 
in  the  field  and  even  in  the  action.  No  Pilot  exerciseth  his  nothing 
office  standing  still.  The  Princes  of  Otomans  race  (the 
chiefest  race  in  the  world  in  warlike  fortune)  have  earnestly 
embraced  this  opinion.  And  Baiazeth  the  second  with  his 
sonne,  who  am  musing  themselves  about  sciences,  and  other 
private  home-matters,  neglected  the  same,  gave  diverse  pre- 
judiciall  blowes  unto  their  Empire.  And  Amurath  the  third 
of  that  name,  who  now  raigneth,  following  their  example, 
beginneth  very  wel  to  feele  their  fortunes.  Was  it  not  the 
King  of  England,  Edward  the  third,  who  spake  these  words 
of  our  King  Charles  the  fifth  ?  4  There  was  never  King  that 
'  lesse  armed  himselfe  ;  and  yet  was  never  King,  that  gave  me 
4  so  much  to  doe,  and  put  me  to  so  many  plunges/  He  had 
reason  to  thinke  it  strange,  as  an  effect  of  fortune,  rather 
then  of  reason.  And  let  such  as  will  number  the  Kings  of 
Castile  and  Portugall  amongst  the  warlike  and  magnanimous 
conquerors,  seeke  for  some  other  adherent  then  my  selfe ; 
forsomuch  as  twelve  hundred  leagues  from  their  idle  resi 
dence  they  have  made  themselves  masters  of  both  Indias, 
onely  by  the  conduct  and  direction  of  their  factors ;  of 
whom  it  would  be  knowne,  whether  they  durst  but  goe  and 
enjoy  them  in  person.  The  Emperor  Julian  said  moreover, 
that  a  Philosopher  and  gallant  minded  man  ought  not  so 
much  as  breathe ;  that  is  to  say,  not  to  give  corporall  neces 
sities,  but  what  may  not  be  refused  them  ;  ever  holding  both 
minde  and  body  busied  about  notable,  great  and  vertuous 
matters.  He  was  ashamed,  any  man  should  see  him  spitte 
or  sweate  before  people  (which  is  also  said  of  the  Lace 
demonian  youths,  and  Xenophon  reporteth  it  of  the  Persian) 
forasmuch  as  he  thought  that  continuall  travel,  exercise  and 
sobriety  shold  have  concocted  and  dried  up  all  such  super 
fluities.  What  Seneca  saith  shall  not  impertinently  be 
alleadged  here ;  That  the  ancient  Romans  kept  their  youth 
upright,  and  taught  their  children  nothing,  that  was  to  be 
learned  sitting.  It  is  a  generous  desire,  to  endevor  to  die 
both  profitable  and  manlike :  But  the  effect  consisteth  not 
so  much  in  our  good  resolution,  as  in  our  good  fortune.  A 

413 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  thousand  have  resolved  to  vanquish  or  to  die  fighting,  which 
XXI  have  missed  both  the  one  and  other :  Hurts  or  emprison- 

Against    idle-  ment?  crossing  their  desseigne  and  yeelding  them  a  forced 

^nothing1*181  kinde  of  life.  There  are  diseases  which  vanquish  our  desires 
and  knowledge.  Fortune  should  not  have  seconded  the 
vanitie  of  the  Romane  Legions,  who  by  oathe  bound  them- 

Liv.  dec.  i.  lib.  selves,  either  to  die  or  conquer.  Victor,  Marce  Fabi,  revertar 
ex  acie :  Si  folio ,  lovem  pair  em  Gradiuumque  Martem  aliosque 
iratos  invoco  Deos.  '  I  will,  O  Marcus  Fabius,  returne  con- 
6  queror  from  the  armie.  If  in  this  I  deceive  you,  I  wish 
'  both  great  lupiter  and  Mars,  and  the  other  Gods  offended 
'  with  me.1  The  Portugalles  report,  that  in  certaine  places  of 
their  Indian  conquests,  they  found  some  Souldiers,  who  with 
horrible  execrations  had  damned  themselves,  never  to  enter 
into  any  composition,  but  either  they  would  be  killed  or 
remaine  victorious  ;  and  in  signe  of  their  vowe  wore  their 
heads  and  beards  shaven.  We  may  hazard  and  obstinate 
our  selves  long  enough.  It  seemeth  that  blowes  shunne 
them,  who  over-joyfully  present  themselves  unto  them  ;  and 
unwillingly  reach  those  that  overwillingly  goe  to  meete  them 
and  corrupt  their  end.  Some  unable  to  lose  his  life  by  his 
adversaries  force,  having  assaied  all  possible  meanes,  hath 
been  enforced  to  accomplish  his  resolution,  either  to  beare 
away  the  honor ;  or  not  to  carry  away  his  life,  and  even  in 
the  fury  of  the  fight  to  put  himselfe  to  death.  There  are 
sundrie  examples  of  it ;  but  note  this  one.  Philistus,  chiefe 
Generall  of  yong  Dionysius  his  navie  against  the  Siracusans, 
presented  them  the  battle,  which  was  very  sharply  withstood, 
their  forces  being  alike ;  wherein,  by  reason  of  his  prowesse 
he  had  the  better  in  the  beginning.  But  the  Siracusans 
flocking  thicke  and  threefold  about  his  gaily  to  grapple  and 
board  him,  having  performed  many  worthy  exployts  with 
his  owne  person,  to  ridde  himselfe  from  them,  dispairing  of 
al  escape,  with  his  own  hand  deprived  himselfe  of  that  life, 
which  so  lavishly  and  in  vaine  he  had  abandoned  to  his 
enemies  hands.  Moly  Moluch,  King  of  Fez,  who  not  long 
since  obtained  that  famous  victory  against  Sebastian  King 
of  Portugall ;  a  notable  victorie,  by  reason  of  the  death  of 
three  Kings,  and  transmission  of  so  great  a  Kingdome  to  the 
crowne  of  Castile ;  chanced  to  be  grievously  sicke,  at  what 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

time  the  Portugales  with  armed  hand  entred  his  dominions,  CHAPTER 
and  afterward,   though   he   foresaw  it,  approaching  nearer        .XXI. 

unto  death,  empaired  worse  and   worse.      Never  did    man  A£amst   ld.le" 

,  ,  P  -.  -,  nesse.  ordomer 

more  stoutly,  or  more  vigorously  make  use  of  an  undanted       nothing 

courage,  than  he.  He  found  himselfe  very  weake  to  endure 
the  ceremonious  pompe  which  the  Kings  of  that  Country,  at 
their  entrance  into  the  Camp,  are  presented  withall,  which 
according  to  their  fashion  is  ful  of  all  magnificence  and  state, 
and  charged  with  al  maner  of  action  ;  and  therefore  he  re 
signed  that  honour  to  his  brother,  yet  resigned  he  nothing 
but  the  office  of  the  chiefe  Captaine.  Himselfe  most  glori 
ously  executed,  and  most  exactly  perfourmed  all  other  neces 
sary  duties  and  profitable  Offices.  Holding  his  body  laid 
along  his  cowch,  but  his  minde  upright  and  courage  con 
stant,  even  to  his  last  gaspe ;  and  in  some  sort  after.  He 
might  have  undermined  his  enemies,  who  were  fond-hardily 
advanced  in  his  dominions  :  and  was  exceedingly  grieved,  that 
for  want  of  a  little  longer  life,  and  a  substitute  to  manage 
the  warre,  and  affaires  of  so  troubled  a  state,  he  was  enforced 
to  seeke  a  bloody  and  hazardous  battel,  having  another  pure 
and  undoubted  victory  in  hand.  He  notwithstanding  man 
aged  the  continuance  of  his  sicknes  so  miraculously,  that  he 
consumed  his  enemy,  diverted  him  from  his  Sea-Fleete,  and 
Maritime  places,  he  held  along  the  Coast  of  Affricke,  even 
untill  the  last  day  of  his  life,  which  by  designe  he  reserved 
and  emploied  for  so  great  and  renowmed  a  fight. 

He  ranged  his  battell  in  a  round,  on  ev'ry  side  besieging 
the  Portugals  army,  which  bending  round,  and  comming  to 
close,  did  not  onely  hinder  them  in  the  conflict  (which 
through  the  valor  of  that  yong-assailant  King  was  very 
furious)  since  they  were  to  turne  their  faces  on  all  sides,  but 
also  hindred  them  from  running  away  after  the  rowte.  And 
finding  all  issues  seized,  and  all  passages  closed,  they  were 
constrained  to  turne  upon  themselves  :  Coacervanturque  non 
solum  ccede,  sed  etiamfuga ;  '  They  fall  on  heapes,  not  only 
6  by  slaughter  but  by  flight."  And  so  pel-mell  to  heape  one 
on  anothers  neck,  preparing  a  most  murtherous  and  compleat 
victory  to  the  Conquerours.  When  he  was  even  dying,  he 
caused  himselfe  to  be  carryed  and  haled,  where-ever  neede 
called  for  him  ;  and  passing  along  the  files,  he  exhorted  the 

415 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Captaines,   and  animated  the  Souldiers  one   after  another. 
XXI          And  seeing  one  wing  of  the  fight  to  have  the  worst,  and  in 
Against   idle-  some  danger,  no  man  could  hold  him,  but  he  would  needs 
'  w^n  his  naked-sword  in  hand  get  on  hors-backe,  striving  by 
al  possible  meanes,  to  enter  the  throng,  his  men  holding  him, 
some  by  the  bridle,  some  by  the  Gowne,  and  some  by  the 
Stirrops.     This  toyle  and  straining  of  himselfe,  made  an  end 
of  that  little  remainder  of  his  life  :  Then  was  he  laid  on  his 
bed  :  But  comming  to  himselfe  again,  starting  up,  as  out  of  a 
swown,  each  other  faculty  failing  him  he  gave  them  warning 
to  conceale  his  death  (which  was  the  necessariest  commande- 
ment  he  could  give  his  servants,  lest  the  souldiers  hearing  of 
his  death,  might  fall  into  dispaire)  and  so  yeelded  the  Ghost, 
holding  his  fore-fingers  upon  his  mouth  ;  an  ordinary  signall 
to  impose  silence.    What  man  ever  lived  so  long  and  so  neere 
death  ;  Who  ever  died  so  upright  and  undaunted  ?     The  ex- 
treamest  degree,  and  most  naturall,  couragiously  to  manage 
death,  is  to  see  or  front  the  same,  not  onely  without  amaze 
ment,  but  without  care ;  the  course  of  life  continuing  free,  even 
in  death.    As  Cato,  who  ammuzed  himselfe  to  studie  and 
sleepe,  having  a  violent  and  bloudy  death,  present  in 
his  heart,  and  as  it  were  holding  it  in  his  hand. 

THE    TWENTY-SECOND    CHAPTER 

Of  running  Posts,  or  Curriers. 

HAVE  been  none  of  the  weakest  in  this 
exercise,  which  is  proper  unto  men  of  my 
stature,  well-trust,  short  and  tough,  but 
now  I  have  given  it  over:    It  toyles   us 
over-much,  to  hold  out  long.     I  was  even- 
now  reading,  how   King  Cyrus,  that   he 
might  more  speedily  receave  news  from  al 
parts  of  his  Empire,  (which  was  of  exceed 
ing  great  length)  would  needs  have  it  tried,  how  far  a  horse 
could  in  a  day  goe  out-right,  without  baiting,  at  which  dis 
tance  he  caused  stations  to  be  set  up  and  men  to  have  fresh 
horses  ready,  for  al  such  as  came  to  him.     And  some  report, 
this  swift  kind  of  running,  answereth  the  flight  of  Cranes, 
416 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Csesar  saith,  that  Lutius  Vibulus   Rufus,   making  hast  to  CHAPTER 

bring  Pompey  an  advertisement,  rode  day  and  night,  and  to        XXII 

make  more  speed  shifted  many  horses.     And  himselfe  (as     p0™snm°]f 

Suetonius    writeth)  would    upon  an  hyred   coache  runne  a      Curriers 

hundred  miles  a  day.     And  sure  he  was  a  rancke-runner : 

for  where  any  river  hindred  his  way,  he  swam  it  over,  and 

never  went  out  of  his  way  to  seek  for  a  bridg  or  foard. 

Tiberius  Nero  going  to  visite  his  brother  Drusus,  who  lay 

sick    in  Germanic,  having  three  Coaches  in  his  company, 

ranne  two  hundred  miles  in  foure  and  twenty  houres.     In 

the  Romane  warres  against   King  Antiochus,  Titus   Sem- 

pronius  Gracchus  (saith  Titus  Livius)  per  dispositos  equos  LIVIUS. 

prope  incredibili  celeritate  ab  Amphisa  tertio  die  Pellam  per- 

venit:  'By  horse  laid  poste,  with   incredible  speede  within 

6  three  dayes  he  past  from  Amphisa  to  Fella.''     And  viewing 

the  place,  it  seemeth,  they  were  set  Stations  for  Postes,  and 

not  newly  appointed  for  that  race.    The  invention  of  Cecinna 

in  sending  newes  to  those  of  his  house  had  much   more 

speede ;  he  carried  certaine  swallowes  with  him,  and  having 

occasion  to  send  newes  home,  he  let  them  flie  toward  their 

nests,  first  marking  them  with  some  colour,  proper  to  signifie 

what  he  meant,  as  before   he   had   agreed  upon  with  his 

friends.     In  the  Theaters  of  Rome,  the  houshold  Masters, 

carried  Pigeons  in  their  bosomes,  under  whose  wings  they 

fastened  letters,  when  they  would  send  any  word  home,  which 

were  also  taught  to  bring  back  an  answer.     D.  Brutus,  used 

some  being  besieged  in  Mutina,  and  others  elsewhere.     In 

Peru  they  went  poste  upon  mens  backes,  who  tooke  their 

Masters  upon  their  shoulders,  sitting  upon  certaine  beares 

or  chaires,  with  such  agilitie,  that  in  full  running  speede  the 

first  porters  without  any  stay,  cast  their  load   upon  other 

who  upon  the  way  waited  for  them,  and  so  they  to  others. 

I  understand  that  the  Valachians,  which  are  messengers  unto 

the  great  Turk,  use  extreame  diligence  in  their  businesse, 

forasmuch   as  they  have   authoritie  to  dis-mount  the   first 

passengers  they  meet  upon  the  high-way,  and  give  him  their 

tyred  Horse.     And  because  they  shal  not  be  weary,  they  are 

wont  to  swathe  themselves  hard  about  the  bodie  with  a 

broad  Swathe  or  Scare -cloath,  as  diverse  others  doe 

with  us  :  I  cold  never  finde  ease  or  good  by  it. 

3G  417 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

THE     TWENTY-THIRD     CHAPTER 

Of  bad  meanes  emploied  to  a  good  end. 


HERE  is  a  woonderfull  relation  and  corre- 
spondencie  found  in  this  universall  policie 
of  Natures  workes,  which  manifestly 
sheweth,  it  is  neither  casual,  nor  directed 
by  diverse  masters.  The  infirmities  and 
conditions  of  our  bodies,  are  likewise 
scene  in  states  and  governments  :  King- 
domes  and  Commonwealths  as  well  as 
we,  are  borne,  florish,  and  fade  through  age.  We  are  sub 
ject  unto  a  repleatnesse  of  humours,  hurtfull  and  unprofit 
able,  yea  be  it  of  good  humours  (for  even  Physitians  fear) 
that,  and  because  there  is  nothing  constant  in  us  ;  they  say, 
that  perfection  of  health  over  joyful  and  strong,  must  by 
art  be  abated  and  diminished,  lest  our  nature  unable  to 
settle  it  selfe  in  any  certaine  place,  and  for  hir  amendment 
to  ascend  higher,  should  over-violently  recoile  backe  into 
disorder ;  and  therfore  they  prescribe  unto  Wrestlers  purg 
ing  and  phlebotomie,  to  substract  that  superabundance  of 
health  from  them)  or  of  bad,  which  is  the  ordinary  cause  of 
sickenesse.  Of  such  like  repletion  are  States  often  scene  to 
be  sicke,  and  divers  purgations  are  wont  to  be  used  to  purge 
them.  As  wee  have  scene  some  to  dismisse  a  great  number 
of  families  (chiefly  to  disburthen  the  country)  which  else 
where  goe  to  seeke  where  they  may  at  others  charge  seat 
themselves.  In  this  sorte  our  ancient  French  leaving  the  high 
Countries  of  Germanic,  came  to  possesse  Gaule,  whence  they 
displaced  the  first  Inhabitants.  Thus  grew  that  infinite  con 
fluence  of  people,  which  afterward  under  Brennus  and  others, 
over-ranne  Italic.  Thus  the  Gothes  and  Vandalls,  as  also  the 
Nations  which  possesse  Greece,  left  their  naturall  countries, 
to  go  where  they  might  have  more  elbow-roome :  And 
hardly  shall  we  see  two  or  three  corners  in  the  worlde,  that 
have  not  felt  the  effect  of  such  a  remooving  alteration.  The 
Romanes,  by  such  meanes,  erected  their  Colonies ;  for  per 
ceiving  their  Citie  to  growe  over-populous,  they  were  wont 
418 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

to  discharge  it  of  unnecessarie  people,  which  they  sent  to  CHAPTER 
inhabite  and  manure  the  Countries  they  had  subdued.    They       XXIII 

have  also  sometimes  maintained  warre  with  some  of  their 

,      . ,        ,  i  1 1    •  i        1 1      meanes  em- 

enemies,  not  onely  thereby  to  keepe  their  men  in  breath,  pi0ied  to  a 

lest  Idlenesse  the  mother  of  Corruption,  should  cause  them     good  end 
some  worse  inconvenience. 

Et  patimur  longee  pads  mala,  saviour  armis  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Luxuria  incumbit.  vi.  192. 

We  suffer  of  long  peace  the  soking  harmes,, 
On  us  lies  luxury  more  fierce  then  armes. 

But  also  to  let  the  Common-wealth  bloud,  and  somewhat  to 
allay  the  over  vehement  heat  of  their  youth,  to  lop  the  sprigs, 
and  thin  the  branches  of  this  over-spreading  tree,  too  much 
abounding  in  ranknesse  and  gaillardise.  To  this  purpose 
they  maintained  a  good  while  war  with  the  Carthaginians. 
In  the  treaty  of  Bretigny,  Edward  the  3.  King  of  England, 
would  by  no  meanes  comprehend  in  that  general  peace  the 
controversie  of  the  Dutchie  of  Britany  to  the  end  he  might 
have  some  way  to  disburthen  himselfe  of  his  men  of  war, 
and  that  the  multitude  of  English-men,  which  he  had  em- 
ploied  about  the  warres  of  France  should  not  returne  into 
England.  It  was  one  of  the  reasons,  induced  Philip  our 
King  to  consent,  that  his  sonne  lohn  should  be  sent  to  warre 
beyond  the  seas,  that  so  he  might  carry  with  him  a  great 
number  of  yong  hot-blouds,  which  were  amongst  his  trained 
military  men.  There  are  divers  now  adaies,  which  will  speake 
thus,  wishing  this  violent  and  burning  emotion  we  see  and 
feele  amongst  us,  might  be  derived  to  some  neighbor  war, 
fearing  lest  those  offending  humours,  which  at  this  instant 
are  predominant  in  our  bodie,  if  they  be  not  diverted  else 
where,  will  still  maintaine  our  fever  in  force,  and  in  the  end 
cause  our  utter  destruction  :  And  in  truth  a  forraine  warre  is 
nothing  so  dangerous  a  disease  as  a  civill :  But  I  will  not 
beleeve  that  God  would  favour  so  unjust  an  enterprise,  to 
offend  and  quarrell  with  others  for  our  commodity. 

Nil  mihi  tarn  valde  placeat  Rhamnusia  virgo,  CAT.  Epig. 

Quod  temere  invitis  suscipiatur  heris.  Eleg.  iv.  77. 

That  fortune  likes  me  not,  which  is  constrained, 
By  Lords  unwilling  rashly  entertained. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER      Notwithstanding   the  weaknesse    of  our   condition,  doth 

XXIII       often  urge  us  to  this  necessity,  to  use  bad  meanes  to  a  good 

kad       end.       Lycurgus  the  most  vertuous  and  perfect  Law-giver 

ploied^to  a  that  ever  was>  devised  this  most  unjust  fashion,  to  instruct 
good  end  his  people  unto  temprance,  by  force  to  make  the  Helotes, 
which  were  their  servants,  to  be  drunke,  that  seeing  them  so 
lost  and  buried  in  wine,  the  Spartanes  might  abhor  the  excesse 
of  that  vice.  Those  were  also  more  to  be  blamed,  who 
anciently  allowed  that  criminall  offenders,  what  death  soever 
they  were  condemned  unto,  should  by  Physitians  all  alive  be 
torne  in  pieces,  that  so  they  might  naturally  see  our  inward 
parts,  and  thereby  establish  a  more  assured  certainty  in  their 
art :  For  if  a  man  must  needes  erre  or  debauch  himselfe,  it 
is  more  excusable,  if  he  doe  it  for  his  soules  health,  then  for 
his  bodies  good.  As  the  Romans  trained  up,  and  instructed 
their  people  to  valour,  and  contempt  of  dangers  and  death, 
by  the  outragious  spectacles  of  Gladiators,  and  deadly  fight 
ing  Fencers,  who  in  presence  of  them  all  combated,  mangled, 
sliced  and  killed  one  another ; 

Quid  vesani  allud  sibi  vult  ars  impia  ludi, 

Quid  mortes  iuvenum,  quid  sanguine  pasta  voluptas  ? 

What  else  meanes  that  mad  art  of  impious  fense, 
Those  yong-mens  deaths,  that  bloud-fed  pleasing  sense  ? 

which  custome  continued  even  untill  the  time  of  Theodosius 
the  Emperour. 

PRUD.  cont,  Arripe  delatam  tua  dux  in  tempora  famam, 

Sym.  ii.  f.  Quodque  patris  super est  successor  laudis  habeto : 

Nullus  in  urbe  cadat,  cujus  sit  poena  voluptas, 
lam  solis  contenta  feris  in/amis  arena, 
Nulla  cruentatis  homicidia  ludat  in  armis. 

The  fame  defer'd  to  your  times  entertaine, 
Enherite  praise  which  doth  from  Sire  remaine, 
Let  none  die  to  give  pleasure  by  his  paine  : 
Be  shamefull  Theaters  with  beasts  content,, 
Not  in  goar'd  armes  man-slaughter  represent. 

Surely  it  was  a  wonderfull  example  and  of  exceeding  benefit 
for  the  peoples  institution,  to  see  dayly  one  or  two  hundred, 
yea  sometimes  a  thousand  brace  of  men  armed  one  against 
another,  in  their  presence  to  cut  and  hacke  one  another  in 
pieces  with  so  great  constancy  of  courage,  that  they  were  never 

420 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

seene  to  utter  one  word  of  faintnes  or  commiseration,  never  CHAPTER 
to  turne  their  backe,  nor  so  much  as  to  shew  a  motion  of       XXIII 
demissenesse,  to  avoide  their  adversaries  blowes  :  but  rather  to  bad 

extend  their  necks  to  their  swords,  and  present  themselves  pi0iea  to  a 
unto  their  strokes.     It  hath  hapned  to  divers  of  them,  who     good  end 
through    many  hurts   being  wounded   to    death,  have  sent 
to  aske  the  people,  whether  they  were  satisfied  with  their 
duty,  before  they  would  lie  down  in  the  place.     They  must, 
not  only  fight  and  die  constantly,  but  jocondly  :    in  such 
sort  as  they  were  cursed  and  bitterly  scolded  at,  if  in  receiv 
ing  their  death  they  were  any  way  seene  to  strive,  yea  maid- 
nesse  encited  them  to  it. 

—consurgit  ad  ictus,  PRUD>  f0nt, 

Et  quoties  victor  ferrum  iugulo  inserit,  ilia  Sym.  ii. 

Delicias  ait  esse  suas,  pectusque  jacentis 
Virgo  modesta  iubet  converse  pollice  rumpi. 

The  modest  Maide,  when  wounds  are  giv'n,  upriseth  ; 
When  victors  sword  the  vanquisht  throate  surpriseth, 
She  saith,,  it  is  hir  sport,  and  doth  command 
T'  embrue  the  conquer'd  breast,  by  signe  of  hand. 

The  first  Romans  disposed  thus  of  their  criminals  :  But  after 
ward  they  did  so  with  their  innocent  servants  ;  yea  of  their 
free  men,  which  were  sold  to  that  purpose  :  yea  of  Senators  ; 
and  Roman  Knights,  and  women  also. 

Nunc  caput  in  mortem  vendunt,  etfunus  arena,  MANIL.  Astr. 

Atque  hostem  sibi  quisque  par  at  cum  bella  quiescunt.  iv.  2,  4. 

They  sell  mens  lives  to  death  and  stages  sight, 
When  wars  do  cease,  they  finde  with  whom  to  fight. 

Hos  inter  fremitus  novosque  lusus, 
Stat  sexus  rudis  insciusqueferri, 
Et  pugnas  capit  improbus  viriles. 

Amidst  these  tumults,  these  strange  sporting  sights, 
That  Sex  doth  sit,  which  knowes  not  how  sword  bites, 
And  entertaines  urimov'd,  those  manly  fights. 

Which  I  should  deeme  very  strange  and  incredible;  if  we  were 

not  dayly  accustomed  to  see  in  our  wars  many  thousands 

of  forraigne  nations,  for  a  very  small  some  of  mony 

to  engage   both  their   blood    and  life  in  quarrels 

wherein  they  are  nothing  interessed. 

421 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 


CLAUD,  in 
Eutrop.  i. 
203. 


THE   TWENTY-FOURTH  CHAPTER 

Of  the  Roman  greatnesse. 

WILL  but  speake  a  word  of  this  infinite 
argument,  and  slightly  glance  at  it,  to 
shew  the  simplicitie  of  those,  who  com 
pare  the  seely  greatnesse  of  these  times 
unto  that :  In  the  seaventh  booke  of 
Ciceroes  familiar  Epistles  (and  let  Gram- 
arians  remove  this  title  of  Familiar,  if 
they  please,  for,  to  say  truth,  it  makes  but 
little  to  the  purpose  :  and  they  who  in  lieu  of  familiar,  have 
placed  adjfamiliares,  may  wrest  some  argument  from  them 
selves,  from  that  which  Suetonius  saith  in  Caesars  life,  that 
there  was  a  volume  of  his  Epistles  ad  familiar  es)  there  is  one 
directed  unto  Caesar  then  being  in  Gaule,  in  which  Cicero 
repeats  these  very  words,  which  were  in  the  end  of  a  former 
letter  that  Caesar  had  writen  to  him  :  '  Touching  Marcus 
4  Furius,  whom  thou  hast  commended  unto  me,  I  will  make 
'  him  King  of  Gaule,  and  if  thou  wilt  have  me  preferre  any 
6  other  of  thy  friends,  send  them  to  me."*  It  was  not  new  in  a 
simple  Roman  Citizen  (as  Caesar  then  was)  to  dispose  of 
Kingdomes,  for  as  well  deprived  he  King  Deiotarus  of  his, 
to  give  it  to  a  Gentleman  of  the  City  of  Pergamo,  called 
Mithridates.  And  those  who  writ  his  life,  mention  many 
Kingdomes  sold  by  him.  And  Suetonius  reporteth,  that  he 
at  one  time  wrested  three  millions  and  sixe  hundred  thousand 
crownes  of  gold  from  King  Ptolomaeus,  which  amounted  very 
neere  unto  the  price  of  his  Kingdome. 

Tot  Galatce,  tot  Pontus  eat,  tot  Lydia  nummis : 

Forsomuch  let  Galatia  go, 
Forsomuch  Lidia,  Pontus  so. 

Marcus  Antonius  said,  the  greatnesse  of  the  Romane  people 
was  not  so  much  discerned  by  what  it  tooke,  as  by  what 
it  gave.  Yet  some  ages  before  Antonius,  was  there  one 
amongst  others  of  so  wonderfull  authoritie,  as  through  all 
his  history  I  know  no  marke,  carrieth  the  name  of  his  credit 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

higher.  Antiochus  possessed  all  ^Egypt,  and  was  very  CHAPTER 
neere  to  conquer  Cipres,  and  others  depending  of  that  XXIV 
Empire.  Upon  the  progresse  of  his  victories,  C.  Popilius  Of  theRomao 
came  unto  him  in  the  behalfe  of  the  Senate,  and  at  first  gre< 
arrivall,  refused  to  take  him  by  the  hand,  before  he  had 
read  the  letters  he  brought  him.  The  King  having  read 
them,  said,  he  wold  deliberate  of  them.  Popilius  with  a 
wand  encircled  the  place  about,  where  he  stood,  and  thus 
bespake  him  ;  '  Give  me  an  answer  to  carry  backe  to  the 
'  Senate,  before  thou  goest  out  of  this  circle.'  Antiochus 
amazed  at  the  rudenesse  of  so  urging  a  comman dement,  after 
he  had  pawsed  a  while,  replyed  thus,  '  I  will  doe  what  the 
'  Senate  commandeth  me.'  Then  Popilius  saluted  him  as  a 
friend  unto  the  Roman  people.  To  have  renounced  so  great 
a  Monarchy,  and  forgon  the  course  of  so  successefull  pro 
sperity,  by  the  only  impression  of  three  written  lines.  He 
had  good  reason,  as  afterward  he  did,  by  his  Ambassadors  to 
send  the  Senate  word,  that  he  had  received  their  ordinances 
with  the  same  respect,  as  if  they  had  come  from  the  im- 
mortall  Gods.  All  the  Kingdomes  Augustus  subdued  by 
right  of  war,  he  restored  to  those  who  had  lost  them,  or 
presented  strangers  with  them  :  And  concerning  this  purpose, 
Tacitus  speaking  of  Cogidunus  King  of  England,  by  a 
wonderful  tract  makes  us  perceive  this  infinit  greatnes  and 
might.  The  Romans  (saith  he)  were  from  all  antiquity  COR.  TAG.  Vit. 
accustomed  to  leave  those  Kings  whom  they  had  vanquished, Iu 
in  the  possession  of  their  kingdomes,  under  their  authority  : 
Vt  haberent  instrumenta  servitutis  et  reges.  '  That  they 
'  might  have  even  Kings  also  for  instruments  of  their  bond- 
'  age.1  It  is  very  likely,  that  Soliman  the  great  Turke,  whom 
we  have  scene  to  use  such  a  liberality,  and  give  away  the 
kingdome  of  Hungary,  and  other  dominions,  did  more  respect 
this  consideration,  then  that  he  was  wont  to  alleage ;  which 
is,  that  he  was  over  wearied  with  the  many  Monarchies, 
and  surcharged  with  the  severall  dominions,  which 
either  his  owne  or  his  ancestors  vertue  had 
gotten  him. 


423 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    TWENTY-FIFTH    CHAPTER 

How  a  man  should  not  counterfeit  to 
be  sicke. 

HERE  is  an  epigram  in  Martiall,  that  may 
passe  for  a  good  one  (for  there  are  of  all 
sortes  in  him)  wherein  he  pleasantly  re- 
lateth  the  storie  of  Cselius,  who  to  avoide 
the  courting  of  certaine  great  men  in 
Rome,  to  give  attendance  at  their  rising, 
and  to  waite,  assist  and  follow  them,  fained 
to  be  troubled  with  the  goute  ;  and  to 
make  his  excuse  more  likely,  he  caused  his  legges  to  be 
ointed  and  swathed,  and  lively  counterfeted  the  behaviour 
and  countenance  of  a  goutie  man.  In  the  end  fortune  did 
him  the  favour  to  make  him  goutie  indeede. 

MART.  vii.  Tantum  euro,  potest  et  ars  doloris, 

Epig.  xxxviii.  Desiitfingere  Calms  podagram. 

So  much  the  care  and  cunning  can  of  paine  : 
Cselius  (growne  gowty)  leaves  the  gowt  to  faine. 

As  farre  as  I  remember,  I  have  read  a  like  History  in 
some  place  of  Appian,  of  one  who  purposing  to  escape  the 
proscriptions  of  the  Triumvirat  of  Rome,  and  to  conceale 
himselfe  from  the  knowledge  of  those  who  pursued  him, 
kept  himselfe  close  and  disguised,  adding  this  other  inven 
tion  to  it,  which  was  to  counterfeit  blindnes  in  one  eye,  who 
when  he  came  somewhat  to  recover  his  liberty,  and  would 
have  left  off  the  plaister  he  had  long  time  worne  over  his 
eyes,  he  found  that  under  that  mask  he  had  altogether  lost 
the  sight  of  it.  It  may  be  the  action  of  his  sight  was 
weakned,  having  so  long  continued  without  exercise  and  the 
usual  vertue  was  wholly  converted  into  the  other  eye  :  For, 
we  may  plainly  perceive,  that  holding  one  eye  shut,  it  con- 
vaieth  some  part  of  it's  effect  into  his  fellow ;  in  such  sort 
as  it  will  swell  and  growe  bigger.  As  also  the  idlenes, 
together  with  the  warmth  of  the  medicaments  and  swathing, 
might  very  wel  draw  some  goutie  humor  into  the  legge  of 

424 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Martials  goutie  fellow.     Reading  in  Froisart,  the  vow  which  CHAPTER 
a  gallant  troupe  of  young  English-men  had  made,  to  weare        xxv 

their  left  eyes  hudwimVt,  untill  such  time  as  they  should        H°7a1, 

•i-ri  TJI  e  iiii',      man  should 

passe  into  1  ranee,  and  there  periorme  some  notable  exploite  notcounter- 

of  armes  upon  us,  I  have  often  laughed  with  my  selfe  to  feit  to  be 
think  what  they  would  have  imagined,  if  as  to  the  fore  sicke 
aleaged,  it  had  hapned  to  them,  and  had  all  beene  blind  of 
the  left  eye,  at  what  time  they  returned  to  look  upon  their 
mistresses,  for  whose  sake  they  had  made  their  vowe  and 
undertaken  such  an  enterprise.  Mothers  have  great  reason 
to  chide  their  children  when  they  counterfeit  to  be  blind 
with  one  eye,  crompt-backe,  squint-eyed,  or  lame,  and  such 
other  deformities  of  the  body  ;  for  besides  that  the  body 
thus  tender  may  easily  receive  some  ill  custome,  I  know  not 
how,  it  seemeth  that  fortune  is  glad  to  take  us  at  our  word ; 
And  I  have  heard  diverse  examples  of  some,  who  have  falen 
sicke  in  very  deede,  because  they  had  purposed  to  faine 
sicknes.  I  have  at  all  times  enured  my  selfe,  whether  I  be 
on  horsebacke  or  a  foote,  to  carry  a  good  heavie  wand  or 
cudgell  in  my  hand ;  yea  I  have  endevoured  to  doe  it  hand 
somely,  and  with  an  effected  kinde  of  countenance  to  continue 
so.  Many  have  threatned  me,  that  fortune  will  one  time  or 
other  turne  this  my  wantonnes  into  necessitie.  I  presume 
upon  this,  that  I  should  be  the  first  of  my  race,  that  ever 
was  troubled  with  the  gowt.  But  lett  us  somewhat  amplifie 
this  chapter,  and  patch  it  up  with  another  piece  concerning 
blindnes.  Plinie  reports  of  one,  who  dreaming  in  his  sleepe, 
that  he  was  blind,  awaking  the  next  morning,  was  found  to 
be  starke  blinde,  having  never  had  any  precedent  sickenes. 
The  power  of  imagination  may  very  well  further  such  things, 
as  elsewhere  I  have  shewed  ;  And  Plinie  seemeth  to  bee  of 
this  opinion  ;  but  it  is  more  likely,  that  the  motions,  which 
the  body  felt  inwardly  (wherof  Physitians,  may  if  they 
please,  finde  out  the  cause)  and  which  tooke  away  his  sight, 
were  the  occasion  of  his  dreame.  Let  us  also  adde  another 
storie,  concerning  this  purpose,  which  Seneca  reporteth  in 
his  Epistles.  '  Thou  knowest '  (saith  he  writing  unto 
Lucilius)  '  that  Harpaste  my  wives  foole,  is  left  upon  me 
'  as  an  hereditarie  charge ;  for  by  mine  owne  nature,  I  am  an 
'  enemie  unto  such  monsters,  and  if  I  have  a  desire  to  lausrh 
3  H  425 


CHAPTER 
XXV 

How  a 

man  should 
not  counter 
feit  to  be 
sicke 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

4  at  a  foole,  I  neede  not  seeke  one  farre ;  I  laugh  at  my  selfe. 
4  This  foolish  woman  hath  sodainly  lost  hir  sight.  I  report 
4  a  strange  thing,  but  yet  very  true  :  She  will  not  beleeve 
4  she  is  blind  ;  and  urgeth  her  keeper  uncessantly  to  lead 
4  her,  saying  still,  My  house  is  very  darke.  What  we  laugh 
6  at  in  hir,  I  entreat  thee  to  beleeve,  that  the  same  hapneth 
'  to  each  for  us.  No  man  knoweth  himselfe  to  be  covetous, 
4  or  niggardly.  Even  the  blind  require  a  guide,  but  wee 
4  stray  from  our  selves.  I  am  not  ambitious,  say  we,  but  no 
4  man  can  live  otherwise  at  Rome  :  I  am  not  sumptuous,  but 
4  the  Cittie  requireth  great  charges.  It  is  not  my  fault,  if 
4  I  be  collerike  ;  If  I  have  not  yet  set  downe  a  sure  course  of 
4  my  life,  the  fault  is  in  youth.  Let  us  not  seeke  our  evill 
4  out  of  us  ;  it  is  within  us,  it  is  rooted  in  our  entrailes. 
4  And  only  because  we  perceive  not  that  we  are  sick,  makes 
4  our  recoverie  to  prove  more  difficult.  If  we  beginne  not 
4  betimes  to  cure  our  selves,  when  shall  we  provide  for  so 
4  many  sores,  for  so  many  evils  ?  Yet  have  we  a  most 
4  sweete  and  gentle  medicine  of  Philosophy  ;  for  of  others, 
4  no  man  feeles  the  pleasure  of  them,  but  after  his  re- 
4  coverie,  whereas  she  pleaseth,  easeth,  and  cureth  all  at 
once."  Lo  here  what  Seneca  saith,  who  hath  some 
what  diverted  me  from  my  purpose  :  But  there 
is  profit  in  the  exchange. 


THE    TWENTY-SIXTH   CHAPTER 

Of  Thumbs. 

ACITUS  reporteth,  that  amongst  certaine 
barbarous  Kings,  for  the  confirmation  of 
an  inviolable  bonde,  or  covenant,  their 
manner  was,  to  joyne  their  right  hands 
close  and  hard  together,  with  enterlacing 
their  thumbs :  And  when  by  hard  wring 
ing  them  the  blood  appeared  at  their 
ends,  they  pricked  them  with  some  sharp 

point,  and  then  mutually  entersuck't  each  one  the  others. 

Fhisicions  say,  thumbs  arc  the  master-fingers  of  the  hand, 
426 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

and  that  their  Latine  Etymologie  is  derived  of  Pollere.    The  CHAPTER 
Graecians  cal  it  avn^dp^  as  a  man  would  say,  another  hand.        XXVI 
And  it  seemeth,  the  Latins  likewise  take  them  sometimes  in    Of  Thumbs 
this  sense,  id  est^  for  a  whole  hand  : 

Sed  nee  vocibus  excitata  blandis,  MART.  xii. 

Molli  pollice  nee  rogata  surgit.  Epig>  xcix.  8. 

It  wil  not  rise,  though  with  sweet  words  excited, 
Nor  with  the  touch  of  softest  thumb  invited. 

In  Rome  it  was  heretofore  a  signe  of  favor,  to  wring  and 
kisse  the  thumbs, 

Fautor  utroque  tuum  laudabit  pollice  ludum :  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

He  that  applaudes  will  praise,  xvm.  66. 

With  both  his  thumbs,  thy  plaies  ; 

and  of  disfavour  or  disgrace  to  lift  them  up,  and  turne  them 
outward  : 

— converso  pollice  vulgi  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Quemlibet  occidunt  populariter. —  iii.  36. 

When  people  turne  their  thumbs  away, 
They  popularly  any  slay. 

Such  as  were  hurt  or  maymed  in  their  thumbs,  were  by  the 

Romanes  dispensed  from  going  to  warre,  as  they  who  had 

lost  their  weapons  hold-fast.    Augustus  did  confiscate  all  the 

goods  of  a  Romane  Knight,  who  through  malice  had  cut  off 

the  thumbes  of  two  yong  children  of  his,  thereby  to  excuse 

them  from  going  to  warre  :  And  before  him,  the  Senate  in 

the  time  of  the  Italian  warres,  had  condemned  Caius  Vatienus 

to  perpetuall  prison,  and  confiscated  all  his  goods,  forsomuch 

as  he  had  willingly  cut  off  the  thumb  of  his  left  hand,  so  to 

exempt  himselfe  from  the  voyage.     Some  one,  whose  name  I 

remember  not,  having  gained  a  great  victory  by  Sea,  caused 

al  the  enemies  whom  he  had  vanquished  and  taken  prisoners, 

to  have  their  thumbs  cut  off,  thinking  thereby  to  deprive 

them  of  all  meanes  of  fighting,  of  rowing,  or  handling  their 

oares.       The   Athenians   likewise   caused   them   to    be   cut 

off  from  them  of  ^Egina,  to  take  from   them  the  pre- 

heminence  in  the  art  of  navigation.     In  Lacedae- 

mon     masters    punished    their    Schollers   by 

byting  their  thumbs. 

427 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


OVID.  Trist. 
iii.  EL  v.  35. 


CLAUD.  Epist. 
ad  Hadr.  v. 
39- 


THE   TWENTY-SEVENTH   CHAPTER 

Cowardize,  the  mother  of  Crueltie. 

HAVE  often  heard  it  reported,  that 
Cowardize  is  the  mother  of  Cruelty  : 
And  have  perceived  by  experience,  that 
this  malicious  sharp  nes,  and  inhumane 
severitie  of  corage,  is  commonly  accom 
panied  with  feminine  remissenesse  :  I  have 
scene  some  of  the  cruelest  subject  to  weep 
easily,  and  for  frivolous  causes.  Alex 
ander  the  tyrant  of  Pheres,  could  not  endure  to  see  tragedies 
acted  in  the  Theaters,  for  feare  his  subjects  should  see  him 
sob  and  weepe  at  the  misfortunes  of  Hecuba  and  Andromaca; 
he  who  without  remorce  or  pitty  caused  daily  so  many  poore 
people  to  be  most  cruelly  massacred  and  barbarously  mur- 
thered.  May  it  be  weaknesse  of  spirit,  makes  them  so 
pliable  to  all  extremities  ?  valor  (whose  effect  is  onely  to 
exercise  it  selfe  against  resistance, 

Nee  nisi  bellantis  gaudet  cervice  iuvenci. 

Nor  takes  he  joy  to  domineere 
But  on  the  necke  of  sturdie  steere) 

refraines  it  selfe  in  seeing  her  enemy  prostrate  to  her  mercy : 
But  pusillanimitie,  to  say  that  she  also  is  of  the  feaste, 
since  it  cannot  bee  joyned  to  the  first  part,  takes  for  her 
share  the  second,  which  is  massacre  and  blood.  Murthers 
after  victories,  are  commonly  effected  by  the  baser  kinde  of 
people,  and  officers  that  waite  upon  the  baggage  and  cariage. 
And  the  reason  we  see  so  many  unheard-of  cruelties  in 
popular  warres,  is,  that  this  vulgar  rascalitie  doth  martially 
flesh  and  enure  it  selfe  to  dive  in  blood  up  to  the  elbowes, 
and  mangle  a  bodie,  or  hacke  a  carcase  lying  and  groveling 
at  their  feete,  having  no  manner  of  feeling  of  other  valor. 

Et  Lupus  et  turpes  instant  morientibus  Ursi. 
Et  qucecumque  minor  nobilitate  fera  est. 

A  Wolfe  or  filthie  Beare  the  dying  man  oppresse. 
Or  some  such  beast  as  in  nobilitie  is  lesse. 
428 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

As  the  Craven  Curres,  which  at  home  or  in  their  Kennels  CHAPTER 
will  tugge  and  bite  the  skins  of  those  wilde  beastes,  which  in       XXVII 

the  fields  they  durst  not  so  much  as  bark-at.     What  is  it    Cowar^e, 

j    •  11  i  L  n  •>      *      i      i  tiie  mother  of 

that  now  adaies  makes  all  our  quarrels  mortall  ?    And  where-      Crueltie 

as  our  forefathers  had  some  degree  of  revenge,  we  now  beginne 
by  the  last ;  and  at  first  brunt  nothing  is  spoken  of  but 
killing  ?  What  is  it,  if  it  be  not  cowardise  ?  Every  man  seeth, 
it  is  more  bravery  and  disdaine  for  one  to  beat  his  enemie, 
than  make  an  end  of  him  ;  and  to  keep  him  at  a  bay,  than 
make  him  die.  Moreover,  that  the  desire  of  revenge  is 
thereby  alayed :  and  better  contented  ;  for,  it  aymeth  at 
nothing  so  much  as  to  give  or  shew  a  motion  or  feeling  of 
revenge  onely  of  her  self.  And  that 's  the  reason  we  do  not 
challenge  a  beast,  or  fall  upon  a  stone,  when  it  hurts  us, 
because  they  are  incapable  to  feele  our  revenge.  And  to  kill 
a  man,  is  to  shelter  him  from  our  offence.  And  even  as  Bias, 
exclaimed  upon  a  wicked  man ;  '  I  know  that  soone  or  late 
6  thou  shalt  bee  punished  for  thy  lewdnes,  but  I  feare  me  I 
*  shall  not  see  it ' :  And  moaned  the  Orchomenians,  because 
the  penance  which  Liciscus  had  for  his  treason  committed 
against  them,  came  at  such  a  time,  as  none  of  them  were 
living,  whom  it  had  concerned,  and  whom  the  pleasure  of 
that  punishment  might  most  delight :  So  ought  revenge  to 
be  moaned,  when  he  on  whom  it  is  inflicted,  looseth  the 
meanes  to  endure  or  feel  it.  For,  even  as  the  revenger,  wil 
see  the  action  of  the  revenge,  that  so  he  may  feele  the  pleasure 
of  it,  so  must  he  on  whom  he  is  revenged,  both  see  and  feele, 
that  he  may  hereby  receive  both  repentance  and  griefe.  He 
shal  rew  it,  say  we.  And  though  he  receive  a  stab  or  a  blow 
with  a  pistoll  on  his  head,  shal  we  think  he  will  repent  ? 
Contrariwise,  if  we  marke  him  wel,  we  shal  perceive  that  in 
falling,  he  makes  a  moe  or  bob  at  us.  Hee  is  farre  from 
repenting,  when  he  rather  seemes  to  be  beholding  to  us :  In 
asmuch  as  we  affoord  him  the  favourablest  office  of  life,  which 
is  to  make  him  dye  speedily  and  as  it  were  insensibly.  We 
are  left  to  shift  up  and  downe,  runne  and  trot,  and  squat 
heere  and  there,  and  al  to  avoyd  the  officers,  or  escape  the 
Magistrates  that  pursue  us ;  and  he  is  at  rest.  To  kill  a 
man,  is  good  to  escape  a  future  offence,  and  not  revenge  the 
wrongs  past.  It  is  rather  an  action  of  feare,  than  of  bravery: 

429 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Of  precaution,  than  of  courage  :  Of  defence,  than  of  an  enter- 

XXVII       prise.     It  is  apparant,  that  by  it,  we  quit  both  the  true  end 

Cowardize,    Qf  revenge    an(J  £ne  respect  of  our  reputation :    If  he  live 

the  mother  of         „  i         M  •nr,i       TI  T,    • 

Crueltie  we  *eare  ne  wll  or  may  charge  us  with  the  like.  It  is  not 
against  him,  it  is  for  thee,  thou  riddest  thy  selfe  of  him.  In 
the  Kingdome  of  Narsinga,  this  expedient  would  be  boote- 
lesse :  There,  not  only  Souldiers,  and  such  as  professe  armes, 
but  every  meane  Artificer,  decide  their  quarels  with  the 
Swords  point.  The  King  never  refuseth  any  man  the  corn- 
bate,  that  is  disposed  to  fight :  and  if  they  be  men  of 
qualitie  he  wil  be  by  in  person,  and  reward  the  victor  with  a 
chaine  of  Gold  :  Which,  whosoever  hath  a  mind  unto,  and 
wil  obtaine  it,  may  freely  chalenge  him  that  weareth  the 
same,  and  enter  combate  with  him.  And  having  overcome 
one  combate,  hath  many  following  the  same.  If  we  thought 
by  vertue  to  be  ever  superiors  unto  our  enemy,  and  at  our 
pleasure  gourmandize  him,  it  would  much  grieve  us  he  should 
escape  us,  as  he  doth  in  dying :  We  rather  endevour  to 
vanquish  surely  then  honourably.  And  in  our  quarrels  we 
rather  seeke  for  the  end,  then  for  the  glory.  Asinius  Pollio 
for  an  honest  man,  lesse  excusable,  committed  a  like  fault ; 
Who  having  written  many  invectives  against  Plancus,  staid 
untill  he  were  dead  to  publish  them.  It  was  rather  to  flurt 
at  a  blind  man,  and  raile  in  a  dead  mans  eare,  and  to  offend 
a  senselesse  man,  then  incurre  the  danger  of  his  revenge.  And 
men  answered  in  this  behalfe,  that  it  onely  belonged  to  Hob 
goblins  to  wrestle  with  the  dead.  He  who  stayeth  till  the 
Author  be  dead,  whose  writings  he  will  combate,  what  saith 
he,  but  that  he  is  weake  and  quarrellous  ?  It  was  told  Aris 
totle,  that  some  body  had  spoken  ill  of  him,  to  whom  he 
answered,  '  Let  him  also  whippe  me,  so  my  selfe  be  not  by.1 
Our  forefathers  were  content  to  revenge  an  injurie  with  a 
lie ;  a  lie  with  a  blowe,  a  blowe  with  bloud ;  and  so  in  order. 
They  were  sufficiently  valiant,  not  to  feare  their  adversary, 
though  he  lived  and  were  wronged :  whereas  we  quake  for 
feare,  so  long  as  we  see  him  a  foot.  And  that  it  is  so,  doth 
not  our  moderne  practize,  pursue  to  death,  as  well  him  who 
hath  wronged  us,  as  him  whom  we  have  offended  ?  It  is  also 
a  kind  of  dastardlinesse,  which  hath  brought  this  fashion 
into  our  single  combates,  to  accompanv  us  in  the  fields  with 
430 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

seconds,  thirdes,  and  fourths.     They  were  anciently  single  CHAPTER 
combates,  but  now  they  are  skirmishes  and  battels.     To  be       XXVII 

alone,  feared  the  first  that  invented  it :    Quum  in  se  cuique    C°wardize,, 

.    .  /?  7     •  f.  -tun  '111  the  mother  of 

minimum  fiducicc  esset.      '  When  every  man  had  least  con-      Crueltie 

6  fidence  in  himselfe.1  For,  what  company  soever  it  be,  it 
doth  naturally  bring  some  comfort  and  ease  in  danger.  In 
ancient  time  they  were  wont  to  employ  third  persons  as 
sticklers,  to  see  no  trechery  or  disorder  were  used,  and  to 
beare  witnes  of  the  combates  successe.  But  now  this  fashion 
is  come  up,  let  any  man  be  engaged  whosoever  is  envited, 
cannot  well  containe  himselfe  to  be  a  spectator,  lest  it  be 
imputed  unto  him,  it  is  either  for  want  of  affection,  or 
lacke  of  courage.  Besides  the  injustice  of  such  an  action 
and  villany,  for  your  honours  protection,  to  engage  other 
valour  and  force  then  your  owne,  I  find  it  a  disadvantage  in 
an  honest  and  worthy  man,  and  who  wholly  trusts  unto  him 
selfe,  to  entermingle  his  fortune  with  a  second  man :  every 
one  runneth  sufficient  hazard  for  himselfe,  and  neede  not  also 
runne  it  for  another  :  And  hath  enough  to  doe,  to  assure  him 
selfe  of  his  owne  vertue  for  the  defence  of  his  life,  without 
committing  so  precious  a  thing  into  third-mens-hands.  For, 
if  the  contrary  hath  not  expresly  beene  covenanted  of  all 
foure,  it  is  a  combined  party.  If  your  fellow  chance  to  faile, 
you  have  two  upon  you,  and  not  without  reason  :  and  to  say, 
it  is  a  Superchiery,  as  it  is  indeed  :  as  being  wel  armed,  to 
charge  a  man  who  hath  but  a  piece  of  a  sword,  or  being 
sound  and  strong,  to  set  upon  a  man  sore  hurt.  But  if  they 
bee  advantages  you  have  gotten  fighting,  you  may  use  them 
without  imputation.  Disparitie  is  not  considered,  and  in 
equality  is  not  balanced,  but  by  the  state  wherein  the  fight 
is  begun.  As  of  the  rest  you  must  rely  on  fortune  :  and 
if  alone  or  single,  you  chance  to  have  three  upon  you,  your 
other  two  companions  being  slain,  you  have  no  more  wrong 
done  you,  than  I  should  offer  in  Wars  in  striking  an  enemie, 
whom  at  such  an  advantage  I  should  finde  grapled  with  one 
of  my  fellow-souldiers.  The  nature  of  societie  beareth,  where 
troupe  is  against  troupe  (as  where  our  Duke  of  Orleans 
chalenged  Hen.  King  of  England,  one  hundred  against 
another  hundred  ;  three  hundred  against  as  many,  as  did  the 
Argians  against  the  Lacedemonians ;  three  to  three,  as  were 

431 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  Horatij  against  the  Curatij)  the  pluralitie  of  either  side 
XXVII  is  never  respected  for  more  than  a  single  man.  Whersoever 
Cowardize,  4-]iere  js  COmpany,  the  hazard  is  confused  and  disordered. 
eCrueltie  °  *  nave  a  Priyate  interest  in  this  discourse.  For,  my  brother, 
the  Lord  of  Matecoulom,  being  desired  in  Rome,  to  second 
and  accompany  a  Gentleman,  with  whom  he  had  no  great 
acquaintance,  who  was  defendant  and  chalenged  by  another ; 
The  fight  begunne,  my  brother  by  chance  found  himselfe 
confronted  with  one  neerer  and  better  known  to  him  (I 
would  faine  be  resolved  of  these  Lawes  of  honor,  which  so 
often  shocke  and  trouble  those  of  reason)  whom  after  he  had 
vanquished  and  dispatched,  seeing  the  two  principals  of  the 
quarrell  yet  standing  and  unhurt,  he  went  to  reskew  his 
fellow.  What  could  he  do  lesse  ?  should  he  have  stood  still, 
and  (if  chance  would  so  have  had  it)  see  him  defeated,  for 
whose  defence  he  was  entred  the  quarrel  ?  What  until  then 
he  had  done,  was  nothing  to  the  purpose,  and  the  quarrel 
was  still  undecided.  Al  the  courtesie  you  can,  you  ought 
surely  use  to  your  enemy,  especially  when  you  have 
brought  him  under,  and  to  some  great  disadvantage ;  I  know 
not  how  a  man  may  use  it,  when  anothers  interest  depends 
on  it,  where  you  are  but  accessory,  and  where  the  quarrel  is 
not  yours.  Hee  could  never  be  just  nor  curteous,  in  hazard 
of  him  unto  whom  he  had  lent  himselfe.  So  was  he 
presently  delivered  out  of  the  Italian  prisons,  by  a  speedy 
and  solemne  letter  of  commendations  from  our  King.  Oh 
indiscreet  Nation.  We  are  not  contented  to  manifest  our 
follies,  and  bewray  our  vices  to  the  world  by  reputation  : 
but  we  go  into  forraigne  Nations  and  there  in  person  shew 
them.  Place  three  French-men  in  the  deserts  of  Libya, 
and  they  wil  never  live  one  moneth  together  without 
brawling,  falling  out  and  scratching  one  another:  you 
would  say  this  peregrination,  is  a  party  erected  to  please 
strangers  with  our  tragedies ;  and  those  most  commonly, 
who  rejoyce  and  scoffe  at  our  evils.  We  travel  into 
Italie  to  learne  the  art  of  fencing,  and  practise  it  at 
the  cost  of  our  lives,  before  we  know  it ;  it  were  requisite 
according  to  the  order  of  true  Discipline,  we  should  pre- 
ferre  the  Theorike  before  the  practike.  We  betray  our 
apprentisage. 
432 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Primitifp  iuvenum  miserce,  bellique  futuri  STAT.  Sylv.  v.     CHAPTER 

Dura  rudimenta.  XXVII 

The  miserable  first  essayes  of  youth,  Cowardize, 

And  hard  beginnings  of  warre  that  ensu'th.  the  mother  of 

Crueltie 

I  know  it  is  an  art  profitable  to  her  end  (in  the  single 
combate  betweene  the  two  Princes,  cosin-Germans,  in  Spaine, 
the  eldest  of  which  (saith  T.  Livius)  by  the  skil  of  his  wea 
pons,  and  by  craft,  overcame  easily  the  dismayed  forces  of 
the  yonger)  and  as  by  experience  I  have  knowen,  the  know 
ledge  and  skil  wherof,  hath  puffed  up  the  heart  of  some, 
beyond  their  naturall  proportion.  But  it  is  not  properly  a 
vertue,  since  she  draweth  her  stay  from  dexteritie,  and  takes 
her  foundation  from  other  than  from  her  selfe.  The  honour 
of  combates  consisteth  in  the  jealousie  of  the  heart,  not  of 
the  science.  And  therefore  have  I  scene  some  of  my  friends, 
renowned  for  great  Masters  in  this  exercise  in  their  quarels 
to  make  choise  of  weapons,  that  might  well  take  the  meane 
of  this  advantage,  or  oddes  from  them  ;  and  which  wholly 
depended  on  fortune,  and  assurance  that  their  victorie  might 
not  rather  be  imputed  to  their  fencing,  than  ascribed  to 
their  valour.  And  in  my  infancy,  our  nobility  scorned  the 
reputation  of  a  fencer,  though  never  so  cunning,  as  injurious  ; 
and  if  any  learnt  it,  they  would  sequester  themselves  from 
company,  deeming  the  same  as  a  mystery  of  craft  and  sub- 
tilty,  derogating  from  true  and  perfect  vertue. 

Non  schivar,  non  parar,  non  ritirarsi  TASSO,  Gier. 

Voglion,  costor,  ne  qui  destrezza  ha  parte ;  can.  xii.  stan. 

Non  danno  i  colpifinti  hor  pieni,  hor  scarsi ;  55- 

Toglie  I'irae  il furor  I'uso  dell'  arte, 

Odie  le  spade  horriblmente  urtarsi 

A  mezzo  ilferro,  il  pie  d'orma  non  parte, 

Sempre  e  ilpiefermo,  e  la  man  sempre  in  moto, 

Ne  scende  taglio  in  van,  ne  punta  a  voto. 

T'  avoyde,  toward  retiring  to  give  ground 

They  reke  not,  nor  hath  nimblenes  heere  part, 

Nor  give  false  blowes,  nor  full,  nor  scarse,  nor  sound, 

Rage  and  revenge  bereave  all  use  of  arte. 

Their  Swordes  at  halfe  Sword  horribly  resound 

You  might  heare  mette  :    No  foote  from  steppe  doth 

parte  : 

Their  foote  still  fast,  their  hand  still  faster  mooveth  : 

No  stroke  in  vaine,  no  thrust  in  vaine,  but  prooveth. 

31  433 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Shooting  at  Buts,  Tilting,  Torneyes,  Barriers,  the  true 
XXVII  images  of  martiall  combates,  were  the  exercises  of  our  fore- 
Cowardize,  fathers.  This  other  exercise  is  so  much  the  lesse  noble,  by 
Crueltie  now  muc^  it  respecteth  but  a  private  end  ;  which  against  the 
lawes  of  justice,  teacheth  us  to  destroy  one  another,  and 
every  way  produceth  ever  mischievous  effects.  It  is  much 
more  worthy,  and  better  beseeming,  for  a  man  to  exercise 
himselfe  in  things  that  assure  and  offend  not  our  Common 
wealth  ;  and  which  respect  publike  securitie  and  generall 
glory.  Publius  Census,  was  the  first  that  ever  instituted  the 
Souldier  to  manage  his  armes  by  dexteritie  and  skil,  and 
joyned  art  unto  vertue,  not  for  the  use  of  private  conten 
tions,  but  for  the  wars  and  Roman  peoples  quarrels.  A 
popular  and  civill  manner  of  fencing.  And  besides  the 
example  of  Caesar,  who  appointed  his  Souldier,  above  all 
things,  to  aime  and  strike  at  the  face  of  Pompeyes  men  in 
the  battell  of  Pharsalia  :  A  thousand  other  Chieftaines  and 
Generals  have  devised  new  fashions  of  weapons,  and  new 
kindes  of  striking,  and  covering  of  themselves,  according  as 
the  present  affaires  require.  But  even  as  Philopcemen  con 
demned  wrestling,  wherein  hee  excelled  others,  forsomuch 
as  the  preparations  appertaining  to  this  exercise  differed 
from  those  that  belong  to  military  discipline,  to  which  he 
supposed,  men  of  honour  should  ammuse  and  addict  them 
selves  :  Me  thinks  also,  that  this  nimblenesse  or  agilitie, 
to  which  men  fashion  and  enure  themselves,  their  limbes, 
their  turnings,  windings,  and  nimble-quicke  motions,  wherein 
youth  is  instructed  and  trained  in  this  new  schoole,  are  not 
onely  unprofitable,  but  rather  contrary  and  domageable  for 
the  use  of  militarie  combate  :  And  we  see  our  men  do  com 
monly  employ  particular  weapons,  in  their  fence  schooles, 
and  peculiarly  appointed  for  that  purpose.  And  I  have  scene 
it  disallowed,  that  a  gentleman  chalenged  to  fight  with 
Rapier  and  Dagger,  should  present  himselfe  in  the  equipage 
of  a  man  at  armes ;  or  that  another  should  offer  to  come 
with  his  cloake  insteade  of  a  Dagger.  It  is  worthy  the  noting, 
that  Lachaz  in  Plato,  speaking  of  an  apprentissage,  how  to 
manage  armes,  conformable  to  ours,  saith,  he  could  never  see 
any  notable  warrior  come  of  a  schoole  of  fence,  and  espe 
cially  from  among  the  maisters.  As  for  them  our  owne 
434 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

experience  confirmes  as  much.     And  for  the  rest  we  may  CHAPTER 
at  least  say,  they  are  sufficiencies  of  no  relation  or  corre-       XXVII 

spondency.     And  in  the  institution  of  the  children   of  his  fl~owa!Size'  - 
J         1,1      ™          •    i      v  ^      .1  /•••!•  the  mother  of 

Common   wealth,  Plato  interdicts  the  artes  of  striking  or      Crueltie 

playing  with  fists,  devised  by  Amycus  and  Epeius,  and  to 
wrestle  invented  by  Anthceus  and  Cecyo :  because  they  aime 
at  another  end,  then  to  adapt  youth  to  warlike  service,  and 
have  no  affinitie  with  it.  But  I  digresse  much  from  my 
theame.  The  Emperour  Mauricius,  being  forewarned  by 
dreames,  and  sundry  prognostications,  that  one  Phocas  a 
Souldier  at  that  time  yet  unknowne,  should  kil  him,  de 
manded  of  Philip  his  sonne  in  law,  who  that  Phocas  was,  his 
nature,  his  conditions,  and  customes,  and  how  amongst  other 
things  Philip  told  him,  he  was  a  faint  cowardly,  and  timorous 
fellow :  The  Emperour  thereby  presently  concluded,  that  he 
was  both  cruel  and  a  murtherer.  What  makes  tyrants  so 
bloud-thirstie  ?  it  is  the  care  of  their  securitie,  and  that 
their  faint-hart  yeelds  them  no  other  meanes  to  assure  them 
selves,  then  by  rooting  out  those  which  may  in  any  sort 
offend  them  ;  yea  silly  women,  for  feare  they  should  or  bite 
or  scratch  them ; 

Cunctaferit  dum  cuncta  timet. —  CLAUD,  in 

Of  all  things  he  afraide, 
At  all  things  fiercely  laide. 

The  first  cruelties  are  exercised  by  themselves,  thence  pro- 
ceedeth  the  feare  of  a  just  revenge,  which  afterward  pro- 
duceth  a  swarme  of  new  cruelties ;  by  the  one  to  stifle  the 
other.  Philip,  the  King  of  Macedon,  who  had  so  many 
crowes  to  pul  with  the  Romanes,  agitated  by  the  horror  of 
so  many  murthers  committed  by  his  appointment,  and  un 
able  to  make  his  partie  good,  or  to  take  any  safe  resolution 
against  so  many  families,  by  him  at  severall  times  injured, 
resolved  at  last  to  seize  upon  al  their  children  whom  he  had 
caused  to  be  murthered,  that  so  he  might  day  by  day  one 
after  another  rid  the  world  of  them,  and  so  establish  his 
safety.  Matters  of  worth  are  not  impertinent  wheresoever 
they  be  placed.  I,  who  rather  respect  the  weight  and  benefite 
of  discourses,  then  their  order  and  placing,  need  not  feare  to 
place  here  at  randone  a  notable  storie.  When  they  are  so 

435 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  rich  of  their  owne  beautie,  and  may  very  well  uphold  them- 
XXVII       selves  alone,  I  am  content  with  a  haires  end,  to  fitte  or  joyne 

Cowardize,    ^hem  to  my  purpose.     Amongst  others  who  had  beene  con- 
the  mother  of  ,  ,  ,    J  X.  .,V  T^        ,.  ^,  .  „  .,       „,, 

Crueltie      demned  by  Philip,  was  one  Herodicus,  Prince  of  the  Ihes- 

salians  :  After  whom  he  caused  his  two  sonnes  in  lawe  to  be 
put  to  death  ;  each  of  them  leaving  a  young  sonne  behind 
him.  Theoxena  and  Arco  were  the  two  widdowes.  Theoxena 
although  she  were  instantly  urged  thereunto,  could  never  be 
induced  to  marry  againe.  Arco  tooke  to  husband  Poris  a 
chiefe  man  amongst  the  ^Enians,  and  by  him  had  divers 
children,  all  which  she  left  very  young.  Theoxena  moved 
by  a  motherly  charitie  toward  her  young  nephews,  and  so  to 
have  them  in  her  protection  and  bringing  up,  wedded  Poris. 
Upon  this  came  out  the  proclamation  of  the  Kings  Edict. 
This  noble-minded  mother,  distrusting  the  Kings  crueltie  and 
fearing  the  mercilesnes  of  his  Satelities  or  officers  towards 
these  noble,  hopefull  and  tender  youths,  feared  not  to  say, 
that  shee  would  rather  kil  them  with  her  own  hands,  then 
deliver  them.  Poris  amazed  at  her  protestations,  promiseth 
her  secretly  to  convey  them  to  Athens,  ther  by  some  of  his 
faithful  friends  to  be  kept  safely.  They  take  occasion  of  a 
yearely  feast,  which  to  the  honor  of  ^Eneas  was  solemnized 
at  JEnea,  and  thither  they  goe,  where  having  all  day-long 
assisted  to  the  ceremonies,  and  publike  banket :  night  being 
come,  they  convay  themselves  into  a  shippe  appointed  for 
that  purpose,  in  hope  to  save  themselves  by  Sea.  But  the 
winde  fell  out  so  contrarie,  that  the  next  morning  they  found 
themselves  in  view  of  the  town,  whence  the  night  before  they 
had  hoised  sailes,  where  they  were  pursued  by  the  guarders 
and  Souldiers  of  the  Port.  Which  Poris  perceiving,  laboured 
to  hasten  and  encourage  the  Mariners  to  shift  away  :  But 
Theoxena,  engaged  through  love  and  revenge,  remembring 
her  first  resolution,  prepared  both  weapons  and  poison,  and 
presenting  them  to  their  sight,  thus  shee  bespake  them  :  Oh 
my  deare  children,  take  a  good  heart,  death  is  now  the  onely 
meane  of  your  defence  and  libertie,  and  shall  be  a  just  cause 
unto  the  Gods  for  their  holy  justice.  These  bright-keene 
blades,  these  full  cuppes  shall  free  you  the  passage  unto  it. 
Courage  therefore,  and  thou  my  eldest  childe,  take  this  sword 
to  die  the  strongest  death.  Who  on  the  one  side  having  so 
436 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

undaunted  a  perswader,  and  on  the  other  their  enemies  ready  CHAPTER 
to  cut  their  throats  in  furious  manner,  ranne  all  to  that       XXVII 

which  came  next  to  his  hand.     And  so  all  goared  and  pant-     Cowardize, 

.    ,      ,  i      o  rr,,  , r  ,        the  mother  of 

mg  were  tnrowne  into  the  sea.      Iheoxena,  proud  she  had  so      Crueltie 

gloriouslie  provided  for  her  childrens  safety,  lovingly  em 
bracing  her  husband,  saide  thus  unto  him  ;  Oh  my  deare 
heart,  let  us  follow  these  boyes,  and  together  with  them 
enjoy  one  selfe  same  grave  ;  and  so  close-claspe  together,  they 
flung  themselves  into  the  maine :  So  that  the  ship  was 
brought  to  shoare  againe,  but  emptie  of  her  Maisters. 
Tyrants  to  act  two  things  together,  that  is,  to  kill  and 
cause  their  rage  to  be  felt,  have  employed  the  utmost  of 
their  skill,  to  devise  lingring  deaths.  They  wil  have  their 
enemies  die,  yet  not  so  soone,  but  that  they  may  have 
leisure  to  feele  their  vengeance.  Wherin  they  are  in  great 
perplexity :  for  if  the  torments  be  over-violent,  they  are 
short ;  if  lingring,  not  grievous  inough.  In  this  they  imploy 
their  wits  and  devises.  Many  examples  wherof  we  see  in 
antiquitie  ;  and  I  wot  not,  whether  wittingly  we  retaine 
some  spice  of  that  barbarisme.  Whatsoever  is  beyond  a 
simple  death,  seemeth  to  mee  meere  cruel  tie.  Our  justice 
cannot  hope,  that  he  whom  the  terror  of  death  cannot  dis 
may,  be  he  to  be  hanged  or  beheaded,  can  in  any  sort  be 
troubled  with  the  imagination  of  a  languishing  fire,  of  a 
wheele,  or  of  burning  pincers.  And  I  wot  not,  whether  in 
that  meane  time  we  bring  him  to  despaire  :  For,  what  plight 
can  the  soule  of  a  man  be  in,  that  is  broken  upon  a  wheele, 
or  after  the  old  fashion,  nailed  upon  a  Crosse,  and  xxiiij 
howres  together  expects  his  death  ?  losephus  reporteth,  that 
whilst  the  Romane  warres  continued  in  lurie,  passing  by  a 
place  where  certain  lewes  had  been  crucified  three  dayes  be 
fore,  he  knew  thre  of  his  friends  amongst  them,  and  having 
gotten  leave  to  remove  them,  two  of  them  died,  but  the  third 
lived  long  after.  Chalcondylas  a  man  of  credite,  in  the 
memories  he  left  of  matters  happened  in  his  time  and  there 
abouts,  maketh  report  of  an  extreame  torment,  the  Emperor 
Mechmed  was  often  wont  to  put  in  practise,  which  was  by 
one  onely  blow  of  a  Cimitary  or  broad  Persian  Sword,  to  have 
men  cut  in  two  parts,  by  the  waste  of  the  body,  about  the 
Diaphragma,  which  is  a  membrane  lying  overthwart  the 

437 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  lower  part  of  the  breast,  separating  the  heart  and  lights  from 
XXVII       the  stomacke,  which  caused  them  to  dye  two  deaths  at  once  : 

.,Cowa^ize^and  affirmeth  that  both  parts  were  seen  full  of  life,  to  move 
the  mother  of        i     ,•         i  ,•  Pt  •#  ,1         i      i    i  •      •%• 

Crueltie      anc*  stirre  long  time  alter,  as  it  they  had  been  in  Imgrmg 

torment.  I  do  not  thinke,  they  felt  any  great  torture  in 
that  moving.  The  gastliest  torments  to  looke  upon  are  not 
alwaies  the  greatest  to  be  endured :  And  I  finde  that  much 
more  fiercely-horrible,  which  other  Historians  write,  and 
which  he  used  against  certain  Lords  of  Epirus,  whom  faire 
and  leasurely  he  caused  to  be  flead  all  over,  disposed  by  so 
malicious  a  dispensation,  that  their  lives  continued  fifteene 
daies  in  that  languor  and  anguish.  And  these  two  others  ; 
Croesus  having  caused  a  Gentleman  to  be  apprehended, 
greatly  favoured  by  Pantaleon  his  brother  ;  led  him  in  a 
fullers  or  cloth-workers  shoppe,  where  with  Gardes  and 
Teazels  belonging  to  that  trade,  he  made  him  to  be  carded, 
scraped,  and  teazled  so  long  untill  he  died  of  it.  George 
Sechell  Ring-leader  of  the  Country  men  of  Polina,  who  under 
the  title  of  a  Croysada,  wrought  so  many  mischiefes,  having 
beene  defeated  in  a  battell  by  the  Vayvoda  of  Transilvania, 
and  taken  Prisoner,  was  for  three  dayes  together  tyed  naked 
to  a  wooden-horse,  exposed  to  all  manner  of  tortures,  any 
man  might  devise  against  him  ;  during  which  time  divers 
other  prisoners  were  kept  fasting.  At  last,  he  yet  living,  saw 
Lucat  his  deare  brother,  and  for  whose  safety  he  sued  and 
entreated,  forced  to  drinke  his  blood,  drawing  all  the  envie 
and  hatred  of  his  misdeedes  upon  himselfe.  And  twentie  of 
his  most  favoured  Captaines  were  compelled  to  feed  upon  his 
flesh,  which  with  their  teeth  they  must  teare  off,  and 
swallow  their  morsels.  The  rest  of  his  body  and  en- 
trailes,  he  being  dead,  were  boiled  in  a  pan,  and 
given  for  food  to  other  of  his  followers. 


438 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

THE    TWENTY-EIGHTH    CHAPTER 

All  things  have  their  season. 


HOSE  who  compare  Cato  the  Censor,  to 
Cato  the  yonger  that  killed  himselfe, 
compare  two  notable  natures,  and  in 
forme  neare  one  unto  another.  The  first 
exploited  his,  sundrie  waies,  and  excelleth 
in  military  exploits,  and  utilitie  of  his 
publike  vacations.  But  the  yongers  vertue 
(besides  that  it  were  blasphemy,  in  vigor 
to  compare  any  unto  him)  was  much  more  sincere  and  un 
spotted.  For,  who  will  discharge  the  Censors  of  envie  and 
ambition,  that  durst  counter-checke  the  honor  of  Scipio,  in 
goodnes  and  all  other  parts  of  excellencie,  farre  greater  and 
better  than  him  or  any  other  man  living  in  his  age?  Amongst 
other  things  reported  of  him,  this  is  one,  that  in  his  eldest 
yeares  he  gave  himselfe,  with  so  earnest  a  longing  to  learn 
the  Greek  tong,  as  if  it  had  been  to  quench  a  long  burning 
thirst.  A  thing  in  mine  opinion  not  very  honorable  in  him  : 
It  is  properly  that  which  we  cal  doting  or  to  become  a  child 
againe.  All  things  have  their  season,  yea  the  good  and  all. 
And  I  may  say  my  Pater  noster  out  of  season.  As  T. 
Quintius  Flaminius  was  accused,  forasmuch  as  being  Generall 
of  an  Army,  even  in  the  houre  of  the  conflict,  he  was  scene 
to  withdraw  himselfe  apart,  ammusing  himselfe  to  pray  God, 
although  he  gained  the  battell. 

Imponitfinem  sapiens  et  rebus  honestis.  IUVEN.  Sat.  vi. 

A  wise-man  will  use  moderation,  344- 

Even  in  things  of  commendation. 

Eudemonidas  seeing  Xenocrates  very  old,  laboriously 
apply  himself  in  his  Schoole-lectures,  said,  When  wil  this 
man  know  something,  since  he  is  yet  learning  ?  And  Philo- 
pcemen,  to  those  who  highly  extolled  King  Ptolomey,  because 
he  daily  hardned  his  body  to  the  exercise  of  arms :  It  is  not 
(said  he)  a  matter  commendable  in  a  King  of  his  age,  in 
them  to  exercise  himselfe,  he  should  now  really  and  sub- 

439 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


CHAPTER 
XXVIII 

All  things 

have  their 

season 


HOR.  Car.  ii. 
Od.  xviii.  17. 


Ixxvii.  p. 


VIRG. 
653- 


CATUL.  Eleg. 
i.  103. 


stancially  imploy  them.  Wise  men  say,  that  young-men 
should  make  their  preparations,  and  old-men  enjoy  them. 
And  the  greatest  vice  they  note  in  us,  is,  that  our  desires  do 
uncessantly  grow  yonger  and  yonger.  We  are  ever  begin 
ning  a  new  to  live.  Our  studies  and  our  desires  should 
sometimes  have  a  feeling  of  age.  We  have  a  foote  in  the 
grave,  and  our  appetites  and  pursuites  are  but  new-borne. 

Tu  secanda  marmora 

Locas  sub  ipsumfunus,  et  sepulcri 

Immemor,  struts  domos. 

You,  when  you  should  be  going  to  your  grave, 
Put  Marble  out  to  worke  ;  build  houses  brave, 
Unmindfull  of  the  buriall  you  must  have. 

The  longest  of  my  desseignes  doth  not  extend  to  a  whole 
yeare ;  now  I  only  apply  my  selfe  to  make  an  end  :  I  shake 
off  all  my  new  hopes  and  enterprises  :  I  bid  my  last  farewell 
to  all  the  places  I  leave,  and  daily  dispossesse  my  selfe  of 
what  I  have.  Olim  iam  nee  perit  quicquam  mihi,  nee  acquiri- 
tur.  Plus  superest  viatici  quam  vice.  'It  is  a  good  while 
4  since  I  neither  loose  nor  get  any  thing ;  I  have  more  to 
'  beare  my  charges,  then  way  to  goe."1 

Vixi,  et  quern  dederat  cursum  fortuna  peregi. 

I  have  liv'd,  and  the  race  have  past, 
Wherein  my  fortune  had  me  plac't. 

To  conclude,  it  is  all  the  ease  I  finde  in  my  age,  and  that 
it  suppresseth  many  cares  and  desires  in  me,  wherewith  life 
is  much  disquieted.  The  care  of  the  worlds  course,  the 
care  of  riches,  of  greatnesse,  of  knowledge,  of  health  and  of 
my  selfe.  This  man  learneth  to  speake,  when  he  should 
rather  learne  to  hold  his  peace  for  ever.  A  man  may  alwaies 
continue  his  studie,  but  not  schooling.  O  fond-foolish  for 
an  old  man  to  be  ever  an  Abcedarian. 

Diver sos  diver sa  iuvant,  non  omnibus  annis 
Omnia  conveniunt. — 

Diverse  delights  to  diverse,  nor  to  all 
Do  all  things  at  all  yeares  convenient  fall. 

If  we  must  needs  study,  let  us  study  something  sorteable 
to  our  condition,  that  we  may  answer,  as  he  did,  who  being 
demanded  what  his  studies  would  stead  him  in  his  decrepity, 

440 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

answered;  that  he  might  the  better,  and  with   more  ease  CHAPTER 

leave  this  world.     Such  a  studie  was  yong  Catoes,  in  fore-      XXVIII 

feeling    his   approaching  end,    who    lighting    upon    Platoes    A11  things 

discourse  of  the  soules   immortality.     Not,    as   it   may  be 

supposed,  that  long  before  he  had  not  stored  himselfe  with 

all  sorts  of  munition  for  such  a  dislodging.     Of  assurance, 

of  constancy  and  instruction,  he  had  more  then  Plato  hath 

in  all  his  writings  :  His  Science,  and  his  courage,  were  in 

this    respect  above  all  Philosophy.      Hee    undertooke  this 

occupation,  not  for  the  service  of  his  death,  but  as  one,  who 

did  not  so  much  as  interrupt  his  sleep,  in  a  deliberation  of 

such  consequence,  whoever  without  choise   or  change  con 

tinued  his  wonted  studies,  and  all  other  accustomed  actions 

of  his  life.     The  same  night,  wherein  the  Pretorship  was 

refused  him,  he  passed  over  in  play.      That  wherein 

he  must  die,  he  spent  in  reading.     The  losse  of 

life  or  office  was  all  one  to  him. 


THE    TWENTY-NINTH  CHAPTER 

Of  Vertue. 

FINDE  by  experience,  that  there  is  great 
difference  betweene  the  sodaine  fits  and 
fantasies  of  the  soule,  and  a  resolute  dis 
position  and  constant  habitude :  And  I 
see,  there  is  nothing  but  we  may  attain e 
unto,  yea,  as  some  say,  to  exceede  Divini- 
tie  it  selfe ;  forsomuch  as  it  is  more  to 
become  impassible  of  himselfe,  then  to  be 
so  by  his  originall  condition:  And  that  one  may  joyne  a 
resolution  and  assurance  of  God  to  mans  imbecillitie.  But 
it  is  by  fits.  And  in  the  lives  of  those  Heroes  or  noble 
worthies  of  former  ages,  are  often  found  wonderfull  parts, 
and  which  seeme  greatly  to  exceed  our  naturall  forces :  but 
they  are  prank es  or  parts  consonant  to  truth :  and  it  may 
hardly  be  believed,  mans  soule  may  so  be  tainted  and  fed 
with  those  so  high -raised  conditions,  that  unto  it  they  may 
become  as  ordinary  and  naturall.  It  hapneth  unto  our 
3K  441 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  selves,  who  are  but  abortive  broods  of  men,  sometimes  to 
XXIX  rowze  our  soule  farre  beyond  her  ordinary  pitch,  as  stirred 
ertue  up  by  the  discourses,  or  provoked  by  the  examples  of  others. 
But  it  is  a  kinde  of  passion,  which  urgeth,  mooveth,  agi- 
tateth  and  in  some  sorte  ravisheth  her  from  out  her  selfe  : 
for,  that  gust  overblowne,  and  storm e  past,  wee  see,  it  wil 
unawares  unbend  and  lose  it  selfe,  if  not  to  the  lowest  pitch, 
at  least  to  be  no  more  the  same  she  was,  so  that  upon  every 
slight  occasion,  for  a  bird  lost,  or  for  a  glasse  broken,  wee 
suffer  our  selves  to  be  mooved  and  distempered  very  neere 
as  one  of  the  vulgar  sort.  Except  order,  moderation  and 
constancie,  I  imagine  all  things  may  bee  done  by  an  in 
different  and  defective  man.  Therefore  say  wisemen,  that 
directly  to  judge  of  a  man,  his  common  actions  must  spe 
cially  be  controuled,  and  he  must  every  day  be  surprised  in 
his  work-day  clothes.  Pyrrho,  who  framed  so  pleasant  a 
Science  of  ignorance,  assaied  (as  all  other  true  Philosophers) 
to  fashion  his  life  answerable  to  his  doctrine.  And  foras 
much  as  he  maintained  the  weakenesse  of  mans  j  udgement,  to 
be  so  extreame,  as  it  could  take  nor  resolution,  nor  inclina 
tion  :  and  would  perpetually  suspend  it,  ballancing,  behold 
ing  and  receiving  all  things,  as  indifferent :  It  is  reported  of 
him,  that  he  ever  kept  himselfe  after  one  fashion,  looke  and 
countenance  :  If  he  had  begunne  a  discourse,  he  would  end 
it,  though  the  party  to  whom  he  spake,  were  gone :  And  if 
he  went  any  where,  he  would  not  goe  an  inche  out  of  his 
path  what  let  or  obstackle  soever  came  in  his  way  ;  being 
kept  from  falls,  from  cartes  or  other  accidents  by  his  friends. 
For,  to  feare  or  shunne  any  thing,  had  beene  to  shocke  his 
propositions,  which  remooved  all  election  and  certainty  from 
his  very  senses.  He  sometimes  suffered  himselfe  to  be  cut 
and  cautherized,  with  such  constancy,  as  he  was  never  seen 
so  much  as  to  shrug,  twitch,  move  or  winke  with  his  eyes.  It 
is  something  to  bring  the  minde  to  these  imaginations,  but 
more  to  joine  the  effects  unto  it,  yet  is  it  not  impossible. 
But  to  joine  them  with  such  perseverance  and  constancy,  as 
to  establish  it  for  an  ordinary  course ;  verily  in  these  enter 
prises  so  farre  from  common  use,  it  is  almost  incredible  to 
be  done.  The  reason  is  this,  that  he  was  sometimes  found 
in  his  house,  bitterly  scolding  with  his  sister,  for  which 
442 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

being  reproved,  as  he  that  wronged  his  indifferencie  :  c  What  ?'  CHAPTER 

said  he ;  '  must  this  seely  woman  also  serve  as  a  witnesse  to        XXIX 

6  my  rules  ? '     Another  time,  being  found  to  defend  himselfe     Of  Vertue 

from  a  dog :  'It  is '  (replied  he)  '  very  hard,  altogether  to 

6  dispoile  and  shake  off  man  :   And  man  must  endevour  and 

'  enforce  himselfe  to  resist  and  confront  all  things,  first  by 

'  effects,  but  if  the  worst  befall,  by  reason  and  by  discourse.1 

It  is  now  about  seaven  or  eight  yeares  since,  that  a  country 

man,  yet  living,  not   above  two  leagues  from    this  place, 

having  long  before  beene  much  vexed  and  troubled  in  minde, 

for  his  wives  jealousie;  one  day  comming  home  from   his 

worke,  and   she  after  her  accustomed  manner  welcomming 

and  entertaining  him  with  brawling  and  scowlding,  as  one 

unable  to  endure  her  any  longer,  fell  into  such  a  moodie 

rage,  that  sodainely   with  a  Sickle,  which  he  held  in  his 

hand,  he  clean  cut  off  those  parts  that  were  the  cause  of  her 

jealousie,  and  flung  them  in  her  face.     And  it  is  reported, 

that    a   yong   gentleman    of  France,    amorous    and    lustie, 

having  by  his  perseverance  at  last  mollified  the  heart  of  his 

faire  mistresse,  desperate,  because  comming  to  the  point  of 

his  so  long  sued-for  businesse,  he  found  himselfe  unable  and 

unprepared,  and  that 

— non  viriliter  TIB.  ad 

Iners  senile  penis  euctulerat  caput,  Priap.  v.  4. 

as  soone  as  he  came  home,  he  deprived  himselfe  of  it :  and 
sent  it  as  a  cruel  and  bloudy  sacrifice  for  the  expiation  of  his 
offence.  Had  he  done  it  by  discourse  or  for  religions  sake, 
as  the  priestes  of  Cybele  were  wont  to  do,  what  might  we  not 
say  of  so  haughty  an  enterprise  ?  Not  long  since  at  Bragerac, 
five  leagues-distance  from  my  house,  up  the  river  of  Dor- 
daigne,  a  woman,  having  the  evening  before  beene  grievously 
tormented,  and  sore  beaten  by  hir  husband  ;  froward  and 
skittish  by  complexion,  determined,  though  it  should  cost 
hir  the  price  of  hir  life,  by  one  meane  or  other,  to  escape  his 
rudenesse,  and  rising  the  next  morning,  went  as  she  was 
accustomed  to  visite  her  neighbours,  to  whom  in  some  sort 
she  recommended  the  state  of  hir  affaires,  then  taking  a 
sister  of  hirs  by  the  hand,  ledde  hir  along  untill  she  came 
upon  the  bridge  that  crosseth  the  River,  and  having  bid  her 

443 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  hartily  farewell ;  as  in  the  way  of  sport  without  shewing  any 
XXIX  maner  of  change  or  alteration,  headlong  threw  hirselfe  down 
>f  Vertue  jnj-o  ^e  River,  where  she  perished.  And  which  is  more  to  be 
noted  in  hir,  is,  that  this  hir  determination  ripened  a  whole 
night  in  hir  head.  But  the  Indian  Wives,  may  not  here  be 
forgotten  as  worthy  the  noting  :  Whose  custome  is,  that 
husbands  have  many  wives,  and  for  hir  that  is  dearest 
unto  hir  husband,  to  kil  hirselfe  after  him  :  Every  one  in 
the  whole  course  of  hir  life,  endevoreth  to  obtaine  this 
priviledge  and  advantage  over  all  her  fellow-wives  :  And  in 
the  good  offices  and  duties  they  shew  their  husbands,  respect 
no  other  recompence  than  to  be  preferred  to  accompany 
them  in  death  : 

PROPERT.  iii.  Vbi  mortifero  jacta  estfaoc  ultima  lecto, 

El.  xii.  17.  V xorum fusis 3  stat pia  turba  co-mis: 

Et  certamen  habent  Lathi,  quce  viva  sequatur 

Coniugium,  pudor  est  non  licuisse  mori : 
Ardent  victrices,  et  flammcR  pectora  prcebent, 

Imponuntque  suis  ora  perusta  viris. 
When  for  his  death-bed  last  flame  is  appli'd 

With  loose  haires  many  kind  wives  stand  beside, 
And  strive  for  death,  which  alive  may  be  next 

Hir  wedlocke,  who  may  not,  is  sham'd  and  vex't. 
They  that  orecome,  are  burn'd,  to  flames  give  way, 

Their  bodies  burnt  on  their  burnt  husbands  lay. 

A  late  Writer  affirmeth,  that  himselfe  hath  scene  this 
custome  highly  reputed  in  the  new  discovered  East  Indiaes, 
where  not  only  the  wives  are  buried  with  their  husbands,  but 
also  such  slaves  as  he  hath  enjoyed  ;  which  is  done  after  this 
manner.  The  husband  being  deceased,  the  widdow  may,  if 
she  will  (but  few  do  it)  request  two  or  three  Monthes  space 
to  dispose  of  hir  busines.  The  day  come,  adorned  as  a 
sumptuous  bride,  she  mounteth  on  horsbacke,  and  with  a 
cheereful  countenance,  telleth  every  body  she  is  going  to  lie 
with  her  bride  groome,  holding  in  her  left  hand  a  looking- 
glasse,  and  an  arrow  in  the  right.  Thus  having  a  while  rid 
up  and  downe  in  great  pomp  and  magnificence,  accompanied 
with  her  friends  and  kins-men,  and  much  concourse  of  people, 
in  feast  and  jollitie,  she  is  brought  unto  a  publike  place, 
purposely  appointed  for  such  spectacles.  WThich  is  a  large 
open  place,  in  the  middest  whereof  is  a  pit  or  grave  full  of 

444 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

wood,  and  neere  unto  it  an  upraised  scaffold,  with  foure  or  CHAPTER 
five  steppes  to  ascend,  upon  which  she  is  brought,  and  served  XXIX 
with  a  stately  and  sumptuous  banket,  which  ended,  she  Vertue 
beginneth  to  dance  and  sing,  and  when  she  thinks  good, 
commandeth  the  fire  to  be  kindled.  That  done,  she  com- 
meth  down  againe,  and  taking  the  nearest  of  hir  husbands 
kindred  by  the  hand,  they  goe  together  to  the  next  river, 
where  shee  strippes  hir  selfe  all  naked,  and  distributeth  hir 
jewels  and  cloathes  among  hir  friends,  then  plungeth  herselfe 
in  the  Water,  as  if  she  meant  to  wash  away  hir  sins  ;  then 
comming  out  she  enwrappeth  her  selfe  in  a  yellow  piece  of 
linnen  cloth,  about  the  length  of  fourteene  yards  ;  And 
giving  her  hand  againe  unto  hir  husbands  Kins-man,  they 
returne  unto  the  Mount,  where  she  speakes  unto  the  people, 
to  whom  (if  she  have  any)  she  recommendeth  hir  Children. 
Betweene  the  Pitte  and  Mount,  there  is  commonly  a 
Curtaine  drawne,  lest  the  sight  of  that  burning  furnace 
might  dismay  them  :  Which  many,  to  shew  the  greater 
courage,  wil  not  have  it  drawne.  Her  speech  ended,  a 
Woman  presenteth  her  with  a  Vessell  ful  of  Oyl,  therewith 
to  annoint  her  head  and  body,  which  done,  she  casteth  the 
rest  into  the  fire,  and  therewithall  sodainly  flings  herselfe 
into  it :  Which  is  no  sooner  done,  but  the  people  cast  great 
store  of  Faggots  and  Billets  upon  hir,  lest  she  should  lan 
guish  over-long:  and  all  their  joy  is  converted  into  griefe 
and  sorrow.  If  they  be  persons  of  meane  quality,  the  dead 
mans  body  is  carried  to  the  place  where  they  intend  to  bury 
him,  and  there  he  is  placed  sitting  ;  his  Widdow  kneeling 
before  him  with  her  armes  close  about  his  middle,  and  so 
keepeth  hirself,  whilest  a  wall  is  erected  up  about  them 
both,  which  raised  to  the  height  of  her  shoulders,  some  of 
her  kindred  taking  her  by  the  head  behind,  wrings  hir  neck 
about;  and  having  given  the  last  gaspe,  the  wall  is  im 
mediately  made  up  close  over  their  heads,  wherein  they 
remain  buried.  In  the  same  Country,  there  was  something 
like  to  this  in  their  Gymnosophists,  or  wise-men,  who  not  by 
menaces  or  compulsions  of  others,  nor  by  the  violence  of  a 
sodaine  humour,  but  by  the  expresse  and  voluntary  profession 
of  their  rule,  their  maner  was  according  as  they  attained  unto 
a  certaine  age,  or  saw  themselves  threatned  by  some  sick- 

445 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nesse,  to  cause  a  pile  of  wood  to  be  erected,  and  upon  it  a 
r*c^  kedde  ;  and  navmg  cheerefully  feasted  their  friends  and 
acquaintance,  with  such  a  resolution  laid  themselves  downe 
in  that  bed,  that  fire  set  unto  it,  they  were  never  scene  to 
stirre  nor  hand  nor  foot ;  and  thus  died  one  of  them,  named 
Calanus,  in  the  presence  of  all  the  army  of  Alexander  the 
Great.  And  who  had  not  so  made  himselfe  away,  was 
neither  esteemed  holy  nor  absolutely  happy  among  them  ; 
sending  his  soule  purged  and  purified  by  fire,  after  it  had 
consumed  whatsoever  was  mortal  and  terrestrial  in  it.  This 
constant  premeditation  of  al  the  life,  is  that  which  makes  the 
wonder.  Amongst  our  other  disputation,  that  of  Fatum, 
hath  much  entermedled  it  selfe  :  and  to  joyne  future  things, 
and  our  wil  it  selfe  unto  a  certaine  unavoydable  necessity, 
we  yet  stand  upon  that  argument  of  former  times :  since 
God  foreseeth  al  things  must  thus  happen  as  undoubtedly 
he  doeth  :  They  must  then  necessarily  happen  so.  To  which 
our  Clarks  and  Maisters  answere,  that  to  see  any  thing  come 
to  passe,  as  we  doe,  and  likewise  God  (for  he  being  present 
in  fill  essence,  rather  seeth  than  foreseeth)  is  not  to  force  the 
same  to  happen :  yea  we  see,  because  things  come  to  passe, 
but  things  happen  not  because  we  se.  The  hapning  makes 
the  science  or  knowledge,  and  not  knowledge  the  happening. 
What  we  see  come  to  passe,  happeneth  ;  but  it  might  come 
to  passe  otherwise.  And  God  in  the  eternall  register  of  the 
causes  of  happenings,  which  he  hath  in  his  prescience,  hath 
also  those,  which  are  caled  casual ;  and  the  voluntary,  which 
depend  of  the  liberty,  he  hath  given  unto  our  free  will,  and 
knoweth  we  shall  faile,  because  our  will  shall  have  beene  to 
faile.  I  have  scene  divers  encourage  their  troupes  with  this 
fatall  necessitie :  For,  if  our  houre  be  tied  unto  a  certaine 
point  neither  the  musket-shottes  of  our  enemies,  nor  our 
courage,  nor  our  flight  and  cowardize,  can  either  advance  or 
recoyle  the  same. 

This  may  well  be  said,  but  seeke  you  who  shall  effect  it : 
And  if  it  be  so,  that  a  strong  and  lively  faith,  doth  likewise 
draw  action  after  it :  truely  this  faith  (wherewith  we  so  much 
fill  our  mouthes)  is  marvelous  light  in  our  times  :  except  the 
contempt  it  hath  of  works,  make  her  disdaine  their  company. 
So  it  is,  that  to  the  same  purpose,  the  Lord  of  loinville,  as 

446 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

credible  a  witnesse  as  any  other,  tells  us  of  the  Bedoins,  a  CHAPTER 
nation  entermingled  with  the  Saracine,  with  whom  our  King  XXIX 
Saint  Lewes  had  to  deale  in  the  holy  land,  who  so  confidently 
believed  in  their  religion,  the  dayes  of  every  one  to  be  pre 
fixed  and  numbred  from  all  eternitie,  by  an  inevitable  pre- 
ordinance,  that  they  went  al  bare  and  naked  to  the  warres, 
except  a  Turkish  Glaive  in  their  hand,  and  their  body 
covered  but  with  a  white  linnen-cloth  :  And  for  the  bitterest 
curse,  if  they  chanced  to  fall  out  one  with  another,  they  had 
ever  in  their  mouth  :  '  Cursed  be  thou,  as  he  that  armeth  him- 
4  selfe  for  feare  of  death."*  Here  is  another  maner  of  triall  or 
a  belief  or  faith  then  ours.  In  this  rank  may  likewise  be 
placed  that  which  those  two  religious  men  of  Florence,  not 
long  since  gave  unto  their  countrymen.  Being  in  some  con- 
troversie  betweene  themselves  about  certaine  points  of  learn 
ing  ;  they  accorded  to  go  both  into  the  fire,  in  the  presence 
of  al  the  people,  and  in  the  open  market  place,  each  one  for 
the  verifying  of  his  opinion  ;  and  all  preparations  were  ready 
made,  and  execution  to  be  performed,  but  that  by  an  un 
expected  accident  it  was  interrupted.  A  yong  Turkish 
Lord,  having  atchieved  a  notable  piece  of  service  in  armes, 
and  with  his  own  person,  in  ful  view  of  the  two  battels 
between  Ammurath  and  Huniades  ready  to  be  joyned 
together,  being  demanded  by  Ammurath  his  Prince,  who 
(being  so  yong  and  unexperienced,  for  it  was  the  first  warre 
or  service  he  had  scene  before)  had  replenished  him  with  so 
generous  and  undanted  vigor  of  courage,  answered,  that  a 
Hare  had  beene  his  soveraigne  maister  and  onely  teacher  of 
valour  :  and  thus  began  his  speech.  '  Being  one  day  a  hunt 
ing,  I  found  a  Hare  sitting  in  her  forme,  and  although  I 
had  a  brace  of  excellent  good  gray-hounds  with  me  in  a 
slip  or  leash,  I  thought  it  good,  because  I  would  be  sure 
of  my  game  to  use  my  bow  ;  for  she  was  a  very  faire  marke. 
I  beganne  to  shoote  my  arrowes  at  her,  which  I  did  to  the 
number  of  fortie  (for  in  my  quiver  were  just  so  many)  yet 
could  I  never  hurt  her,  no  not  so  much  as  start  her  :  After 
all  this,  I  let  slip  my  gray  hounds,  who  could  doe  no  more 
then  I  had  done  :  by  which  I  learnt,  that  she  had  beene 
sheltred  and  defended  by  her  destinie  ;  and  that  no  glaives 
nor  arrowes  never  hit,  but  by  the  permission  of  our  fatalitie, 

447 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  which  it  lieth  not  in  us  to  avoide  or  advance."     This  storie 
XXIX        mav  serve  to  make  us  perceive  by  the  way,  how  flexible  our 
•f  Vertue     reason  js  to  all  sorts  of  objects.     A  notable  man,  great  in 
yeares,  in  name,  in  dignity  and  in  learning,  vaunted  himselfe 
unto  me,  that  he  was  induced  to  a  certaine  most  important 
change  of  his  religion,  by  a  strange  and  fantastical  incita- 
tion  :  and  in  al  things  so  il  concluding  that  I  deemed  the 
same  stronger  and  more  forcible,  being  taken  contrary.     He 
termed  it  a  miracle,  and  so  did  I,  but  in  a  different  sense. 
Their  historians  say,  that  perswasion  having  popularly  beene 
scattered  amongst  the  Turkes,  of  the   fatal  and  inflexible 
prescription  of  their  dayes,  doth  apparantly  aide  to  warrant 
and  embolden  them  in  dangers.    And  I  know  a  great  Prince, 
who  happily  thrives  by  it,  be  it  he  believe  it,  or  take  it 
for  an  excuse  to  hazard  himselfe  extraordinarily  ;  provided 
fortune  be  not  soone  wearie  to  favour  and  backe  him.    There 
hath  not  happened  in  our  memorie  a  more  admirable  effect 
of  resolution,  than  of  those  two  villaines  that  conspired  the 
death  of  the  Prince  of  Orange  :  It  is  strange  how,  the  last, 
who  performed  the  same,  could  be  induced  or  encouraged  to 
undergo  such  an  enterprise,  wherin  his  fellow  (though  he  had 
resolutely  attempted  it,  and  had  all  might  be  required  for 
such  an  action)  had  so  ill  successe,  and  miscarried.     And  in 
those  steps,  and  with  the  same  weapons,  to  go  and  undertake 
a  Lord,  armed  with  so  late  an  instruction  of  distrust ;  mighty 
in  friends  and  followers  ;  puissant  of  bodily  strength  :  in  his 
owne  hall :  amiddest  his  servants  and  guarde  ;  and  in  a  City 
wholly  at  his  devotion.     It  must  of  force  be  saide,  that  in 
performing  it,  he  employed  a  well-directed  and  resolute  hand, 
and  a  dreadlesse  courage,  mooved  by  a  vigorous  passion.     A 
Poynard  is  more  sure  to  wound  a  man,  which  forsomuch  as 
it  requireth  more  motion  and  vigor  of  the  arme,  than  a 
pistol,  it's  stroke  is  more  subject  to  be  hindred  or  avoyded. 
That  the  first  ranne  not  to  an  assured  death,  I  make  no  great 
doubt,  for  the  hopes  wherwith  he  might  be  entertained  could 
not  harbour  in  a  well  setled  and  resolute  minde  ;  and  the 
conduct  of  his  exploit,  sheweth,  he  wanted  no  more  that, 
then  courage.     The  motions  of  so  forcible  a  perswasion  may 
be  divers  ;  for,  our  fantasie  disposeth  of  her  self  and  of  us 
as  she  pleaseth.     The    execution   committed   neere  Orleans 
448 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

had  no  coherence  with  this,  wherin  was  more  hazard,  then  CHAPTER 
vigor  ;  the  blow  was  not  mortall,  had  not  fortune  made  it  XXIX 
so  :  and  the  enterprise  to  shoote  on  horse-backe  and  far-off, 
and  to  one  who  mooved  still  according  to  the  motion  of  his 
horse  ;  was  the  attempt  of  a  man  that  rather  loved  to  misse 
of  his  effect,  then  faile  to  save  himselfe.  What  followed  did 
manifestly  shew  it.  For,  he  was  so  amazed  and  drunken  with 
the  thought  of  so  haughty  an  execution,  as  he  lost  all  his 
senses,  both  to  worke  his  escape,  and  direct  his  tongue  in  his 
answers.  What  needed  he  have  done  more,  then  recover  his 
friends  by  crossing  of  a  river  ?  It  is  a  meane,  wherein  I  have 
cast  my  selfe  in  farre  lesse  dangers,  and  which  I  thinke  of 
small  hazard,  how  broad  soever,  alwaies  provided  your  horse 
find  an  easie  entrance,  and  on  the  further  side  you  foresee  an 
easie  and  shallow  landing,  according  to  the  course  of  the 
streame  of  the  water.  The  second,  when  the  horrible 
sentence  was  pronounced  against  him,  answered  stoutly,  '  I 
'  was  prepared  for  it,  and  I  shall  amaze  you  with  my  patience/ 
The  Assassines,  a  nation  depending  of  Phoenicia,  are  esteemed 
among  the  Mahometists  of  a  soveraigne  devotion  and  puritie 
of  maners  ;  they  hold,  that  the  readiest  and  shortest  way  to 
gaine  Paradise,  is  to  kill  some  one  of  a  contrary  religion  : 
therefore  hath  it  often  beene  seene,  that  one  or  two  in  their 
bare  doublets  have  undertaken  to  assault  mighty  enemies, 
with  the  price  of  an  assured  death,  and  without  any  care  of 
their  owne  danger.  And  thus  was  our  Earle  Raymond  of 
Tripoli  murthered  or  assassinated  (this  word  is  borrowed 
from  their  name)  in  the  middest  of  his  Citie,  during  the 
time  of  our  warres  in  the  holy  land  :  And  likewise  Conrade 
Marquis  of  Montferrato  his  murtherors  being  brought  to 
their  torture  ;  were  seene  to  swel  with  pride,  that 
they  had  performed  so  worthy  an  exploit. 


3L 


449 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    THIRTIETH    CHAPTER 

Of  a  monstrous  Child. 

HIS  discourse  shall  passe  single,  for  I  leave 
it  to  Physitions  to  treate  of.  I  saw  two 
dayes  since  a  child,  whom  two  men  and  a 
nurce  (which  named  themselves  to  be  his 
father,  his  Unckle,  and  his  Aunt)  carried 
about  with  intent  to  get  some  money 
with  the  sight  of  him,  by  reason  of  his 
strangenes.  In  all  the  rest,  he  was  as 
other  children  are,  he  stood  upon  his  feete,  went  and  pratled 
in  a  maner  as  all  others  of  his  age  :  He  would  never  take 
nourishment,  but  by  his  nourses  breast ;  and  what  in  my  pre 
sence  was  offred  to  be  put  in  his  mouth,  he  chewed  a  little, 
and  put  it  all  out  againe.  His  puling  differed  somewhat 
from  others  :  He  was  just  fourteene  moneths  olde.  Under  his 
paps  he  was  fastned  and  joyned  to  an  other  child,  but  had 
no  head,  and  who  had  the  conduite  of  his  backe  stopped,  the 
rest  whole.  One  of  his  armes  was  shorter  then  the  other, 
and  was  by  accident  broken  at  their  birth.  They  were 
joyned  face  to  face,  and  as  if  a  little  child  would  embrace 
another  somewhat  bigger.  The  joyning  and  space  whereat 
they  were  closed  together,  was  but  foure  inches  broad,  or 
thereabouts  ;  in  such  sort  that  if  you  thrust  up  the  imperfect 
child,  you  might  see  under  the  others  navill.  And  the  seame 
was  betweene  the  paps  and  his  navill.  The  navill  of  the 
imperfect  one  could  not  be  seene,  but  all  the  rest  of  his  belly 
might.  Thus,  what  of  the  imperfect  one  was  not  joyned,  as 
armes,  buttockes,  thighes  and  legges,  did  hang  and  shake 
upon  the  other,  whose  length  reached  to  the  middle-leg  of 
the  other  perfect.  His  Nurce  told  me,  he  made  water  by 
both  privities.  The  members  of  the  little  one  were  nour 
ished,  living,  and  in  the  same  state  as  the  others,  except 
only,  they  were  lesse  and  thinner.  This  double  body,  and 
these  different  members,  having  reference  to  one  onely  head, 
might  serve  for  a  favorable  prognostication  to  our  King,  to 
maintaine  the  factions  and  differing  parties  of  this  our  king- 
450 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

dome  under  an  unitie  of  the  lawes.     But  least  the  successe  CHAPTER 
should  prove  it  contrary,  it  is  not  amisse  to  let  him  runne 
his  course  :  For  in  things  already  past  their  need  no  divina-  . 

tion.  Vt  quumjacta  sunt,  turn  ad  conjecturam  aliqua  inter-  c  D .  . 
pretatlone  revocantur :  '  So  as  when  they  are  done,  they  then 
'  by  some  construction  should  be  revoked  to  conjecture1:  As 
it  is  reported  of  Epimenides,  who  ever  divined  backward.  I 
come  now  from  seeing  of  a  shepheard  at  Medoc,  of  thirtie 
yeares  of  age,  or  thereabouts,  who  had  no  signe  at  all  of  geni- 
torie  parts :  But  where  they  should  be,  are  three  little  holes, 
by  which  his  water  doth  continually  tril  from  him.  This 
poore  man  hath  a  beard,  and  desireth  still  to  be  fumbling  of 
women.  Those  which  we  call  monsters  are  not  so  with  God, 
who  in  the  immensitie  of  his  worke,  seeth  the  infinitie  of 
formes  therein  contained.  And  it  may  be  thought,  that  any 
figure  doth  amaze  us,  hath  relation  unto  some  other  figure 
of  the  same  kinde,  although  unknown  unto  man.  From  out 
his  all  seeing  wisedome  proceedeth  nothing  but  good,  common, 
regular  and  orderly ;  but  we  neither  see  the  sorting,  nor  con 
ceive  the  relation.  Quod  crebro  videt,  non  miratur,  etiam  si,  Ib. 
curjiat,  nescit.  Quod  ante  non  vidit,  id,  si  evenerit,  ostentum 
esse  censet.  '  That  which  he  often  seeth,  he  doth  not  won- 
'  der  at,  though  he  know  not  why  it  is  done ;  But  if  that 
4  happen,  which  he  never  saw  before,  he  thinkes  it  some  por- 
'  tentuous  wonder.1  Wee  call  that  against  nature,  which 
commeth  against  custome.  There  is  nothing,  whatsoever  it 
be,  that  is  not  according  to  hir.  Let  therefore  this  universall 
and  naturall  reason,  chase  from  us  the  error,  and  expell 
the  astonishment,  which  noveltie  breedeth,  and 
strangenes  causeth  in  us. 


451 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


luv.  Sat.  vi. 
548. 


THE    THIRTY-FIRST    CHAPTER 

Of  anger  and  choler. 


LUTARKE  is  every  where  admirable,  but 
especially  where  he  judgeth  of  humane 
actions.  The  notable  things  he  reporteth, 
may  be  perceived  in  the  comparison  of 
Lycurgus  and  Numa,  speaking  of  the  great 
simplicity  we  commit,  in  leaving  yong 
children  under  the  government  and  charge 
of  their  fathers  and  parents.  Most  of 
our  policies,  or  Common-wealths,  saith  Aristotle  (as  the 
Cyclopes  were  wont)  commit  the  conduct  of  their  wives,  and 
charge  of  their  children,  to  all  men,  according  to  their  foolish 
humor  or  indiscreete  fantazies.  And  wel-nigh,  none  but  the 
Lacedemonian  and  Cretensian,  have  resigned  the  discipline  of 
children  to  the  lawes.  Who  seeth  not,  that  in  an  estate  all 
things  depend  of  nurture  and  education  ?  And  all  the  while, 
without  discretion,  it  is  wholy  left  to  the  parents  mercy, 
how  foolish  and  wicked  soever  they  be.  Amongst  other 
things,  how  often  (walking  through  our  streetes)  have  I 
desired  to  have  a  play  or  comedie  made  in  revenge  of  young 
boyes,  which  I  sawe  thumpt,  misused,  and  well  nigh  mur- 
thered  by  some  haire-brained,  moodie,  and  through  choler- 
raging  Fathers  and  Mothers,  from  out  whose  eyes  a  man 
might  see  sparkles  of  rage  to  startle, 

— rabie  jecur  incendente  feruntur 
Prcecipites,  ut  saxa  jugis  abrupta,  qtiibus  mow 
Subtrahitur,  clivoque  latus  pendente  recedit : 

They  headlong   runne  with   rage,  which   doth   enflame 

their  livers 
Like   stones  that  broken   fall  from 

shivers, 

The  hill  withdrawes,  and  they  are  rould 
From  hanging  cliffe  which  leaves  their  hold, 


mountaine  tops  in 


(And    according   to    Hypocrates,  the  most  dangerous  infir 
mities,  are  those  which  disfigure  the  face)  and  with  a  loud 
thundring  voice  often    to    follow   children    that    came    but 
452 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

lately  from  nurce  ;  Which  after  prove  lame,  maimed,  blockish  CHAPTER 
and  dul-pated  with  blowes :    And  yet  our  lawes  makes  no       XXXI 

accompt  of  it,  as  if  these  spraines,  and  unioyntings  of  limbs,  Of  anger  and 

,1  •  i  £          Jn J  choler 

or  these  maimes  were  no  members  01  our  Common-wealth. 

Gratum  est  quod  patrice  civem  populoque  dedisti,  luv.  Sat.  xiv. 

Si  fads  ut  patrice  sit  idoneus,  utilis  agris,  70. 

Vtilis  et  bellorum  et  pads  rebus  agendis. 

That  you  to  th'  countrie  give  a  man,  'tis  acceptable, 

If  for  the  countrie  fit  you  make  him,  for  fields  able. 

Of  peace  and  warre  for  all  achievements  profitable. 

There  is  no  passion  so  much  transports  the  sinceritie  of 
judgement,  as  doth  anger.  No  man  would  make  conscience 
to  punish  that  ludge  by  death,  who  in  rage  or  choler  had 
condemned  an  offender.  And  why  should  fathers  be  allowed 
to  beate,  or  schoolemasters  be  suffered  to  whip  children,  or 
to  punish  them  being  angry  ?  It  is  no  longer  correction, 
but  revenge.  Punishment  is  unto  children  as  physicke  ;  and 
would  any  man  endure  a  physicion,  that  were  angrie  and 
wroth  against  his  patient  ?  Our  selves  (did  we  well)  during 
the  time  of  our  anger,  should  never  lay  hands  on  our 
servants.  So  long  as  our  pulse  panted,  and  we  feele  any 
concitation,  so  long  remit  we  the  partie  :  And  things  will 
seeme  farre  otherwise  unto  us,  if  we  once  come  to  our  senses 
againe,  and  shall  better  bethinke  us.  Then  is  it  passion 
that  commandes.  It  is  passion  that  speaketh  and  not  we. 
Athwart  it,  faults  seeme  much  greater  unto  us,  as  bodies  doe 
athwart  a  foggy  mist.  Who  so  is  hungry,  useth  meat,  but 
who  so  will  use  chastisement,  should  never  hunger  nor  thirst 
after  it.  Moreover,  corrections  given  with  discretion  and 
moderation,  are  more  gently  received,  and  with  more  good 
to  him  that  receiveth  them.  Otherwise  hee  shall  never 
thinke  to  have  beene  justly  condemned,  by  a  man  who  is 
transported  by  rage  and  choler,  and  for  his  justification 
alleadgeth  the  extraordinary  motions  of  his  maister,  the 
inflammation  of  his  face,  his  unwonted  oaths,  his  chafing, 
his  unquietnesse  and  his  rash  precipitation. 

Ora  tument  ira,  nigrescunt  sanguine  vence:  OVID.  Art. 

Lumina  Gorgoneo  savins  igne  micant.  Am.  iii.  53. 

The  face  with  anger  swelles,  the  veines  grow  blacke  with 

blood, 

The  eyes  more  fiercely  shine  then  Gorgoris  fierie  moode. 

453 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Suetonius  writeth,  that  Caius  Rabirius,  having  by  Caesar 
XXXI  been  condemned,  nothing  did  him  so  much  good  toward  the 
anger  and  peOp}e  ^o  w}1Om  he  appealed)  to  make  him  obtain  his 
suite,  as  the  sharpnes  and  over  boldnes  which  Cassar  had 
declared  in  that  judgement.  Saying  is  one  thing,  and  doing 
another.  A  man  must  consider  the  Sermon  apart  and  the 
preacher  severall.  Those  have  made  themselves  good  sport, 
who  in  our  dayes  have  gone  about  to  checke  the  veritie  of 
our  Church,  by  the  ministers  vice :  She  fetcheth  hir  testi- 
monie  from  elsewhere.  It  is  a  foolish  manner  of  arguing, 
and  which  would  soone  reduce  all  things  to  a  confusion.  An 
honest  man  may  sometimes  have  false  opinions,  and  a  wicked 
man  may  preach  truth  :  Yea  such  a  one  as  beleeves  it  not. 
Verely,  it  is  a  pleasing  harmonic,  when  doing  and  saying  goe 
together.  And  I  will  not  deny,  but  saying,  when  deeds 
follow,  is  of  more  efficacie  and  authoritie :  As  said  Euda- 
midas,  when  he  heard  a  Philosopher  discourse  of  warre  : 
'  These  speeches  are  good,  but  he  that  speakes  them,  is  not 
'  to  be  beleeved.  For  his  eares  were  never  acustomed  to 
'  heare  the  clang  of  trumpets,  nor  rattling  of  drums. '  And 
Cleomenes  hearing  a  Rhetoritian  speake  of  valour,  burst 
out  into  an  extreame  laughter :  Whereat  the  other  being 
offended,  he  said  unto  him  :  '  I  would  doe  as  much  if  it  were 
4  a  Swallow  should  speake  of  it,  but  were  he  an  Eagle,  I 
6  should  gladly  heare  him."1  Me  seemeth  I  perceive  in 
ancient  mens  writings,  that  he  who  speaks  what  he  thinketh, 
toucheth  nearer  the  quick,  then  he  who  counterfaits.  Heare 
Cicero  speak  of  the  love  of  libertie ;  then  listen  to  Brutus ; 
their  very  wordes  will  tell  you  and  sound  in  your  eare,  the 
latter  was  a  man  readie  to  purchase  it  with  the  price  of  his 
life.  Let  Cicero,  that  father  of  eloquence  treate  of  the  con 
tempt  of  death,  and  let  Seneca  discourse  of  the  same  ;  the 
first  drawes  it  on  languishing,  and  you  shall  plainly  perceive, 
he  would  faine  resolve  you  of  a  thing,  whereof  he  is  not  yet 
resolved  himselfe.  He  giveth  you  no  heart,  for  himselfe  hath 
none :  Whereas  the  other  doth  rowze,  animate  and  inflame 
you.  I  never  looke  upon  an  Author,  be  they  such  as  write 
of  vertue  and  of  actions,  but  I  curiously  endevor  to  finde  out 
what  he  was  himselfe.  For,  the  Ephori  of  Sparta,  hearing 
a  dissolute  liver  propose  a  very  beneficial  advise  unto  the 
454 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

people,  commaunded  him  to  hold  his  peace,  and  desired  an  CHAPTER 
honest  man  to  assume  the  invention  of  it  unto  himselfe  and  XXXI 
to  propound  it.  Plutarkes  compositions,  if  they  be  well  Of 
savored,  doe  plainely  manifest  the  same  unto  us :  And  I  am 
perswaded  I  know  him  inwardly :  Yet  would  I  be  glad,  we 
had  some  memories  of  his  owne  life  :  And  by  the  way  I  am 
falne  into  this  discourse,  by  reason  of  the  thanks  I  owe  unto 
Aulus  Gellius,  in  that  he  hath  left  us  written  this  storie  of 
his  manners,  which  fitteth  my  subject  of  anger.  A  slave  of 
his,  who  was  a  lewd  and  vicious  man,  but  yet  whose  eares 
were  somewhat  fedde  with  Philosophicall  documents,  having 
for  some  faults  by  him  committed,  by  the  commandement  of 
Ptutarke  his  master,  been  stripped  naked,  whilst  another 
servant  of  his  whipped  him,  grombled  in  the  beginning,  that 
he  was  whipped  without  reason,  and  had  done  nothing :  But 
in  the  end,  mainly  crying  out,  he  fell  to  raling  and  wrong 
ing  his  master,  upbraiding  him  that  he  was  not  a  true  Philo 
sopher,  as  he  vanted  himselfe  to  be,  and  how  he  had  often 
heard  him  say,  that,  it  was  an  unseemely  thing  in  a  man 
to  be  angry.  And  that  he  had  made  a  booke  of  it :  And 
now  all  plonged  in  rage,  and  engulfed  in  choler  to  cause 
him  so  cruelly  to  be  beaten,  was  cleane  contrarie  to  his 
owne  writing.  To  whom  Plutarke  with  an  unaltered,  and 
milde-setled  countenance,  said  thus  unto  him.  '  What  ? 
4  Thou  raskall,  whereby  doest  thou  judge  I  am  now  angrie  ? 
'  Doth  my  countenance,  doth  my  voice,  doth  my  coulour,  or 
'  doth  my  speech  give  thee  any  testimony,  that  I  am  either 
4  moved  or  cholericke  ?  Me  seemeth,  mine  eyes  are  not  star- 
'  ingly-wilde,  nor  my  face  troubled,  nor  my  voice  frightful  or 
'  distempered  :  Doe  I  waxe  red  ?  Doe  I  foame  at  the  mouth  ? 
Doth  any  word  escape  me  I  may  repent  hereafter  ?  Doe  I 
startle  and  quake  ?  Doe  I  rage  and  ruffle  with  anger  ?  For, 
to  tel  thee  true,  these  are  the  right  signes  of  choler  and  tokens 
of  anger.1  Then  turning  to  the  party  that  whipped  him; 
Continue  still  thy  worke,'  quoth  he,  '  whilst  this  fellow  and 
I  dispute  of  the  matter."  This  is  the  report  of  Gellius. 
Architas  Tarentinus  returning  from  a  war,  where  he  had 
beene  Captaine  generall,  found  his  house  all  out  of  order,  hus- 
bandrie  all  spoiled,  and  by  the  ill  government  of  his  Bailife, 
his  ground  all  waste  and  unmanured ;  and  having  called  for 

455 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  him,  said  thus ;  'Away  bad  man,  for  if  I  were  not  angrie,  I 
XXXI  <  would  have  thee  whipt  for  this/  Plato  likewise,  being  vexed 
anger  an  ancj  angrje  with  one  of  his  slaves,  commaunded  Speusippus  to 
punish  him,  excusing  himselfe,  that  now  being  angrie  he 
would  not  lay  hands  upon  him.  Charilus  the  Lacedemonian, 
to  one  Helot  who  behaved  himself  over  insolently  and  auda 
ciously  towards  him  ;  'By  the  Gods'*  (saith  he)  'If  I  were 
'  not  now  angry,  I  would  presently  make  thee  die.1  It  is  a 
passion  which  pleaseth  and  flattereth  it  selfe.  How  many 
times  being  moved  by  any  false  suggestion,  if  at  that  in 
stant  we  be  presented  with  any  lawfull  defence  or  true  excuse 
doe  we  fall  into  rage  against  truth  and  innocencie  it  selfe  ? 
Touching  this  purpose,  I  have  retained  a  wonderfull  example 
of  antiquitie.  Piso,  in  divers  other  respects  a  man  of 
notable  vertue,  being  angrie,  and  chafing  with  one  of  his 
Souldiers,  who  returning  from  forage  or  boot-haling,  could 
not  give  him  an  accompt  where  he  had  left  a  fellow-Souldier 
of  his,  and  thereupon  concluding  he  had  killed  or  made  him 
away,  forthwith  condemned  him  to  be  hanged.  And  being 
upon  the  gallowes  ready  to  dye ;  behold  his  companion,  who 
had  stragled  abroade,  comming  home,  whereat  all  the  army 
rejoyced  very  much,  and  after  many  embracings  and  signes 
of  joy  between  the  two  souldiers,  the  hangman  brought  both 
unto  Piso  ;  al  the  company  hoping,  it  wold  be  a  great  plea 
sure  unto  him  ;  but  it  fel  out  cleane  contrary,  for  through 
shame  and  spite  his  wrath  still  burning  was  redoubled,  and 
with  a  slie  devise  his  passion  instantly  presented  to  his  mind, 
he  made  three  guiltie,  forsomuch  as  one  of  them  was  found 
innocent ;  and  caused  them  all  three  to  bee  dispatched.  The 
first  Souldier  because  he  was  alreadie  condemned  ;  the  second, 
which  had  stragled  abroade,  by  reason  he  was  the  cause  of 
his  fellowes  death  ;  and  the  hangman,  for  that  he  had  not 
fulfilled  his  Generalls  commaundement.  Those  who  have  to 
deale  with  froward  and  skittish  women  have  no  doubt  seene 
what  rage  they  wil  fal  into,  if  when  they  are  most  angrie 
and  chafing,  a  man  be  silent  and  patient,  and  disdaine  to 
foster  their  anger  and  wrath.  Celius  the  Orator  was  by 
nature  exceeding  fretfull  and  cholerike.  To  one  who  was 
with  him  at  supper,  a  man  of  a  milde  and  gentle  conversa 
tion,  and  who  because  lie  would  not  move  him,  seemed  to 
456 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

approve  what  ever  he  said,  and  yeeld  to  him  in  every  thing ;  CHAPTER 

as  unable  to  endure  his  peevishnes  should  so  passe  without       XXXI 

some  nourishment,  burst  out  into  a  rage,  and  said  unto  him  :  Of  anger  and 

'  For  the  love  of  God  deny  me  something,  that  we  may  be 

'  two.1     So,  women  are  never  angrie,  but  to  the  end  a  man 

should  againe  be  angrie  with  them,  therein   imitating  the 

lawes  of  Love.     Phocion  to  a  man  who  troubled  his  discourse 

with  brawling  and  skolding  at  him,  in  most  injurious  manner, 

did   nothing  else  but  hold   his  peace,  and  give  him  what 

leasure  he  would  to  vent  his  choler ;  which   done,  without 

taking  any  notice  of  it,  began  his  discourse  againe  where  he 

had  left  it  off.     There  is  no  reply  so  sharpe  as  such  silent 

contempt.     Of  the  most  cholerike  and  testie  man  of  France 

(which  is  ever  an  imperfection,  but  more  excusable  in  a 

military  man ;   for  it  must  needes  be  granted,  there  are  in 

that  profession  some  men   who  cannot   well   avoyde    it)   I 

ever   say,  he  is  the  patientest  man  I  knowe  to  bridle    his 

choler ;   it  mooveth  and  transporteth  him  with  such    furie 

and  violence, 

— magno  veluti  cumflamma  sonore  VIRG.  sEn.  vii. 

Virgea  suggeritur  costis  undantis  aheni,  462. 

Exultantque  testu  latices,  furit  intus  aquai 

Fumidus  atque  alte  spumis  exuberat  amnis, 

Nee  jam  se  capit  unda,  volat  vapor  ater  ad  auras. 

As  when  a  fagot  flame  with  hurring  sounds 
Under  the  ribbes  of  boyling  cauldron  lies, 
The  water  swelles  with  heat  beyond  the  bounds, 
Whence  steeming  streames  raging  and  foming  rise  ; 
Water  out-runn's  it  selfe,  blacke  vapors  flye  to  skies, 

that  he  must  cruelly  enforce  himselfe  to  moderate  the  same. 
And  for  my  part,  I  know  noe  passion  I  were  able  to  smother 
with  such  temper  and  abide  with  such  resolution.  I  would 
not  set  wisdome  at  so  high  a  rate.  I  respect  not  so  much 
what  he  doth,  as  how  much  it  costs  him  not  to  doe  worse. 
Another  boasted  in  my  presence,  of  his  behaviours  order  and 
mildenesse,  which  in  truth  is  singular :  I  tolde  him,  that  in 
deed  it  was  much,  namely  in  men  of  so  eminent  quality,  as 
himselfe  was,  on  whom  all  eyes  are  fixed,  alwaies  to  shew 
himselfe  in  a  good  temper :  but  that  the  chiefest  point  con 
sisted  in  providing  inwardly  and  for  himselfe  ;  and  that  in 
mine  opinion,  it  was  no  discreet  part  inwardlv  to  fret: 
3M  457 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which,  to  maintaine  that  marke  and  formall  outward  appar- 
XXXI  ance,  I  feared  hee  did.  Choler  is  incorporated  by  concealing 
anger  and  an(j  smothering  the  same,  as  Diogenes  said  to  Demosthenes, 
who  fearing  to  be  scene  in  a  Taverne,  withdrew  himselfe  into 
the  same :  The  more  thou  recoylest  back,  the  further  thou 
goest  into  it.  I  would  rather  perswade  a  man,  though  some 
what  out  of  season,  to  give  his  boy  a  wherret  on  the  eare, 
then  to  dissemble  this  wise,  sterne  or  severe  countenance,  to 
vex  and  fret  his  minde.  And  I  would  rather  make  shew  of 
my  passions,  then  smother  them  to  my  cost :  which  being 
vented  and  exprest,  become  more  languishing  and  weake  : 
Better  it  is  to  let  its  pointe  worke  outwardly,  then  bend  it 

SEN.  Epist.       against  our  selves.     Omnia  vitia  in  aperto  leviora  sunt :  et 

lvi>  tune  perniciosissima,  quum  simulata  sanitate  subsidunt.     '  All 

'  vices  are  then  lesse  perillous  when  they  lie  open  to  bee  seene, 
'  but  then  most  pernitious,  when  they  lurke  under  counter- 
'  feited  soundnesse."1  I  ever  warne  those  of  my  houshold, 
who  by  their  offices-authoritie  may  sometimes  have  occasion 
to  be  angry,  first  to  husband  their  anger ;  then  not  employ 
it  upon  every  slight  cause ;  for  that  empeacheth  the  effect 
and  worth  of  it.  Rash  and  ordinary  brawling  is  converted 
to  a  custome,  and  that 's  the  reason  each  man  contemnes  it : 
That  which  you  employ  against  a  servant  for  any  theeving, 
is  not  perceived,  because  it  is  the  same  he  hath  sundry  times 
seene  you  use  against  him,  if  he  have  not  washt  a  glasse  well 
or  misplaced  a  stoole.  Secondly,  that  they  be  not  angry  in 
vaine,  but  ever  have  regard  their  chiding  come  to  his  eares 
with  whom  they  are  offended :  for,  commonly  some  will 
brawle  before  he  come  in  their  presence,  and  chide  a  good 
while  after  he  is  gone, 

CLAUD,  in  Eu.  Et  secum  petulans  amentia  certat. 

*•  48-  Madnesse  makes  with  it  selfe  a  fray,, 

Which  fondly  doth  the  wanton  play, 

and  wreake  their  anger  against  his  shadow,  and  make  the 
storme  fall  where  no  man  is  either  chastised  or  interessed, 
but  with  the  rumour  of  their  voice,  and  sometimes  with  such 
as  cannot  doe  withall.  I  likewise  blame  those  who  being 
angry,  will  brave  and  mutinie  when  the  partie  with  whom 
they  are  offended  is  not  by.  These  Rodomantados  must  be 
employed  on  such  as  feare  them. 
458 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

Mugitus  veluti  cum  prima  in  pralia  taurus  CHAP  TE  R 
Terriftcos  ciet,  atque  irasci  in  cornua  tentat,  XXXI 

Arboris  obnixus  trunco,  ventosque  lacessit  Of  anger  and 
Ictibus,  et  sparsa  ad  pvgnam  proludit  arena.  choler 

As  when  a  furious  Bull  to  his  first  combate  mooves  VIRG.  ALn.  xii. 

His  terror-breeding  lowes,  his  home  to  anger  prooves,  103. 
Striving  against  a  trees  trunke,  and  the  winde  with  strokes, 
His  preface  made  to  fight  with  scattered  sand,  provokes. 

When  I  chance  to  be  angry,  it  is  in  the  earnestest  manner 
that  may  be,  but  yet  as  briefly  and  as  secretly,  as  is  possible. 
I  lose  my  selfe  in  hastinesse  and  violence,  but  not  in  trouble  : 
So  that,  let  me  spend  all  manner  of  injurious  words  at  ran- 
dome  and  without  all  heed,  and  never  respect  to  place  my 
points  pertinently,  and  where  they  may  doe  most  hurt :  For 
commonly  I  employ  nothing  but  my  tongue.  My  boyes  scape 
better  cheape  in  great  matters,  then  in  smal  trifles.  Slight 
occasions  surprise  me,  and  the  mischiefe  is,  that  after  you 
are  once  falne  into  the  pit,  it  is  no  matter  who  thrusts 
you  in,  you  never  cease  til  you  come  to  the  bottome.  The 
fall  presseth,  hasteneth,  mooveth  and  furthereth  it  selfe.  In 
great  occasions  I  am  pleased,  that  they  are  so  just,  that  every 
body  respects  a  reasonable  anger  to  in  sue.  I  glorify  my  selfe 
to  deceive  their  expectation.  Against  these  I  bandy  and  pre 
pare  my  selfe ;  they  make  me  summon  up  my  wits,  and 
threaten  to  carry  me  very  farre,  if  I  would  follow  them.  I 
easily  keepe  my  selfe  from  falling  into  them,  and  if  I  stay  for 
them,  I  am  strong  enough  to  reject  the  impulsion  of  this 
passion,  what  violent  cause  soever  it  hath.  But  if  it  seize 
upon  and  once  preoccupate  me,  what  vaine  cause  soever  it 
hath,  it  doth  cleane  transport  me  :  I  condition  thus  with 
those  that  may  contest  with  me,  When  you  perceive  me  to  be 
first  angry,  be  it  right  or  wrong,  let  me  hold-on  my  course, 
I  will  do  the  like  to  you,  when  ever  it  shal  come  to  my  lot. 
The  rage  is  not  engendred  but  by  the  concurrencie  of  cholers, 
which  are  easily  produced  one  of  another,  and  are  not  borne 
at  one  instant.  Let  us  allow  every  man  his  course,  so  shal 
we  ever  be  in  peace.  Oh  profitable  prescription,  but  of  an 
hard  execution  !  I  shal  some  time  seeme  to  be  angry  for  the 
order  and  direction  of  my  house,  without  any  just  emotion; 
According  as  my  age  yeeldeth  my  humours  more  sharpe  and 
peevish,  so  do  I  endevour  to  oppose  my  selfe  against  them, 

459 


Of 


choler 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  if  I  can  I  will  hereafter  enforce  my  selfe  to  be  lesse  fro- 
XXXI       ward  and  not  so  teasty,  as  I  shall  have  more  excuse  and  in- 
a      clination  to  bee  so ;  although   I  have   heretofore  beene   in 
their  number  that  are  least.     A  word  more  to  conclude  this 
Chapter :  Aristotle  saith,  '  Choler  doth  sometimes  serve  as 
4  armes  unto  Vertue  and  Valour/     It  is  very  likely  :  notwith 
standing  such  as  gainesay  him,  answer  pleasantly,  it  is  a 
weapon  of  a  new  fashion  and  strange  use :  For  we  moove 
other  weapons,  but  this  mooveth  us :  our  hand  doth 
not  guide  it,   but  it  directeth   our  hand  ;  it 
holdeth  us,  and  we  hold  not  it. 


THE    THIRTY-SECOND    CHAPTER 

A  defence  of  Seneca  and  Plutarke. 

HE  familiarity  I  have  with  these  two  men, 
and  the  ayd  they  affoord  me  in  my  olde 
age,  and  my  Booke  meerely  framed  of 
their  spoiles,  bindeth  me  to  wed  and 
maintaine  their  honour.  As  for  Seneca, 
amongest  a  thousand  petty -Pamphlets, 
those  of  the  pretended  reformed  religion 
have  published,  for  the  defence  of  their 
cause,  which  now  and  then  proceede  from  a  good  hand,  and 
which,  pitty  it  is,  it  should  not  be  employed  in  more  serious 
and  better  subjects  :  I  have  heretofore  scene  one,  who  to 
prolong  and  fil  up  the  similitude,  he  would  finde  betweene 
the  government  of  our  unfortunate  late  King  Charles  the 
ninth  and  that  of  Nero,  compareth  the  whilom  Lord  Car- 
dinall  of  Lorene  unto  Seneca ;  their  fortunes  to  have  beene 
both  chiefe  men  in  the  government  of  their  Princes,  and 
there withall  their  manners,  their  conditions  and  their  de 
meanours  :  wherein  (in  mine  opinion)  he  doth  the  said  Lord 
Cardinal  great  honour :  for,  although  I  be  one  of  those  that 
highly  respect  his  spirit,  his  worth,  his  eloquence,  his  zeale 
toward  his  religion  and  the  service  of  his  King  ;  and  his 
good  fortune  to  have  beene  borne  in  an  age,  wherein  hee 
was  so  new,  so  rare,  and  there  withall  so  necessary  for  the 
460 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

common- wealth,  to  have  a  Clergie-man  of  such  dignitie  and  CHAPTER 
nobility,  sufficient  and  capable  of  so  weighty  a  charge :  yet  XXXII 
to  confesse  the  truth,  I  esteeme  not  his  capacitie  such,  nor  "L  defence  of 
his  vertue  so  exquisitely  unspotted,  nor  so  entire  or  constant,  pjutarke 
as  that  of  Seneca.  Now  this  Booke  whereof  I  speake,  to 
come  to  his  intention,  maketh  a  most  injurious  description 
of  Seneca,  having  borrowed  his  reproaches  from  Dion  the 
historian,  to  whose  testimony  I  give  no  credit  at  all :  For 
besides,  he  is  inconstant,  as  one  who  after  he  hath  called 
Seneca  exceeding  wise,  and  shortly  after  termed  him  a  mortal 
enemy  to  Neroes  vices,  in  other  places  makes  him  covetous, 
given  to  usurie,  ambitious,  ..base-minded,  voluptuous,  and 
under  false  pretences,  and  fained  shewes,  a  counterfet  Philo 
sopher;  his  vertue  appeareth  so  lively,  and  wisedome  so 
vigorous  in  his  writings ;  and  the  defence  of  these  imputa 
tions  is  so  manifest,  as  wel  of  his  riches,  as  of  his  excessive 
expences,  that  I  beleeve  no  witnesse  to  the  contrary.  More 
over,  there  is  great  reason  we  should  rather  give  credit  to 
Homane  Historians  in  such  things,  then  to  Graecians  and 
strangers,  whereas  Tacitus  and  others  speake  very  honour 
ably  of  his  life  and  death,  and  in  all  other  circumstance 
declare  him  to  have  beene  a  most  excellent  and  rarely  vertu- 
ous  man.  I  wil  alleadge  no  other  reproach  against  Dions 
judgement,  then  this,  which  is  unavoydable :  that  is,  his 
understanding  of  the  Roman  affaires,  is  so  weake  and  il 
advised,  as  he  dareth  defend  and  maintaine  lulius  Caesars 
cause  against  Pompey,  and  blusheth  not  to  j  ustifie  Antonius 
against  Cicero.  But  let  us  come  to  Plutarke ;  lohn  Bodine 
is  a  good  moderne  Author,  and  endowed  with  much  more 
judgement  then  the  common-rabble  of  Scriblers  and  blur- 
papers  which  now  adayes  stuffe  Stationers  shops,  and  who 
deserveth  to  be  judged,  considered  and  had  in  more  then 
ordinary  esteeme.  Neverthelesse  I  finde  him  somewhat  mala 
pert  and  bolde  in  that  passage  of  his  Methode  of  Historic, 
when  he  accuseth  Plutarke,  not  only  of  ignorance  (wherein 
I  would  have  let  him  say  his  pleasure,  for  that  is  not  within 
my  element)  but  also  that  he  often  writeth  things,  altogether 
incredible  and  meerely  fabulous  (these  are  his  very  words). 
If  he  had  simply  said  things  otherwise  then  they  are,  it  had 
been  no  great  reprehension  :  for,  what  we  have  not  scene,  we 

461 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  receive  from  others  and  upon  trust:  And  I  see  him  some- 
<f?XI1  time,  wittingly  and  in  good  earnest  report  one  and  same 

Seneca °and  r^  ^iversly  :  As»  tne  judgements  of  three  best  captaines 
Plutarke  that  ever  were,  spoken  by  Hanibal,  is  otherwise  in  Flaminius 
his  life,  and  otherwise  in  Pyrrhus.  But  to  taxe  him,  to 
have  taken  incredible,  and  impossible  things  for  ready  pay 
ment,  is  to  accuse  the  more  judicious  author  of  the  World, 
of  want  of  judgement.  And  see  heere  his  example  :  As  (saith 
he)  when  he  reports  that  a  Childe  of  Lacedemon  suffered  all 
his  belly  and  gutts  to  be  torne  out  by  a  Cubbe  or  young 
Foxe,  which  he  had  stolne,  and  kept  close  under  his  gar 
ment,  rather  then  he  would  discover  his  theft.  First,  I  finde 
this  example  ill  chosen  :  Forasmuch  as  it  is  very  hard  to 
limit  the  powers  of  the  soules-faculties,  whereas  of  corporal 
forces,  we  have  more  law  to  limite  and  know  them  :  And 
therfore,  had  I  been  to  write  of  such  a  subject,  I  would 
rather  have  made  choyce  of  an  example  of  this  second  kind. 
And  some  there  be  lesse  credible.  As  amongest  others,  that 
which  he  reports  of  Pyrrhus,  who  being  sore  wounded,  gave 
so  great  a  blow  with  a  sword  unto  one  of  his  enemies,  arm'd 
at  al  assay es,  and  with  all  pieces,  as  he  cleft  him  from  the 
crowne  of  the  head  down  to  the  groine,  so  that  the  body 
fell  in  two  pieces.  In  which  example  I  finde  no  great 
wonder,  nor  do  I  admit  of  his  excuse,  wherewith  he 
cloaketh  Plutarke :  to  have  added  this  word  (as  it  is  said)  to 
forewarne  us,  and  restraine  our  beliefe.  For,  if  it  be  not  in 
things  received,  by  authoritie  and  reverence  of  antiquity  or 
religion,  neither  would  himselfe  have  received,  nor  proposed 
to  us  to  believe  things  in  themselves  incredible :  And  that 
(as  it  is  said)  hee  doth  not  here  sette  downe  this  phrase  to 
that  purpose,  may  easily  be  perceived,  by  what  himselfe  in 
other  places  telleth  us  upon  the  subject  of  the  Lacede 
monian  Childrens  patience,  of  examples  happened  in  his 
time,  much  harder  to  be  perswaded  :  As  that  which  Cicero 
hath  also  witnessed  before  him,  because,  (as  he  saith)  he  had 
been  there  himselfe :  That  even  in  their  times  there  were 
Children  found  prepared  to  endure  al  maner  of  patience, 
whereof  they  made  trial  before  Dianaes  Altar,  and  which 
suffered  themselves  to  bee  whipped,  till  the  blood  trilled 
downe  al  parts  of  their  body,  not  onely  without  crying,  but 
462 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

also  without  sobbing:    and  some   who   voluntarily   suffered  CHAPTER 
themselves  to  bee  scourged  to  death.     And  what  Plutarke       XXXII 

also  reporteth,  and  a  hundreth  other  witnesses  averre,  that  \ defence  of 

.  . .   r  .  r.  i         .  i     i  -,   .      ,.  „  .    .       Seneca  and 

assisting  at  a  sacrifice,  a  burning  coale  happened  to  fall  into     piutarke 

the  sleeve  of  a  Lacedemonian  childe,  as  he  was  busie  at  in 
censing,  suffered  his  arme  to  burne  so  long,  untill  the  smel 
of  his  burnt  flesh  came  to  al  the  by-standers.  There  was 
nothing  according  to  their  custome,  so  much  called  their 
reputation  in  question,  and  for  which  they  endured  more 
blame  and  shame,  than  to  be  surprised  stealing.  I  am  so 
well  instructed  of  those  mens  greatnes  of  courage,  that  this 
report,  doth  not  only  not  seeme  incredible  to  me,  as  to 
Bodine,  but  I  do  not  so  much  as  deeme  it  rare,  or  suppose 
it  strange  :  The  Spartane  story  is  full  of  thousands  of  much 
more  rare  and  cruell  examples;  then  according  to  this  rate,  it 
containeth  nothing  but  miracle.  Concerning  this  point  of  steal 
ing,  Marcellinus  reporteth,  that  whilest  hee  lived,  there  could 
never  be  found  any  kinde  of  torment  that  might  in  any  sort 
compell  the  Egyptians  surprized  filching  (which  was  much 
used  amongst  them)  to  confesse  and  tell  but  their  names.  A 
Spanish  Peasant  being  laide  upon  the  racke,  about  the  com 
plices  of  the  murther  of  the  Pretor  Lucius  Piso,  in  the  midst 
of  his  torments  cried  out,  his  friends  should  not  stir,  but 
with  al  security  assist  him,  and  that  it  was  not  in  the  power 
of  any  griefe  or  paine  to  wrest  one  word  of  confession  from 
him :  and  the  first  day  nothing  else  could  possibly  be  drawn 
from  him  :  The  next  morrow  as  he  was  led  toward  the  rack, 
to  be  tormented  a  new,  he  by  strong  violence  freed  himselfe 
from  out  his  keepers  hands,  and  so  furiously  ranne  with  his 
head  against  a  wall,  that  he  burst  his  braines  out,  and  pre 
sently  fel  down  dead.  Epicharis,  having  glutted  and  wearied 
the  moody  cruelty  of  Neroes  Satellites  or  officers,  and  stoutly 
endured  their  fire,  their  beatings,  and  their  engins  a  whole 
day  long,  without  any  one  voyce,  or  word  of  revealing  hir 
conspiracy,  and  the  next  day  after,  being  againe  brought  to 
the  torture,  with  hir  limbs  bruzed  and  broken,  convayed  the 
lace  or  string  of  hir  gowne  over  one  of  the  pillers  of  the 
Chaire  wherein  she  sate,  with  a  sliding  knot  in  it  into  which 
sodainly  thrusting  her  head,  she  strangled  her  selfe  with  the 
weight  of  hir  body  :  Having  the  courage  to  dve  so,  and 

463 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  steale  from  the  first  torments  ;  seemeth  she  not  purposely  to 
XXXII  have  lent  her  life  to  the  trial  of  hir  patience  of  the  precedent 

A  defence  of  ja^  orjv  ^o  mocke  that  Tyrant,  and  encourage  others  to 
Plutarke  attempt  the  like  enterprize  against  him  ?  And  he  that  shall 
enquire  of  our  Argolettiers  or  Free-booters,  what  experiences 
they  have  had  in  these  our  late  civil  wars,  shal  no  doubt 
find  effects  and  examples  of  patience,  of  obstinacy  and  stif- 
neckednes  in  these  our  miserable  dayes,  and  amidst  the 
effeminate,  and  puling  worldlings  far  beyond  the  Egyptian, 
and  well  worthie  to  be  compared  to  those  alreadie  reported 
of  Spartan  vertue.  I  know,  there  have  been  found  seely 
boores,  who  have  rather  endure  to  have  their  feet  broiled 
upon  a  Greedyron,  their  fingers  ends  crusht  and  wrung  with 
the  lock  of  a  Pistoll,  their  eyes  all  bloody  to  be  thrust  out 
of  their  heads  with  wringing  and  wresting  of  a  cord  about 
their  foreheads,  before  they  would  so  much  as  be  ransomed. 
I  have  seene  and  spoken  with  one  who  had  beene  left  al 
naked  in  a  ditch  for  dead,  his  necke  all  bruised  and  swolne, 
with  a  halter  about  it,  wherewith  he  had  beene  dragged  a 
whole  night  at  a  horses  taile  through  thick  and  thin,  with  a 
100.  thrusts  in  his  body,  given  him  with  daggers,  not  to  kill 
him  outright,  but  to  grieve  and  terrific  him,  and  who  had 
patiently  endured  all  that,  and  lost  both  speech  and  sense, 
fully  resolved  (as  himselfe  told  me)  rather  to  die  a  thousand 
deaths  (as  verily,  if  you  apprehend  what  he  suffered,  he  past 
more  then  one  full  death)  then  promise  any  ransome ;  yet 
was  he  one  of  the  wealthiest  husbandmen  in  al  his  country. 
How  many  have  bin  seene,  who  have  patiently  endured  to 
be  burnt  and  rosted  for  unknown  and  wilful  opinions,  which 
they  had  borrowed  of  others :  My  selfe  have  knowne  a 
hundred  and  a  hundred  women  (for,  the  saying  is,  Gaskoine 
heads  have  some  prerogative  in  that)  whom  you  might 
sooner  have  made  to  bite  a  red-hot  piece  of  iron,  then  recant 
an  opinion,  they  had  conceived  in  anger.  They  will  be 
exasperated  and  grow  more  fell  against  blowes  and  compul 
sion.  And  he  who  first  invented  the  tale  of  that  woman, 
which  by  no  threats  or  stripes,  would  leave  to  call  her 
husband  pricke-lowse,  and  being  cast  into  a  pond  and  duckt 
under  water,  lifted  up  her  hands,  and  joyning  her  two 
thumbs-nailes  in  act  to  kill  lice  above  her  head,  seemed  to 
464 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

call   him  lousie  stil,   devised  a  fable,   whereof  in  truth  we  CHAPTER 
dayly  see  the  expres  image  in  divers  womens  obstinacie  and       XXXII 
wilf  ulnesse.     And  yet  obstinacy  is  the  sister  of  constancy  at  \  defence  of 
least  in  vigor  and  stedfastnesse.  Pluterke 

A  man  must  not  j  udge  that  which  is  possible,  and  that 
which  is  not,  according  to  that  which  is  credible  and  in 
credible  to  our  sense  and  understanding,  as  I  have  already 
said  elsewhere.  And  it  is  a  great  fault,  wherein  the  greater 
number  of  men  doe  dayly  fall  (I  speake  not  this  of  Bodine) 
to  make  a  difficulty  in  believing  that  of  others,  which  them 
selves  neither  can  nor  would  doe.  Every  man  perswades 
himselfe,  that  the  chiefe  forme  of  humane  nature  is  in  him- 
selfe ;  according  to  her,  must  all  others  be  directed.  The 
proceedings  that  have  no  reference  to  hirs,  are  false  and 
fained.  Is  any  thing  proposed  unto  him  of  another  mans 
faculties  or  actions?  The  first  thing  he  calls  to  the  judge 
ment  of  his  consultation,  is  his  owne  examples ;  according  as 
it  goeth  in  him,  so  goeth  the  worlds  order.  Oh  dangerous 
sottishnesse,  and  intolerable  foppery  !  I  consider  some  men 
a  farre-off,  beyond  and  above  my  selfe,  namely  amongst 
those  ancient  ones :  and  though  I  manifestly  acknowledge 
mine  owne  insufficiencie  to  follow  or  come  neere  them  by  a 
thousand  paces,  I  cease  not  to  keepe  them  still  in  view,  and 
to  judge  of  those  wardes  and  springs  that  raise  them  so 
high ;  the  seedes  whereof  I  somewhat  perceive  in  my  selfe : 
as  likewise  I  doe  of  the  mindes  extreame  basenes  which 
amazeth  me  nothing  at  all,  and  I  misbelieve  no  more.  I  see 
the  turne  those  give  to  wind  up  themselves,  and  I  admire 
their  greatnesse,  and  those  starts  which  I  perceive  to  be  so 
wondrous  faire,  I  embrace  them  :  and  if  with  my  strength  I 
reach  not  unto  them,  at  least  my  judgement  doth  most 
willingly  apply  it  selfe  unto  them.  The  other  example 
he  alledgeth  of  things  incredible,  and  altogether  fabulous, 
reported  by  Plutarke,  is,  that  Agesilaus  was  fined  by  the 
Ephories,  because  he  had  drawne  the  hearts  and  good  wills 
of  al  his  fellow-cittizens  unto  himselfe  alone.  I  know  not 
what  marke  of  falsehood,  or  shew  of  impossibilitie  he  findes 
in  it ;  but  so  it  is,  that  Plutarke  speaks  there  of  things 
which  in  al  likelyhood  were  better  knowne  to  him,  then 
to  us  :  And  as  it  was  not  strange  in  Greece,  to  see  men 

BN  465 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  punished  and  exiled,  onely  because  they  were  too  popular, 
XXXII  and  pleased  the  common  people  over  much.  Witnesse  the 

A  defence  j°f  Ostracisme  amongst  the  Athenians,  and  the  Petalisme  among 
Plutarke  ^he  Siracusans.  There  is  another  accusation  in  the  same 
place,  which  for  Plutarkes  sake  doth  somewhat  touch  me, 
where  he  saith,  that  he  hath  very  well  and  in  good  truth 
sorted  the  Romanes  with  the  Romanes,  and  the  Grecians 
amongst  themselves,  but  not  the  Romanes  with  the  Graecians, 
witnesse  (saith  he)  Demosthenes  and  Cicero,  Cato  and  Aris- 
tides,  Sylla  and  Lysander,  Marcellus  and  Pelopidas  ;  Pompey 
and  Agesilaus,  deeming  thereby  that  he  hath  favoured  the 
Graecians,  in  giving  them  so  unequall  companions.  It  is  a 
just  reproving  of  that,  which  is  most  excellent  and  com 
mendable  in  Plutarke :  For,  in  his  comparisons  (which  is  the 
most  admirable  part  of  his  worke,  and  wherein  in  mine 
opinion  he  so  much  pleased  himselfe)  the  faithfulnesse  and 
sinceritie  of  his  judgement  equalleth  their  depth  and  weight. 
He  is  a  Philosopher  that  teacheth  us  vertue.  But  let  us  see, 
whether  we  can  warrant  him  from  this  reproch  of  prevari 
cation  and  false-hood.  That  which  I  imagine  hath  given 
occasion  or  ground  to  this  judgement  is,  that  great  and 
farre-spreading  lustre  of  the  Romane  names,  which  still  are 
tingling  in  our  eares,  and  never  out  of  our  mindes.  Wee 
doe  not  thinke  Demosthenes  may  equall  the  glory  of  a  Con 
sul,  of  a  Proconsul  and  a  Questor  of  this  great  common 
wealth  of  Rome.  But  he  that  shall  impartially  consider  the 
truth  of  the  matter,  and  men  in  themselves,  which  Plutarke 
did  chiefly  aime  at,  and  more  to  balance  their  custome,  their 
naturall  dispositions  and  their  sufficiencie,  then  their  fortune: 
I  am  of  a  cleane  opposite  opinion  to  Bodine,  and  thinke 
that  Cicero  and  old  Cato  are  much  behind  or  short  of  their 
parallels.  For  this  purpose,  I  would  rather  have  chosen  the 
example  of  yong  Cato  compared  to  Phocion  :  for  in  that 
paire  might  well  be  found  a  more  likely  disparitie  for  the 
Romanes  advantage.  As  for  Marcellus,  Sylla  and  Pompey, 
I  see  very  well,  how  their  exploits  of  warre,  be  more  swolne, 
glorious  and  pompous,  then  the  Graecians,  whom  Plutarke 
compareth  unto  them  ;  but  the  most  vertuous,  and  fairest 
actions,  no  more  in  warre,  then  elsewhere,  are  not  alwaies 
the  most  famous.  I  often  see  the  names  of  some  Captaines 
466 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

smothered  under  the  brightnesse  of  other  names  of  lesser  CHAPTER 
desert,  witnesse  Labienus,  Ventidius,  Telesinus  and  divers       XXXII 

others.     And  to  take  him  in  that  sense,  were  I  to  complaine   a  defence  •* 
„       ,,      .-         .  .    ,  ,         .    T  .1,^1       MI        •  i      keneca  and 

for  the  Graecians,  might  not  1  say,  that  Lamillus  is  much      Plutarke 

lesse  comparable  unto  Themistocles,  the  Gracchi  to  Agis  and 
Cleomenes,  and  Numa  to  Lycurgus  ?  But  it  is  follie  at  one 
glance  to  judge  of  things  with  so  many  and  divers  faces. 
When  Plutarke  compares  them,  he  doth  not  for  all  that 
equall  them.  Who  could  more  eloquently,  and  with  more 
conscience  note  their  differences  ?  Doth  he  compare  the 
victories,  the  exploites  of  armes,  the  power  of  the  armies 
conducted  by  Pompy  and  his  triumphs  unto  those  of 
Agesilaus  ?  I  do  not  believe  (saith  he)  that  Xenophon 
himself  (were  he  living)  though  it  were  granted  him  to 
write  his  pleasure  for  the  advantage  of  Agesilaus,  durst  ever 
dare  to  admit  any  comparison  betweene  them  :  Seemeth  he 
to  equall  Lysander  to  Sylla  ?  There  is  no  comparison  (saith 
he)  neither  in  number  of  victories,  nor  in  hazard  of  battels 
betweene  them  :  for,  Lysander  onely  obtained  two  sea-battels 
etc.  This  is  no  derogation  from  the  Romanes.  If  hee  have 
but  simply  presented  them  unto  the  Graecians,  what  ever 
disparity  may  bee  betweene  them,  he  hath  not  in  any  sort 
wronged  them.  And  Plutarke  doth  not  directly  counter 
poise  them.  In  some  there  is  none  preferred  before  others  ; 
He  compareth  the  parts  and  the  circumstances  one  after 
another,  and  severally  judgeth  of  them.  If  therefore  any 
would  goe  about  to  convince  him  of  favour,  he  should 
narrowly  sift  out  some  particular  j  udgement ;  or  in  generall 
and  plaine  termes  say,  hee  hath  missed  in  sorting  such  a 
Graecian  to  such  a  Romane,  forasmuch  as  there  are 
other  more  sortable  and  correspondent,  and  might 
better  be  compared,  as  having  more  reference 
one  unto  another. 


467 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

THE   THIRTY-THIRD   CHAPTER 

The  Historic  of  Spurina. 


HILOSOPHY  thinketh,  she  hath  not  il 
imployed  hir  meanes,  having  yeelded  the 
soveraign  rule  of  our  mind,  and  the 
authoritie  to  restraine  our  appetites,  unto 
reason.  Amongst  which,  those  who  judge 
there  is  none  more  violent,  than  those 
which  love  begetteth,  have  this  for  their 
opinion,  that  they  holde  both  of  body 
and  soule  ;  and  man  is  wholly  possessed  with  them  :  so  that 
health  it  selfe  depended  of  them,  and  physick  is  sometimes 
constrained  to  serve  them  in  stead  of  a  Pandership.  But 
contrariwise,  a  man  might  also  say,  that  the  commixture  of 
the  body  doth  bring  abatement  and  weaknesse  unto  them  ; 
because  such  desires  are  subject  to  saciety  and  capable  of 
materiall  remedies.  Many  who  have  endevored  to  free  and 
exempt  their  mindes  from  the  continuall  alarumes,  which 
this  appetite  did  assail  them  with,  have  used  incisions,  yea 
and  cut-off  the  mooving,  turbulent  and  unruly  parts. 
Others  have  alayed  the  force  and  fervency  of  them  by 
frequent  applications  of  cold  things,  as  snow  and  vineger. 
The  haire-cloths  which  our  forefathers  used  to  weare  for 
this  purpose,  wherof  some  made  shirts,  and  some  waste- 
bands  or  girdles,  to  torment  their  reines.  A  Prince  told  me 
not  long  since,  that  being  very  yong,  and  waiting  in  the 
Court  of  King  Francis  the  first,  upon  a  solemne  feastival 
day,  when  all  the  Court  endevored  to  be  in  their  best 
clothes,  a  humor  possessed  him  to  put-on  a  shirt  of  haire- 
cloth,  which  he  yet  keepeth,  and  had  beene  his  fathers  ;  but 
what  devotion  soever  possessed  him,  he  could  not  possibly 
endure  untill  night  to  put  it  off  again e,  and  was  sick  a  long 
time  after,  protesting  he  thought  no  youthly  heat  could  be 
so  violent,  but  the  use  of  this  receipt  would  coole  arid  alay  ; 
of  which  he  perhaps  never  assayed  the  strongest :  For,  ex 
perience  sheweth  us,  that  such  emotion  doth  often  maintaine 
it  selfe  under  base,  rude  and  slovenly  cloathes  :  and  haire 
468 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

cloathes  doe  not  ever  make  those  poore  that  weare  them.  CHAPTER 
Zenocrates  proceeded  more  rigorously ;  for,  his  Disciples  XXXIII 
to  make  triall  of  his  continencie,  having  convayed  that Th^  Historic 
beauteous  and  famous  curtizan  Lais  naked  into  his  bed, 
saving  the  weapons  of  her  beauty,  wanton  alurements,  and 
amorous  or  love-procuring  potions,  feeling  that  maugre  all 
Philosophicall  discourses,  and  strict  rules,  his  skittish  body 
beganne  to  mutinie,  he  caused  those  members  to  be  burned, 
which  had  listened  to  that  rebellion.  Whereas  the  passions 
that  are  in  the  minde,  as  ambition,  covetousnesse  and  others, 
trouble  reason  much  more  :  for,  it  can  have  no  ayde  but 
from  it's  owne  meanes  ;  nor  are  those  appetites  capable  of 
saciety,  but  rather  sharpened  by  enjoying,  and  augmented 
by  possession.  The  example  alone  of  lulius  Caesar  may 
suffice  to  shew  us  the  disparitie  of  these  appetites,  for  never 
was  man  more  given  to  amorous  delights.  The  curious  and 
exact  care  he  had  of  his  body,  is  an  authenticall  witnesse  of 
it,  forsomuch  as  he  used  the  most  lascivious  meanes  that 
then  were  in  use  :  as,  to  have  the  haires  of  his  body  smeered 
and  perfumed  al  over,  with  an  extreame  and  labored  curio- 
sitie ;  being  of  himselfe  a  goodly  personage,  white,  of  a  tall 
and  comely  stature,  of  a  cheerefull  and  seemely  counte 
nance,  his  face  ful  and  round,  and  his  eies  browne  lively,  if 
at  least  Suetonius  may  be  believed  :  For,  the  statues  which 
nowadaies  are  to  be  seene  of  him  in  Rome,  answere  not  al 
together  this  portraiture  we  speake  of.  Besides  his  wives, 
which  he  changed  foure  times,  without  reckoning  the  bies, 
or  Amours  in  his  youth  with  Nicomedes  King  of  Bythinia, 
he  had  the  Maiden-head  of  that  so  farre,  and  highly-renowned 
Queene  of  Egypt  Cleopatra ;  witnesse  yong  Caesarion  whom 
he  begotte  of  hir.  He  also  made  love  unto  Eunoe  Queene 
of  Mauritania,  and  at  Rome  to  Posthumia,  wife  unto  Servius 
Sulpitius  :  to  Lolio  wife  to  Gabinius  ;  to  Tertulla,  of  Crassus  ; 
yea  unto  Mutia  wife  to  great  Pompy,  which  as  historians 
say,  was  the  cause  hir  Husband  was  divorced  from  her. 
Which  thing  Plutarke  confesseth  not  to  have  knowne.  And 
the  Curions  both  father  and  sonne  twitted  Pompey  in  the 
teeth,  at  what  time  he  took  Caesars  Daughter  to  wife,  that 
he  made  himselfe  Sonne  in  law  to  one,  who  had  made  him 
Cuckold,  and  himself  was  wont  to  call  Egystus.  Besides  all 

469 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  this  number,  he  entertained  Servilia  the  sister  of  Cato,  and 
XXXIII  mother  to  Marcus  Brutus :  whence  (as  divers  hold)  pro- 
f  gHls*one  ceeded  that  great  affection,  he  ever  bare  to  Marcus  Brutus  : 
for  his  mother  bare  him  at  such  a  time  as  it  was  not  unlikely 
he  might  be  borne  of  him.  Thus,  (as  me  seemeth)  have  I 
good  reason  to  deeme  him  a  man  extreamly  addicted  to  all 
amorous  licenciousnesse,  and  of  a  wanton-lascivious  com 
plexion.  But  the  other  passion  of  ambition,  wherewith  he 
was  infinitely  infected,  and  much  tainted,  when  he  came  once 
to  withstand  the  same,  it  made  him  presently  to  give  ground. 
And  touching  this  point,  when  I  call  Mahomet  to  remem 
brance  (I  meane  him  that  subdued  Constantinople,  and  who 
brought  the  final  extermination  of  the  name  of  Grecians)  I 
know  not  where  these  two  passions  are  more  equal  ballanced: 
equally  an  indefatigable  letcher,  and  a  never-tired  souldier : 
but  when  in  his  life  they  seeme  to  strive  and  concurre  one 
with  another,  the  mutinous  heate,  doth  ever  gourmandize 
the  amorous  flame.  And  the  latter,  although  out  of  naturall 
season  did  never  attain  to  a  ful  and  absolutely  authority, 
but  when  he  perceived  himself  to  be  so  aged  that  he  was 
utterly  unable  longer  to  undergoe  the  burthen  of  War. 
That  which  is  aleadged,  as  an  example  on  the  contrary  side 
of  Ladislaus  King  of  Naples,  is  very  wel  worth  the  noting, 
who  though  he  were  an  excellent,  couragious  and  ambitious 
Captaine,  proposed  unto  himselfe,  as  the  principall  scope  of 
his  ambition,  the  execution  of  his  sensuality,  and  enjoying 
of  some  rare  and  unmatched  beauty.  So  was  his  death  : 
Having  by  a  continuall  tedious  siege  brought  the  City  of 
Florence  to  so  narrow  a  pinch,  that  the  inhabitants  were 
ready  to  yeeld  him  the  victory,  he  yeelded  the  same  to  them, 
upon  condition  they  would  deliver  into  his  hands  a  wench  of 
excellent  beauty  that  was  in  the  city,  of  whom  he  had  heard 
great  commendations  ;  which  they  were  enforced  to  graunt 
him,  and  so  by  a  private  injury  to  warrant  the  publike  ruine 
of  the  City.  She  was  the  Daughter  of  a  notable  rare 
Phisician  and  whilest  he  lived  chiefe  of  his  profession  :  Who 
seeing  himselfe  engaged  in  so  stuprous  a  necessitie,  resolved 
upon  an  haughty  enterprize  ;  Whilst  all  were  busie  adorning 
his  daughter,  and  besetting  her  with  costly  jewels,  that  she 
might  the  more  delight  and  please  this  new  Kingly  lover,  he 
470 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

also  gave  her  an  exquisitely-wrought,  and  sweetly-perfumed  CHAPTER 

handkercher,  to  use  in  their  first  approches  and  embrace-      XXXIII 

ments,  a  thing  commonly  in  use  amongst  the  Women  of  that      ?  « 

Country.    This  Handkercher  strongly  empoysoned  according 

to  the  cunning  skill  of  his  Art,  comming  to  wipe  both  their 

enflamed  secret  parts  and  open  pores,  did  so  readily  convay 

and  disperse  ifs  poyson,  that  having  sodainly  changed  the 

heate  into  colde,  they  immediately  deceased  one  in  anothers 

armes.     But  I  will  now  returne  to  Caesar.     His  pleasures 

could  never  make  him  lose  one  minute  of  an  houre,  nor 

turne  one  step  from  the    occasions,   that   might  any  way 

further  his  advancement.     This  passion  did  so  soveraignly 

oversway  all  others,  and  possessed  his  mind  with  so  uncon- 

trouled  an  authority,  that  shee  carryed  him  whither  she  list. 

Truely  I  am  grieved,  when  in  other  things  I  consider  this 

mans  greatnesse,  and  the  wondrous  parts  that  were  in  him ; 

so  great  sufficiencie  in  all  maner  of  knowledge  and  learning, 

as  there  is  almost  no  science  wherein  he  hath  not  written. 

Hee  was  so  good  an  Orator,  that  diverse  have  preferred  his 

eloquence  before  Ciceroes  :  And  himselfe  (in  mine  opinion) 

in  that  facultie  thought  himselfe  nothing  short  of  him.    And 

his  two  Anti-CatoeS)  were  especially  written  to  over-ballance 

the  eloquence  which  Cicero  had  emploied  in  his  Cato.     And 

for  all  other  matters  ;  was  ever  minde  so  vigilant,  so  active, 

and  so  patient  of  labour  as  his  ?    And  doubtlesse,  it  was  also 

embellished  with   sundry  rare  seedes   of  vertue.     I   meane 

lively,  naturall    and   not  counterfeits.      He  was  exceeding 

sober,  and  so  homely  in  his  feeding,  that  Oppius  reporteth  : 

how  upon  a  time,  through  a  certaine  Cookes  negligence,  his 

meat  being  dressed  with  a  kind  of  medicinable  Oyle,  in  stead 

of  Olive-oyle,  and  so  brought  to  the  boorde,  although  he 

found  it,  yet  he  fed  hartily  of  it,  only  because  he  would  not 

shame  his  Hoste  :  Another  time  he  caused  his  Baker  to  be 

whipped,  because  he  had  served  him  with  other,  than  common 

houshold  bread.    Cato  himselfe  was  wont  to  say  of  him,  that 

he  was  the  first  sober  man,  had  addrest  himselfe  to  the  ruine 

of  his  country.     And  whereas  the  same  Cato  called  him  one 

day  drunkard,  it  hapned  in  this  maner.    Being  both  together 

in  the  Senate  house,  where  Catelines  conspiracie  was  much 

spoken  of,  wherein  Caesar  was  greatly  suspected  to  have  a 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  hand  ;  a  note  was  by  a  friend  of  bis  brought,  and  in  very 
XXXIII  secret  sort  delivered  him,  which  Cato  perceiving,  supposing 
g  ^or*e  it  might  be  something,  that  the  Conspirators  advertized  him 
of,  instantly  summoned  him  to  shew  it,  which  Caesar  to  avoid 
a  greater  suspition,  refused  not :  It  was  by  chance  an  amorous 
letter,  which  Servilia  Catoes  sister  writ  to  him  :  Cato  having 
read  it,  threw  it  at  him,  saying,  Hold  it  againe  thou  drunkard. 
I  say,  it  was  rather  a  word  of  disdaine  and  anger,  than  an 
expres  reproch  of  this  vice  ;  as  often  we  nick-name  those  that 
anger  us,  with  the  first  nick-names  of  reproaches,  that  come 
into  our  mouth,  though  meerely  impertinent  to  those  with 
whom  we  fall  out.  Considering,  that  the  vice  wherewith  Cato 
charged  him,  hath  neare  coherencie  unto  that,  wherein  he 
had  surprised  Caesar  :  for  Venus  and  Bacchus  (as  the  vulgar 
Proverbe  saith)  agree  well  together  ;  but  with  me  Venus  is 
much  more  blith  and  gamesome,  being  accompanied  with 
sobrietie. 

The  examples  of  his  mildenes  and  clemencie,  toward  such 
as  had  offended  him,  are  infinite  :  I  meane,  besides  those  he 
shewed  during  the  civill  warres,  which  (as  by  his  own  writ 
ings  may  plainly  appeare)  he  used  to  blandish  and  allure  his 
enemies,  to  make  them  feare  his  future  domination  and  vic 
tories  the  lesse.  But  if  any  shall  say,  those  examples  are  not 
of  validitie  to  witnes  his  genuine  and  natural  affabilitie,  we 
may  lawfully  answere,  that  at  least  they  shew  us  a  wonder- 
full  confidence,  and  greatnes  of  courage  to  have  been  in 
him.  It  hath  often  befalne  him,  to  send  whole  armies 
backe  again  to  his  enemies,  after  he  had  vanquished  them, 
without  dayning  to  binde  them  so  much,  as  with  an  oath,  if 
not  to  favour,  at  least  not  to  beare  armes  against  him.  He 
hath  three  or  foure  times  taken  some  of  Pompeyes  chief 
Captaines  prisoners,  and  as  often  set  them  at  libertie  againe. 
Pompey  declared  all  such  as  would  not  follow  and  accom 
pany  him  in  his  wars,  to  be  his  enemies ;  and  he  caused 
those  to  be  proclamed  as  friends,  who  either  would  not  stirre 
at  all,  or  not  effectually  arme  themselves  against  him.  To 
such  of  his  Captaines  as  fled  from  him,  to  procure  other 
conditions  he  sent  them  their  weapons,  their  horses  and  all 
other  furniture.  The  Citties  he  had  taken,  by  maine  force, 
lie  freed  to  follow  what  faction  they  would,  giving  them  no 

472 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

other  garison,  then  the  memorie  of  his  clemencie  and  mildnes.  CHAPTER 
In  the  day  of  his  great  battail  of  Pharsalia,  he  expresly  in-  XXXIII 
hibited,  that  unles  they  were  driven  to  unavoydable  extremi-  £  Historic 
tie,  no  man  should  lay  hands  upon  any  Romane  cittizen.  In 
my  judgement  these  are  very  hazardous  partes,  and  it  is  no 
wonder,  if  in  the  civill  warres  tumultuous  broiles,  we  have 
now  on  foote,  those  that  fight  for  the  ancient  lawes  and  state 
of  their  country,  as  he  did,  doe  not  follow  and  imitate  the 
example.  They  are  extraordinary  meanes,  and  which  onely 
belongs  to  Caesars  fortune,  and  to  his  admirable  fore-sight, 
succesfully  to  direct,  and  happily  to  conduct  them.  When 
I  consider  the  incomparable  greatnesse  and  unvaluable  worth 
of  his  minde,  I  excuse  Victorie,  in  that  shee  could  not  well 
give  him  over,  in  this  most  unjust  and  unnatural  cause.  But 
to  returne  to  his  clemencie ;  we  have  diverse  genuine  and 
lively  examples,  even  in  the  time  of  his  al-swaying  govern 
ment,  when  all  things  were  reduced  into  his  hands,  and  hee 
needed  no  longer  to  dissemble.  Caius  Memmius,  had  writ 
ten  certaine  detracting  and  railing  orations  against  him, 
which  he  at  full  and  most  sharpely  had  answered,  never- 
thelesse  hee  shortly  after  helped  to  make  him  Consul.  Caius 
Calvus,  who  had  composed  diverse  most  injurious  Epigrams 
against  him,  having  employed  sundrie  of  his  friendes  to  bee 
reconciled  to  him  againe,  Caesar  descended  to  write  first 
unto  him.  And  our  good  Catullus,  who  under  the  name 
of  Mamurra  had  so  rudely  and  bitterly  railed  against  him, 
at  last  comming  to  excuse  himselfe,  Caesar  that  very  night 
made  him  to  suppe  at  his  owne  table.  Having  beene  ad 
vertised  how  some  were  overlavish  in  rayling  against  him,  all 
he  did  was  but  in  a  publike  oration  to  declare  how  he  was 
advertised  of  it.  His  enemies,  he  feared  lesse  then  he  hated 
them.  Certaine  conspiracies  and  conventicles  were  made 
against  his  life,  which  being  discovered  unto  him,  he  was 
contented  by  an  edict  to  publish,  how  he  was  throughly 
enformed  of  them,  and  never  prosecuted  the  Authors.  Touch 
ing  the  respect  he  ever  bare  unto  his  friendes  ;  Caius  Oppius 
travelling  with  him,  and  falling  very  sick,  having  but  one 
chamber,  he  resigned  the  same  unto  him,  and  himselfe  was 
contented  to  lie  all  night  abroade  and  upon  the  bare  ground. 
Concerning  his  justice,  he  caused  a  servant  of  his  whom  he 
3O  473 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  exceedingly  loved,  to  be  executed,  forsomuch  as  he  had  laine 
XXXIII  with  the  wife  of  a  Roman  Knight,  although  no  man  sued 
or  comP^ne(^  °f  ^im.  Never  was  man,  that  shewed  more 
moderation  in  his  victorie,  or  more  resolution  in  his  adverse 
fortune.  But  all  these  noble  inclinations,  rich  gifts,  worthy 
qualities,  were  altered,  smothered  and  eclipsed  by  this  furious 
passion  of  ambition  ;  by  which  he  suffered  himselfe  to  be  so 
farre  mis-led,  that  it  may  be  well  affirmed,  she  onely  ruled 
the  Sterne  of  all  his  actions.  Of  a  liberall  man,  she  made 
him  a  common  theefe,  that  so  he  might  the  better  supply 
his  profusion  and  prodigalitie ;  and  made  him  utter  that 
vile  and  most  injurious  speech;  that  if  the  wickedst  and 
most  pernicious  men  of  the  world,  had  for  his  service  and 
furtherance  beene  faithfull  unto  him,  he  would  to  the  utmost 
of  his  power  have  cherished  and  preferred  them,  as  well  as 
if  they  had  beene  the  honestest :  It  so  besotted,  and  as  it 
were  made  him  drunke  with  so  extreame  vanitie,  that  in 
the  presence  of  all  his  fellow- cittizens  he  durst  vaunt  him 
selfe,  to  have  made  that  great  and  farre-spread  Romane 
Common- wealth,  a  shapelesse  and  bodilesse  name ;  and  pro 
nounce,  that  his  Sentences  or  Answeres  should  thence  for 
ward  serve  as  Lawes  :  And  sitting,  to  receive  the  whole 
bodie  of  the  Senate  comming  toward  him :  and  suffer  him 
selfe  to  be  adored :  and  in  his  presence  divine  honours  to 
be  done  him.  To  conclude,  this  only  vice  (in  mine  opinion) 
lost,  and  overthrew  in  him  the  fairest  naturall  and  richest 
ingenuitie  that  ever  was ;  and  hath  made  his  memorie  ab- 
hominable  to  all  honest  mindes,  insomuch  as  by  the  ruine  of 
his  countrey,  and  subversion  of  the  mightiest  state  and  most 
flourishing  Common-wealth,  that  ever  the  world  shall  see, 
he  went  about  to  procure  his  glorie.  A  man  might  con 
trariwise  finde  diverse  examples  of  greate  persons,  whom 
pleasure  hath  made  to  forget  the  conduct  of  their  owne 
affaires,  as  Marcus  Antonius,  and  others  :  but  where  love  and 
ambition  should  be  in  one  equall  balance  and  with  like 
forces  mate  one  another,  I  will  never  doubt  but  Caesar 
would  gaine  the  prize  and  gole  of  the  victorie.  But  to 
come  into  my  path  againe.  It  is  much,  by  discourse  of 
reason,  to  bridle  our  appetites,  or  by  violence  to  force  our 
members  to  containe  themselves  within  the  bonds  of  dutie. 
474 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

But  to  whippe  us  for  the  interest  of  our  neighbours,  not  only  CHAPTER 
to  shake  off  this  sweete  pleasing  passion,  which  tickleth  us      XXXIII 
with  selfe-joying  pleasure,  we  apprehend  and  feele  to  see  our  The.   Historic 
selves  gratefull  to  others,  and  of  all  men  beloved  and  sued          Pu"na 
unto :  but  also  to  hate  and  scorne  those  graces,  which  of  it 
are  the  cause ;  and  to  condemne  our  beauty,  because  some 
others  will  be  set  on  fire  with  it,  I  have  scene  few  examples 
like  to  this.     Spurina  a  yong  Gentleman  of  Thuscanie, 

Qualis  gemma  micatflavum  quce  dividit  aurum,  VIRG.  s£n.  x. 

Aut  collo  decus  aut  capiti,  vel  quale  per  artem,  134* 

Inclusum  buxo  aut  Ericia  terebintho, 
Lucet  ebur. 

As  when  a  precious  stone  cleare  rayes  doth  spread, 

Set  in  pure  golde,  adorning  necke  or  head  : 

Or  as  faire  Iv'ry  shines  in  boxe  enclos'd, 

Or  workemanly  with  Mountaine  gumme  dispos'd, 

being  endowed  with  so  alluringly-excessive  and  singular 
beautie,  that  the  chastest  eyes  could  not  possibly  gainstand 
or  continently  resist  the  sparkling  glances  thereof,  not  con 
tented  to  leave  so  great  a  flame  succourlesse,  or  burning  fever 
remedilesse,  which  he  in  all  persons,  and  every  where  en 
kindled,  entred  into  so  furious  despite  against  himselfe,  and 
those  rich  gifts,  nature  had  so  prodigally  conferred  upon  him 
(as  if  they  must  beare  the  blame  of  others  faults)  that  with 
gashes,  and  skars,  he  wittingly  mangled,  and  voluntarily  cut 
that  perfect  proportion  and  absolute  feature,  which  nature 
had  so  curiously  observed  in  his  unmatched  face  ;  whereof  to 
speake  my  opinion,  such  outrages  are  enemies  to  my  rules. 
I  rather  admire,  then  honour  such  actions.  His  intent  was 
commendable,  and  his  purpose  consciencious,  but  in  my 
seeming  somewhat  wanting  of  wisedome.  What  ?  if  his  de- 
formitie  or  uglinesse  was  afterward  an  instrument  to  induce 
others  to  fall  into  the  sinne  of  contempt  and  vice  of  hatred, 
or  fault  of  envy  for  the  glory  of  so  rare  commendation  ; 
or  of  slander,  interpreting  his  humour  to  be  a  franticke 
ambition  ;  Is  there  any  forme,  whence  vice  (if  so  it  please) 
may  not  wrest  an  occasion,  in  some  manner  to  exercise  it 
selfe?  It  had  beene  more  just  and  therewithall  more 
glorious,  of  so  rare  gifts  of  God,  to  have  made  a  subject 
of  exemplar  vertue  and  orderly  methode.  Those  which 

475 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  sequester  themselves  from  publike  offices,  and  from  this  in- 
XXXIII      finite  number  of  thornie  and  so  many-faced  rules,  which  in 

rrn  TT*    -I-         *  * 

So  ie  civill  life,  binde  a  man  of  exact  honesty  and  exquisite  in- 

tegritie :  in  mine  opinion  reape  a  goodly  commoditie,  what 
peculiar  sharpenesse  soever  they  enjoyne  themselves.  It  is  a 
kinde  of  death,  to  avoide  the  paine  of  well-doing,  or  trouble 
of  well-living.  They  may  have  another  prise,  but  the  prise 
of  uneasines  me  thinkes  they  never  had.  Nor  that  in  diffi 
culty,  there  be  any  thing  that  is  amid  the  waves  of  the 
worldly  multitude,  beyond  keeping  himselfe  upright  and 
untainted,  answering  loyally  and  truely  discharging  al 
members  and  severall  parts  of  his  charge.  It  is  happily 
more  easie  for  one,  in  honest  sort  to  neglect  and  passe  over 
all  the  sexe,  then  duely  and  wholly  to  maintaine  himselfe  in 
his  wives  company.  And  a  man  may  more  incuriously  fall 
into  povertie,  then  into  plenteousnesse ;  being  justly  dis- 
penced.  Custome,  according  to  reason,  doth  leade  to  more 
sharpenesse  then  abstinence  hath.  Moderation  is  a  vertue 
much  more  toylesome,  then  sufferance.  The  chaste  and  well 
living  of  yong  Scipio,  hath  a  thousand  severall  fashions  ;  that 
of  Diogenes  but  one.  This  doth  by  so  much  more  exceed 
all  ordinary  lives  in  innocencie  and  unspottednesse,  as 
those  which  are  most  exquisite  and  accomplished, 
exceed  in  profit  and  out-goe  it  in  force. 


THE    THIRTY-FOURTH    CHAPTER 

Observations  concerning  the  meanes  to  warre 
after  the  maner  of  lulius  Csesar. 

T  is  reported  of  divers  chiefe  Generals  in 
warre,  that  they  have  particularly  affected 
some  peculiar  book  or  other :    as,  Alex 
ander  the  great  highly  esteemed  Homer; 
Scipio    Affricanus,    Xenophon  ;    Marcus 
Brutus,  Polybius;  Charles  the  fifth,  Philip 
de  Comines:  And  it  is  lately  averred,  that 
in  some  places,  and  with  some  men,  Ma- 
chiavell  is  much  accompted  of :  But  our  late  Marshall  Strozzi, 
476 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

who  had  made  especiall  choise  to  love  Caesar;  without  doubt,  CHAPTER 
I  thinke  of  all  other  chose  best :  for  truely  he  ought  to  be  XXXIV 
the  Breviary  of  all  true  Souldiers,  as  being  the  absolute  and  °^ne™*j°ns 
perfect  chiefe  patterne  of  Military  profession.  And  God  the^  meanes 
hee  knowes  with  what  grace,  and  with  what  decorum,  hee  to  warre  after 
hath  embellished  this  rich  subject,  with  so  pure  a  kinde  of  the  maner 
speech,  so  pleasing  and  so  absolutely  perfect,  that  to  my  of  lulini 
taste,  there  are  no  writings  in  the  world,  which  in  this  sub 
ject  may  be  compared  to  his.  I  will  heere  register  certaine 
particular  and  rare  parts  concerning  his  maner  of  War, 
which  yet  remaine  in  my  memory.  His  Armie  beeing  some 
what  afrighted,  upon  the  report  that  ranne  of  the  great 
forces,  which  K.  luba  brought  against  him,  in  stead  of  abat 
ing  the  opinion  his  souldiers  had  conceived  of  it,  and  to 
diminish  the  meanes  or  forces  of  his  enemie,  having  caused 
them  to  be  assembled  altogether,  therby  to  assure  and 
incourage  them,  he  tooke  a  cleane  contrary  course,  to  that 
which  in  like  cases  we  are  accustomed  to  do :  for  he  bad  them 
trouble  themselves  no  more  to  finde  out  the  number  of  the 
forces,  which  his  enemies  brought  against  him,  for  himselfe 
had  already  true  knowledge  and  certaine  intelligence  of  them, 
and  told  them  a  number  farre  exceeding  both  the  truth  and 
report  of  them  :  following  what  Cyrus  commandeth  in  Xeno- 
phon.  Forasmuch  as  the  deceipt  is  not  of  like  interest,  for 
a  man  to  finde  his  enemies  in  effect  weaker  then  he  hoped, 
then  stronger  indeed,  having  once  conceived  an  opinion  of 
their  weaknesse.  He  enured  all  his  Souldiers  simply  to  obey, 
without  controling,  gaine-saying,  or  speaking  of  their  cap- 
taines  desseignes,  which  he  never  communicated  unto  them, 
but  upon  the  last  point  of  execution  :  and  was  pleased,  if  by 
chance  they  had  any  inkling  of  them,  so  to  deceive  them, 
presently  to  change  his  opinion :  And  having  prefixt  a  place 
to  quarter  in  at  night,  he  hath  often  beene  seene  to  march 
further,  and  lengthen  his  journey,  namely  if  the  weather 
were  foule,  or  if  it  rained.  The  Swizzers  in  the  beginning 
of  his  warres  in  Gaule,  having  sent  toward  him  to  give  them 
free  passage  through  the  Romane  countries,  and  he  being 
resolved  by  force  to  empeach  them,  did  notwithstanding 
shew  them  very  good  lookes,  and  tooke  certaine  dayes  respit 
to  give  them  an  answer,  during  which  time  he  might  have 

477 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  leasure  to  assemble  his  Armie  together.    These  poore  people 
XXXIV      knew  not  how  wel  he  could  husband  time  :    For  he  often 
^^rvations  repeated,  that  the  skill  to  embrace  occasions  in  the  nicke,  is 
the  ^^eanes  the  chiefest  part  of  an  absolute  Captaine :  And  truely  the 
to  warre  after  diligence  he  used  in  all  his  exploits,  is  incredible ;  and  the 
the  maner    like  was  never  heard  of.     If  he  were  not  over  consciencious 
of  lulms      jn  j-nat    uncler  colour  of  some  treatie,  parle  or  accord,  to 
take  any  advantage  of  his  enemies :  he  was  as  little  scrupu 
lous,  in  that  he  required  no  other  vertue  in  his  Souldiers  but 
valour;  and  except  mutinie  and  disobedience,  he  punished 
not  greatly  other  vices.      After  his  victories,  he  often  gave 
them  the  reines  to  all  licenciousnesse,  for  a  while  dispencing 
them  from  all  rules  of  military  discipline  ;  saying  moreover, 
his  Souldiers  were  so  well  instructed,  that  though  they  were 
in  their  gayest  clothes,  pranked  up,  muskt  and  perfumed, 
they  would  notwithstanding  runne  furiously  to  any  combate. 
And  in  truth  he  loved  to  see  them  richly  armed,  and  made 
them  weare  gilt,  graven  and  silvered  armours,  that  their  care 
to  keepe  them  cleane  and  bright,  might  make  them  more 
fierce,  and  readie  to  defend  themselves.     Speaking  to  them, 
he  ever  called  them  by  the  name  of  Fellow-souldiers  ;  a  name 
used  at  this  day  by  some  Captaines ;    which  his  successour 
Augustus  afterward  reformed,  esteeming  he  had  done  it  for 
the  necessitie  of  his  affaires,  and  to  flatter  the  hearts  of  those 
which  followed  him  but  voluntarily ; 

LUCAN.  v.  289.  — Rheni  mihi  Ccesar  in  undis, 

Dux  erat,  hie  socius ,  f acinus  quos  inquinat,  cvquat. 

When  Caesar  past  the  Rheine  he  was  my  Generall, 
My   Fellow   heere  :    sinne^   whom  it  staines,   makes 
fellowes  all ; 

but  that  this  custome  was  over-lowelie  for  the  dignitie  of 
an  Emperor,  and  chiefe  Generall  of  an  armie,  and  brought 
up  the  fashion  againe  to  cal  them  only  Souldiers.  To  this 
curtesie, Caesar  did  notwithstanding  intermixe  a  great  severity, 
to  suppresse  and  keep  them  humble.  His  ninth  Legion  having 
mutined  neere  unto  Placentia,  he  presently  cassiered  the  same 
with  great  ignominie  unto  it,  notwithstanding  that  Pompey 
were  yet  on  foot  and  strong  ;  and  would  not  receive  it  into 
favour,  but  with  humble  petition  and  entreatie.  Hee  did 
more  appease  them  by  authoritie  and  audacitie,  then  by 
478 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

mildenesse  and  affabilitie.    Where  he  speaketh  of  his  passage  CHAPTER 
over  the  River  of  Rheine,  towards  Germanic,  he  saith,  that      XXXIV 

deeming  it  unworthy  the  honour  of  the  Romane  people,  his  Observati°ns 
?      i  i  J  i  •  S    .  i    '  concerning 

army  should  passe   over  in  shippes,  he  caused  a  bridge  to  the      meanes 

be  built,  that  so  it  might  passe  over  drie-foot.  There  he  to  warre  after 
erected  that  admirable  bridge,  whereof  he  so  particularly  the  maner 
describeth  the  frame :  For  he  never  more  willingly  dilates  ° ulms 
himself  in  describing  any  of  his  exploites,  then  where  he 
endevoreth  to  represent  unto  us  the  subtilitie  of  his  inven 
tions,  in  such  kindes  of  manuall  workes.  I  have  also  noted 
this  in  his  booke,  that  he  much  accompteth  of  his  exhortations 
he  made  to  his  Souldiers  before  any  fight,  for  where  he  would 
shew  to  have  beene  either  surprised  or  urged,  he  ever  alledg- 
eth  this,  that  he  had  not  so  much  leasure  as  to  make  an  oration 
to  his  Souldiers  or  armie :  Before  that  great  battell  against 
those  of  Tournay :  Caesar  (saith  he)  having  disposed  of  the  rest, 
ranne  sodainly  whither  fortune  carried  him,  to  exhort  his  men: 
and  meeting  with  the  tenth  Legion  he  had  not  leasure  to 
say  any  thing  else  unto  them,  but  that  they  should  remember 
their  former  wonted  vertue,  they  should  nothing  be  danted, 
they  should  stoutly  resist  the  encounter  of  their  adversaries ; 
and  forasmuch  as  the  enemie  was  come  within  an  arrow-shot 
unto  him,  he  gave  the  signall  of  the  battell ;  and  sodainely  go 
ing  elsewhere,  to  encourage  others,  he  found  them  already  to 
gether  by  the  eares  ;  See  here  what  himself  saith  of  it  in  that 
place.  Verely  his  tongue  hath  in  diverse  places  much  bestead, 
and  done  him  notable  service ;  and  even  whilst  he  lived,  his 
military  eloquence  was  so  highly  regarded,  that  many  of  his 
Armie  were  scene  to  copie  and  keepe  his  orations  ;  by  which 
meanes  diverse  volumes  were  filled  with  them,  and  continued 
many  ages  after  his  death.  His  speech  had  particular  graces, 
so  that  his  familiar  friends,  and  namely  Augustus,  hearing 
that  rehearsed,  which  had  beene  collected  of  his,  knew  by  the 
Phrases  and  words,  what  was  his  or  not.  The  first  time  that 
with  any  publike  charge  he  issued  out  of  Rome,  he  came  in 
eight  dayes  to  the  river  of  Rhone,  having  ever  one  or  two 
Secretaries  before  him,  who  continually  writ  what  heendited, 
and  one  behinde  him  that  carried  his  sword.  And  surely,  if 
one  did  nothing  but  runne  up  and  downe,  he  could  very 
hardly  attaine  to  that  promptitude,  wherewith  ever  being 

479 


of  lulius 
Caesar 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  victorious,  having  left  Gaule,  and  following  Pompey  to  Brun- 
XXXIV  dusium,  in  eighteene  dayes  he  subdued  al  Italic;  returned 
from  Brundusium  to  Rome,  and  thence  went  even  to  the 
neart  °f  Spaine,  where  he  past  many  extreame  difficulties,  in 

to  warre  after  the  warres  betweene  Affranius  and  Petreius,  and  at  the  long 
the  maner  siege  of  Marseille :  from  whence  he  returned  into  Macedon, 
overthrew  the  Romane  Armie  at  Pharsalia;  thence  pursuing 
Pompey  he  passed  into  Egypt,  which  he  subdued  ;  from 
Egypt  he  came  unto  Syria,  and  into  the  countrie  of  Pontus, 
where  hee  fought  with  Pharnaces  ;  thence  into  Affrica,  where 
he  defeated  Scipio  and  luba,  and  thence  through  Italic  he 
returned  into  Spaine,  where  he  overthrew  Pompeyes  children. 

Luc.  iv.  505.  Ocior  et  call  flammis  et  tigride  fata. 

VIRG.  s£n.  Ac  veluti  montis  saxum  de  vertice  prceceps 

xii.  684.  Gum  ruit  avulsum  vento,  sen  turbidus  imber 

Proluit,  aut  annis  solvit  sublapsa  vetustas, 
Fertur  in  abruptum  magno  mons  improbus  actu, 
Eocultatque  solo,  silvas,  armenta,  virosque, 
Involvens  secum. 

Swifter  then  breed-yong  Tiger,,  or  heav'ns  flash, 
And  as  from  mountaines  top  a  headlong  stone, 
Rent-off  by  winde,  or  by  stormes  troublous  dash 
Washt-off,  or  loos'd  by  age  of  yeares  are  gone, 
Crosse-carried  with  great  force  that  hill-like  masse 
Bounds  on  the  earth,  and  rowles  with  it  in  one 
Woods,  h cards,  and  men,  and  all  that  neere-it  was. 

Speaking  of  the  siege  of  Avaricum,  he  saith,  that  it  was 
his  custome,  both  day  and  night,  ever  to  be  neere  and  about 
such  workemen  as  he  had  set  a  worke.  In  all  enterprises  of 
consequence  he  was  ever  the  first  skout-man,  or  survayer  of 
any  place  :  And  his  armie  never  approched  place,  which  he 
had  not  viewd  or  survayed  himselfe.  And  if  wee  may  be 
lieve  Suetonius,  at  what  time  he  attempted  to  passe  over 
into  England,  he  was  the  first  man  that  sounded  the  pas 
sage.  He  was  wont  to  say,  that  he  esteemed  that  victory 
much  more  which  was  conducted  by  advise,  and  managed 
by  counsell,  then  by  maine  strength  and  force.  In  the  warre 
against  Petreius  and  Afranius,  Fortune  presenting  an  ap- 
parant  occasion  of  advantage  unto  him,  he  saith,  that  he 
refused  it,  hoping  with  a  little  more  time,  but  with  lesse 
hazard,  to  see  the  overthrow  of  his  enemie.  Where  he  also 

480 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

plaid  a  notable  part,  to  command  all  his  Armie  to  swimme  CHAPTER 
over  a  river,  without  any  necessitie.  XXXIV 

Observations 

LUCAN.  iv.  — rapuitque  ruens  in  prcelia  miles,  concerning 

I5I-  Quodfugiens  timuisset  Her,  mox  uda  receptis  the      meanes 

Membra  fovent  armis,  gelidosque  d  gurgite  cursu  to  warre  after 

Restituunt  artus.  the    maner 

The  Souldier  rids  that  way  in  hast  to  fight,  of  lulius 

Which  yet  he  would  have  fearde  in  haste  of  flight ; 
His  limbs  with  water  wet  and  cold  before, 
With  armes  he  covers,  running  doth  restore. 

I  finde  him  somewhat  more  warie  and  considerate  in  his 
enterprises,  then  Alexander  ;  for  the  latter  seemeth  to  seeke 
out,  and  by  maine  force  to  runne  into  dangers,  as  an  im 
petuous  or  raging  torrent,  which  without  heede,  discretion, 
or  choise,  shockes  and  checkmates  what  ere  it  meeteth 
withall. 

Sic  tauriformis  volvitur  Aufidus,  HOR.  Car.  iv. 

Qui  Regna  Dauni  perfluit  Appuli,  Od.  xiv.  25. 

Dum  scevit,  horrendamque  cultis 
Diluviem  meditatur  agris. 

So  Bull-fac'd  Aufidus  still  rowling  growes, 
Which  through  Apulias  ancient  kingdome  flowes, 
When  he  doth  rage  in  threatning  meditation 
To  bring  on  faire  fields  fearefull  inundation. 

And  to  say  truth,  his  hap  was  to  be  most  employed  in  the 
spring-time,  and  first  heate  of  his  age  :  whereas  Caesar  was 
well  strucken  in  yeares,  when  he  beganne  to  follow  armes. 
Alexander  was  of  a  more  cholerike,  sanguine  and  violent  con 
stitution,  which  humour  hee  stirred  up  with  wine,  whereof 
Caesar  was  very  abstinent.  But  where  occasions  of  necessitie 
were  offered,  and  where  the  subject  required  it,  there  was 
never  man  that  so  little  regarded  his  person.  As  for  me,  me 
seemeth  I  reade  in  diverse  of  his  exploits,  a  certaine  resolu 
tion  rather  to  lose  himselfe,  then  to  abide  the  brunt  or  shame 
to  be  overthrowne.  In  that  great  battel,  which  he  fought 
against  those  of  Turnay,  seeing  the  vangard  of  his  army 
somewhat  enclining  to  route,  even  as  he  was,  without  shield 
or  target,  he  ranne  headlong  to  the  front  of  his  enemies : 
Which  many  other  times  happened  unto  him.  Hearing  once 
how  his  men  were  besieged,  he  past  disguized  through  the 

3P  481 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  midst  and  thickest  of  his  enemies  campe,  so  to  encourage  and 
XXXIV  awe  them  with  his  presence.  Having  crossed  the  way  to 
•servations  Jjyrrhachium,  with  very  few  forces,  and  perceiving  the  rest 
the  nC^neaiSs  °^  ^s  armv  (the  conduct  whereof  hee  had  left  unto  Antonius), 
to  warre  after  to  be  somewhat  slow  in  comming,  he  undertooke  all  alone, 
the  maner  to  repasse  the  Sea,  notwithstanding  a  violent  and  raging 
of  lulms  Tempest ;  and  secretly  stole  himselfe  away  to  fetch  the  rest 
of  his  forces :  All  the  havens  on  that  side,  yea  and  all  the 
Sea  being  possessed  by  Pompey.  And  concerning  the  enter 
prises  he  underwent  with  armed  hand,  there  are  divers  of 
them,  which  in  respect  of  the  hazard,  exceede  all  discourse  of 
military  reason  :  for,  with  how  weake  meanes  undertooke  he 
to  subdue  the  Kingdome  of  ^Egypt,  and  afterward  to  front 
the  forces  of  Scipio  and  luba,  which  were  tenne  parts  greater 
than  his  ?  Mee  thinkes  such  men  have  had  a  kinde  of  more 
than  humane  confidence  of  their  fortune :  And  himselfe  was 
wont  to  say,  that  haughty  enterprises  were  to  be  executed 
and  not  consulted  upon.  After  the  battell  of  Pharsalia, 
having  sent  his  Armie  before  into  Asia  and  himselfe  with 
onely  one  ship  passing  through  the  straight  of  Hellespont, 
he  met  on  the  Seas  with  Lucius  Cassius,  attended  on  with  ten 
tall  shippes  of  Warre  ;  he  was  so  farre  from  shunning  him, 
that  he  durst  not  only  stay  for  him,  but  with  all  haste  make 
toward  and  summon  him,  to  yeeld  himselfe  to  his  mercie  ; 
which  he  did.  Having  undertaken  that  furious  siege  of 
Alexia,  wherein  were  fourescore  thousand  men  of  defence,  and 
all  France  up  in  armes,  with  a  resolution  to  runne  upon  him 
and  raise  the  siege,  and  having  an  armie  on  foote  of  one 
hundred  and  nine  thousand  horse,  and  two  hundred  fortie 
thousand  foote ;  What  a  fond  hardy  and  outragious  confi 
dence  was  it  in  him,  that  he  would  never  give  over  his  attempt 
and  resolve  in  two  so  great  difficulties  together  ?  Which  he 
notwithstanding  underwent :  And  after  he  had  obtained  so 
notable  a  battell  of  those  which  were  without,  he  soone  re 
duced  those  that  were  besieged  in  the  Towne  to  his  mercy. 
The  very  like  happened  to  Lucullus  at  the  siege  of  Tigrano- 
certa,  against  King  Tigranes,  but  with  an  unlike  condition, 
seeing  his  enemies  demissenesse,  with  whom  Lucullus  was  to 
deale.  I  will  heere  note  two  rare  and  extraordinary  events, 
touching  the  siege  of  Alexia ;  the  one,  that  the  French  men 
482 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

being  all  assembled  together  with  a  purpose  to  meet  with  CHAPTER 
Cassar,  having  diligently  survaied  and  exactly  numbred  all      XXXIV 
their  forces,  resolved  in  their  counsell,  to  cutte-off  a  great  Ol)servations 
part  of  this   huge  multitude  for  feare  they  might  breed  a  n™™™^ 

^       •  mi    *  1*  _iP  i         1  Wl"          IllctlllcS 

confusion,  llns  example  is  new,  to  teare  to  be  over  many  ;  to  warre  after 
yet  if  it  be  well  taken,  it  is  very  likely,  that  the  bodie  of  an  the  maner 
armie  ought  to  have  a  well  proportioned  greatnesse,  and  °*  Iulius 
ordered  to  indifferent  bounds.  Whether  it  be  for  the  diffi-  Caesar 
culty  to  feed  the  same  or  to  lead  it  in  order  and  keepe  it  in 
awe.  And  we  may  easily  verifie  by  examples,  that  these 
numerous  and  infinite  Armies  have  seldome  brought  any 
notable  thing  to  passe  :  According  to  Cyrus  his  saying  in 
Xenophon,  '  It  is  not  the  multitude  of  men,  but  the  number 
'  of  good  men  that  causeth  an  advantage ' :  The  rest  rather 
breeding  confusion  and  trouble,  than  helpe  or  availe.  And 
Bajazeth  tooke  the  chiefest  foundation  of  his  resolution, 
against  the  advise  of  all  his  Captaines,  to  joyne  fight  with 
Tarnburlane,  onely  because  the  innumerable  number  of  men, 
which  his  enemie  brought  into  the  field,  gave  him  an  assured 
hope  of  route  and  confusion.  Scanderbeg,  a  sufficient  and  most 
expert  ludge  in  such  a  case,  was  wont  to  say,  that  tenne 
or  twelve  thousand  trusty  and  resolute  fighting  men,  ought 
to  suffice  any  sufficient  Chieftaine  of  warre,  to  warrant  his 
reputation  in  any  kinde  of  military  exploite.  The  other 
point,  which  seemeth  to  be  repugnant  both  untocustome  and 
reason  of  Warre,  is,  that  Vercingentorix,  who  was  appointed 
chiefe  Generall  of  all  the  forces  of  the  revolted  Gaules,  under- 
tooke  to  immure  and  shutte  himselfe  into  Alexia.  For,  He 
that  hath  the  commaundement  of  a  whole  Countrie,  ought 
never  to  engage  himselfe,  except  in  cases  of  extremitie,  and 
where  all  his  rest  and  last  refuge  goeth  on  it,  and  hath  no 
other  hope  left  him,  but  the  defence  of  such  a  place.  Other 
wise  he  ought  to  keepe  himselfe  free,  that  so  he  may  have 
meanes  to  provide  in  all  parts  of  his  Government.  But  to 
returne  to  Caesar,  he  became  in  time  somewhat  more  slow, 
heedy,  and  considerate,  as  witnesseth  his  familiar  friend 
Oppius  ;  deeming,  he  should  not  so  easily  hazard  the  honour 
of  so  many  Victories,  which  one  onely  disaster,  or  mis- 
encounter,  might  make  him  lose.  It  is  that  the  Italians 
are  wont  to  say,  when  they  will  or  blame  or  reproach  any 

483  * 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  man  with  this  overdaring,  or  rash  fond-hardinesse,  which  is 
XXXIV  often  scene  in  yoong  men,  calling  them,  Bisognosid  honore, 
^ncernin118  as  muc^  to  saJ  as  neecty  of  honour  :  And  that  being  yet 
the1  Cmeanes  hungrie,  greedy  and  voyd  of  reputation,  they  have  reason  to 
to  warre  after  seeke  after  it,  whatsoever  it  may  cost  them  ;  Which  they 
the  maner  should  never  doe,  that  have  already  acquired  the  same. 
P  us  There  may  be  some  just  moderation  in  this  desire  of  glory, 
and  some  saciety  in  this  appetite,  as  wel  as  in  others  ; 
Diverse  doe  so  practize  it.  He  was  farre  from  that  religion 
of  the  auncient  Romans,  who  in  their  Warres  would  never 
prevaile  but  with  meere  and  genuine  vertue :  But  rather 
joyned  more  conscience  unto  it,  than  now-adaies  we  should 
doe ;  And  would  never  allow  of  all  meanes,  were  he  never  so 
certaine  to  get  the  victory.  In  his  Warres  against  Ario- 
vistus,  whilest  he  was  in  parly  with  him,  some  tumult  or  in 
surrection  happened  between  the  two  armies,  which  beganne 
by  the  fault  or  negligence  of  some  of  Ariovistus  horsmen. 
In  which  hurlie-burlie  Csesar  found  himselfe  to  have  a  great 
advantage  over  his  enemies,  which  notwithstanding  he  would 
not  embrace,  for  feare  he  might  be  taxed  or  suspected  to 
have  proceeded  falsly,  or  consented  to  any  trechery.  At  what 
time  soever  hee  went  to  fight,  he  was  accustomed  to  weare  a 
very  rich  garment,  and  of  a  sheene  and  garish  colour,  that  so 
he  might  the  better  be  marked.  When  his  Souldiers  were 
neerest  unto  their  enemies  he  restrained  and  kept  them  very 
short.  When  the  ancient  Graecians  would  accuse  or  taxe 
any  man  of  extreme  insufficiencie,  they  used  this  common 
Proverbe  ;  '  That  he  could  neyther  reade  nor  swimme ' :  And 
himselfe  was  of  this  opinion,  that  the  arte  of  swimming  was 
most  necessary  and  beneh'ciall  in  War,  and  a  Souldier  might 
reape  diverse  commodities  by  it :  If  he  were  in  haste,  and  to 
make  speed,  he  would  ordinarily  swimme  over  al  the  Rivers 
he  met  withal :  and  loved  greatly  to  travell  on  foote :  as 
Alexander  the  great  was  wont.  In  JEgypt  being  on  a  time 
forced  (to  save  himselfe)  to  leap  into  a  little  whirry  or  Bote, 
and  so  many  of  his  people  following  him,  that  he  was  in 
danger  to  sink,  he  rather  chose  to  fling  himself  into  the  Sea, 
which  he  did  ;  and  swimming  came  into  his  fleete,  that  was 
more  than  two  hundred  paces  from  him,  holding  his  writing- 
Tables  in  his  left  hand  out  of  the  water,  and  with  his  teeth 
484 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

drawing  his  Coate  of   Armes    after  him,  that  his  enemies  CHAPTER 
might  not  enjoy  it,  and  this  did  he  being  well  stricken  in       XXXIV 
yeares.     No  Generall  of  Warre  had  ever  so  much  credit  with  Observati°ns 
his  Souldiers.     In  the  beginning  of  his  civill  warres,  his  Cen-  the  DC  meanes 
teniers  offered  him  every  one,  at  their  owne  charges  to  pay  to  warre  after 
and  find  him  a  man  at  Armes,  and  his  foote-men  to  serve    the    maner 
him  for  nothing  ;  and  those  that  were  best  able,  to  defray     of  lulms 
the  poore  and  needy. 

Our  late  Admirall  of  France  Lord  Chastillion,  in  our  late 
civill  warres  shewed  such  an  example  :  For,  the  French-men 
of  his  army,  at  their  proper  cost,  and  charges  helped  to  pay 
such  strangers  as  followed  him.  Few  examples  of  so  loving 
and  earnest  affection  may  bee  found  amongst  those  that 
follow  the  old  manner  of  warre,  and  strictly  hold  themselves 
under  the  ancient  pollicie  of  their  lawes.  Passion  hath  more 
sway  over  us,  then  reason  :  Yet  hath  it  chanced  in  the  war 
against  Hannibal,  that  imitating  the  example  of  the  Romane 
peoples  liberalitie  in  the  Citie,  the  Souldiers  and  Captaines 
refused  their  pay,  and  in  Marcellus  his  campe,  those  were 
called  mercenary,  that  tooke  any  pay.  Having  had  some 
defeate  neere  unto  Dyrrachium,  his  souldiers  came  voluntarily 
before  him,  and  offered  themselves  to  be  punished  ;  so  that 
he  was  more  troubled  to  comfort,  then  to  chide  them.  One 
onely  of  his  Cohortes  (whereof  ten  went  to  a  Legion)  held 
fight  above  foure  howres  with  foure  of  Pompeies  whole 
Legions,  until  it  was  well-nigh  all  defeated  with  the  multi 
tude  and  force  of  arrowes  :  And  in  his  trenches  were  after 
ward  found  one  hundred  and  thirtie  thousand  shafts.  A 
Souldier  of  his,  named  Scaeva,  who  commanded  one  of  the 
entrances,  did  so  invincibly  defend  and  keepe  himselfe,  that 
he  had  one  of  his  eyes  thrust  out,  and  one  shoulder  and  one 
thigh  thrust  through,  and  his  shield  flawed  and  pearced  in 
two  hundred  and  thirtie  severall  places.  It  hath  befallen  to 
many  of  his  Souldiers,  being  taken  prisoners,  to  chuse  rather 
to  die  then  promise  to  follow  any  other  faction,  or  receive 
any  other  entertainment.  Granius  Petronius  taken  by  Scipio 
in  Affricke  :  After  Scipio  had  caused  all  his  fellowes  to  bee 
put  to  death,  sent  him  word  that  he  gave  him  his  life,  forso- 
much  as  he  was  a  man  of  ranke  and  a  Questor  :  Petronius 
answered,  that  Caesars  Souldiers  were  wont  to  give  life  to 

485 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  others,  and  not  accept  it  themselves  :  and  there withall  with 

XXXIV      his  owne  hands  killed  himselfe.     Infinite  examples  there  are 

Observations     f  th  j     ndelitie>      That  part    which   they  acted     who   were 

concerning    ,  .    .      c   .  _£.      '  ,  .  ,  ^  J  '  .,,     ~ 

the      meanes  beseiged   in  salona,  a   Litie  which  tooke  part  with  Cassar 

to  warre  after  against  Pompey,  must  not  be  forgotten,  by  reason  of  a  rare 
the    maner    accident  that  there  hapned.     Marcus  Octavius,  having  long 
of  lulms     time  beleagred  the  Town,  they  within  were  reduced  to  such 
extreamitie  and  pinching  necessitie   of  all  things,  that  to 
supply  the  great  want  they  had  of  men,  most  of  them  being 
alreadie  or  hurt  or  dead  ;    they  had  set  all  their  slaves  at 
libertie,  and  for  the  behoofe  of  their  engines,  were  compelled 
to  cut  off  all  their  womens  haires,  to  make  ropes  with  them  ; 
besides  a  wonderfull  lacke  of  victualls,  resolving  notwith 
standing  never  to  yeeld  themselves  :    After  they  had  a  long 
time    lingered    the    siege,  and   that    Octavius   was   thereby 
become  more  carelesse,  and  lesse  heeding  or  attentive  to  his 
enterprise  ;   they  one  day  about  high  noone  (having   first 
ranged  their  wives  and  children  upon  the  walles,  to  set  the 
better  face  upon  the  matter)  rushed  out  in  such  a  furie  upon 
the  beseigers,  that  having  put  to  rout  and  defeated  the  first, 
the  second,  and  third  corps  de  garde ;  then  the  fourth  and 
the  rest :    and  having  forced  them  to  quit  their  trenches, 
chased    them    even    to    their   shippes :    and   Octavius    with 
much  adoe  saved   himselfe  in  Dyrrachium,  where  Pompey 
was.      I  remember  not  at  this  time,  to  have  read  of  any 
other  example,  where  the   beleagred    doe    in    grosse  beate 
the  beleagrers,  and  get  the  maistry  and  possession  of 
the  field  :  nor  that  a  sallie  hath  drawne  a  meere 
and    absolute    victory    of    a    battell    into 
consequence. 


486 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 


THE   THIRTY-FIFTH   CHAPTER 

Of  three  good  women. 

HEY  are  not  to  be  had  by  dozens,  as  each 
one  knowes,  namely  in  rights  and  duties 
of  mariage ;  For,  it  is  a  bargaine  full  of 
so  many  thornie  circumstances,  that  it  is 
hard  the  will  of  a  woman  should  long 
keepe  her  selfe  whole  and  perfect  there 
in.  And  although  men  have  somewhat  a 
better  condition  in  the  same,  yet  have 
they  much  to  doe.  The  touchstone  and  perfect  triall  of  a 
good  mariage,  respects  the  time  that  the  societie  continueth  ; 
whether  it  have  constantly  beene  milde,  loyall  and  com 
modious.  In  our  age,  they  more  commonly  reserve  to 
enstall  their  good  offices,  and  set  foorth  the  vehemence  of 
their  affections  toward  their  lost  husbands  :  And  then  seeke 
they  at  least  to  yeeld  some  testimonie  of  their  good  wil.  O 
late  testimonie  and  out  of  season,  whereby  they  rather  shew, 
they  never  love  them  but  when  they  are  dead.  Our  life  is 
full  of  combustion  and  scolding,  but  our  disease  full  of  love 
and  of  curtesie.  As  fathers  conceale  affection  toward  their 
children  ;  so  they  to  maintaine  an  honest  respect,  cloake 
their  love  toward  their  husbands.  This  mystery  answereth 
not  my  taste.  They  may  long  enough  scratch  and  dishevell 
themselves  ;  let  me  enquire  of  a  chamber-maide  or  of  a 
secretarie,  how  they  were,  how  they  did,  and  how  they 
have  lived  together  :  I  can  never  forget  this  good  saying, 
lactantius  mcerent,  quce  minus  dolent.  4  They  keepe  a  howl- 
'  ing  with  most  ostentation,  who  are  lesse  sorrowfull  at 
'  heart.1  Their  lowring  and  puling  is  hatefull  to  the  living, 
and  vaine  to  the  dead.  Wee  shall  easily  dispence  with  them 
to  laugh  at  us  when  we  are  dead,  upon  condition  they  smile 
upon  us  while  wee  live.  Is  not  this  the  way  to  revive  a  man 
with  spite  ;  that  he  who  hath  spitten  in  my  face  when  I  was 
living,  shal  come  and  claw  my  feet  when  I  am  dead  ?  If 
there  be  any  honour  for  a  woman  to  weepe  for  hir  husband, 
it  belongs  to  hir  that  hath  smiled  upon  him  when  she 

487 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  had  him.     Such  as  have   wept  when  they  lived,  let  them 
XXXV       laugh  when  they  are  dead,  as  well  outwardly  as  inwardly. 

Of  three  good  Moreover,  regard  not  those  blubbred  eyes,  nor  that  pitty 

women  .  •  i  •         ,1          ^  ,1  11 

moving  voice  ;    but  view  that  demeanor,  that  colour  and 

cheerefull  good  plight  of  those  cheekes,  under  their  great 
vailes  ;  thence  it  is  she  speaks  plaine  French.  There  are 
few  whose  health  doth  not  daily  grow  better  and  better  ;  a 
quality  that  cannot  lie.  This  ceremonious  countenance  look- 
eth  not  so  much  backward,  as  forward :  It  is  rather  a  pur 
chase  then  a  payment.  In  mine  infancie  an  honest  and  most 
faire  Ladie  (who  yet  liveth,  the  widdowe  of  a  Prince)  had 
somewhat  more  of  I  wot  not  what  in  her  attires,  then  the 
lawes  of  widdowhood  would  well  permit.  To  such  as  blamed 
hir  for  it  :  It  is  (said  shee)  because  I  intend  no  more  new 
acquaintances,  and  have  no  mind  at  all  to  marry  againe. 
Because  I  will  not  altogether  dissent  from  our  custome,  I 
have  heere  made  choise  of  three  women,  who  have  also  im- 
ployed  the  utmost  endevor  of  their  goodnes  and  affection, 
about  their  husbands  deaths.  Yet  are  they  examples  some 
what  different  and  so  urging  that  they  hardly  draw  life  into 
consequence.  Plinie  the  yonger,  had  dwelling  neere  to  a 
house  of  his  in  Italic,  a  neighbour  wonderfuly  tormented  with 
certaine  ulcers,  which  much  troubled  him  in  his  secret  parts. 
His  wife  perceiving  him  to  droope  and  languish  away,  en 
treated  him  she  might  leasurely  search  and  neerely  view  the 
quality  of  his  disease,  and  she  would  more  freely  then  any 
other  tell  him  what  he  was  to  hope  for:  Which  having 
obtained,  and  curiously  considered  the  same,  she  found  it 
impossible  ever  to  be  cured,  and  all  he  might  expect  was  but 
to  lead  a  long,  dolorous,  and  languishing  life  ;  and  therefore 
for  his  more  safetie  and  soveraigne  remedie,  perswaded  him 
to  kill  himselfe.  And  finding  him  somewhat  nice  and  backe- 
ward  to  effect  so  rude  an  enterprise :  Thinke  not  my  deare 
friend  (quoth  shee)  but  that  the  sorrowes  and  griefes,  I  see 
thee  feele,  touch  me  as  neere  and  more,  if  more  may  be,  as 
thy  selfe,  and  that  to  be  rid  of  them,  I  will  applie  the  same 
remedie  to  my  selfe,  which  I  prescribe  to  thee.  I  will 
accompany  thee  in  thy  cure  as  I  have  done  in  thy  sick- 
nesse :  remoove  all  feare,  and  assure  thy  selfe,  we  shall  have 
pleasure  in  this  passage,  which  shall  deliver  us  from  all 
488 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

torments,  for  we  will  happily  goe  together  :  That  said,  and  CHAPTER 

having  cheared  up  hir  husbands  courage,  she  determined       XXXV 

they  should  both  headlong  throw  themselves  into  the  sea  Of  three  £ood 

from  out  a  window  of  their  house,  that  overlooked  the  same: 

and  to  maintaine  this  loyall,  vehement  and   never  to  be 

severed  affection  to  the  end,  wherewith  shee  had  during  his 

life  embraced  him,  she  would  also  have  him  die  in  her  armes; 

and  fearing  they  might  faile  her,  and  through  the  fall,  or 

feare  or  apprehension  her  hold-fast  might  be  loosed,  shee 

caused  herselfe  to  be  fast  bound  unto  him  by  the  middle : 

And  thus  for  the  ease  of  her  husbands  life  she  was  contented 

to  forgoe  her  owne.     She  was  but  of  meane  place  and  low 

fortune  :    and  amidde  such  condition  of  people,  it  is  not 

so  strange  to  see  some  parts  of  rare  vertue  and  exemplar 

goodnesse. 

— extrema  per  illos  VIRG.  Georg. 

lustitia  excedens  terris  vestigia  fecit.  ii.  473« 

Justice  departing  from  the  earth  did  take 

Of  them  her  leave,  through  them  last  passage  make. 

The  other  two  are  noble  and  Rich  ;  where  examples  of 
vertue  are  rarely  lodged.  Arria  wife  unto  Cecinna  Paetus, 
a  man  that  had  been  Consul,  was  mother  of  another  Arria, 
wife  to  Thrasea  Paetus  whose  vertue  was  so  highly  renowmed 
during  the  time  of  Nero  ;  and  by  meane  of  his  sonne-in-law, 
grandmother  to  Fannia.  For,  the  resemblance  of  these  mens 
and  womens  names  and  fortunes  hath  made  diverse  to  mis 
take  them.  This  first  Arria,  her  husband  Cecinna  Paetus 
having  beene  taken  prisoner  by  the  Souldiers  of  Claudius 
the  Emperour,  after  the  overthrow  of  Scribonianus,  whose 
faction  he  had  followed,  entreated  those  who  led  him  prisoner 
to  Rome,  to  take  her  into  their  ship,  where  for  the  service 
of  her  husband  shee  should  be  of  lesse  charge  and  incom- 
moditie  to  them,  then  a  number  of  other  persons,  which 
they  must  necessarily  have,  and  that  she  alone  might  supply 
and  stead  him  in  his  chamber,  in  his  kitchen  and  all  other 
offices ;  which  they  utterly  refused,  and  so  hoised  sailes,  but 
shee  leaping  into  a  fishers  boate,  that  she  immediately  hired, 
followed  him  aloofe  from  the  further  shore  of  Sclaviona. 
Being  come  to  Rome,  one  day,  in  the  Emperours  presence, 
lunia  the  widdow  of  Scribonianus,  by  reason  of  the  neere- 

3Q  489 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nesse  and  society  of  their  fortunes,  familiarly  accosted  her, 
XXXV       k^  s}ie  rudely,  with  these  words,  thrust  her  away  :    What 

woTen  (cluoth  shee)  sha11  T  SPeake  to  thee'  °r  sha11  l  listen  what 
thou  saiest  ?  Thou,  in  whose  lappe  Scribonianus  thy  hus 
band  was  slaine,  and  thou  yet  livest  ?  and  thou  breathest  ? 
These  words  with  divers  other  signes,  made  her  kinsfolkes 
and  friends  perceive  that  she  purposed  to  make  herselfe 
away,  as  impatient  to  abide  her  husbands  fortune.  And 
Thrasea  her  son  in  law,  taking  hold  of  her  speeches,  beseech 
ing  her  that  she  would  not  so  unheedily  spoile  her  selfe,  he 
thus  bespake  her :  What  ?  If  I  were  in  Cecinnaes  fortune 
or  the  like,  would  you  have  my  wife  your  daughter  to  do 
so  ?  What  else  ?  make  you  a  question  of  it  ?  (answered  she). 
Yes  marry  would  I,  had  she  lived  so  long  and  in  so  good- 
agreeing  sort  with  thee,  as  I  have  done  with  my  husband. 
These  and  such  like  answers,  encreased  the  care  they  had  of 
her ;  and  made  them  more  heedfull  to  watch,  and  neerely  to 
look  unto  her.  One  day,  after  she  had  uttered  these  words 
to  her  keepers  ;  You  may  looke  long  enough  to  me,  well  may 
you  make  me  die  worse,  but  you  shall  never  be  able  to  keepe 
me  from  dying  :  and  therewith  furiously  flinging  her  selfe 
out  of  a  chaire  (wherein  she  sate)  with  all  the  strength  she 
had,  she  fiercely  ranne  her  head  against  the  next  wall ;  with 
which  blow  having  sore  hurt  her  selfe,  and  falling  into  a 
dead  swowne,  after  they  had  with  much  adoe  brought  her  to 
her  selfe  againe  :  Did  I  not  tell  you  (quoth  she)  that  if  you 
kept  me  from  one  easi  death,  I  would  choose  another,  how 
hard  and  difficult  soever  ?  The  end  of  so  admirable  a  vertue 
was  this.  Her  husband  Paetus  wanting  the  courage  to  doe 
himselfe  to  death,  unto  which  the  Emperors  cruelty  reserved 
him ;  one  day,  having  first  employed  discourses  and  exhorta 
tions,  befitting  the  counsel!  she  gave  him  to  make  himselfe 
away,  shee  tooke  a  Dagger  that  her  husband  wore,  and  hold 
ing  it  outright  in  her  hand,  for  the  period  of  her  exhortation  : 
Doe  thus  Paetus  (said  she)  and  at  that  instant,  stabbing  her 
selfe  mortally  to  the  heart,  and  presently  pulling  the  dagger 
out  againe  she  reached  the  same  unto  her  husband,  and  so 
yeelded  up  the  ghost,  uttering  this  noble,  generous  and 
immortall  speech,  Pcete  non  dolet,  she  had  not  the  leasure  to 
pronounce  other  than  these  three  wordes,  in  substance  mate- 
490 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

riall  and  worthy  her  selfe,  'Holde  Paetus,  it  hath  done  me  no  CHAPTER 
'  hurt/  XXXV 

Castes  suo  gladium  cum  traderet  Arria  Pceto,  Of  three  good 

Quern  de  visceribus  traxerat  ipsa  suis ;  women 

Si  qua  fides,  vulnus  quod  fed,  non  dolet,  inquit,  MART.  \.Epig. 

Sed  quod  tu  fades,  id  mihi  Pate  dolet.  xiv.  i. 

Chast  Arria  when  she  gave  her  Paetus  that  sharpe  sword, 
Which  from  her  bowells  she  had  drawne  forth  bleeding 

new,, 

The  wound  I  gave  and  have,  if  you  will  trust  my  word, 
Griev's  not,  said  she,  but  that  which  shall  be  made  by 
you. 

It  is  much  more  lively  in  his  owne  naturall,  and  of  a 
richer  Sense  ;  for  both  her  husbands  wound  and  death,  and 
her  owne  hurts,  she  was  so  farre  from  grieving  to  have  beene 
the  counselor  and  motive  of  them,  that  shee  rejoyced  to 
have  performed  so  haughty  and  couragious  an  act,  onely  for 
the  behoofe  of  her  deere  husband,  and  at  the  last  gaspe  of 
her  life,  she  only  regarded  him  ;  and  to  remove  all  feare 
from  him,  to  follow  her  in  death,  which  Paetus  beholding, 
he  immediately  wounded  himselfe  with  the  same  dagger, 
ashamed  (as  I  suppose)  to  have  had  need  of  so  deare  an 
instruction,  and  precious  a  teaching.  Pompea  Paulina,  an 
high  and  noble-borne  yong  Romane  Ladie,  had  wedded 
Seneca,  being  very  aged.  Nero  (his  faire  disciple)  having 
sent  his  Satellites  or  officers  toward  him,  to  denounce  the 
decree  of  his  death  to  him  :  which  in  those  dayes  was  done 
after  this  manner.  When  the  Roman  Emperors  had  con 
demned  any  man  of  quality  to  death,  they  were  wont  to 
send  their  officers  unto  him,  to  chuse  what  death  he  pleased, 
and  to  take  it  within  such  and  such  a  time,  which  according 
to  the  temper  of  their  choller,  they  prescribed  unto  him, 
sometimes  shorter,  and  some  times  longer,  giving  him  that 
time  to  dispose  of  his  affaires,  which  also  by  reason  of  some 
short  warning  they  divers  times  tooke  from  him :  And  if 
the  condemned  partie  seemed  in  any  sort  to  strive  against 
their  will,  they  would  often  send  men  of  purpose  to  execute 
him,  either  cutting  the  veins  of  his  armes  and  legs,  or  com 
pelling  him  to  take  and  swallow  poison.  But  men  of  honor 
stayed  not  that  enforcement,  but  to  that  effect  used  their 
own  Phisitions  or  Surgeons.  Seneca,  with  a  reposed  and 

491 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  undanted  countenance  listned  attentively  to  their  charge, 
XXXV       an(j  presently  demaunded  for  paper  and  inke  to  make  his 

woTen  last  wil  and  testament>  which  the  Captaine  refusing  him,  he 
turned  towards  his  friends,  and  thus  bespake  them  :  Sith 
(my  loving  friends)  I  cannot  bequeath  you  any  other  thing 
in  remembrance  or  acknowledgement  of  what  I  owe  you,  I 
leave  you  at  least  the  richest  and  best  portion  I  have,  that 
is,  the  image  of  my  maners  and  my  life,  which  I  beseech  you 
to  keepe  in  memory;  which  doing,  you  may  acquire  the 
glory  and  purchase  the  name  of  truly  sincere  and  absolutely 
true  friends.  And  therewithall  sometimes  appeasing  the 
sharpenes  of  the  sorow  he  saw  them  endure  for  his  sake, 
with  mild  and  gentle  speeches,  sometime  raising  his  voice  to 
chide  them ;  Where  are  (said  he)  those  memorable  precepts 
of  Philosophy  ?  What  is  become  of  those  provisions,  which 
for  so  many  yeares  together  we  have  laid  up  against  the 
brunts  and  accidents  of  Fortune?  Was  Neroes  innated 
cruelty  unknowne  unto  us  ?  What  might  we  expect  or  hope 
for  at  his  hands,  who  had  murdred  his  mother  and  mas 
sacred  his  Brother,  but  that  he  would  also  do  his  Tutor  and 
Governor  to  death  that  hath  fostred  and  brought  him  up  ? 
Having  uttered  these  words  to  al  the  by-standers,  he  turned 
him  to  his  wife,  as  she  was  ready  to  sinke  downe,  and  with 
the  burthen  of  her  griefe  to  faint  in  heart  and  strength  ; 
he  colled  and  embraced  her  about  the  necke,  and  heartily 
entreated  her,  for  the  love  of  him,  somewhat  more  patiently 
to  beare  this  accident ;  and  that  his  houre  was  come,  wherein 
he  must  shew  no  longer  by  discourse  and  disputation,  but  in 
earnest  effect,  declare  the  fruit  he  had  reaped  by  his  studie ; 
and  that  undoubtedly  he  embraced  death,  not  only  without 
griefe  but  with  exceeding  joy.  Wherefore  my  deere-deere 
heart,  do  not  dishonor  it  by  thy  teares,  lest  thou  seeme  to  love 
thy  selfe  more  than  my  reputation.  Asswage  thy  sorrowes, 
and  comfort  thy  selfe  in  the  knowledge  thou  hast  had  of  me 
and  of  my  actions  ;  leading  the  rest  of  thy  life  by  the  honest 
occupations  to  which  thou  art  addicted.  To  whom  Paulina, 
having  somwhat  rouzed  her  drooping  spirits,  and  by  a  thrice- 
noble  affection  awakened  the  magnanimitie  of  her  liigh- 
setled  courage,  answered  thus  :  No  Seneca,  thinke  not  that 
in  this  necessitie  I  will  leave  you  without  my  company. 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

I  would  not  have  you  imagin  that  the  vertuous  examples  CHAPTER 
of  your  life  have  not  also  taught  me  to  die  :  And  when  shal  XXXV 
I  be  able  to  do  it  or  better,  or  more  honestly,  or  more  to 
mine  own  liking,  then  with  your  selfe  ?  And  be  resolved  I 
wil  go  with  you  and  be  partaker  of  your  fortune.  Seneca 
taking  so  generous  a  resolve,  and  glorious  a  determination  of 
his  wife  in  good  part,  and  to  free  himselfe  from  the  feare  he 
had  to  leave  her  after  his  death,  to  his  enemies  mercie  and 
cruelty:  Oh  mydeare  Paulina,  I  had  (quoth  he)  pers waded  thee 
what  I  thought  was  convenient,  to  leade  thy  life  more  happily, 
and  doost  thou  then  rather  choose  the  honour  of  a  glorious 
death  ?  Assuredly  I  will  not  envy  thee :  Be  the  constancie 
and  resolution  answerable  to  our  common  end,  but  be  the 
beautie  and  glory  greater  on  thy  side.  That  said,  the  veines 
of  both  their  armes  were  cut,  to  the  end  they  might  bleede 
to  death ;  but  because  Senecaes  were  somwhat  shrunken  up 
through  age  and  abstinence,  and  his  bloud  could  have  no 
speedy  course,  he  commaunded  the  veines  of  his  thighes  to  be 
launced :  And  fearing  lest  the  torments  he  felt,  might  in 
some  sort  entender  his  wifes  heart ;  as  also  to  deliver  himselfe 
from  the  affliction,  which  greatly  yearned  him  to  see  her  in 
so  pittious  plight :  after  he  had  most  lovingly  taken  leave  of 
her,  he  besought  her  to  be  pleased  she  might  be  caried  into 
the  next  chamber,  which  was  accordingly  performed.  But 
all  those  incisions  being  unable  to  make  him  die,  he  willed 
Statius  Anneus  his  Phisition  to  give  him  some  poysoned 
potion,  which  wrought  but  small  effect  in  him,  for  through 
the  weaknesse  and  coldenesse  of  his  members,  it  could  not 
come  unto  his  heart.  And  therefore  they  caused  a  warme  bath 
to  be  prepared,  wherein  they  layd  him,  then  perceiving  his 
end  to  approch,  so  long  as  he  had  breath,  he  continued  his 
excellent  discourses,  concerning  the  subject  of  the  estate 
wherein  he  found  himselfe,  which  his  Secretaries,  so  long  as 
they  could  heare  his  voice,  collected  very  diligently,  whose 
last  words  continued  long  time  after  in  high  esteem  and 
honor  amongst  the  better  sort  of  men,  as  Oracles  ;  but  they 
were  afterward  lost,  and  great  pittie  it  is  they  never  came 
unto  our  handes.  But  when  he  once  beganne  to  feele  the  last 

ajs  of  death,  taking  some  of  the  water,  wherein  he  lay 
ing,  all  bloody,  he  therewith  washed  his  head,  saying,  I 

493 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  vow  this  water  unto  lupiter  the  Deliverer.  Nero  being 
XXXV  advertised  of  all  this,  fearing  lest  Paulinaes  death  (who  was 

Of  three  good  one  of  ^he  best  alied  Ladies  in  Rome,  and  to  whom  he  bare 
no  particular  grudge)  might  cause  him  some  reproach,  sent 
in  all  poste  haste  to  have  her  incisions  closed  up  againe,  and 
if  possibly  it  could  be,  to  save  her  life ;  which  hir  servants  by 
unwrithing  her,  performed,  she  being  more  then  halfe  dead 
and  voyd  of  any  sence.  And  that  afterward,  contrary  to  her 
intent,  she  lived,  it  was  very  honourable,  and  as  befitted  her 
vertue,  shewing  by  the  pale  hew  and  wanne  colour  of  her 
face,  how  much  of  her  life  she  had  wasted  by  her  incisions. 
Loe  heere  my  three  true  stories,  which  in  my  conceit  are  as 
pleasant  and  as  tragicall,  as  any  we  devise  at  our  pleasures, 
to  please  the  vulgar  sort  withall :  and  I  wonder,  that  those 
who  invent  so  many  fabulous  tales,  do  not  rather  make 
choise  of  infinite  excellent,  and  quaint  stories,  that  are  found 
in  bookes,  wherein  they  should  have  lesse  trouble  to  write 
them,  and  might  doubtlesse  proove  more  pleasing  to  the 
hearer,  and  profitable  to  the  Reader.  And  whosoever  would 
undertake  to  frame  a  compleate  and  well  joynted  bodie  of 
them,  neede  neither  employe  nor  adde  any  thing  of  his  owne 
unto  it  except  the  ligaments,  as  the  soldring  of  another 
mettall,  and  by  this  meanes  might  compact  sundry  events  of 
all  kindes,  disposing  and  diversifying  them,  according  as  the 
beauty  and  lustre  of  the  worke  should  require  :  And  very 
neere,  as  Ovid  hath  sowen  and  contrived  his  Metamorphosis ', 
with  that  strange  number  of  diverse  fables.  In  the  last 
couple  this  is  also  worthy  consideration,  that  Paulina  offreth 
willingly  to  leave  her  life  for  her  husbands  sake,  and  that 
her  husband  had  also  other  times  quit  death  for  the  love  of 
her.  There  is  no  great  counterpoyze  in  this  exchange  for 
us  :  but  according  to  his  Stoike  humour,  I  suppose  he  per- 
swaded  himselfe  to  have  done  as  much  for  hir,  prolonging 
his  life  for  hir  availe,  as  if  he  had  died  for  hir.  In  one  of 
his  letters,  he  writeth  to  Lucilius,  after  he  hath  given  him  to 
understand  how  an  ague  having  surprised  him  in  Rome,  con 
trary  to  his  wives  opinion,  who  would  needs  have  stayed  him, 
he  sodainly  tooke  his  Coach,  to  goe  unto  a  house  of  his  into 
the  country ;  and  how  he  told  her  that  the  ague  he  had  was 
no  bodily  fever,  but  of  the  place  :  and  followeth  thus :  'At 
494 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

4  last  she  let  me  goe,  earnestly  recommending  my  health  unto  CHAPTER 
4  me.  Now  I  who  know,  how  her  life  lodgeth  in  mine,  begin  XXXV 
4  to  provide  for  my  self,  that  consequently  I  may  provide  for  Of  three  £ood 
4  her:  The  priviledge  my  age  hath  bestowed  on  me,  making  me 
4  more  constant,  and  more  resolute  in  many  things,  I  lose  it ; 
4  when  ever  I  call  to  minde,  that  in  this  aged  corps  there 
4  harboureth  a  yoong  woman,  to  whom  I  bring  some  profit. 
4  Since  I  cannot  induce  her  to  love  me  more  couragiously,  shee 
4  induceth  me  to  love  my  selfe  more  carefully ;  for  something 
4  must  be  lent  to  honest  affections,  and  sometimes,  although 
4  occasions  urge  us  to  the  contrary,  life  must  be  revoked 
4  againe,  yea  with  torment.  The  soule  must  be  held  fast 
4  with  ones  teeth,  since  the  lawe  to  live  an  honest  man,  is  not 
4  to  live  as  long  as  they  please,  but  so  long  as  they  ought. 
4  He  who  esteemeth  not  his  wife  or  a  friend  so  much,  as  that 
4  he  will  not  lengthen  his  life  for  them,  and  wil  obstinately 
4  die,  that  man  is  over-nice,  and  too  effeminate :  The  soule 
4  must  commaund  that  unto  her  selfe,  when  the  utilitie  of  our 
4  friends  requireth  it:  we  must  sometimes  lend  our  selves 
4  unto  our  friends,  and  when  we  would  die  for  us,  we  ought 
4  for  their  sakes  to  interrupt  our  deseigne.  It  is  a  testimony  of 
4  high  courage  to  returne  to  life  for  the  respect  of  others  as 
4  diverse  notable  men  have  done :  and  to  preserve  age  is  a 
4  part  of  singular  integritie  (the  chiefest  commoditie  whereof, 
4  is  the  carelesnesse  of  her  continuance,  and  a  more  coura- 
4  gious  and  disdainefull  use  of  life)  if  a  man  perceive  such 
4  an  office  to  be  pleasing,  acceptable  and  profitable  to  any 
4  well-affected  friend.  And  who  doeth  it,  receiveth  thereby 
4  a  gratefull  meede  and  pleasing  recompence  :  for  what  can 
*  bee  sweeter,  than  to  be  so  deare  unto  his  wife,  that  in  re- 
4  spect  of  her  a  man  become  more  deere  unto  himselfe  ?  So 
4  my  Paulina,  hath  not  onely  charged  me  with  her  feare, 
4  but  also  with  mine.  It  hath  not  beene  sufficient  for  me 
4  to  consider,  how  resolutely  I  might  dye,  but  I  have  also 
4  considered  how  irresolutely  she  might  endure  it.  I  have 
4  enforced  my  selfe  to  live :  And  to  live  is  sometime 
4  magnanimitie '  :  Reade  heere  his  owne  wordes, 
as  excellent  as  is  his  use. 


495 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE   THIRTY-SIXTH   CHAPTER 

Of  the  worthiest  and  most  excellent  men. 

F  a  man  should  demaund  of  mee,  which  of 
all  men  that  ever  came  to  my  knowledge, 
I  would  make  choise  of,  me  seemeth,  I 
finde  three,  who  have  beene  excellent 
above  all  others.  The  one  is,  Homer,  not 
that  Aristotle  or  Varro,  (for  example  sake) 
were  not  perad venture  as  wise  and  as 
sufficient  as  he :  Nor  that  Virgil,  (and 
possibly  in  his  owne  arte)  be  not  comparable  unto  him. 
I  leave  that  to  their  judgements  that  know  them  both.  I 
who  know  but  one  of  them,  according  to  my  skill  may  onely 
say  this,  that  I  cannot  be  perswaded,  the  Muses  themselves 
did  ever  go  beyond  the  Roman. 

PROPERT.  ii.  Talefacit  carmen  docta  testudine,  quale 

El.  xxxiv.  79.  — Cynthius  impositis  temperat  articulis. 

He  on  his  learned  Lute  such  verse  doth  play, 
As  Phoebus  should  thereto  his  fingers  lay. 

In  which  ludgement,  this  must  notwithstanding  not  be 
forgotten,  that  Virgil  doth  especially  derive  his  sufficiencie 
from  Homer,  and  he  is  his  guide  and  Schoolemaster,  and  that 
but  one  only  glance  or  sentence  of  the  Iliads,  hath  given 
both  body  and  matter  to  that  great  and  divine  Poem  of  the 
dEneid.  My  meaning  is  not  to  account  so  :  I  entermix  divers 
other  circumstances,  which  yeeld  this  man  most  admirable 
unto  me,  and  as  it  were  beyond  humane  condition.  And 
truely  I  am  often  amazed,  that  he  who  hath  produced,  and 
by  his  authority  brought  so  many  Deities  in  credit  with  the 
World,  hath  not  obtained  to  be  reputed  a  God  himselfe. 
Being  blind  and  indigent ;  having  lived  before  ever  the 
Sciences  were  redacted  into  strict  rules  and  certaine  observa 
tions,  he  had  so  perfect  knowledge  of  them,  that  all  those 
which  since  his  time  have  labored  to  establish  pollicies  or 
Common-wealths,  to  manage  warres,  and  to  write  either  of 
Religion  or  Philosophy,  in  what  Sect  soever  or  of  all  Artes, 

496 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

have  made  use  of  him,  as  of  an  absolutely -perfect  Master  in  CHAPTER 
the   knowledge  of  al  things  ;    and   of  his  Bookes,  as  of  a      XXXVI 

Seminary,  a  Spring-garden   or  Store-house  of  all  kinds  of Of tlie  worthl~ 

f^   •  j  \          •  est   and  most 

sufficiency  and  learning.  excellent  men 

HOR.  Epist.     Qui  quid  sit  pulchrum,  quid  turpe,  quid  utile,  quid  non, 
xxiii.  Plenius  ac  melius  Chrysippo,  ac  Grantor e  dicit. 

What  is  faire,  What  is  foule,  What  profit  may.,  What 

not, 
Better  than  Crantor  or  Chrysippus,  Homer  wrot. 

And  as  another  saith  : 

— a  quo  ceufonte  perrenni  OVID.  Am.  iii. 

Vatum  Pierijs  labra  rigantur  aquis.  El.  viii.  25. 

By  whom,  as  by  an  ever-flowing-filling  spring, 
With  Muses  liquor  poets  lippes  are  bath'de  to  sing. 

And  another  : 

Adde  Heliconiadum  comites,  quorum  unus  Homer  m  LUCR.  iii.ioSi. 

Astra  potitus. 

Muses  companions  adde  to  these,  of  all 
One  onely  Homer  hath  in  heav'n  his  stall. 

And  another  : 

— cuj  usque  ex  ore  profuso  MANIL.  Ast.  ii. 

Omnis  posteritas  latices  in  carmina  duxit,  8. 

Amnemque  in  tenues,  ausa  est  deducere  rivos: 
Vnius  foecunda  bonis. 

From  whose  large  mouth  for  verse  all  that  since  live 
Drew  water,  and  grew  bolder  to  derive 
Into  thinne  shallow  rivers  his  deepe  floods  ; 
Richly  luxuriant  in  one  mans  good. 

It  is  against  natures  course,  that  he  hath  made  the  most 
excellent  production,  that  may  be  :  for,  the  ordinary  birth 
of  things  is  imperfect :  They  are  augmented  by  encrease, 
and  corroborated  by  growth.  He  hath  reduced  the  infancy 
of  poesie,  and  divers  other  Sciences  to  be  ripe,  perfect  and 
compleate.  By  which  reason  he  may  be  termed  the  first  and 
last  of  poets,  following  the  noble  testimony,  antiquity  hath 
left  us  of  him,  that  having  had  no  man  before  him,  whom  he 
might  imitate,  so  hath  hee  had  none  after  him,  could  imitate 
him.  His  wordes  (according  to  Aristotle)  are  the  onely 

3  R  497  * 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  words  that  have   motion  and  action  :    they  are  the  onely 

XXXVI       substantiall  Wordes.     Alexander  the  Great,  having  lighted 

t  ewort  i-  Up0n  a  rjch  casket  amongst  Darius  his  spoiles,  appoynted 

est  and  most    J  1  „  ,     ,       p  „       ,  .         i/»     .    S 

excellent  men  the  same  to  be  safely  kept  for  himselfe,  to  keepe  his  Homer 

in  :  saying,  he  was  the  best  adviser,  and  faithfullest  coun 
selor  he  had  in  his  military  affaires.  By  the  same  reason 
said  Cliomenes,  sonne  to  Anaxandridas,  that  hee  was  the 
Lacedemonians  Poet ;  for  he  was  an  excellent  good  teacher 
or  Master  of  Warre-like  discipline.  This  singular  praise 
and  particular  commendation  hath  also  beene  given  him  by 
Plutarke  where  he  saith,  that  he  is  the  only  author  in  the 
world,  who  yet  never  distasted  Reader,  cr  glutted  man  ;  ever 
shewing  himself  other,  and  different  to  the  Readers  ;  and 
ever  flourishing  with  a  new  grace.  That  Wagge  Alcibiades, 
demanding  one  of  Homers  bookes  of  one  who  professed 
letters,  because  he  had  it  not,  gave  him  a  whirrit  on  the 
eare  ;  as  if  a  man  should  finde  one  of  our  Priests,  without  a 
Breviarie.  Xenophanes  one  day  made  his  moane  to  Hieron 
the  Tyrant  of  Siracusa,  that  he  was  so  poore  as  he  had  not 
wherewithal!  to  finde  two  servants :  How  commeth  that 
to  passe  ?  (answered  Hieron).  Homer,  who  was  much 
poorer  than  thou  art,  dead  as  he  is,  findeth  more  then 
tenne  thousand.  What  left  Panaetius  unsaide,  when  he 
named  Plato  the  Homer  of  Philosophers  ?  Besides  what 
glory  may  be  compared  to  his  ?  There  is  nothing,  liveth  so 
in  mens  mouthes  as  his  name  and  his  workes  ;  nothing  so 
knowne  and  received  as  Troy,  as  Helen  and  her  Warres, 
which  peradventure  never  were.  Our  Children  are  yet  called 
by  the  names  he  invented  three  thousand  yeeres  since  and 
more.  Who  knoweth  not  Hector  ?  Who  hath  not  heard 
of  Achilles  ?  Not  onely  some  particular  races,  but  most 
nations  seeke  to  derive  themselves  from  his  inventions. 
Machomet,  the  second  of  that  name,  Emperour  of  Turkes, 
writing  to  Pope  Pius  the  second  :  I  wonder  (saith  he) 
how  the  Italians  will  bandie  against  me,  seeing  we  have  our 
common  off-spring  from  the  Troians ;  and  I  as  well  as  they 
have  an  interest  to  revenge  the  blood  of  Hector  upon  the 
Grsecians,  whom  they  favour  against  me.  Is  it  not  a 
worthie  Comedie,  whereof  Kings,  Common-wealths,  Princi 
palities,  and  Emperours,  have  for  many  ages  together  played 
498 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

their  parts,  and  to  which  this  great  Universe  serveth  as  a  CHAPTER 
Theatre  ?    seven  cities  of  Greece  strived  amongst  themselves  Qf^XXV\- 
about  the  places  of  his  birth.     So  much  honour  his  very  est  an^  mog^ 
obscuritie  procured  him.  excellent  men 


Smyrna,  Rhodos,  Colophon,  Salamis,  Chios,  Argos,  Athena.          ^,',G^'  Noct' 

jTtll*     111*      C.      II* 

Rhodes,  Salamis,  Colophon,  Chios,,  Argos,  Smyrna,  with 
Athens. 

The  other  is  Alexander  the  great.  For,  who  shall  con 
sider  his  age,  wherein  hee  beganne  his  enterprises  ;  the  small 
meanes  he  had  to  ground  so  glorious  a  desseigne  upon,  the 
authoritie  he  attained  unto  in  his  infancy,  amongst  the 
greatest  Commaunders,  and  most  experienced  Captaines  in 
the  world,  by  whom  he  was  followed  :  the  extraordinary 
favour,  wherwith  fortune  embraced  him,  and  seconded  so 
many  of  his  haughty-dangerous  exploites,  which  I  may  in 
a  manner  call  rash  or  fond-hardie. 

Impellens  quicquid  sibi  summa  petenti  LUCAN.  i.  148. 

Obstaret,  gaudensque  viamfecisse  ruince. 

While  he  shot  at  the  high'st,  all  that  might  stay 

He  for'st,  and  joyde  with  ruine  to  make  way. 

That  eminent  greatnesse,  to  have  at  the  age  of  thirtie 
yeares  passed  victorious  through  al  the  habitable  earth,  and 
but  with  halfe  the  life  of  a  man  to  have  attained  the  utmost 
endevour  of  humane  nature  ;  so  that  you  cannot  imagine  his 
continuance  lawfull,  and  the  lasting  of  his  increase  in  fortune, 
and  progres  in  vertue  even  unto  a  j  ust  terme  of  age,  but  you 
must  suppose  something  above  man,  to  have  caused  so  many 
Royal  branches  to  issue  from  out  the  loines  of  his  Souldiers, 
leaving  the  world  after  his  death  to  be  shared  between  foure 
successours,  onely  Captaines  of  his  Armie,  whose  succeeders, 
have  so  long  time  since  continued,  and  descendents  main 
tained  that  large  possession.  So  infinite,  rare  and  excellent 
vertues  that  were  in  him,  as  justice,  temperance,  liberalitie, 
integritie  in  words,  love  toward  his,  and  humanitie  toward 
the  conquered.  For  in  truth,  his  maners  seeme  to  admit  no 
just  cause  of  reproach  :  indeed  some  of  his  particular,  rare 
and  extraordinary  actions,  may  in  some  sort  be  taxed.  For 
it  is  impossible  to  conduct  so  great,  and  direct  so  violent 
motions  with  the  strict  rules  of  justice.  Such  men  ought  to 

499 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  be  judged  in  grose,  by  the  mistris  end  of  their  actions.  The 
XXXVI  ruine  of  Thebes  ;  the  murther  of  Menander,  and  of  Ephes- 
est  anJ°most  ^^ons  Position  ;  the  massacre  of  so  many  Persian  prisoners 
excellent  men  a^  once  :  °^  a  troupe  of  Indian  Souldiers,  not  without  some 
prejudice  unto  his  word  and  promise  :  and  of  the  Cosseyans 
and  their  little  children,  are  escapes  somewhat  hard  to  be 
excused.  For,  concerning  Clitus,  the  fault  was  expiated 
beyond  it's  merit ;  and  that  action,  as  much  as  any  other, 
witnesseth  the  integritie  and  cheerefulnes  of  his  complexion, 
and  that  it  was  a  complexion  in  it  selfe  excellently  formed 
to  goodnesse  ;  And  it  was  wittily  said  of  one,  that  he  had 
vertues  by  nature,  and  vices  by  accident.  Concerning  the 
point,  that  he  was  somewhat  to  lavish  a  boaster,  and  over 
impatient  to  heare  himselfe  ill  spoken  of;  and  touching 
those  mangers,  armes,  and  bits,  which  he  caused  to  be 
scattered  in  India,  respecting  his  age  and  the  prosperitie  of 
his  fortune  they  are  in  my  conceit  pardonable  in  him.  He 
that  shall  also  consider  his  many  military  vertues,  as  diligence, 
foresight,  patience ;  discipline,  policie,  magnanimitie,  resolu 
tion  and  good  fortune  ;  wherin  though  Haniballs  authority 
had  not  taught  it  us,  he  hath  beene  the  first  and  chiefe  of 
men  :  the  rare  beauties,  matchlesse  features,  and  incomparable 
conditions  of  his  person,  beyond  all  comparison,  and  wonder 
breeding ;  his  carriage  ;  demeanor,  and  venerable  behaviour, 
in  a  face  so  young,  so  vermeill,  and  heart  enflaming  : 

VIRG.  ALn.  Qualis  ubi  Oceani  perfusus  Lucifer  unda, 

viii-  589-  Quern  Venus  ante  alios  astrorum  diligit  ignes. 

Extulit  os  sacrum  ccelo,  tenebraxque  resohnt. 

As  when  the  day  starre  washt  in  Ocean  streames, 

Which  Venus  most  of  all  the  starres  esteemes, 

Shewes  sacred  light,  shakes  darkenesse-off  with  beames. 

The  excellencie  of  his  wit,  knowledge  and  capacity ;  the 
continuance  and  greatnesse  of  his  glory,  unspotted,  untainted, 
pure  and  free  from  all  blame  or  envie :  insomuch  as  long 
after  his  death,  it  was  religiously  beleeved  of  many,  that 
the  medalls  or  brooches  representing  his  person  brought 
good  lucke  unto  such  as  wore  or  had  them  about  them.  And 
that  more  Kings  and  Princes  have  written  his  gestes  and 
actions,  then  any  other  historians,  of  what  quality  soever, 
have  registred  the  gests,  or  collected  the  actions  of  any  other 

500 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

King  or  Prince  that  ever  was  :  And  that  even  at  this  day,  CHAPTER 
the    Mahometists,    who    contemne    all    other    histories,    by      XXXVI 

speciall  priviled^e,  allow,  receive,  and  onely  honour  his. 
A  ii  i  •  u  •  j  i  -j  j  i.i  i  n  est  and  most 

All    which    premises    duely  considered    together,   hee    shall  excellent  men 

confesse,  I  have  had  good  reason  to  preferre  him  before  Caesar 
himselfe  who  alone  might  have  made  me  doubt  of  my  choise. 
And  it  must  needes  bee  granted,  that  in  his  exploites  there 
was  more  of  his  owne  ;  but  more  of  fortunes  in  Alexanders 
atchievements.  They  have  both  had  many  things  mutually 
alike,  and  Caesar  happily  some  greater.  They  were  two 
quicke  and  devouring  fires,  or  two  swift  and  surrounding 
streames  able  to  ravage  the  world  by  sundry  wayes. 


Et  velut  immissi  diversis  partibus  ignes 

Arentem  in  silvam,  et  virgulta  sonantia  lauro:  521 

Aut  ubi  decursu  rapido  demontibus  altis 

Dant  sonitum  spumosi  amnes,  et  iu  tequora  currant, 

Quisque  suum  populatus  iter. 

As  when  on  divers  sides  fire  is  applied 
To  crackling  bay-shrubs,  or  to  woods  Sunne  dried, 
Or  as  when  foaming  streames  from  mountaines  hie, 
With  downe-fall  swift  resound,  and  to  sea  flie  ; 
Each-one  doth  havocke-out  his  way  thereby. 

But  grant  Csesars  ambition  were  more  moderate,  it  is  so 
unhappy,  in  that  it  met  with  this  vile  subject  of  the  subver 
sion  of  his  countrie,  and  universall  empairing  of  the  world  ; 
that  all  parts  impartially  collected  and  put  together  in  the 
balance,  I  must  necessarily  bend  to  Alexanders  side.  The 
third,  and  in  my  judgement,  most  excellent  man,  is  Epami- 
nondas.  Of  glorie  he  hath  not  so  much  as  some,  and  is  farre 
shorte  of  diverse  (which  well  considered  is  no  substantiall  part 
of  the  thing)  ;  in  resolution  and  true  valour,  not  of  that  which 
is  set  on  by  ambition,  but  of  that,  which  wisedome  and 
reason  may  settle  in  a  well  disposed  minde,  hee  had  as  much 
as  may  be  imagined  or  wished  for.  He  hath  in  mine  opinion, 
made  as  great  triall  of  his  vertues,  as  ever  did  Alexander  or 
Caesar  :  for  although  his  exploites  of  warre  be  not  so  fre 
quent,  and  so  high  raised,  yet  being  throughly  considered, 
they  are  as  weightie,  as  resolute,  as  constant,  yea  and  as 
authenticall  a  testimony  of  hardnes  and  military  sufficiencie, 
as  any  mans  else.  The  Graecians,  without  any  contradiction 

501 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  offoorded  him  the  honour,  to  entitle  him  the  chiefe  and  first 
XXXVI  man  among  themselves :  and  to  be  the  first  and  chiefe  man 
the  worthi-  Qf  Qreecej  js  without  all  question  to  bee  chiefe  and  first  man 

excellent  men  °^  ^ie  world.  Touching  his  knowledge  and  worth,  this 
ancient  judgement  doth  yet  remaine  amongst  us,  that  never 
was  man  who  knew  so  much,  nor  never  man  that  spake  lesse 
then  he.  For  he  was  by  Sect  a  Pythagorian  ;  and  what  he 
spake,  no  man  ever  spake  better  :  An  excellent  and  most  per- 
swasive  Orator  was  hee.  And  concerning  his  maners  and 
conscience  therein  he  farre  outwent  all  that  ever  medled  with 
managing  affaires :  For  in  this  one  part,  which  ought 
especially  to  be  noted,  and  which  alone  declareth  what  we 
are,  and  which  only  I  counterpoise  to  al  others  together, 
he  giveth  place  to  no  Philosopher ;  no  not  to  Socrates  him- 
selfe.  In  whom  innocencie  is  a  quality,  proper,  chiefe,  con 
stant,  uniforme  and  incorruptible.  In  comparison  of  which, 
it  seemeth  in  Alexander  subalternall,  uncertaine,  variable, 
effeminate  and  accidentall.  Antiquitie  judged  that  precisely 
to  sift  out,  and  curiously  to  prie  into  all  other  famous  Cap- 
taines,  there  is  in  every  one  severally  some  speciall  quality, 
which  makes  him  renowmed  and  famous  ;  In  this  man  alone, 
it  is  a  vertue  and  sufficiencie,  every  where  compleate  and 
alike ;  which  in  all  offices  of  humane  life,  leaveth  nothing 
more  to  be  wished-for.  Be  it  in  publike  or  private ;  in 
peaceable  negotiations  or  warlike  occupations  ;  be  it  to  live 
or  die,  greatly  or  gloriously,  I  know  no  forme  or  fortune  of 
man,  that  I  admire  or  regard,  with  so  much  honour,  with  so 
much  love.  True  it  is,  I  finde  this  obstinacie  in  povertie, 
somewhat  scrupulous  ;  and  so  have  his  best  friends  pour- 
trayed  it.  And  this  onely  action  (high  notwithstanding  and 
very  worthy  admiration)  I  finde  or  deeme  somewhat  sharpe ; 
so  as  I  would  nor  wish,  nor  desire  the  imitation  thereof  in 
me,  according  to  the  forme  it  was  in  him.  Scipio  JEmilianus 
alone  (wold  any  charge  him  with  as  fierce,  and  nobly-minded 
an  end,  and  with  as  deepe  and  universall  knowledge  of 
Sciences)  might  be  placed  in  the  other  scale  of  the  ballance 
against  him.  Oh  what  a  displeasure  hath  swift-gliding  Time 
done  me,  even  in  the  nick,  to  deprive  our  eyes  of  the  chiefest 
paire  of  lives,  directly  the  noblest  that  ever  were  in  Plutarke, 
of  these  two  truly  worthy  personages  :  by  the  universall  con- 
502 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

sent  of  the  world,  the  one  chiefe  of  Graecians,  the  other  CHAPTER 
principall  of  Romanes.  What  a  matter,  what  a  workeman  !  XXXVI 
For  a  man  that  was  no  Saint,  but  as  we  say,  a  gallant-  ^^d  Omost 
honest  man,  of  civil  maners  and  common  customes  ;  of  a  tern-  excellent  men 
perate  haughtinesse ;  the  richest  life  I  know  (as  the  vulgar 
saying  is)  to  have  lived  amongst  the  living,  and  fraughted 
with  the  richest  qualities,  and  most  to  be  desired  parts  (all 
things  impartially  considered)  in  my  humour,  is  that  of 
Alcibiades.  But  touching  Epaminondas,  for  a  patterne  of 
excessive  goodnes,  I  wil  here  insert  certaine  of  his  opinions. 
The  sweetest  contentment  he  had  in  all  his  life,  he  witnesseth 
to  have  beene,  the  pleasure  he  gave  his  father  and  mother, 
of  his  victory  upon  Leuctra  :  he  staketh  much  in  preferring 
their  pleasure,  before  his  content,  so  just  and  full  of  so 
glorious  an  action.  Hee  thought  it  unlawfull,  yea  were  it  to 
recover  the  libertie  of  his  countrey,  for  any  one  to  kill  a 
man,  except  he  knew  a  just  cause.  And  therefore  was  he  so 
backeward  in  the  enterprise  of  Pelopidas  his  companion,  for 
the  deliverance  of  Thebes.  He  was  also  of  opinion,  that  in 
a  battell  a  man  should  avoid  to  encounter  his  friend,  being 
on  the  contrary  part ;  and  if  he  met  him,  to  spare  him.  And 
his  humanitie  or  gentlenes,  even  towards  his  very  enemies, 
having  made  him  to  be  suspected  of  the  Boeotians,  forsomuch 
as  after  he  had  miraculously  forced  the  Lacedemonians  to 
open  him  a  passage,  which  at  the  entrance  of  Morea  neere 
Corinth,  they  had  undertaken  to  make-good,  he  was  contented, 
without  further  pursuing  them  in  furie,  to  have  marched 
over  their  bellies  ;  was  the  cause  he  was  deposed  of  his  office 
of  Captaine  Generall.  Most  honourable  for  such  a  cause ; 
and  for  the  shame  it  was  to  them,  soone  after  to  be  forced  by 
necessitie  to  advance  him  to  his  first  place :  and  to  acknow 
ledge  how  their  glorie,  and  confesse  that  their  safetie  did 
onely  depend  on  him  :  victory  following  him  as  his 
shadow,  whither  soever  he  went :  and  as  the  pro 
sperity  of  his  countrie  was  borne  by  and  with 
him,  so  it  died  with  and  by  him. 


503 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

THE    THIRTY-SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  resemblance  betweene  children 
and  fathers. 

HIS  hudling  up  of  so  much  trash,  or  pack 
ing  of  so  many  severall  pieces,  is  done  so 
strangely,  as  I  never  lay  hands  on  it,  but 
when  an  over  lazie  idlenesse  urgeth  me  : 
and  no  where,  but  in  mine  owne  house. 
So  have  it  beene  compact  at  sundry  pauses, 
and  contrived  at  severall  intervalls,  as 
occasions  have  sometime  for  many  months 
together,  here  and  there  in  other  places,  detained  me.  Be 
sides,  I  never  correct  my  first  imaginations  by  the  second,  it 
may  happen,  I  now  and  then  alter  some  word,  rather  to 
diversifie,  then  take  any  thing  away.  My  purpose  is,  to  re 
present  the  progresse  of  my  humours,  that  every  part  be 
scene  or  member  distinguished,  as  it  was  produced.  I  would 
to  God  I  had  begunne  sooner,  and  knew  the  tracke  of  my 
changes,  and  course  of  my  variations.  A  boy  whom  I  em 
ployed  to  write  for  me,  supposed  he  had  gotten  a  rich 
bootie,  when  he  stole  some  parts,  which  he  best  liked. 
But  one  thing  comforts  me  that  he  shall  gaine  no  more,  then 
I  lost  by  them.  I  am  growne  elder  by  seaven  or  eight  yeares 
since  I  beganne  them  ;  nor  hath  it  beene  without  some  new 
purchase.  I  have  by  the  liberality  of  yeares  acquainted  my 
selfe  with  the  stone-chollike.  Their  commerce  and  long  con 
versation,  is  not  easily  past-over  without  some  such-like 
fruite.  I  would  be  glad,  that  of  many  other  presents,  they 
have  ever  in  store,  to  bestow  upon  such  as  waite  upon  them 
long,  they  had  made  choise  of  some  one,  that  had  beene  more 
acceptable  unto  me :  for  they  could  never  possesse  me  with 
any,  that,  even  from  my  infancy,  I  hated  more.  Of  all 
accidents  incident  to  age,  it  was  that  I  feared  most.  My 
selfe  have  many  times  thought,  I  went  on  too  farre,  and  that 
to  hold  out  so  long  a  journey,  I  must  of  necessitie,  in  the 
end,  stumble  upon  some  such  unpleasing  chance.  I  per 
ceived  plainely,  and  protested  sufficiently,  it  was  high  time  to 
504 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

depart,  and  that  according  to  the  rule  of  skillfull  chirurgions,  CHAPTER 
who  when  they  must  cut  off  some  member,  life  must  be  seared      XXXVII 

to  the  quicke,  and  cut  to  the  sound  flesh.     That  nature  is    Of,  ,the  re," 

•       •  «  ,111  •  ,  semblance  he- 

wont  to  make    him   pay  untolerable   usurie,  who  doth  not  tweene     chil- 

yeeld  or  pay  the  same  in  due  time.     I  was  so  farre  from  being     dren  and 
readie  to  make  lawfull  tender  of  it,  that  in  eighteene  months,        fathers 
or  thereabouts,  I  have  continued  in  so  yrkesome  and  un- 
pleasing  plight,  I  have  already  learned  to  apply  my  selfe  unto 
it ;  and  am  now  entring  into  covenant  with  this  chollicall 
kinde  of  life  ;  for  therein  I  finde  matter,  wherewith  to  com 
fort  me,  and  to  hope  better.     So  much  are  men  enured  in 
their  miserable  estate,  that  no  condition  is  so  poore,  but  they 
will  accept ;    so  they  may  continue  in  the  same.      Heare 
Maecenas. 

Debilem  facito  manu,  SEN.  Epist. 

Debilem  pede,  coxa,  101  f. 

Lubricos  quate  denies, 

Vita  dum  super  est,  bene  est. 

Make  me  be  weake  of  hand, 
Scarce  on  my  legges  to  stand., 
Shake  my  loose  teeth  with  paine, 
'Tis  well  so  life  remaine. 

And  Tamburlane  cloked  the  fantasticall  cruelty,  he 
exercised  upon  Lazars  or  Leprousmen,  with  a  foolish  kinde 
of  humanitie,  putting  all  he  could  finde  or  heare-of,  to 
death,  (as  he  said,)  to  ridde  them  from  so  painefull  and 
miserable  a  life,  as  they  lived.  For,  there  was  none  so 
wretched  amongst  them,  that  would  not  rather  have  beene 
three  times  a  Leper,  than  not  to  be  at  all.  And  Antisthenes 
the  Stoick,  being  very  sicke,  and  crying  out :  '  Oh  who  shall 
4  deliver  me  from  my  tormenting  evils  ? '  Diogenes,  who  was 
come  to  visite  him,  foorthwith  presenting  him  a  knife ; 
*  Mary,  this.1  said  he,  '  and  that  very  speedily,  if  thou 
'  please ' :  '  I  meane  not  of  my  life,1  replyed  hee,  '  but  of  my 
'  sickenesse.1  The  sufferances  which  simply  touch  us  in 
minde,  doe  much  lesse  afflict  me,  then  most  men  :  Partly  by 
judgement;  For  the  World  deemeth  diverse  things  horible, 
or  avoydable  with  the  losse  of  life,  which  to  me  are  in  a 
maner  indifferent :  Partly,  by  a  stupid  and  insensible  com 
plexion,  I  have  in  accidents,  that  hit  me  not  point-blancke  : 

3S  505 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Which  complexion  I  esteeme  one  of  the  better  partes  of  my 
XXXVII      naturall  condition.     But  the  truely-essentiall  and  corporall 

Of  the  re-    sufferances    those  I  taste  very  sensibly  :    Yet  is  it,  having 
semblance  be-  '  .        ^    .  J  .,  J       ,  ,.  ',          ,° 

tweene    chil-  other  times  fore-apprehended  them  with  a  delicate  and  weake 

dren  and  sight,  and  by  the  enjoying  of  this  long  health  and  happy 
fathers  rest,  which  God  hath  lent  me,  the  better  part  of  my  age, 
somewhat  empaired  :  I  had  by  imagination  conceived  them 
so  intolerable,  that  in  good  truth,  I  was  more  afraide,  than 
since  I  have  found  hurt  in  them  :  Whereupon,  I  dayly 
augment  this  opinion  :  That  most  of  our  soules  faculties  (as 
we  employ  them)  doe  more  trouble  than  stead  the  quiet 
repose  of  life.  I  am  continually  grapling  with  the  worst  of 
all  diseases,  the  most  grievous,  the  most  mortall,  the  most 
remedilesse  and  the  most  violent.  I  have  alreadie  had  triall 
of  five  or  sixe  long  and  painefull  fittes  of  it.  Neverthelesse, 
eyther  I  flatter  my  selfe,  or  in  this  plight  there  is  yet  some 
thing,  that  would  faine  keep  life  and  soule  together,  namely 
in  him,  whose  minde  is  free  from  feare  of  death,  and  from 
the  threats,  conclusions  and  consequences,  which  physicke  is 
ever  buzzing  into  our  heads.  But  the  effect  of  paine  it  selfe, 
hath  not  so  sharpe  a  smarting,  or  so  pricking  a  sharpenesse, 
that  a  setled  man  should  enter  into  rage  or  fall  into  dispaire. 
This  commoditie  at  least  I  have  by  the  chollicke,  that  what 
I  could  never  bring  to  passe  in  my  selfe,  which  was,  al 
together  to  reconcile,  and  throughly  to  acquaint  my  selfe 
with  death,  shee  shall  atchieve,  she  shall  accomplish  :  for 
by  how  much  more  shee  shall  importune  and  urge  me,  by 
so  much  lesse  shall  death  bee  fearefull  unto  mee.  I  had 
already  gotten,  not  to  be  beholding  to  life,  but  onely  in 
regard  of  life,  and  for  lives  sake  :  She  shall  also  untie  this 
intelligence,  and  loose  this  combination.  And  God  graunt, 
if  in  the  end  her  sharpenesse  shall  happen  to  surmount  my 
strength,  shee  cast  me  not  into  the  other  extremitie,  no  lesse 
vicious,  no  lesse  bad,  that  is,  to  love  and  desire,  to  die. 

MART.  x.  Epig.  Summum  nee  metuas  diem,  nee  optes. 

Nor  feare  thy  latest  doome, 
Nor  wish  it  ere  it  come. 


They  are  two  passions  to  be  feared,  but  one  hath  her 
remedy  neerer  than  the  other.     Otherwise,  I  have  ever  found 
506 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

that  precept  ceremonious,  which  so  precizely  appoints  a  man  CHAPTER 
to  set  a  good  countenance,  a  setled  resolution,  and  disdaine-      XXXVII 

full  carriage,  upon  the  sufferance  of  evills.    Why  doth  Philo-    Of,  ,the  r«- 

,  1-11  .    ii      v     v  j  1.1    semblance  be- 

sophy,    which    onely    respecteth    hvelmesse    and    regardeth  tweene    c^i_ 

effects,  ammuze  it  selfe  about  these  externall  apparances  ?     dren  and 

Let  her  leave  this  care  to  Mimikes,  to  Histrions,  and   to       fathers 

Rhetoricke  Masters,   who   make  so  great  accompt    of  our 

gestures.     Let  her  hardly  remit  this  vocall  lithernesse  unto 

evill,  if  it  be  neither  cordiall,  nor  stomacall.     And  let  her 

lend  her  voluntary  plaints  to  the  kinde  of  sighes,  sobs,  pal- 

patations,  and  palenesse,  which  nature  hath  exempted  from 

our  puissance.     Alwayes  provided,  the  courage  be  without 

feare,  and   words  sans  dispaire ;    let  her  be  so   contented. 

What  matter  is  it  if  wee  bend  our  armes,  so  we  writhe  not 

our  thoughts  ?    She  frameth  us  for  our  selves,  not  for  others: 

to  be,  not  to  seeme.    Let  her  applie  her  selfe  to  governe  our 

understanding,  which  she  hath  undertaken  to  instruct.     Let 

her  in  the  pangs  or  fits  of  the  chollike,  still  maintaine  the 

soule   capable    to    acknowledge    her   selfe   and    follow   her 

accustomed    course,   resisting   sorrow  and    enduring   griefe, 

and    not   shamefully  to   prostrate   her   selfe   at   his   feete : 

Mooved  and  chafed  with  the  combate,  not  basely  suppressed 

nor   faintly    overthrowne :    Capable    of   entertainment   and 

other  occupations,  unto  a  certaine  limit.      In  so  extreme 

accidents,  it  is  cruelty,  to  require  so  composed  a  warde  at  our 

hands.     If  we  have  a  good  game,  it  skills  not,  though  we 

have  an  ill  countenance.     If  the  body  be  any  whit  eased  by 

complaining,  let  him  doe  it :  If  stirring  or  agitation  please 

him,  let  him  turne,  rowle  and  toste  himselfe  as  long  as  he 

list :  If  with  raising  his  voyce,  or  sending  it  forth  with  more 

violence,  he  think  his  griefe  any  thing  alayed  or  vented  (as 

some   Physitians  affirme  it  somewhat   easeth  women  great 

with  childe,  and  is  a  meane  of  easie  or  speedy  delivery)  feare 

he  not  to  do  it ;  or  if  he  may  but  entertaine  his  torment, 

let  him  mainely  cry  out.     Let  us  not  commaund  our  voyce 

to  depart  ;  but  if  she  will,  let  us  not  hinder  it.     Epicurus 

doth  not  only  pardon  his  wise-man  to  crie  out,  when  he 

is  grieved    or   vexed,  but  perswadeth    him  to  it.     Pugiles  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 

etiam  quum  feriunt,  in  jactandis  ccestibus  ingemiscunt,  quia  "• 

profundenda  voce   omne   corpus   intenditur,    venitque  plaga 

O\J  i 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  vehementior.     'Men  when  they  fight  with  sand-bags  or  such 

XXXVII      '  heavy  Weapons,  in  fetching  their  blow  and  driving  it,  will 

Of  the  re-    c  gjve  a  groane  withall,  because  by  stretching   their  voyce 

tweene^chil-  '  a^  their  body  is  also  strayned,  and  the  stroke  commeth 
dren  and  '  with  more  vehemence.1  We  are  vexed  and  troubled  enough 
fathers  with  the  evill,  without  troubling  and  vexing  our  selves  with 
these  superfluous  rules.  This  I  say  to  excuse  those,  which 
are  ordinarily  scene  to  rage  in  the  fits,  and  storme  in  the 
assaults  of  this  sickenesse  :  for,  as  for  me,  I  have  hitherto 
past  it  over  with  somewhat  a  better  countenance,  and  am 
content  to  groane  without  braying  and  exclaiming.  And 
yet  I  trouble  not  my  selfe,  to  maintaine  this  exterior 
decencie  ;  for,  I  make  small  reckoning  of  such  an  advantage; 
In  that  I  lend  my  sicknesse  what  it  requireth  :  But  either 
my  paine  is  not  so  excessive,  or  I  beare  it  with  more  con 
stancy  than  the  vulgar  sorte.  Indeede  I  must  confesse, 
when  the  sharpe  fits  or  throwes  assaile  me,  I  complaine, 
and  vexe  my  selfe,  but  yet  I  never  fall  into  despaire,  as  that 
fellow  : 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  Eiulatu,  questu,  gemitu,  fremitibus 

ii.  Resonando  multum  fleblles  voces  refert. 

With  howling,  growning  and  complant  of  fates, 
Most  lamentable  cries  he  imitates. 

I  feele  my  selfe  in  the  greatest  heate  of  my  sickenesse  ;  and  I 
ever  found  my  selfe  capable  and  in  tune,  to  speake,  to  thinke 
and  to  answer,  as  soundly  as  at  any  other  time,  but  not  so 
constantly,  because  my  paine  doth  much  trouble  and  dis 
tract  me.  When  I  am  thought  to  bee  at  the  lowest,  and 
that  such  as  are  about  me  spare  me,  I  often  make  a  triall  of 
my  forces,  and  propose  them  such  discourses  as  are  furthest 
from  my  state.  There  is  nothing  impossible  for  mee,  and 
me  thinkes  I  can  doe  all  things  upon  a  sodaine  fitte,  so  it 
continue  not  long.  Oh  why  have  not  I  the  gift  of  that 
dreamer,  mentioned  by  Cicero,  who  dreaming  that  hee  was 
closely  embracing  a  yong  wench  ;  found  himselfe  ridde  of 
the  stone  in  his  sheetes  !  Mine  doe  strangely  dis-wench  me. 
In  the  intermission  or  respites  of  this  outragious  paine,  when 
as  my  Vreters  (through  which  the  Vrine  passeth  from  the 
reines  to  the  bladder)  languish  without  gnawing  me,  I 
sodainely  returne  into  my  ordinary  forme  :  forsomuch  as 
508 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

my  mind  taketh    no    other  allarume,  but  the  sensible  and  CHAPTER 
corporal!.     All  which  I  certainely  owe  unto  the  care  I  have      XXXVII 
had  to  prepare  my  selfe  by  reason  and  discourse  of  such        u?  e  r?~ 
accidents  :  toene    cMl- 

VIRG.  s£n.  — laborum  dren  and 

vi.  103.  Nulla  mihi  nova  nvncf octet  inopinaque  surgit,  fathers 

Omnia  prcecepi,  atque  animo  mecum  ante  peregi. 

No  new  or  unexpected  forme  is  cast, 
Of  travels  in  my  brest :  all  I  forecast, 
In  my  minde  with  my  selfe  I  all  forepast. 

I  am  handled  somewhat  roughly  for  a  Prentise,  and  with 
a  violent  and  rude  change  ;  being  at  one  instant  falne  from 
a  very  pleasing,  calme,  and  most  happy  condition  of  life, 
unto  the  most  dolorous,  yrkesome  and  painefull,  that  can 
possibly  be  imagined  :  For,  besides  that  in  it  selfe  it  is  a  dis 
ease  greatly  to  be  feared,  its  beginnings  or  approaches  are 
in  mee  sharper  or  more  difficult,  than  it  is  wont  to  trouble 
others  withall.  The  pangs  and  fittes  thereof  doe  so  often 
assaile  mee,  that  in  a  manner  I  have  no  more  feeling  of  per 
fect  health.  Notwithstanding  I  hitherto  keepe  my  spirit  so 
seated,  as  if  I  can  but  joyne  constancy  unto  it,  I  finde  my 
selfe  to  be  in  a  much  better  state  of  life,  than  a  thousand 
others,  who  have  neither  ague  nor  other  infirmitie,  but 
such  as  for  want  of  discourse  they  give  themselves.  There  is 
a  certaine  fashion  of  subtile  humilitie,  which  proceedeth 
of  presumption  :  As  this  :  That  in  many  things  we  acknow 
ledge  our  ignorance,  and  are  so  curteous  to  avowe,  that 
in  Natures  workes,  there  are  some  qualities  and  condi 
tions,  which  to  us  are  imperceptible,  and  whereof  our  suffi- 
ciencie  cannot  discover  the  meanes,  nor  finde  out  the  causes. 
By  this  honest  and  conscientious  declaration,  we  hope  to 
gaine,  that  we  shall  also  be  beleeved  in  those,  we  shall  say 
to  understand.  Wee  neede  not  goe  to  cull  out  miracles,  and 
chuse  strange  difficulties :  me  seemeth,  that  amongst  those 
things  we  ordinarily  see,  there  are  such  incomprehensible 
rarities,  as  they  exceed  all  difficulty  of  miracles.  What 
monster  is  it,  that  this  teare  or  drop  of  seed,  wherof  we  are 
ingendred  brings  with  it ;  and  in  it  the  impressions,  not 
only  of  the  corporall  forme,  but  even  of  the  very  thoughts 
and  inclinations  of  our  fathers  ?  Where  doth  this  droppe  of 

509 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  water  containe  or  lodge  this  infinite  number  of  formes  ? 
XXXVII  And  how  beare  they  these  resemblances,  of  so  rash,  and 
semblanc/be-  unru^y  a  progresse,  that  the  childes  childe  shall  be  answerable 
tweene  chil-  to  his  grandfather,  and  the  nephew  to  his  uncle  ?  In  the 
dren  and  family  of  Lepidus  the  Roman,  there  have  beene  three,  not 
fathers  successively,  but  some  between,  that  were  borne  with  one 
same  eye  covered  with  a  cartilage  or  gristle.  There  was  a 
race  in  Thebes,  which  from  their  mothers  wombe,  bare  the 
forme  of  a  burre,  or  yron  of  a  launce ;  and  such  as  had  it 
not,  were  judged  as  mis-begotten  and  deemed  unlawfull.  Aris 
totle  reporteth  of  a  certaine  Nation,  with  whom  all  women 
were  common,  where  children  were  allotted  their  fathers, 
only  by  their  resemblances.  It  may  be  supposed,  that  I  am 
indebted  to  my  father  for  this  stonie  quality ;  for  he  died 
exceedingly  tormented  with  a  great  stone  in  his  bladder. 
He  never  felt  himself  troubled  with  the  disease,  but  at  the 
age  of  sixtie  seaven  yeares,  before  which  time  he  had  never 
felt  any  likelihood,  or  motion  of  it,  nor  in  his  reines,  nor  in 
his  sides,  nor  elsewhere :  and  untill  then  had  lived  in  very 
prosperous  health,  and  little  subject  to  infirmities,  and  con 
tinued  seven  yeares  and  more  with  that  disease  training  a 
very  dolorous  lives-end.  I  was  borne  five  and  twenty  yeares 
before  his  sicknes,  and  during  the  course  of  his  healthy  state 
his  third  child.  Where  was  al  this  while  the  propension  or 
inclination  to  this  defect,  hatched  ?  And  when  -he  was  so 
farre  from  such  a  disease,  that  light  part  of  his  substance 
wherewith  he  composed  me,  how  could  it  for  her  part,  beare  so 
great  an  impression  of  it  ?  And  how  so  closely  covered,  that 
for  tie  five  yeares  after,  I  have  begunne  to  have  a  feeling  of  it? 
And  hitherto  alone,  among  so  many  brethren  and  sisters, 
and  all  of  one  mother.  He  that  shal  resolve  me  of  this  pro- 
gresse,  I  will  believe  him  as  many  other  miracles  as  he  shall 
please  to  tell  mee  :  alwayes  provided  (as  commonly  they 
doe)  hee  goe  not  about  to  pay  me,  with  a  doctrine  much 
more  difficult  and  fantastical,  then  is  the  thing  it  selfe  (let 
Physitians  somewhat  excuse  my  libertie :)  for  by  the  same 
infusion  and  fatall  insinuation,  I  have  received  the  hate  and 
contempt  of  their  doctrine.  The  Antipathie,  which  is  betweene 
me  and  their  arte,  is  to  me  hereditarie.  My  father  lived 
three  score  and  fourteene  yeares :  My  grandfather  three 
510 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

score  and  nine ;  my  great  grandfather  very  neere  fourescore,  CHAPTER 
and  never  tasted  or  tooke  any  kinde  of  Physicke.  And  what-  O?X?VI1 
soever  was  not  in  ordinary  use  amongst  them,  was  deemed  a  ggmbianc^be- 
drug.  Physicke  is  grounded  upon  experience  and  examples,  tweene  chil- 
So  is  mine  opinion.  Is  not  this  a  manifest  kinde  of  experi-  dren  and 
ence  and  very  advantageous  ?  I  know  not  whether  in  all  their  fathers 
registers,  they  are  able  to  finde  me  three  more,  borne,  bred, 
brought  up,  and  deceased,  under  one  roofe,  in  one  same 
chimnie,  that  by  their  owne  direction  and  regiment  have 
lived  so  long.  Wherein  they  must  needes  grant  me,  that  if 
it  be  not  reason,  at  least  it  is  Fortune  that  is  on  my  side. 
Whereas  among  Physitions  fortune  is  of  more  consequence, 
then  reason.  Low-brought,  and  weake  as  I  am  now,  let  them 
not  take  me  at  an  advantage,  nor  let  them  not  threaten  me : 
for  that  were  insulting  arrogance.  And  to  say  truth,  I  have 
by  my  familiar  examples  gained  enough  upon  them  although 
they  would  take  hold  and  stay  there.  Humane  things  have 
not  so  much  constancie :  It  is  now  two  hundred  yeares ; 
wanting  but  eighteene,  that  this  Essay  continueth  with  us : 
For,  the  first  was  borne  in  the  yeare  of  our  Lord  one  thou 
sand  foure  hundred  and  two.  Some  reason  there  is  why  this 
experience  should  now  beginne  to  faile  us.  Let  them  not 
upbraide  me  with  those  infirmities,  which  now  have  seazed 
upon  me :  Is  it  not  sufficient  to  have  lived  seaven  and  fortie 
yeares  in  good  and  perfect  health  for  my  part  ?  Suppose  it 
be  the  end  of  my  carriere,  yet  it  is  of  the  longest.  Mine 
ancestors  by  some  secret  instinct  and  naturall  inclination 
have  ever  loathed  al  maner  of  Physicke  :  for  the  very  sight 
of  drugs  bred  a  kinde  of  horror  in  my  father.  The  Lord  of 
Gaviac  mine  unckle  by  the  fathers  side,  a  man  of  the  church, 
sickish  even  from  his  birth,  and  who  notwithstanding  made 
his  weake  life  to  hold  untill  sixtie  seaven  yeares,  falling  once 
into  a  dangerous  and  vehement  continual!  feaver,  it  was  by 
the  physitions  concluded,  that  unlesse  he  would  aide  himselfe 
(for  they  often  terme  that  aide,  which  indeede  is  impeachment) 
he  was  but  a  dead  man.  The  good  soule,  afrighted  as  he  was, 
at  that  horrible  sentence,  answered  thus,  Why  then  I  am  a 
dead  man :  But  shortly  after  God  made  their  prognostica 
tions  to  proove  vaine.  The  Lord  of  Bussaguet  last  of  the 
brethren  (for  they  were  foure)  and  by  much  the  last,  he  alone 

511 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  submitted  himselfe  to  that  arte,  as  I  imagine  by  reason  of 
Of  X^VI1  the  frequence  he  had  in  other  Sciences  ;  for  he  was  a  Coun- 
semblancebe-  se^or  in  tne  Court  of  Parliament,  which  prospered  so  ill 
tweene  chil-  with  him,  that  though  he  were  in  shew  of  a  very  strong  com- 
dren  and  plexion,  he  died  long  before  the  others,  except  one,  the  Lord 
fathers  of  Saint  Michaell.  It  may  well  be,  I  have  received  of  them 
that  natural  dyspathie  unto  physicke.  Yet  if  there  had  been 
no  other  consideration  but  this,  I  would  have  endevoured  to 
force  it.  For,  all  these  conditions,  which  without  reason  are 
borne  in  us,  are  vicious.  It  is  a  kinde  of  maladie  a  man  must 
fight  withall.  It  may  be  I  had  such  a  propension,  but  I  have 
settled  and  strengthned  the  same  by  discourses,  which  in 
me  have  confirmed  the  opinion  I  have  of  it.  For,  I  have  also 
the  consideration  to  refuse  Phisicke  by  reason  of  the  sharpe- 
nesse  of  its  taste.  "It  would  not  easily  agree  with  my  humour, 
who  thinke  health  worthy  to  be  purchased,  with  the  price  of 
all  cauteries  and  incisions,  how  painefull  soever.  And  follow 
ing  Epicurus,  mee  seemeth  that  all  maner  of  voluptuousnesse 
should  be  avoided,  if  greater  griefes  follow  them  :  And  griefes 
to  be  sought  after,  that  have  greater  voluptuousnesse  ensu 
ing  them.  Health  is  a  very  precious  Jewell,  and  the  onely 
thing,  that  in  pursuite  of  it  deserveth,  a  man  should  not 
onely  employ,  time,  labour,  sweate  and  goods,  but  also  life 
to  get  it;  forasmuch  as  without  it,  life  becommeth  injuri 
ous  unto  us.  Voluptuousnes,  Science  and  vertue,  without 
it,  tarnish  and  vanish  away.  And  to  the  most  constant  and 
exact  discourses,  that  philosophy  will  imprint  in  our  minds 
to  the  contrary,  wee  need  not  oppose  any  thing  against  it 
but  the  image  of  Plato,  being  visited  with  the  falling  sicke- 
nesse,  or  an  Apoplexie  ;  and  in  this  presupposition  chalenge 
him  to  call  the  richest  faculties  of  his  minde  to  helpe  him. 

All  meanes  that  may  bring  us  unto  health,  cannot  be 
esteemed  of  men  either  sharpe  or  deare.  But  I  have  some 
other  apparances,  which  strangely  make  me  to  distrust  al 
this  ware.  I  doe  not  say  but  there  may  be  some  arte  of  it : 
It  is  certaine,  that  amongst  so  many  of  Natures  workes, 
there  are  some  things  proper  for  the  preservation  of  our 
health.  I  know  there  are  some  simples,  which  in  operation 
are  moistning  and  some  drying.  My  selfe  have  found  by 
experience,  that  radish  rootes  are  windie,  and  senie-leaves 
512 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

breede  loosenes  in  the  belly.  I  have  the  knowledge  of  CHAPTER 
divers  such  experiments,  as  I  know  that  Mutton  nourisheth,  XXXVII 
that  Wine  warmeth  me.  And  Solon  was  wont  to  say,  that  ,  ~e  re~ 
eating  was  as  all  other  Drugges  are,  a  medicine  against  the  tweene^chil- 
disease  of  hunger.  I  disallow  not  the  use  we  draw  from  the  dren  and 
world,  nor  doubt  I  of  natures  power  and  fruitfulnesse,  and  fathers 
of  her  application  to  our  neede.  I  see,  that  the  Pickrell- 
fish,  and  the  Swallowes  live  well  by  her  lawes.  I  greatly 
distrust  the  inventions  of  our  wit,  of  our  arte  and  of  our 
Science :  in  favour  of  which  we  have  forsaken  Nature,  and 
abandoned  her  rules ;  wherein  we  can  neither  observe  limita 
tion,  nor  keepe  moderation.  As  we  terme  lustice,  the  com 
position  of  the  first  lawes  that  came  unto  our  hands,  and 
their  practise  and  dispensation  very  often  most  wicked  and 
unconvenient :  And  as  those  which  mocke  and  condemne  it, 
intend  neverthelesse  to  wrong  this  noble  vertue ;  but  onely 
to  condemne  the  abuse  and  profanation  of  so  sacred  a  title  : 
So  likewise  in  physicke,  I  know  her  glorious  name,  her  pro 
position,  and  her  promise,  so  profitable  to  mankinde :  but 
what  it  desseigneth  amongst  us,  I  neither  honour  nor  re 
spect.  First,  experience  makes  me  feare  it,  for  of  all  I 
know,  I  see  no  kinde  of  men  so  soone  sicke,  nor  so  late 
cured,  as  those  who  are  under  the  jurisdiction  of  Physicke. 
Their  very  health  is  distempered  and  corrupted  by  the  con 
straint  of  their  prescriptions.  Physitions  are  not  contented 
to  have  the  government  over  sicknesses,  but  they  make 
Health  to  be  sicke,  lest  a  man  should  at  any  time  escape 
their  authority.  Of  a  constant  and  perfect  health,  doe  they 
not  frame  an  argument  of  some  future  daungerous  sickenesse  ? 
I  have  often  beene  sicke,  and  without  any  their  helpe,  I 
have  found  my  sickenesses  (though  I  never  medled  with  the 
bitternes  of  their  prescriptions)  as  easie  to  be  tollerated  and 
as  short,  as  any  mans  else,  and  yet  I  have  felt  diverse.  My 
health  is  free  and  sound,  without  any  rules  or  discipline, 
except  of  my  owne  custome  and  pleasure.  I  finde  no  differ 
ence  in  places,  al  are  alike  to  me  to  dwell  in  :  for  being 
sicke,  I  neede  no  other  commodities,  then  those  I  must  have 
when  I  am  in  health.  I  am  nothing  passionated,  though  I 
be  without  Physition,  without  Apothecary,  or  without  physi 
cal  helpe ;  whereat  I  see  some  as  much  troubled  in  rninde,  as 
3T  513 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  they  are  with  their  disease.  What  ?  doth  the  best  Physition 
XXXVII  of  them  all  make  us  perceive  any  happinesse  or  continuance 
Of  *he  r|r~  in  his  life,  as  may  witnesse  some  manifest  effect  of  his  skill 
tweene  chil- anc^  learning  ?  There  is  no  Nation,  but  hath  continued 
dren  and  many  ages  without  physicke :  yea  the  first  ages,  which  is  as 
fathers  much  to  say,  the  best  and  most  happy :  and  the  tenth  part 
of  the  world  hath  as  yet  no  use  of  it.  Infinite  nations  know 
it  not ;  where  they  live  both  more  healthie  and  much  longer 
then  we  doe  :  yea  and  amongst  us,  the  common  sort  live 
happily  without  it.  The  Romanes  had  beene  sixe  hundred 
yeares  before  ever  they  received  it :  by  meanes  or  interposi 
tion  of  Cato  the  Censor,  they  banisht  it  their  Citie,  who 
declared  how  easily  man  might  live  without  it,  having  lived 
himselfe  foure  score  and  five  yeeres,  and  his  wife  untill  she 
was  extreamely  old,  not  without  phisicke,  but  indeed  with 
out  any  Physition :  For,  whatsoever  is  by  experience  found 
healthy  for  our  body  and  health,  may  be  termed  physicke. 
He  entertained  (as  Plutarke  saith)  his  familie  in  health,  by 
the  use  (as  farre  as  I  remember)  of  Hares  milke :  As  the 
Arcadians  (saith  Plinie)  cure  all  maladies  with  Cowes  milke. 
And  the  Lybians  (saith  Herodotus)  doe  generally  enjoy  a 
perfect  health,  by  observing  this  custome,  which  is,  so  soone 
as  their  children  are  about  foure  yeeres  old,  to  cautherize 
and  scare  the  veines  of  their  head  and  temples,  whereby 
they  cut  off  the  way  to  all  rumes  and  defluxions.  And 
the  countrie-people  where  I  dwell,  use  nothing  against  all 
diseases,  but  some  of  the  strongest  wine  they  can  get,  with 
store  of  saffron  and  spice  in  it ;  and  all  with  one  like  fortune. 
And  to  say  true,  of  all  this  diversitie  of  rules  and  confusion 
of  prescriptions,  what  other  end  or  effect  workes  it,  but  to 
evacuate  the  belly  ?  which  a  thousand  home-simples  will  doe 
as  well.  And  I  know  not  whether  it  be  as  profitable  (as 
they  say)  and  whether  our  nature  require  the  residents  of 
her  excrements,  untill  a  certaine  measure,  as  wine  doth  his 
lees  for  his  preservation.  You  see  often  men  very  healthy 
by  some  strange  accidents,  to  fall  into  violent  vomites,  and 
fluxies,  and  voyd  great  store  of  excrements,  without  any 
precedent  need,  or  succeeding  benefite  :  yea  with  some 
empairing  and  prejudice.  I  learn't  of  Plato  not  long  since, 
that  of  three  motions,  which  belong  to  us,  the  last  and 
514 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

worst,  is  that  of  purgations,  and  that  no   man,  except  he  CHAPTER 
be  a  foole,  ought  to  undertake  it ;  unlesse  it  be  in  great      XXXVII 

extremity.     The  evill  is   troubled   and   stirred  up   bv  con-        ,  J       rf " 

',-  TJ_  •     j.i      e  i?  VI?      .1  n  i  semblance  be- 

trary  oppositions.     It  is  the  forme  of  life,  that  gently  must  tweene    chil- 

diminish,  consume  and  bring  it  to  an  end.  Since  the  violent  dren  arid 
twinges  of  the  drug  and  maladie  are  ever  to  our  losse ;  since  fathers 
the  quarrell  is  cleared  in  us,  and  the  drug  a  trustlesse  helpe  ; 
by  it's  own  nature  an  enemie  to  our  health,  and  but  by 
trouble  hath  no  accesse  in  our  state  :  Let 's  give  them  leave 
to  go  on.  That  order  which  provideth  for  Fleas  and  Moles, 
doth  also  provide  for  men,  who  have  the  same  patience  to 
suffer  themselves  to  be  governed,  that  Fleas  and  Moles  have. 
We  may  fairely  cry  bo-bo-boe ;  it  may  well  make  us  hoarse, 
but  it  will  nothing  advaunce  it.  It  is  a  proud  and  impetuous 
order.  Our  feare  and  our  dispaire,  in  liew  of  enviting  the 
same  unto  it,  doth  distaste  and  delay  it  out  of  our  helpe : 
he  oweth  his  course  to  evill  as  well  as  to  sickenesse.  To 
suffer  himselfe  to  be  corrupted  in  favour  of  one,  to  the  pre 
judice  of  the  others  rights,  he  will  not  doe  it,  so  should  they 
fall  into  disorder.  Let  us  goe  on  in  the  name  of  God  ;  let 
us  follow ;  He  leadeth  on  such  as  follow  him  :  those  that 
follow  him  not,  he  haleth  on,  both  with  their  rage  and 
physicke  together.  Cause  a  purgation  to  be  prepared  for 
your  braine ;  it  will  bee  better  emploied  unto  it,  then  to 
your  stomacke.  A  Lacedemonian  being  asked,  what  had 
made  him  live  so  long  in  health,  answered,  'The  ignorance  of 
'  physicke.'  And  Adrian  the  Emperour,  as  he  was  dying, 
ceased  not  to  crie  out,  that  the  number  of  Physitions  had 
killed  him.  A  bad  wrestler  became  a  Physition.  '  Courage,1 
said  Diogenes  to  him,  '  thou  hast  reason  to  doe  so,  for  now 
*  shalt  thou  helpe  to  put  them  into  the  ground,  who  have 
'  heeretofore  ayded  to  lay  thee  on  it.1  But  according  to 
Nicocles,  they  have  this  happe,  that  the  Sunne  doth  mani 
fest  their  successe,  and  the  earth  doth  cover  their  fault. 
And  besides,  they  have  a  very  advantageous  fashion  among 
themselves,  to  make  use  of  all  manner  of  events ;  for,  what 
soever  either  Fortune  or  Nature,  or  any  other  strange  cause 
(wherof  the  number  is  infinite)  produceth  in  us,  or  good 
or  healthfull,  it  is  the  priviledge  of  Physicke  to  ascribe  it 
unto  herselfe.  All  the  fortunate  successes  that  come  to  the 

515 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  patient,  which  is  under  their  government,  it  is  from  nature 
XXXVII      he   hath  them.      The  occasions   that    have  cured  me,  and 
the  re~    which  heale  a  thousand  others,  who  never  send  or  call  for 
-  Positions  to  helPe  them>  thej  usurpe  them  in  their  subjects, 
dren  and      And    touching    ill    accidents,    either    they    utterly    disavow 
fathers       them,   in  imputing  the  blame  of  them  to  the  patient,  by 
some  vaine  reasons,   whereof  they  never   misse   to    finde  a 
great  number ;  as  he  lay  with  his  armes  out  of  the  bed,  he 
hath  heard  the  noyse  of  a  coach  : 

luv.  Sat.  iii.  — rhodarum  transitus  arcto 

236.  Vicorum  inflexu. 

Coaches  could  hardly  passe, 
The  lane  so  crooked  was  : 

His  Window  was  left  open  all  night :  Hee  hath  laine 
upon  the  left  side,  or  troubled  his  head  with  some  heavie 
thought.  In  some,  a  word,  a  dreame,  or  a  looke,  is  of  them 
deemed  a  sufficient  excuse,  to  free  themselves  from  all  im 
putation  :  Or  if  they  please,  they  will  also  make  use  of  this 
emparing,  and  thereby  make  up  their  businesse,  and  as  a 
meane  which  can  never  faile  them,  when  by  their  applica 
tions  the  disease  is  growne  desperate,  to  pay  us  with  the 
assurance,  that  if  their  remedies  had  not  beene,  it  would 
have  beene  much  worse.  He,  whom  but  from  a  cold  they 
have  brought  to  a  quotidian  Ague,  without  them  should 
have  had  a  continuall  feaver.  They  must  needes  thrive  in 
their  businesse,  since  all  ills  redownd  to  their  profit.  Truely 
they  have  reason  to  require  of  the  pacient  an  application  of 
favourable  confidence  in  them :  which  must  necessarily  be  in 
good  earnest,  and  yeelding  to  apply  it  self  unto  imaginations, 
over-hardly  to  be  believed.  Plato  said  very  well  and  to  the 
purpose,  that  freely  to  lie  belonged  onely  to  Physitions,  since 
our  health  dependeth  on  their  vanitie  and  falsehood  of  pro 
mises,  ^sope  an  author  of  exceeding  rare  excellence,  and 
whose  graces  few  discover,  is  very  pleasant  in  representing 
this  kinde  of  tyrannicall  authority  unto  us,  which  they  usurpe 
upon  poore  soules,  weakned  by  sickenes,  and  overwhelmed 
through  feare  :  for  he  reporteth,  how  a  sicke  man  being 
demaunded  by  his  Physition,  what  operation  he  felt  by  the 
Physicke  he  had  given  him  :  i  have  sweate  much,  answered 

516 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

he  :  That  is  good,  replied  the  Physition.     Another  time  he  CHAPTER 
asked  him  againe  how  he  had    done  since :  I  have   had  a     XXXVII 

great  cold  and  quivered  much,  said  lie :  That  is  very  well,        ,  fhe  rf~ 

,i      ™       •,•  •  MM       .1  •    i  j-        i       i        •?  i  semblance  be- 

quoth  tlie  .rhysition  againe.      Ine  third  time  he  demaunded  tweene    chil- 

of  him,  how  he  felt  himselfe :  he  answered,  I  swell  and  puft'e     dren  and 

up  as  it  were  with  the  dropsie  :  That  "s  not  amisse,  said  the       fathers 

physitian.     A  familiar  friend  of  his  comming  afterward  to 

visite  him,  and  to  know  how  hee  did  ?     Verily  (said  he)  my 

friend  I  die  with   being  too  too  well.     There   was  a  more 

equall  Law  in  ^Egypt,  by  which  for  the  first  three  dayes  the 

Physition  tooke  the  patient  in  hand,  upon  the  patients  perill 

and  fortune ;  but  the  three  dayes  expired,  it  was  at  his  owne. 

For,  what  reason  is  there,  that  ^sculapius  their  patrone 

must  have  beene  strucken  with  Thunder,  forsomuch  as  he 

recovered  Hippolitus  from  death  to  life  ? 

Nam  pater  omnipotens  aliquem  indignatus  ab  umbris,  VIRG.  ALn.  vii, 

Mortalem  infernis,  ad  lumina  surgere  vita  770. 

Ipse  repertorem  medicines  talis,  et  artis 
Fulmine  Phcebigenam  stygias  detrusit  ad  undas. 

love  scorning  that  from  shades  infernall  night, 
A  mortall  man  should  rise  to  lifes  new  light, 
Apolloes  sonne  to  hell  he  thunder-threw, 
Who  such  an  arte  found  out,  such  med'cine  knew  ; 

and  his  followers  must  be  absolved,  that  send  so  many  soules 
from  life  to  death  ?  A  physition  boasted  unto  Nicocles,  that 
his  Arte  was  of  exceeding  great  authority.  It  is  true  (quoth 
Nicocles)  for,  it  may  kill  so  many  people  without  feare  of 
punishment  by  Law.  As  for  the  rest,  had  I  beene  of  their 
counsell,  I  would  surely  have  made  my  discipline  more  sacred 
and  mysterious.  They  had  begunne  very  well,  but  the  end 
hath  not  answered  the  beginning.  It  was  a  good  ground,  to 
have  made  Gods  and  Dremons  Authors  of  their  Science,  to 
have  assumed  a  peculiar  language  and  writing  to  themselves. 
Howbeit  philosophy  supposeth  it  to  be  folly  to  perswade  a 
man  to  his  profit,  by  wayes  not  understood  :  Vt  si  quis  medi- 
cus  imperet  ut  sumat :  '  As  if  a  Physition  should  bid  a  man 
4  take/ 

Terrigenam,  herbigradam,  domiportam,  sanguine  cassam.        Cic.  Divin.  ii. 

One   earth -borne,  goe-by-grasse,   house-bearing,  slimie, 
bloodlesse. 

517 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER      It  was  a  good  rule  in  their  arte,  and  which  accompanieth 
XXXVII     all    fanaticall,    vaine,    and    supernaturall    artes,    that    the 

K?  6  rf"    patients  beliefe  must  by  good  hope  and  assurance  preoccu- 

semblance be-  r          ,,     .        &     .          ,       J  «  ,.  r,,  •  i 

tweene  chil-  P^e  their  effect  and  operation.  Which  rule  they  hold  so 
dren  and  farre  forth,  that  the  most  ignorant  and  bungling  horse-leach 
fathers  is  fitter  for  a  man  that  hath  confidence  in  him,  than  the 
skilfullest  and  learnedst  physition.  The  very  choyce  of  most 
of  their  Drugges,  is  somewhat  mysterious  and  divine.  The 
left  foote  of  a  Tortoyze  ;  The  stale  of  a  Lizard  ;  The  dongue 
of  an  Elephant ;  The  liver  of  a  Mole,  Blood  drawne  from 
under  the  right  wing  of  a  white  Pigeon  ;  And  for  us  who  are 
troubled  with  the  stone-cholike  (so  disdainfully  abuse  they 
our  misery)  some  Rattes  pounded  to  small  powder ;  and  such 
other  foolish  trash,  which  rather  seeme  to  be  magike-spells 
or  charmes,  than  effects  of  any  solide  science.  I  omit  to 
speake  of  the  odde  number  of  their  pilles  ;  The  destination 
of  certaine  dayes  and  feastes  of  the  yeare  ;  The  distinction  of 
houres  to  gather  the  simples  of  their  ingredients ;  And  the 
same  rewbarbative  and  severely-grave  looke  of  theirs,  and  of 
their  port  and  countenance  ;  Which  Plinie  himselfe  mocketh 
at.  But,  as  I  was  about  to  say,  they  have  failed,  forsomuch 
as  they  have  not  added  this  to  their  faire  beginning,  to  make 
their  assemblies  more  religious,  and  their  consultations  more 
secret.  No  profane  man  should  have  accesse  unto  them,  no 
more  than  to  the  secret  ceremonies  of  ^Esculapius.  By  which 
meanes  it  commeth  to  passe,  that  their  irresolution,  the 
weakenesse  of  their  arguments,  divinations  and  grounds,  the 
sharpenesse  of  their  contestations  full  of  hatred,  of  jealousie 
and  particular  considerations,  being  apparant  to  all  men ;  a 
man  must  needes  be  starke  blinde,  if  he  who  falleth  into 
their  hands,  see  not  himselfe  greatly  endangered.  Who  ever 
saw  Physition  use  his  fellowes  receipt,  without  diminishing 
or  adding  somewhat  unto  it  ?  Whereby  they  greatly  betraie 
their  Arte ;  And  make  us  perceive,  they  rather  respect  their 
reputation,  and  consequently  their  profit,  than  the  well-fare 
or  interests  of  their  patients.  He  is  the  wisest  amongst  their 
Doctors,  who  hath  long  since  prescribed  them  that  one  alone 
should  meddle  to  cure  a  sicke  man ;  for,  if  it  prosper  not 
with  him,  and  he  do  no  good,  the  reproch  will  not  be  great 
to  the  Arte  of  physicke,  through  the  fault  of  one  man 
518 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

alone  ;  and  on  the  other  side,  if  it  thrive  well  with  him,  CHAPTER 
the  Glorie  shal  be  the  greater.  Whereas  if  they  be  many,  XXXVII 
every  hand-while  they  discover  their  mysterie,  because  they  s^blance'be- 
oftner  happen  to  doe  ill  than  well.  They  should  have  tweene  chil- 
beene  content  with  the  perpetuall  dis-agreeing  which  is  ever  dren  and 
found  in  the  opinions  of  the  principal!  Masters  and  chiefe  fathers 
Authors  of  their  Science,  knowne  but  by  such  as  are  conver 
sant  in  Bookes,  without  making  apparent  shew  of  the  con 
troversies,  and  inconstancies  of  their  judgement,  which  they 
foster  and  continue  amongst  themselves.  Will  wee  have  an 
example  of  the  ancient  debate  of  Physicke  ?  Hirophils 
placeth  the  originall  cause  of  sickenesse  in  the  humours  : 
Erasistratus,  in  the  blood  of  the  Arteries  :  Asclepiades,  in 
the  invisible  Atonies  that  passe  into  our  pores  :  Alcmeon,  in 
the  abundance  or  defence  of  corporall  forces  :  Diocles,  in  the 
inequality  of  the  bodies  elements,  and  in  the  quality  of  the 
aire,  wee  breathe  :  Strato,  in  the  abundance,  cruditie  and 
corruption  of  the  nourishment  wee  take  :  Hipocrates  doth 
place  it  in  the  spirits.  There  is  a  friend  of  theirs,  whom 
they  know  better  than  I,  who  to  this  purpose  crieth  out ; 
that  the  most  important  science  in  use  amongst  us  (as  that 
which  hath  charge  of  our  health  and  preservation)  is  by  il 
hap,  the  most  uncertaine,  the  most  confused,  and  most 
agitated  with  infinite  changes.  There  is  no  great  danger 
to  mistake  the  height  of  the  Sunne,  or  misse-reckon  the 
fraction  of  some  Astronomical  supputation  ;  but  herein, 
whereon  our  being  and  chiefe  free-hold  doth  wholly  de 
pend,  it  is  no  wisedome  to  abandon  our  selves  to  the  mercy 
of  the  agitation  of  so  manifold  contrary  windes.  Before 
the  Peloponesian  war,  there  was  no  great  newes  of  this 
science.  Hipocrates  brought  it  into  credite.  Whatsoever  he 
established,  Chrysippus  overthrew.  Afterward  Erasistratus 
Grand-Childe  to  Aristotle,  re-enverst  what  ever  Chrysippus 
had  written  of  it.  After  these,  start  up  the  Emperikes,  who 
concerning  the  managing  of  this  Arte,  tooke  a  new  course, 
altogether  different  from  those  ancient  fathers.  And  when 
their  credit  began  to  growe  stale ;  Hirophilus  brought 
another  kinde  of  physicke  into  use,  which  Asclepiades  when 
his  turne  came,  impugned,  and  in  the  end  subverted.  Then 
came  the  opinions  of  Themison  to  bee  in  great  authority, 

519 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  then  those  of  Musa,  and  afterward  those  of  Vectius  Valens,  a 
XXXVII      famous  Physition,  by  reason  of  the  acquaintance  he  had  with 

t  e  re-    Messaijna<     During  the   time   of  Nero,  the  soveraigntie  of 
semblance  be-     ,  .  .  ,     „  ,    .       . ,     &,        ,        f  ^  ,         ,     ..  ,&  , 

tweene    chil-  phisick  fel   to  the  hands  of  Ihessalus,  who  abolished   and 

dren  and     condemned  whatsoever  had  been  held  of  it  before  his  time, 
fathers       This  mans  Doctrine  was  afterward  wholly  overthrowne  by 
Crinas  of  Marseille,  who  a  new  revived  and  framed,  that  all 
men  should  direct  and  rule  medicinable  operations  to  the 
Ephemerides  and  motions  of  the  starres,  to  eate,  to  drinke, 
to  sleepe  at  what  houre  it  should  please  Luna  and   Mer- 
curie.     His  authority  was  soone  after  supplanted  by  Charinus 
a  Physition  of  the  same  towne  of  Marseilles,  who  not  onely 
impugned  ancient  physicke,  but  also  the  use  of  warme  and 
publike  bathes,  which  had  beene  accustomed  to  many  ages 
before.     Hee  caused  men  to  bee  bathed  in  cold  Water  ;  yea, 
were  it  in  the  deepe  of  winter  he  plunged  and  dived  sicke 
men  into  the  running  streame  of  Rivers.     Until!  Plinies  time 
no  Romane  had  ever  dained  to  exercise  the  arte  of  physicke, 
but  was  ever  used  by  strangers  and  Grsecians,  as  at  this  daie 
it  is  used  in  France  by  Latinizers.     For,  as  a  famous  physi- 
tion  saith,  we  doe  not  easily  admit  and  allow  that  physicke, 
which  wee  understand,  nor  those  Drugs  we  gather  our  selves. 
If  those  nations  from  whom  wee  have  the  Wood  Guiacum, 
the  Salsapareille,  and  the  Wood  Desquine,  have  any  physition 
amongst  them,  how  much  thinke  we  by  the  same  commenda 
tion  of  the  strangenesse,  rarenesse  and  dearth,  they  will  re- 
joyce  at  our  cole  worts  and  parsly  ?    For,  who  dareth  contemne 
things  sought  and  fetcht  so  farre-off  with  the  hazard  of  so 
long  and  dangerous  a  peregrination  ?     Since  these  auncient 
mutations  of  physicke,  there  have  beene  infinite  others,  that 
have  continued  unto  our  dayes,  and  most  often  entire  and 
universal!  mutations  ;  as  are  those  which  Paracelsus,  Fiora- 
vanti  and  Argenterius  have  produced  :  for  (as  it  is  told  me) 
they  do  not  only  change  a  receipt,  but  also  the  whole  con 
texture  and  policie  of  physickes  whole  body,  accusing  such 
as  hitherto  have  made  profession  thereof,  of  ignorance  and 
cousinage.     Now  I  leave  to  your  imagination,  in  what  plight 
the   poore  patient  findeth  himselfe.       If  we   could   but   be 
assured,  when  they  mistake  themselves,  their  physick  would 
do  us  no  harme,  although  not  profit  us,  it  were  a  reasonable 
520 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

composition,  for  a  man  to  hazard  himselfe  to  get  some  good,  CHAPTER 
so  he  endangered  not  himselfe  to  lose  by  it.  JEsope  re-  XXXVII 
porteth  this  storie  ;  that  one  who  had  bought  a  Moore-slave,  semkfancebe 
supposing  his  blacke  hew  had  come  unto  him  by  some  strange  tweene  chil- 
accident,  or  ill  usage  of  his  former  Master,  with  great  dren  and 
diligence  caused  him  to  be  medicined  with  divers  bathes  fathers 
and  sundry  potions  :  It  fortuned  the  Moore  did  no  whit 
mend  or  change  his  swarthy  complexion,  but  lost  his  former 
health.  How  often  commeth  it  to  passe,  and  how  many 
times  see  we  physitions  charge  one  another  with  their 
patients  death.  I  remember  a  popular  sickenesse,  which 
some  yeares  since,  greatly  troubled  the  townes  about  mee, 
very  mortall  and  dangerous  ;  the  rage  whereof  being  over 
past,  which  had  carried  away  an  infinite  number  of  persons  : 
One  of  the  most  famous  physitions  in  all  the  country,  pub 
lished  a  booke,  concerning  that  disease  wherein  he  adviseth 
himselfe,  that  they  had  done  amisse  to  use  phlebotomy,  and 
confesseth,  it  had  beene  one  of  the  principall  causes  of  so 
great  an  inconvenience.  Moreover,  their  authors  hold,  that 
there  is  no  kinde  of  Physicke,  but  hath  some  hurtfull  part 
in  it.  And  if  those  that  fit  our  turne,  doe  in  some  sort 
harme  us ;  what  must  those  doe,  which  are  given  us  to  no 
purpose,  and  out  of  season  ?  As  for  me,  if  nothing  else  be 
longed  thereunto,  I  deeme  it  a  matter  very  dangerous,  and 
of  great  prejudice  for  him  who  loathes  the  taste,  or  abhorres 
the  smell  of  a  potion,  to  swallow  it  at  so  unconvenient 
houres,  and  so  much  against  his  heart.  And  I  thinke  it 
much  distempereth  a  sicke  man,  namely  in  a  season  he  hath 
so  much  neede  of  rest.  Besides,  consider  but  the  occasions, 
on  which  they  ordinarily  ground  the  cause  of  our  sickenesses  ; 
they  are  so  light  and  delicate,  as  thence  I  argue,  that  a 
very  small  error  in  compounding  of  their  Drugges,  may 
occasion  us  much  detriment.  Now  if  the  mistaking  in  a 
Physition  be  dangerous,  it  is  very  ill  for  us  :  for  it  is  hard  if 
he  fall  not  often  into  it.  He  hath  neede  of  many  parts, 
divers  considerations  and  severall  circumstances  to  proportion 
his  desseigne  justly.  He  ought  to  know  the  sicke  mans  com 
plexion,  his  temper,  his  humours,  his  inclinations,  his  actions, 
his  thoughts  and  his  imaginations.  He  must  be  assured  of 
externall  circumstances ;  of  the  nature  of  the  place ;  the 
3U  521 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  condition  of  the  aire  ;  the  quality  of  the  weather  ;  the  situa- 
XXXVII      tion  Of  the  planets,  and  their  influences.      In  sickenes,  he 

, ,   e  rf~    ought  to  be  acquainted  with  the  causes,  with  the  siemes,  with 
semblance  be-    .  &      ™      .  ,        ...     ..     ,    .  T'      ,  p 

tweene    chil-  the    affections   and  criticall  dales :    In   drugges    he  should 

dren  and  understand  their  weight,  their  vertue  and  their  operation, 
fathers  the  country,  the  figure,  the  age,  the  dispensation.  In  all 
these  parts,  he  must  know  how  to  proportion  and  referre 
them  one  unto  another ;  thereby  to  beget  a  perfect  Sym 
metric  or  due  proportion  of  each  part :  wherein  if  he  misse 
never  so  little,  or  if  amongst  so  many  wheeles  and  several 
motions,  the  least  be  out  of  tune  or  temper ;  it  is  enough  to 
marre  all. 

God  knowes  how  hard  the  knowledge  of  most  of  these  parts 
is  :  As  for  example,  how  shall  he  finde  out  the  proper  signe  of 
the  disease,  every  malady  being  capable  of  an  infinite  num 
ber  of  signes :  How  many  debates,  doubts  and  controversies 
have  they  amongst  themselves  about  the  interpretations  of 
Vrine  ?  Otherwise  whence  should  that  continuall  altercation 
come  we  see  amongst  them,  about  the  knowledge  of  the  dis 
ease  ?  How  should  we  excuse  this  fault,  wherein  they  fall  so 
often,  to  take  a  Martin  for  a  Fox  ?  In  those  diseases  I  have 
had  (so  they  admitted  any  difficulty)  I  could  never  yet  finde 
three  agreeing  in  one  opinion.  I  more  willingly  note 
examples  that  concerne  my  selfe.  A  Gentleman  in  Paris 
was  not  long  since  cut  off  the  stone  by  the  appointment  of 
i3hysitions,  in  whose  blader  they  found  no  more  stone,  then 
in  his  hand  :  Where  also  a  Bishop,  who  was  my  very  good 
friend,  had  by  his  Phisitions  been  earnestly  sollicited  to  be 
cut ;  and  my  selfe,  because  they  were  of  his  counsell,  upon 
their  words,  aided  to  perswade  him  to  it ;  who  being  deceased 
and  opened,  it  was  found,  he  had  no  infirmity  but  in  his 
reines.  They  are  lesse  excusable  in  this  disease,  forsomuch 
as  it  is  in  some  sort  palpable.  Whereby  I  judge  the  arte  of 
Chirurgery  much  more  certaine ;  For  it  seeth  and  handleth 
what  it  doth  :  and  therein  is  lesse  conjecture  and  divination. 
Whereas  Phisitions  have  no  speculum  matricis^  to  discover 
our  braine,  our  lungs,  and  our  liver  unto  them.  The  very 
promises  of  Phisicke  are  incredible.  For  being  to  provide 
for  divers  and  contrary  accidents,  which  often  trouble  us 
together,  and  with  a  kinde  of  necessary  relation  one  unto 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

another:  as  the  heate  of  the  liver,  and  the  cold  of  the  CHAPTER 
stomacke,  they  will  perswade  us,  that  with  their  ingredients, 
this  one  shall  warme  the  stomacke,  and  this  other  coole 
the  liver :  the  one  hath  charge  to  goe  directly  to  the  tweene  chil- 
reynes,  yea  even  to  the  bladder,  without  enstalling  his  dren  and 
operation  any  where  else,  and  by  reason  of  it's  secret  fathers 
propriety,  keeping  his  force  and  vertue,  all  that  long 
way,  and  so  full  of  stops  or  lets,  untill  it  come  to  the 
place,  to  whose  service  it  is  destinated.  Another  shall  drie 
the  braine,  and  another  moisten  the  lungs.  Of  all  this 
hotch-pot  having  composed  a  mixture  or  potion,  is  it  not 
a  kinde  of  raving,  to  hope  their  severall  vertues  shall  divide 
and  separate  themselves  from  out  such  a  confusion  or  com 
mixture,  to  run  to  so  divers  charges  ?  I  should  greatly  feare 
they  would  loose  or  change  their  tickets  and  trouble  their 
quarters.  And  who  can  imagine,  that  in  this  liquid  confu 
sion,  these  faculties  be  not  corrupted,  confounded  and  alter 
one  another  ?  What  ?  that  the  execution  of  this  ordinance 
depends  from  another  officer,  to  whose  trust  and  mercy 
we  must  once  more  forsake  our  lives  ?  As  we  have  doublet 
and  hose-makers  to  make  our  cloths,  and  are  so  much  the 
better  fitted,  in  as  much  as  each  medleth  with  his  owne 
trade,  and  such  have  their  occupation  more  strictly  limited, 
then  a  Tailer  that  will  make  all.  And  as  for  our  necessary 
foode,  some  of  our  great  Lords,  for  their  more  commodity 
and  ease  have  severall  cookes,  as  some  only  to  dresse  boyled 
meates,  and  some  to  roste,  others  to  bake,  whereas  if  one 
Cooke  alone  would  supply  all  three  in  generall  he  could 
never  doe  it  so  exactly.  In  like  sort  for  the  curing  of  all 
diseases,  the  ^Egyptians  had  reason  to  reject  this  generall 
mysterie  of  Physitians,  and  to  sunder  this  profession  for 
every  malady,  allotting  each  part  of  the  body  his  distinct 
workman.  For,  every  particular  part  was  thereby  more  pro 
perly  attended,  and  lesse  confusedly  governed,  and  forsomuch 
as  they  regarded  but  the  same  especially.  Our  Physitians 
never  remember,  that  he  who  will  provide  for  all,  provideth 
for  nothing ;  and  that  the  totall  and  summarie  policy  of  this 
little  world,  is  unto  them  undigestible.  Whilst  they  feared 
to  stop  the  course  of  a  bloody  flux,  because  he  shold  not 
fal  into  an  ague,  they  killed  me  a  friend  of  mine  who  was 

523 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  more  worth  then   all  the   rabble  of  them;    yea  were  they 

XXXVII      as  many  more.     They  ballance  their  divinations  of  future 

Of  the  r£'    things,  with  present  evils,  and  because  they  will  not  cure  the 

tweene^chil-  braine  m  prejudice  of  the  stomacke,  they  offend  the  stomacke 
dren  and  and  empaire  the  braine,  and  all  by  their  seditious  and  tumul- 
fathers  tuary  drugs.  Concerning  the  variety  and  weaknes  of  the 
reasons  of  this  Art,  it  is  more  apparent  then  in  any  other  Art. 
Aperitive  things  are  good  for  a  man  thats  troubled  with  the 
collike,  because,  that  opening  and  dilating  the  passages,  they 
addresse  this  slimy  matter  whereof  the  gravel  and  stone  is 
ingendred,  and  so  convay  downeward  whatsoever  beginneth 
to  harden  and  petrifie  in  the  reines :  Aperitive  things  are 
dangerous  for  a  man  thats  troubled  with  the  collick,  because 
that  opening  and  dilating  the  passages,  they  addresse  towards 
the  reines,  the  matter  engendring  gravel],  which  by  reason 
of  the  propensions  they  have  with  it,  easily  seizing  on  the 
same,  must  by  consequence  stay  great  store  of  that  which  is 
convaied  unto  them.  Moreover,  if  by  chance  it  fortune  to 
meet  with  a  body,  somewhat  more  grosse  then  it  ought  to 
be,  to  passe  all  those  strait  turnings,  which  to  expel  the 
same  they  must  glide  thorow ;  that  body  being  moved  by 
those  soluble  things,  and  cast  in  those  strait  chanels,  and 
comming  to  stop  them,  it  will  doubtlesse  hasten  a  certaine 
and  most  dolorous  death.  They  have  a  like  constancy  about 
the  counsels  they  give  us,  touching  the  regiment  of  our  life. 
It  is  good  to  make  water  often  ;  for  by  experience  we  see, 
that  permitting  the  same  idlely  to  ly  still,  we  give  it  leisure 
to  discharge  it  selfe  of  her  lees  and  excrements,  which  may 
serve  to  breed  the  stone  in  the  bladder :  It  is  good  to  make 
water  but  seldome,  for  the  weighty  dregs  it  drawes  with  it, 
are  not  easily  caried  away,  except  by  violence :  as  by  experi 
ence  is  scene  in  a  torrent  that  runneth  very  swift,  which 
sweepeth  and  clenseth  the  place  through  which  he  passeth, 
much  more  then  doth  a  slow-gliding  streame.  Likewise  it  is 
good  to  have  often  copulation  with  women ;  for  that  openeth 
the  passages,  and  convaieth  the  gravell  away  :  It  is  also  hurt- 
full  ;  for  it  heateth,  wearieth,  and  weakneth  the  reines.  It  is 
good  for  one  to  bathe  himselfe  in  warme  water;  forsomuch 
as  that  looseth  and  moistneth  the  places  where  the  gravel 
and  stone  lurketh  :  It  is  also  bad  ;  because  this  application 
524 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

of  externall  heat  helpeth  the  reines  to  concoct,  to  harden  CHAPTER 
and  petrifie  the  matter  disposed  unto  it.  To  such  as  are  at  *XXVI1 
the  bathes,  it  is  more  healthfull  to  eat  but  little  at  night,  ^  JanceTe- 
that  the  water  they  are  to  drink  the  next  morning,  finding  tweene  chil- 
the  stomacke  empty,  and  without  any  obstacle,  it  may  worke  dren  and 
the  greater  operation  :  on  the  other  side,  it  is  better  to  eat  fathers 
but  a  little  at  dinner,  lest  a  man  might  hinder  the  operation 
of  the  water,  which  is  not  yet  perfect,  and  not  to  charge  the 
stomacke  so  suddenly,  after  this  other  travell,  and  leave 
the  office  of  digesting  unto  the  night,  which  can  better  do  it 
then  the  day  ;  the  body  and  spirit  being  then  in  continual 
motion  and  action.  Loe  heere  how  they  in  all  their  dis 
courses  juggle,  dally,  and  trifle  at  our  charge,  and  are  never 
able  to  bring  mee  a  proposition,  but  I  can  presently  frame 
another  to  the  contrary  of  like  force  and  consequence.  Let 
them  then  no  longer  raile  against  those  who  in  any  sicknes, 
suffer  themselves  gently  to  be  directed  by  their  owne  appetite, 
and  by  the  counsell  of  nature  ;  and  who  remit  themselves  to 
common  fortune.  I  have  by  occasion  of  my  travels  scene 
almost  all  the  famous  Bathes  of  Christendome,  and  some 
yeers  since  have  begun  to  use  them :  For,  in  generall  I 
deeme  bathing  to  be  very  good  and  healthy,  and  I  am  per- 
swaded,  we  incurre  no  small  incommodites  in  our  health,  by 
having  neglected  and  lost  this  custome,  which  in  former 
times  were  generally  observed  very  neere  amongst  all  Nations, 
and  is  yet  with  divers  at  this  time  to  wash  their  bodies  every 
day :  And  I  cannot  imagine  but  that  we  are  much  the  worse 
with  keeping  our  bodies  all  over-crusted,  and  our  pores  stopt 
with  grease  and  filth.  And  touching  the  drinking  of  them, 
fortune  hath  first  made  it  to  agree  very  well  with  my  taste  : 
secondly  it  is  naturall  and  simple ;  and  though  vaine,  no 
thing  dangerous  :  whereof  this  infinity  of  people  of  al  sorts 
and  complexions,  and  of  all  nations  that  come  to  them,  doth 
warrant  mee.  And  although  I  have  as  yet  found  no  extra 
ordinary  good  or  wondrous  effect  in  them,  but  rather  having 
somewhat  curiously  examined  the  matter,  I  finde  all  the 
reports  of  such  operations,  which  in  such  places  are  reported, 
and  of  many  believed,  to  be  false  and  fabulous.  So  easily 
doth  the  world  deceive  it  selfe,  namely  in  things  it  desireth, 
or  faine  would  have  come  to  passe.  Yet  have  I  scene  but 

525 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  few  or  none  at  al,  whom  these  waters  have  made  worse ;  and 

XXXVII      no  man  can  without  malice  denie,  but  that  they  stirre  up  a 

Ut  the  re-    mans  appetite,  make  easie  digestion,  and  except  a  man  e'oe 

semblance  be-  ,      ,,      rr  j  i*  •    .  /    i  •  i_  T          i  i  i  i     \ 

tweene    chil-  ^°  them  overweake  and  taint  (which  1  would  have  none  doe) 

dren  and  they  will  adde  a  kinde  of  new  mirth  unto  him.  They  have 
fathers  not  the  power  to  raise  men  from  desperate  diseases.  They 
may  stay  some  light  accident,  or  prevent  the  threats  of  some 
alteration.  Whosoever  goeth  to  them,  and  resolveth  not  to 
be  merry,  that  so  he  may  enjoy  the  pleasure  of  the  good 
company  resorts  to  them,  and  of  the  pleasant  walks  or 
exercises,  which  the  beauty  of  those  places,  where  bathes  are 
commonly  seated,  doth  affoord  and  delight  men  withall ;  he 
without  doubt  loseth  the  better  part  and  most  assured  of 
their  effect.  And  therefore  have  I  hitherto  chosen  to  stay 
my  selfe  and  make  use  of  those,  where  I  found  the  pleasure 
of  the  scituation  most  delightsome,  most  conveniencie  of  lodg 
ing,  of  victuals  and  company,  as  are  in  France  the  bathes  of 
Banieres ;  those  of  Plombieres,  on  the  frontiers  of  Germany 
and  Loraine  ;  those  of  Baden  in  Switzerland;  those  of  Luca 
in  Tuscanie  ;  and  especially  those  of  Delia  villa ;  which  I 
have  used  most  often  and  at  divers  seasons  of  the  yeare. 
Every  nation  hath  some  particular  opinion  concerning  their 
use,  and  severall  lawes  and  formes  how  to  use  them,  and  all 
different :  And  as  I  have  found  by  experience  the  effect  in  a 
manner  all  one.  In  Germanic  they  never  use  to  drinke  of  the 
waters :  but  bathe  themselves  for  all  diseases,  and  wil  lie 
padling  in  them,  almost  from  Sunne  to  Sunne.  In  Italic  if 
they  drinke  nine  dayes  of  the  water,  they  wash  themselves 
other  thirtie  dayes  with  it.  And  commonly  they  drinke  it 
mixt  with  other  drugges,  thereby  to  helpe  the  operation. 
Here  our  Physitions  appoint  us  when  wee  have  drunke  to 
walke  upon  it,  that  so  wee  may  helpe  to  digest  it :  There,  so 
soone  as  they  have  drunke,  they  make  them  lie  a  bed,  untill 
they  have  voyded  the  same  out  againe,  continually  warm 
ing  their  stomack  and  feete  with  warme  clothes.  All  the 
Germanes  whilest  they  lie  in  the  water,  doe  particularly  use 
cupping  glasses,  and  scarifications :  And  the  Italians  use 
their  Doccie,  which  are  certaine  spowts  running  with  warme 
waters,  convayed  from  the  bathes-spring  in  leaden  pipes, 
where,  for  the  space  of  a  month,  they  let  it  spout  upon  their 
526 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

heads,  upon  their  stomacke,  or   upon    any    other   part    of  CHAPTER 
the  bodie,  according  as  neede  requireth,  one  houre  in  the    O?X?^V11 
forenoone,  and  as  long  in  the  afternoone.     There  are  infinit  g^nblance^be- 
other  differences  of  customes  in  every  countrey :  or  to  say  tweene     chil- 
better,   there  is  almost  no  resemblances  betweene  one  and      dren  and 
other.    See  how  this  part  of  Physicke,  by  which  alone  I  have        fathers 
suffered  my  selfe  to  be  carried  away,  which  though  it  be  least 
artificial!,  yet  hath  she  the  share  of  the  confusion  and  uncer 
tainty,  seene  in  all  other  parts  and  every  where  of  this  arte. 
Poets  may  say  what  they  list,  and  with  more  emphasis  and 
grace  :  witnesse  these  two  Epigram  mes. 

Alcon  hesterno  signum  lovis  attigit.     Ille  LUCIL. 

Quamvis  marmoreus,  vim  patitur  medici.  AUSON.  Epig. 

Kcce  hodie  jussus  transferri  ex  cede  vetusta,  Ixxiii. 

Effertur,  quamvis  sit  Deux  atque  lapis. 
Alcon  look't  yester-day  on  carved  love. 

love,,  though  of  Marble,  feeles  the  leeches  force, 
From  his  old  Church  to  day  made  to  remoove, 

Though  God  and  Stone,  hee  's  carried  like  a  coarse. 

And  the  other  : 

Lotus  nobiscum  est  hilaris,  ccenavit  et  idem,  ^A.RT'.X*' 

Inventus  mane  est  mortuus  Androgoras.  Epig.  liii. 

Tarn  subitae  mortis  causam  Faustine  requiris  ? 

In  somnis  medicum  viderat  Hermocratem. 
Androgoras  in  health  bath'd  over  night  with  us, 

And  merry  supt,  but  in  the  morne  starke  dead  was 

found. 
Of  his  so  sudden  death,  the  cause  shall  I  discusse  ? 

Hermocrates  the  Leech  he  saw  in  sleepe  unsound. 

Upon  which  I  will  tell  you  two  pretty  stories.  The  Baron 
of  Caupene  in  Chalosse  and  I,  have  both  in  common  the 
right  of  the  patronage  of  a  benefice,  which  is  of  a  very  large 
precinct,  situated  at  the  feet  of  our  Mountaines  named 
Lohontan.  It  is  with  the  inhabitants  of  that  corner,  as  it  is 
said  to  be  with  those  of  the  valley  of  Angrougne.  They 
leade  a  kind  of  peculiar  life  ;  their  attire,  and  their  customes 
apart  and  severall.  They  were  directed  and  governed  by 
certaine  particular  policies  and  customes,  received  by  tradi 
tion  from  Father  to  Child  :  Whereto,  without  other  Lawes 
or  Compulsion,  except  the  reverence  and  awe  of  their 
custome  and  use,  they  awefully  tie  and  bound  themselves. 
This  petty  state  had  from  all  antiquity  continued  in  so 

527 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  happy  a  condition,  that  no  neighbouring  severe  judge  had 
O?XifVI1  ever  ^eene  troubled  to  enquire  of  their  life  and  affaires,  nor 
semblanc/be-  was  ever  4tturny  or  Pety-fogging  Lawyer  called  for,  to  give 
tweene  chil-  them  advise  or  counsell ;  nor  stranger  sought  unto  to  de- 
dren  and  termine  their  quarrels  or  decide  their  contentions  ;  neither 
fathers  were  ever  beggers  seen  among  them.  They  alwaies  avoyded 
commerce  and  shunned  alliances  with  the  other  World,  lest 
they  should  alter  the  purity  of  their  orders  and  policy  ;  untill 
such  time  (as  they  say)  that  one  amongst  them,  in  their 
fathers  daies,  having  a  minde  puft  up  with  a  noble  ambition, 
to  bring  his  name  and  credit  in  reputation,  devised  to  make 
one  of  his  Children  Sir  lohn  Lackelatine,  or  Master  Peter 
an  Oake :  And  having  made  him  learne  to  write  in  some 
neighbour  Towne  not  farre  off,  at  last  procured  him  to 
be  a  country  Notary,  or  Petty-fogging  Clark.  This  fellow 
having  gotten  some  pelfe  and  become  great,  began  to  dis- 
daine  their  ancient  customes,  and  put  the  pompe  and  state- 
lines  of  our  higher  regions  into  their  heads.  It  fortuned 
that  a  chiefe  Gossip  of  his  had  a  Goate  dishorned,  whom  he 
so  importunately  solicited  to  sue  the  Trespasser,  and  demand 
law  and  right  at  the  lusticers  hands,  that  dwelt  thereabouts  ; 
And  so  never  ceasing  to  sow  sedition  and  breed  suites 
amongst  his  neighbours,  he  never  left  till  he  had  confounded 
and  marred  all.  After  this  corruption  or  intrusion  of  law 
(they  say)  there  ensued  presently  another  mischiefe  of  worse 
consequence,  by  meanes  of  a  Quacke-salver,  or  Empirike 
Physition  that  dwelt  amongst  them,  who  would  needes  be 
married  to  one  of  their  daughters,  and  so  endenizon  and 
settle  himselfe  amongst  them. 

This  gallant  began  first  to  teach  and  instruct  them  in  the 
names  of  agewes,  rheumes  and  impostumes  ;  then  the  scitua- 
tion  of  the  heart,  of  the  liver  and  other  intrailes  :  A  Science 
untill  then  never  known  or  heard  of  among  them.  And  in 
stead  of  garlike,  wherewith  they  had  learned  to  expell,  and 
were  wont  to  cure  all  diseases,  of  what  qualitie  and  how 
dangerous  soever  they  were,  he  induced  and  inured  them,  were 
it  but  for  a  cough  or  cold,  to  take  strange  compositions 
and  potions  :  And  thus  beganne  to  trafficke  not  only  their 
health,  but  also  their  deaths.  They  sweare,  that  even  from 
that  time,  they  have  apparantly  perceived,  that  the  evening 
528 


dren  and 
fathers 


THE   SECOND    BOOKE 

Sereine  or  night-calme  bred  the  head-ach  and  blasted  them  ;  CHAPTER 
that  to    drinke   being   hot    or   in  a  sweat  empaired  their     XXXVII 
healths  ;  that  Autumne  windes  were  more  unwholesome  and 
dangerous,  then  those  of  the  spring-time  :  And  that  since 
his   slibber-sawces,  potions  and  physicke  came  first  in  use  ; 
they  finde  themselves  molested  and  distempered  with  Legions 
of    unaccustomed    maladies    and    unknowne   diseases  ;    and 
plainly  feele  and  sensibly  perceive  a  generall  weakenesse  and 
declination  in  their  antient  vigor  ;  and  that  their  lives  are 
nothing  so  long,  as  before  they  were.     Loe  here  the  first  of 
my  tales.     The  other  is,  that  before  I  was  troubled  with  the 
stone-chollicke  and  gravell  in  the  bladder,  hearing  divers 
make  especiall  account  of  a  hee-goates  blood,  as  a  heavenly 
Manna  sent  in  these  latter  ages  for  the  good  and  preservation 
of  mans  life  :  and  hearing  men  of  good  understanding  speake 
of  it,  as  of  an  admirable  and  much-good-working  drugge, 
and  of  an  infallible  operation  :    I,  who  have  ever  thought 
my  selfe  subject  to  all  accidents,  that  may  in  any  sort  fall 
on  man,  being  yet  in  perfect  health,  began  to  take  pleasure 
to  provide  my  selfe   of  this   myracle,  and  forthwith  gave 
order  (according  to  the  receipt)  to  have  a  Buck-goate  gotten, 
and  carefully  fed  in  mine  owne  house.     For  the  blood  must 
be  drawne  from  him  in  the  hottest  month  of  Summer,  and 
he  must  onely  be  fed  with  soluble  hearbes,  and  drincke  no 
thing  but  White-  wine.     It  was  my  fortune  to  come  to  mine 
owne  house  the  very  same  day  the  Goate  should  be  killed  ; 
where  some  of  my  people  came  in  haste  to  tell  me,  that 
my  Cooke  found  two  or  three  great  bowles  in  his  paunch, 
which  in  his  maw  amongst  his  meat  shocked  one  against 
another.     I  was  so  curious  as  I  would  needes  have  all  his 
garbage  brought  before  me  ;   the  thicke  and  large  skinne 
whereof  I  caused  to  be  opened,  out  of  which  came  three 
great  lumps  or  bodies,  as  light  as  any  spunge,  so  framed  as 
they  seemed  to  be  hollow,  yet  outwardly  hard  and  very 
firme,  bemotled  with  divers  dead  and  wannish  colours  :  The 
one  perfectly  as  round  as  any  bowle,  the  other  two  somewhat 
lesser,  and  not  so  round,  yet  seemed  to  grow  towards  it.     I 
have  found  (after  I  had  made  diligent  inquiry  among  such 
as  were  wont  to  open  such  beasts)  that  it  was  a  seld-seene 
and  unheard  of  accident.     It  is  very  likely  they  were  such 
3X  529 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  stones  as  ours  be,  and  cozen-germanes  to  them  ;  which  if  it 
XXXVII      J3e  it  is  kut  vaine  for  such  as  be  troubled  with  the  stone  or 


? 

semblanceb  -  Srave^  ^°  n°Pe  to  be  cured,  by  meanes  of  a  beasts  blood, 
tweene  Cchil-  that  was  drawing  neere  unto  death,  and  suffered  the  same 
dren  and  disease.  For,  to  aleadge  the  blood  cannot  participate  of 
fathers  that  contagion,  and  doth  no  whit  therby  alter  his  accustomed 
vertue,  it  may  rather  be  inferred  that  nothing  ingendereth 
in  a  body,  but  by  consent  and  communication  of  all  the 
parts.  The  whole  masse  doth  worke,  and  the  whole  frame 
agitate  altogether,  although  one  part,  according  to  the 
diversitie  of  operations,  doth  contribute  more  or  lesse  than 
another  ;  whereby  it  manifestly  appeareth,  that  in  all  parts 
of  this  bucke-goate,  there  was  some  grettie  or  petrificant 
qualitie.  It  was  not  so  much  for  feare  of  any  future  chaunce, 
or  in  regard  of  my  selfe,  that  I  was  so  curious  of  this  experi 
ment  ;  as  in  respect,  that  as  well  in  mine  owne  house,  as 
else-where  in  sundry  other  places,  it  commeth  to  passe,  that 
many  women  do  often  gather  and  lay  up  in  store,  divers  such 
kindes  of  slight  druggs  to  help  their  neighbours,  and  other 
people  with  them,  in  time  of  necessitie  ;  applying  one  same 
remedie  to  an  hundred  severall  diseases  :  yea  many  times  such 
as  they  would  be  very  loath  to  take  themselves  ;  with  which 
they  often  have  good  lucke,  and  well  thrives  it  with  them. 
As  for  me  I  honour  Physitions,  not  according  to  the  common- 
receiv'd  rule,  for  necessitie  sake  (for  to  this  passage  another  of 
the  Prophets  may  be  aleaged  who  reprooved  King  Asa,  because 
he  had  recourse  unto  Physitions)  but  rather  for  love  I  beare 
unto  themselves  ;  having  scene  some,  and  knowne  diverse 
honest  men  amongst  them,  and  worthy  all  love  and  esteeme. 
It  is  not  them  I  blame,  but  their  Arte  ;  yet  doe  I  not  greatly 
condemne  them  for  seeking  to  profit  by  our  foolishnesse  (for 
most  men  do  so)  and  it  is  a  thing  common  to  all  worldlings. 
Diverse  professions  and  many  vocations,  both  more  and  lesse 
worthie  than  theirs,  subsist  and  are  grounded  onely  upon 
publike  abuses  and  popular  errours.  I  send  for  them  when 
I  am  sicke,  if  they  may  conveniently  be  found  ;  and  love  to 
be  entertained  by  them,  rewarding  them  as  other  men  doe. 
I  give  them  authority  to  enjoyne  me  to  keepe  my  selfe 
warme,  if  I  love  it  better  so  than  otherwise.  They  may 
chuse,  be  it  either  leekes  or  lettuce,  what  my  broth  shall  be 
530 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

made  withall,  and  appoint  me  either  white  or  claret  to  CHAPTER 
drink  :  and  so  of  other  things  else,  indifferent  to  my  taste,  O?X?"VI1 
humour  or  custome.  I  know  well  it  is  nothing  to  them,  g^bianc/be- 
forsomuch  as  Sharpenesse  and  Strangenesse  are  accidents  of  tweene  chil- 
physickes  proper  essence.  Lycurgus  allowed  and  appoynted  dren  and 
the  sicke  men  of  Sparta  to  drinke  wine.  Why  did  he  so  ?  fathers 
Because  being  in  health,  they  hated  the  use  of  it.  Even  as 
a  Gentleman  who  dwelleth  not  farre  from  me,  useth  wine  as 
a  soveraigne  remedie  against  agews,  because  being  in  perfect 
health,  he  hateth  the  taste  thereof  as  death.  How  many  of 
them  see  we  to  be  of  my  humour  ?  That  is,  to  disdaine  all 
Physicke  for  their  owne  behoofe,  and  live  a  kinde  of  formall 
free  life,  and  altogether  contrary  to  that,  which  they  pre 
scribe  to  others  ?  And  what  is  that,  but  a  manifest  abusing 
of  our  simplicitie  ?  For,  they  hold  their  life  as  deare,  and 
esteeme  their  health  as  pretious  as  wee  do  ours,  and  would 
apply  their  effects  to  their  skill,  if  themselves  knew  not  the 
uncertainty  and  falsehood  of  it.  It  is  the  feare  of  paine  and 
death  ;  the  impatience  of  the  disease  and  griefe  :  and  in 
discreet  desire  and  headlong  thirst  of  health,  that  so  blindeth 
them,  and  us.  It  is  meere  faintnes  that  makes  our  conceit : 
and  pusillanimitie  forceth  our  credulitie,  to  be  so  yeelding 
and  pliable.  The  greater  part  of  whom  doe  notwithstanding 
not  beleeve  so  much,  as  they  endure  and  suffer  of  others  : 
For  I  heare  them  complaine,  and  speake  of  it  no  otherwise 
than  we  doe.  Yet  in  the  end  are  they  resolved.  What 
should  I  doe  then  ?  As  if  impatience  were  in  it  selfe  a  better 
remedie  than  patience.  Is  there  any  of  them,  that  hath 
yeelded  to  this  miserable  subjection,  that  doth  not  likewise 
yeelde  to  all  maner  of  impostures  ?  or  dooth  not  subject 
himselfe  to  the  mercie  of  whomsoever  hath  the  impudencie 
to  promise  him  recoverie,  and  warrant  him  health  ? 

The  Babilonians  were  wont  to  carry  their  sicke  people, 
into  the  open  streetes  :  the  common  sort  were  there  physi- 
tions  :  where  all  such  as  passed  by  were  by  humanitie  and 
civilitie  to  enquire  of  their  state  and  maladie,  and  according 
to  their  skill  or  experience,  give  them  some  sound  advise 
and  good  counsell.  We  differ  not  greatly  from  them : 
There  is  no  poore  Woman  so  simple,  whose  mumbling  and 
muttering,  whose  slibber- slabbers  and  drenches  we  doe  not 

531 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  employ.     And  as  for  mee,  were  I  to  buy  any  medicine,  I 

XXXVII      would  rather  spend  my  money  in  this  kinde  of  Physicke,  than 

s  mblthe  T\)    *n  any  °tner  :  because  therein  is  no  danger  or  hurt  to  be 

tweene*1  chil-  feared.      What  Homer  and   Plato  said   of  the  ^Egyptians, 

dren  and     that  they  were  all  Physitions,  may  well  be  said  of  all  people. 

fathers       There  is  neither  Man  nor  Woman,  that  vanteth  not  him- 

selfe  to  have  some  receipt  or  other,  and  doth  not  hazard 

the  same  upon  his  neighbour,  if  he  will  but  give  credite 

unto  him. 

I  was  not  long  since  in  a  company,  where  I  wot  not  who 
of  my  fraternity,  brought  newes  of  a  kinde  of  pilles,  by  true 
accompt,  composed  of  a  hundered  and  odde  severall  in 
gredients  ;  Whereat  we  laughed  very  heartily,  and  made  our 
selves  good  sport :  For,  what  rocke  so  hard  were  able  to 
resist  the  shocke,  or  withstand  the  force  of  so  thicke  and 
numerous  a  battery  ?  I  understand  neverthelesse,  of  such  as 
tooke  of  them,  that  the  least  graine  of  gravell  dained  not  to 
stirre  at  all.  I  cannot  so  soone  give  over  writing  of  this 
subject,  but  I  must  needs  say  a  word  or  two,  concerning 
the  experience  they  have  made  of  their  prescriptions,  which 
they  would  have  us  take  as  a  warantice  or  assurance  of  the 
certainty  of  their  drugges  and  potions.  The  greatest 
number,  and  as  I  deeme,  more  than  the  two  thirds  of 
medicinable  vertues,  consist  in  the  quintessence  or  secret 
propriety  of  simples,  whereof  wee  can  have  no  other  instruc 
tion  but  use  and  custome.  For,  Quintessence  is  no  other 
thing  than  a  quality,  whereof  wee  cannot  with  our  reason 
finde  out  the  cause.  In  such  trials  or  experiments,  those 
which  they  affirme  to  have  acquired  by  the  inspiration  of 
some  Daemon,  I  am  contented  to  receive  and  allow  of  them 
(for,  touching  myracles,  I  meddle  not  with  them)  or  be  it 
the  experiments  drawne  from  things,  which  for  other  respects 
fall  often  in  use  with  us  :  As  if  in  Wooll,  wherewith  we  wont 
to  cloth  our  selves,  some  secret  exsiccating  or  drying  quality, 
have  by  accident  beene  found,  that  cureth  kibes  or  chil- 
blaines  in  the  heeles ;  and  if  in  reddishes,  we  eat  for  nourish 
ment,  some  opening  or  aperitive  operation  have  beene  dis 
covered.  Galen  reporteth,  that  a  Leprous  man  chanced  to 
be  cured,  by  meanes  of  a  Cuppe  of  Wine  he  had  drunke, 
forsomuch  as  a  Viper  was  by  fortune  fallen  into  the  Wine 
532 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

caske.  In  which  example  we  finde  the  meane,  and  a  very  CHAPTER 
likely  directory  to  this  experience.  As  also  in  those,  to  XXXVII 
which  Physitions  affirme,  to  have  beene  addressed  by  the  j^jJJj^Je. 
examples  of  some  beasts.  But  in  most  of  other  experiences,  tweene  chil- 
to  which  they  say  they  came  by  fortune,  and  had  no  other  dren  and 
guide  but  hazard*!,  I  finde  the  progresse  of  this  information  fathers 
incredible.  I  imagine  man,  needfully  viewing  about  him 
the  infinite  number  of  things,  creatures,  plants  and  mettals. 
I  wot  not  where  to  make  him  beginne  his  Essay ;  And 
suppose  he  cast  his  first  fantasie  upon  an  Elkes-Horne,  to 
which  an  easie  and  gentle  credulity  must  be  given ;  he  will 
be  as  farre  to  seeke,  and  as  much  troubled  in  his  second 
operation  :  So  many  diseases  and  severall  circumstances  are 
proposed  unto  him,  that  before  hee  come  to  the  certainty  of 
this  point,  unto  which  the  perfection  of  his  experience  should 
arrive,  mans  wit  shall  be  to  seeke,  and  not  know  where  to 
turne  himselfe  ;  And  before  (amiddest  this  infinity  of  things) 
hee  finde  out  what  this  Home  is  :  Amongst  the  numberlesse 
diseases  that  are,  what  an  Epilepsie  is  ;  the  sundry  and 
manifolde  complexions  in  a  melancholy  man ;  So  many 
seasons  in  Winter :  So  diverse  Nations  amongst  French 
men  ;  So  many  ages  in  age  ;  So  diverse  coelestiall  changes 
and  alterations,  in  the  conjunction  of  Venus  and  Saturne  ; 
So  severall  and  many  partes  in  a  mans  body,  nay  in  one  of 
his  fingers.  To  all  which  being  neither  guided  by  argu 
ment,  nor  by  conjecture,  nor  by  example,  or  divine  inspira 
tion,  but  by  the  onely  motion  of  fortune ;  it  were  most 
necessary,  it  should  be  by  a  perfectly  artificiall,  well-ordred, 
and  methodicall  fortune.  Moreover,  suppose  the  disease 
thorowly  cured,  how  shall  he  rest  assured,  but  that  either  the 
evill  was  come  to  his  utmost  period,  or  that  an  effect  of  the 
hazard,  caused  the  same  health  ?  Or  the  operation  of  some 
other  thing,  which  that  day  he  had  either  eaten,  drunke  or 
touched  ?  or  whether  it  were  by  the  merite  of  his  Grand 
mothers  prayers  ?  Besides,  suppose  this  experiment  to  have 
beene  perfect,  how  many  times  was  it  applied  and  begun  a 
new  ;  And  how  often  was  this  long  and  tedious  web  of 
fortunes  and  encounters  woven  over  againe,  before  a  certaine 
rule  might  be  concluded  ?  And  being  concluded,  by  whom 
is  it  I  pray  you  ?  Amongst  so  many  millions  of  men,  you 

533 


fathers 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  shall  scarse  meete  with  three  or  foure,  that  will  duely  observe, 
XXXVII     and  carefully  keepe  a  Register  of  their  experiments  ;  shall 

semblanceTe- il  be  >T°Ur'  °r  his  happ6'  to  li^ht  true1^'  °r  hit  Just  with  one 
tweene     chil-  °f  them  three  or  foure  ?    What  if  another  man  ?    Nay  what 

dren  and     if  a  hundred  other  men  have  had  and  made  contrary  experi 
ments,  and  cleane  opposite  conclusions,  and  yet  have  sorted 
well  ?    We  should  peradventure  discerne  some  shew  of  light, 
if  all  the  judgements  and  consultations  of  men  were  knowne 
unto  us.     But  that  three  Witnesses  and  three  Doctors  shall 
sway  all  mankind,  there  is  no  reason.      It  were  requisite, 
humane  nature  had  appointed  and  made  speciall  choise 
of  them,  and  that  by  expresse  procuration  and  letter 
of  atturny  they  were  by  her  declared  our  Judges 
and  deputed  our  Atturnies. 


TO    MY    LADY    OF    DURAS 


ADAME,  the  last  time  it  pleased  you  to 
come  and  visite  me,  you  found  me  upon 
this  point.  And  because  it  may  be,  these 
toyes  of  mine  may  happily  come  to  your 
hands  :  I  would  have  them  witnesse,  their 
author  reputeth  himselfe  highly  honoured, 
for  the  favours  it  shall  please  you  to  shew 
them.  Wherein  you  shall  discerne  the 
very  same  demeanor  and  selfe-countenance,  you  have  scene 
in  his  conversation.  And  could  I  have  assumed  unto  my 
selfe  any  other  fashion,  than  mine  owne  accustomed,  or  more 
honourable  and  better  forme,  I  would  not  have  done  it : 
For,  al  I  seeke  to  reape  by  my  writings,  is,  they  will  naturally 
represent  and  to  the  life,  pourtray  me  to  your  remembrance. 
The  very  same  conditions  and  faculties,  it  pleased  your 
Lady-ship  to  frequent  and  receive,  with  much  more  honor 
and  curtesie,  than  they  any  way  deserve,  I  will  place  and 
reduce  (but  without  alteration  and  change)  into  a  solide 
534 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

body,  which  may  happily  continue  some  dayes  and  yeares  TO  MY 
after  mee  :  Where,  when  soever  it  shall  please  you  to  refresh  LADY  OF 
your  memory  with  them,  you  may  easily  finde  them,  without  DURAS 
calling  them  to  remembrance ;  which  they  scarsely  deserve. 
I  would  entreate  you  to  continue  the  favour  of  your  Friend 
ship  towards  me,  by  the  same  qualities,  through  whose 
meanes  it  was  produced.  I  labour  not  to  be  beloved  more 
and  esteemed  better  being  dead,  than  alive.  The  humour 
of  Tyberius  is  ridiculous  and  common,  who  endevoured  more 
to  extinguish  his  glory  in  future  ages,  than  yeeld  himselfe 
regardfull  and  pleasing  to  men  of  his  times.  If  I  were  one 
of  those,  to  whom  the  World  may  be  indebted  for  praise,  I 
would  quit  it  for  the  one  moytie,  on  condition  it  would  pay 
me  before-hand :  And  that  the  same  would  hasten,  and  in 
great  heapes  environ  me  about,  more  thicke  than  long,  and 
more  full  than  lasting.  And  let  it  hardly  vanish  with  my 
knowledge,  and  when  this  sweet  alluring  sound  shall  no 
more  tickle  mine  eares.  It  were  a  fond  conceit,  now  I  am 
ready  to  leave  the  commerce  of  men,  by  new  commendations, 
to  goe  about,  anew  to  beget  my  selfe  unto  them. 

I  make  no  account  of  goods,  which  I  could  not  employ  to 
the  use  of  my  life.  Such  as  I  am,  so  would  I  be  elsewhere 
then  in  Paper.  Mine  art  and  industry  have  been  employed 
to  make  myselfe  of  some  worth.  My  study  and  endevour 
to  doe,  and  not  to  write.  I  have  applied  all  my  skill  and 
devoire  to  frame  my  life.  Lo-heere  mine  occupation  and 
my  worke.  I  am  a  lesse  maker  of  bookes,  then  of  any  thing 
else.  I  have  desired  and  aimed  at  sufficiencie,  rather  for  the 
benefite  of  my  present  and  essentiall  commodities,  then  to 
make  a  store-house,  and  hoard  it  up  for  mine  heires.  Who 
soever  hath  any  worth  in  him,  let  him  shew  it  in  his  be 
haviour,  maners  and  ordinary  discourses ;  be  it  to  treat  of 
love  or  of  quarrels;  of  sport  and  play  or  bed-matters,  at 
board  or  else-where ;  or  be  it  in  the  conduct  of  his  owne 
affaires,  or  private  houshold  matters.  Those  whom  I  see 
make  good  bookes,  having  tattered  hosen  and  ragged  clothes 
on,  had  they  believed  me  they  should  first  have  gotten 
themselves  good  clothes.  Demand  a  Spartan,  whether  he 
would  rather  be  a  cunning  Rhethorician,  then  an  excellent 
Souldier  :  nay  were  I  asked,  I  wuld  say,  a  good  Cooke,  had 

535 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

TO  MY  I  not  some  to  serve  me.  Good  Lord  (Madame)  how  I  would 
LADY  OF  hate  such  a  commendation,  to  be  a  sufficient  man  in  writing, 
DURAS  and  a  foolish-shallow-headed  braine  or  coxcombe  in  all 
things  else :  yet  had  I  rather  be  a  foole,  both  here  and 
there,  then  to  have  made  so  base  a  choise,  wherein  to  imploy 
my  worth.  So  farre  am  I  also  from  expecting,  by  such  trifles 
to  gaine  new  honour  to  my  self:  as  I  shal  think  I  make  a 
good  bargain,  if  I  loose  not  a  part  of  that  little,  I  had 
already  gained.  For,  besides  that  this  domb  and  dead 
picture,  shall  derogate  and  steale  from  my  naturall  being,  it 
fadgeth  not  and  hath  no  reference  unto  my  better  state,  but 
is  much  fallen  from  my  first  vigor  and  naturall  jollity,  en- 
clining  to  a  kinde  of  drooping  or  mouldinesse.  I  am  now 
come  to  the  bottome  of  the  vessell,  which  beginneth  to  taste 
of  his  dregs  and  lees.  Otherwise  (good  Madame)  I  should 
not  have  dared  so  boldly  to  have  ripped  up  the  mysteries  of 
Physicke,  considering  the  esteeme  and  credite  your  selfe, 
and  so  many  others,  ascribe  unto  it,  and  hold  it  in ;  had  I 
not  beene  directed  therunto  by  the  authors  of  the  same.  I 
thinke  they  have  but  two  ancient  ones  in  Latine,  to  wit 
Pliny  and  Celsus.  If  you  fortune  at  any  time  to  looke  into 
them,  you  shall  finde  them  to  speake  much  more  rudely  of 
their  Art,  then  I  doe.  I  but  pinch  it  gently,  they  cut  the 
throate  of  it.  Pliny  amongst  other  things,  doth  much  scoffe 
at  them,  forsomuch  as  when  they  are  at  their  wits  end,  and 
can  go  no  further,  they  have  found  out  this  goodly  shift,  to 
send  their  long-turmoiled,  and  to  no  end  much  tormented 
patient,  with  their  drugs  and  diets,  some  to  the  helpe  of 
their  vowes  and  myracles,  and  some  others  to  hot  Baths  and 
waters.  (Be  not  offended  noble  Lady,  he  meaneth  not  those 
on  this  side,  under  the  protection  of  your  house,  and  all 
Gramontoises.)  They  have  a  third  kinde  of  shift  or  evasion 
to  shake  us  off  and  discharge  themselves  of  the  imputations 
or  reproaches,  wee  may  justly  charge  them  with,  for  the 
small  amendment  of  our  infirmities  ;  whereof  they  have  so 
long  had  the  survay  and  government,  as  they  have  no  more 
inventions  or  devises  left  them,  to  ammuse  us  with  ;  that  is, 
to  send  us,  to  seeke  and  take  the  good  aire  of  some  other 
Country.  Madam,  we  have  harped  long  enough  upon  one 
string  ;  I  hope  you  will  give  me  leave  to  come  to  my  former 
536 


THE    SECOND    BOOKE 

discourses  againc,   from   which   for  your  better  entertaine-      TO  MY 
ment,  I  had  somewhat  digressed.  LADY  OF 

It  was  (as  farre  as  I  remember)  Pericles,  who  being  de-  DU11AS 
manded,  how  he  did ;  You  may  (said  he)  judge  it  by  this, 
shewing  certaine  scroules  or  briefes  he  had  tied  about  his 
necke  and  armes.  He  would  infer,  that  he  was  very  sicke, 
since  he  was  forced  to  have  recourse  to  such  vanities,  and 
had  suffered  himselfe  to  be  so  drest.  I  affirme  not,  but  I 
may  one  day  be  drawne  to  such  fond  opinions,  and  yeeld  my 
life  and  health  to  the  mercy,  discretion,  and  regiment  of 
Phisitions.  I  may  happily  fall  into  this  fond  madnesse ;  I 
dare  not  warrant  my  future  constancy.  And  even  then  if 
any  aske  me  how  I  doe,  I  may  answer  him  as  did  Pericles ; 
You  may  judge,  by  shewing  my  hand  fraughted  with  six 
drammes  of  Opium.  It  will  be  an  evident  token  of  a  violent 
sickenesse.  My  judgement  shall  be  exceedingly  out  of 
temper.  If  impacience  or  feare  get  that  advantage  upon 
me,  you  may  thereby  conclude  some  quelling  fever  hath 
seized  upon  my  minde.  I  have  taken  the  paines  to  plead 
this  cause,  whereof  I  have  but  small  understanding,  some 
what  to  strengthen  and  comfort  naturall  propension,  against 
the  drugs  and  practise  of  our  Physicke,  which  is  derived  into 
me  from  mine  ancestors :  lest  it  might  only  be  a  stupid  and 
rash  inclination ;  and  that  it  might  have  a  little  more  forme. 
And  that  also  those,  who  see  me  so  constant  against  the 
exhortations  and  threates,  which  are  made  against  me,  when 
sickenesse  commeth  upon  me,  may  not  thinke  it  to  be  a 
meere  conceit,  and  simple  wilfulnesse ;  And  also,  lest  there 
be  any  so  peevish,  as  to  judge  it  to  be  some  motive  of 
vaine  glory.  It  were  a  strange  desire,  to  seeke  to  draw 
honour  from  an  action,  common  both  to  me,  to  my  Gardiner, 
or  to  my  Groome.  Surely  my  heart  is  not  so  pufft  up,  nor 
so  winay,  that  a  solide,  fleshy  and  marrowy  pleasure,  as 
health  is ;  I  should  change  it  for  an  imaginary  spirituall  and 
airy  delight.  Renowme  or  glory  (were  it  that  of  Aymons 
foure  sons)  is  over  deerely  bought  by  a  man  of  my  humour, 
if  it  cost  him  but  three  violent  fits  of  the  chollike.  Give 
me  health  a  Gods  name.  Those  that  love  our  Physicke, 
may  likewise  have  their  considerations  good,  great  and 
strong,  I  hate  no  fantasies  contrary  to  mine.  I  am  so  far 

3Y  537 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

TO  MY      from  vexing  my  selfe,  to  see  my  j  udgement  differ  from  other 
LADY  OF   mens,  or  to  grow  incompatible  of  the  society  or  conversation 
DURAS      of  men,  to  be  of  any  other  faction  or  opinion  then  mine 
owne ;  that  contrariwise  (as  variety  is   the   most   generall 
fashion  that  nature  hath  followed,  and  more  in  the  mindes, 
then  in  the  bodies :  forsomuch  as  they  are  of  a  more  supple 
and    yeelding    substance    and    susceptible    or    admitting 
of  formes)  I  finde  it  more  rare  to  see  our  humor  or 
desseignes  agree  in  one.     And  never  were  there  two 
opinions  in  the  world  alike,  no  more  than  two 
haires,  or  two  graines.     Diversity  is  the 
most  universall  quality. 


THE  END  OF  THE  SECOND  BOOKE 


538 


EDINBURGH 

T.   «&»  A.    CONSTABLE 

Printers  to  Her  Majesty 

1893 


BINDING  SECTl 
JUN  15  1971 


PQ  Montaigne,  Michel  Eyquem  de 

16^2  The  essays  of  Montaigne 

E5F6 

1892 

t.2 


PLEASE  DO  NOT  REMOVE 
CARDS  OR  SLIPS  FROM  THIS  POCKET 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  no  lesse  consequence  in  his  mouth  that  hateth  the  same,  for- 
!,  somuch  as  truth  by  force  doth  wrest  it  from  him,  and  if  he 

Honesty  wil1  not  admire  ii:  in  him>  at  least> to  ado™e  himselfe  he  will 
put  it  on.  Our  composition,  both  publike  and  private,  is 
full  of  imperfection  ;  yet  is  there  nothing  in  nature  unservice 
able,  no  not  inutility  it  selfe ;  nothing  thereof  hath  beene 
insinuated  in  this  huge  universe,  but  holdeth  some  fit  place 
therein.  Our  essence  is  cy  men  ted  with  erased  qualities ; 
ambition,  jealosie,  envy,  revenge,  superstition,  dispaire,  lodge 
in  us,  with  so  naturall  a  possession,  as  their  image  is  also  dis 
cerned  in  beasts :  yea  and  cruelty,  so  unnaturall  a  vice :  for 
in  the  middest  of  compassion,  we  inwardly  feele  a  kinde 
of  bitter-sweet-pricking  of  malicious  delight,  to  see  others 
suffer  ;  and  children  feele  it  also  : 

LUCR.  ii.  i.  Suaue  mari  magno  turbantibux  cequora  ventis, 

E  terra  magnum  altering  xpectare  laborem. 

Tis  sweet  on  graund  seas,  when  windes  waves  turmoyle, 
From  land  to  see  an  others  greevous  toyle. 

The  seed  of  which  qualities,  who  should  roote  out  of  man, 
should  ruine  the  fundamental  conditions  of  our  life  :  In 
matter  of  policy  likewise ;  some  necessary  functions  are  not 
onely  base,  but  faulty  vices  finde  therein  a  seate,  and  employ 
themselves  in  the  stitching  up  of  our  frame  ;  as  poysons  in 
the  preservations  of  our  health.  If  they  become  excusable, 
because  wee  have  neede  of  them,  and  that  common  necessity 
effaceth  their  true  property  ;  let  us  resigne  the  acting  of 
this  part  to  hardy  Citizens,  who  sticke  not  to  sacrifice  their 
honours  and  consciences,  as  those  of  old,  their  lives,  for  their 
Countries  availe  and  safety.  We  that  are  more  weake,  had 
best  assume  taskes  of  more  ease  and  lesse  hazard.  The 
Common-wealth  requireth  some  to  betray,  some  to  lie,  and 
some  to  massaker :  leave  we  that  commission  to  people  more 
obedient  and  more  pliable.  Truly,  I  have  often  beene  vexed, 
to  see  our  judges,  by  fraude  or  false  hopes  of  favour  or 
pardon,  draw  on  a  malefactor,  to  bewray  his  offence  ;  em 
ploying  therein  both  cousenage  and  impudencie.  It  were  fit 
for  justice,  and  Plato  himselfe,  who  favoureth  this  custome, 
to  furnish  me  with  meanes  more  sutable  to  my  humour. 
"Tis  a  malicious  justice,  and  in  my  conceit  no  lesse  wounded 

6 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

by  it  selfe,  then  by  others.     I  answered  not  long  since,  that  CHAPTER 
hardly  could  I  betray  my  Prince  for  a  particular  man,  who  1 

should  be  very  sory  to  betray  a  particular  man  for  my  Prince. 
And  loath  not  onely  to  deceive,  but  that  any  be  deceived  in 
me  ;  whereto  I  will  neither  furnish  matter  nor  occasion.  In 
that  little  busines  I  have  managed  betweene  our  Princes,  amid 
the  divisions  and  subdivisions,  which  at  this  day  so  teare  and 
turmoile  us,  I  have  curiously  heeded,  that  they  mistake  me 
not,  nor  muffled  themselves  in  my  maske.  The  professors 
of  that  trade  hold  themselves  most  covert ;  pretending  and 
counterfeiting  the  greatest  indifference  and  neerenes  to  the 
cause  they  can.  As  for  me,  I  offer  my  selfe  in  my  liveliest 
reasons,  in  a  forme  most  mine  owne :  A  tender  and  young 
Negotiator,  and  who  had  rather  faile  in  my  businesse,  then 
in  my  selfe.  Yet  hath  this  been  hitherto  with  so  good  hap 
(for  surely  fortune  is  in  these  matters  a  principal  actor)  that 
few  have  dealt  betwene  party  and  party  with  lesse  suspition, 
and  more  inward  favour.  I  have  in  all  my  proceedings  an 
open  fashion,  easie  to  insinuate  and  give  it  selfe  credit  at 
first  acquaintance.  Sincerity,  plainenesse,  and  naked  truth, 
in  what  age  soever,  finde  also  their  opportunitie  and  employ 
ment.  Besides,  their  liberty  is  little  called  in  question,  or 
subject  to  hate,  who  deale  without  respect  of  their  owne  in 
terest.  And  they  may  truely  use  the  answer  of  Hyperides 
unto  the  Athenians,  complaining  of  his  bitter  invectives  and 
sharpenesse  of  his  speech  :  'Consider  not,  my  masters,  whether 
'  I  am  free,  but  whether  I  be  so,  without  taking  ought,  or 
4  bettering  my  state  by  it.'  My  liberty  also  hath  easily  dis 
charged  me  from  all  suspition  of  faintnesse,  by  it's  vigor  (nor 
forbearing  to  speake  any  thing,  though  it  bit  or  stung  them  ; 
I  could  not  have  said  worse  in  their  absence)  and  because  it 
carrieth  an  apparant  show  of  simplicity  and  carelesnesse.  I 
pretend  no  other  fruit  by  negotiating,  then  to  negotiate ; 
and  annex  no  long  pursuites  or  propositions  to  it.  Every 
action  makes  his  particular  game,  win  he  if  he  can.  Nor 
am  I  urged  with  the  passion  of  love  or  hate  unto  great  men  ; 
nor  is  my  wil  shackled  with  anger,  or  particular  respect.  I 
regard  our  Kings  with  an  affection  simply  lawfull,  and  meerely 
civil,  neither  mooved  nor  unmoov'd  by  private  interest :  for 
which  I  like  my  selfe  the  better.  The  generall  and  just 

7 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  cause  bindes  me  no  more   then    moderately,  and   without 
I  violent  fits.     I  am  not  subject  to  these  piercing  pledges  and 

°f  honest andinward  ga£es'  Clloller  and  hate  are  beyond  the  duty  of 
justice,  and  are  passions  fitting  only  those,  whose  reason  is 
not  sufficient  to  hold  them  to  their  duty.  Vtatur  motu 
animi,  qui  uti  ratione  non  potest,  4  Let  him  use  the  motion  of 
4  his  minde,  that  cannot  use  reason.1  All  lawfull  intentions 
are  of  themselves  temperate  :  if  not,  they  are  altered  into 
sedicious  and  unlawful.  It  is  that  makes  me  march  every 
where  with  my  head  aloft,  my  face  and  heart  open.  Verily 
(and  I  feare  not  to  avouch  it)  I  could  easily  for  a  neede, 
bring  a  candle  to  Saint  Michael],  and  another  to  his  Dragon, 
as  the  good  old  woman.  I  will  follow  the  best  side  to  the 
fire,  but  not  into  it,  if  I  can  choose.  If  neede  require,  let 
Montaigne  my  Mannor-house  be  swallowed  up  in  the  publike 
ruine :  but  if  there  be  no  such  necessity,  I  will  acknowledge 
my  selfe  beholding  unto  fortune  if  she  please  to  save  it ;  and 
for  it's  safety  employ  as  much  scope  as  my  endevours  can 
affoord  me.  Was  it  not  Atticus,  who  cleaving  to  the  right 
(but  loosing  side)  saved  himselfe  by  his  moderation,  in  that 
1  generall  Shipwracke  of  the  world,  amidst  so  many  changes 
'  and  divers  alterations  ?  To  private  men,  such  as  he  was,  it 
is  more  easie.  And  in  such  kinde  of  businesse,  I  thinke 
one  dealeth  justly,  not  to  be  too  forward  to  insinuate  or 
invite  himselfe  :  To  hold  a  staggering  or  middle  course, 
to  beare  an  unmooved  affection,  and  without  inclination  in 
the  troubles  of  his  country,  and  publike  divisions,  I  deeme 
neither  seemely  nor  honest :  Ea  non  media,  sed  nulla  via  est, 
vehit  eventum  expect  antmm,  quo  fortunes  consilia  sua  appll- 
cent,  4  That  is  not  the  mid-way,  but  a  mad  way,  or  no  way, 
4  as  of  those  that  expect  the  event  with  intent  to  apply 
4  their  dessignes  as  fortune  shall  fall  out."  That  may  be 
permitted  in  the  affaires  of  neighbours.  So  did  Gelon  the 
tyrant  of  Siracusa  suspend  his  inclination  in  the  Barbarian 
wars  against  the  Greekes,  keeping  Ambasdours  at  Delphos, 
with  presents,  to  watch  on  what  side  the  victory  would  light, 
and  to  apprehend  the  fittest  occasion  of  reconcilement  with 
the  victors.  It  were  a  kind  of  treason  to  do  so  in  our  owne 
affaires  and  domesticall  matters,  wherein  of  necessity  one 
must  resolve  and  take  a  side ;  but  for  a  man  that  hath 
8 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

neither  charge,  nor  expresse  commandement  to  urge  him  ;  CHAPTER 
not  to  busie  or  entermedle  himselfe  therein,  I  holde  it  more  J  I 
excusable :  (Yet  frame  I  not  this  excuse  for  my  selfe)  then  profit  and 
in  forraine  and  strangers  wars,  wherewith  according  to  our 
laws,  no  man  is  troubled  against  his  will.  Neverthelesse 
those,  who  wholly  ingage  themselves  into  them,  may  carry 
such  an  order  and  temper,  as  the  storme  (without  offending 
them)  may  glide  over  their  head.  Had  wee  not  reason  to 
hope  as  much  of  the  deceased  Bishop  of  Orleans,  Lord  of 
Moruilliers  ?  And  I  know  some,  who  at  this  present  worthily 
bestirre  themselves,  in  so  even  a  fashion  or  pleasing  a  man 
ner,  that  they  are  likely  to  continue  on  foote,  whatsoever 
injurious  alteration  or  fall,  the  heavens  may  prepare  against 
us.  I  holde  it  onely  fit  for  Kings  to  be  angry  with  Kings  : 
And  mocke  at  those  rash  spirits,  who  from  the  brave rie  of 
their  hearts  offer  themselves  to  so  unproportionate  quarrels. 
For  one  undertaketh  not  a  particular  quarrell  against  a 
Prince,  in  marching  against  him  openly  and  couragiously, 
for  his  honour,  and  according  to  his  duty  :  If  hee  love  not 
such  a  man  :  hee  doth  better  :  at  least  hee  esteemeth  him. 
And  the  cause  of  lawes  especially,  and  defence  of  the 
auncient  state,  hath  ever  found  this  priviledge,  that  such  as 
for  their  owne  interest,  disturbe  the  same,  excuse  (if  they 
honour  not)  their  defenders.  But  wee  ought  not  terme  duty 
(as  now  a  dayes  wee  do)  a  sower  rigour,  and  intestine  crab- 
bednesse,  proceeding  of  private  interest  and  passion :  nor 
courage  a  treacherous  and  malicious  proceeding.  Their  dis 
position  to  frowardnesse  and  mischiefe,  they  entitle  Zeale  : 
That's  not  the  cause  doth  heate  them,  "'tis  their  owne  inV 
terest:  They  kindle  a  warre,  not  because  it  is  just,  but 
because  it  is  warre.  Why  may  not  a  man  beare  himselfe 
betweene  enemies  featly  and  faithfully  ?  Doe  it,  if  not  alto 
gether  with  an  equall  (for  it  may  admit  different  measure) 
at  least  with  a  sober  affection,  which  may  not  so  much 
engage  you  to  the  one,  that  he  looke  for  al  at  your  hands. 
Content  your  selfe  with  a  moderate  proportion  of  their 
favour,  and  to  glide  in  troubled  waters  without  fishing  in 
them.  Th"  other  manner  of  offering  ones  uttermost  en- 
devours  to  both  sides,  implyeth  lesse  discretion  then  con 
science.  What  knows  he  to  whom  you  betrav  another,  as 
B  9 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  much  your  friend  as  himselfe,  but  you  will  do  the  like  for 
!,  him,  when  his  turne  shall  come  ?  He  takes  you  for  a  villaine: 

Of  profit  and  ^jigj.  t^at  ]iee  heares  you,  and  gathers  out  of  you,  and  makes 
38  y  his  best  use  of  your  disloyalty.  For,  double  fellowes  are 
onely  beneficiall  in  what  they  bring,  but  we  must  looke, 
they  carry  away  as  little  as  may  be.  I  carry  nothing  to  the 
one,  which  I  may  not  (having  opportunity)  say  unto  the 
other,  the  accent  only  changed  a  little :  and  report  either 
but  indifferent  or  knowne,  or  common  things.  No  benefit 
can  induce  mee  to  lye  unto  them :  what  is  entrusted  to  my 
silence  I  conceale  religiously,  but  take  as  little  in  trust  as  I 
can.  Princes  secrets  are  a  troublesome  charge,  to  such  as 
have  nought  to  do  with  them.  I  ever  by  my  good  will 
capitulate  with  them,  that  they  trust  mee  with  very  little : 
but  let  them  assuredly  trust  what  I  disclose  unto  them.  I 
alwayes  knew  more  then  I  wold.  An  open  speach  opens  the 
way  to  another,  and  draws  all  out,  even  as  Wine,  and  Love. 
Philippedes  in  my  minde,  answered  King  Lysimachus  wisely, 
when  hee  demaunded  of  him,  what  of  his  wealth  or  state 
hee  should  empart  unto  him  :  '  Which  and  what  you  please ' 
(quoth  hee)  4so  it  be  not  your  secrets/  I  see  every  one 
mutinie,  if  another  conceale  the  deapth  or  mysterie  of  the 
affaires  from  him,  wherein  he  pleaseth  to  employ  him,  or 
have  but  purloyned  any  circumstance  from  him.  For  my 
part,  I  am  content  one  tell  me  no  more  of  his  businesse  then 
he  will  have  me  know  or  deale  in ;  nor  desire  I,  that  my 
knowledge  exceede  or  strain e  my  word.  If  I  must  needs  be 
the  instrument  of  cozinage,  it  shall  at  least  be  with  safety 
of  my  conscience.  I  will  not  be  esteemed  a  servant,  nor 
so  affectionate,  nor  yet  so  faithfull,  that  I  be  j  udged  fit  to 
betray  any  man.  Who  is  unfaithfull  to  himselfe,  may  be 
excused  if  hee  be  faithlesse  to  his  Master.  But  Princes 
entertaine  not  men  by  halfes,  and  despise  bounded  and  con- 
ditionall  service.  What  remedy?  I  freely  tell  them  my 
f  limits ;  for,  a  slave  I  must  not  be  but  unto  reason,  which 
I  yet  I  cannot  compasse :  And  they  are  to  blame,  to  exact 
from  a  free  man,  the  like  subjection  unto  their  service,  and 
the  same  obligation,  which  they  may  from  those  they  have 
made  and  bought ;  and  whose  fortune  dependeth  particu 
larly  and  expresly  on  theirs.  The  lawes  have  delivered  mee 
10 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

from  much  trouble:  they  have  chosen  mee  a  side  to  followe,  CHAPTER 
and  appointed  mee  a  maister  to  obey  :  all  other  superiority  ^        * 

I     i  _  -  .j.*'  -  -j1-  »       I  )T     irv<**1"k'"  "*"      *mrl 

£and  duty,  ought  to  bee  relative  unto  that,  and  bee  re- 
strained.  Yet  may  it  not  be  concluded,  that  if  my  affection 
should  otherwise  transport  mee,  I  would  presently  afforde 
my  helping  hand  unto  it.  Will  and  desires  are  a  lawe  to 
themselves,  actions  are  to  receive  it  of  publike  institutions : 
All  these  procedings  of  mine,  are  somewhat  dissonant  from 
our  formes.  They  should  produce  no  great  effects,  nor  holde 
out  long  among  us.  Innocencie  it  selfe  could  not  in  these"] 
times  nor  negotiate  without  dissimulation,  nor  trafficke  with-' 
out  lying.  Neither  are  publike  functions  of  my  diet ;  what 
my  profession  requires  thereto,  I  furnish  in  the  most  private") 
manner  I  can.  Being  a  childe,  I  was  plunged  into  them  up 
to  the  eares,  and  had  good  successe ;  but  I  got  loose  in  good 
time.  I  have  often  since  shunned  medling  with  them,  sel- 
dome  accepted  and  never  required  ;  ever  holding  my  back 
toward  ambition ;  but  if  not  as  rowers,  who  goe  forward  as 
it  were  backeward  :  Yet  so,  as  I  am  lesse  beholding  to 
resolution,  then  to  my  good  fortune,  that  I  was  not  wholly 
embarked  in  them.  For,  there  are  courses  lesse  against  my 
taste,  and  more  comfortable  to  my  carriage,  by  which  if 
heretofore  it  had  called  mee  to  the  service  of  the  common 
wealth,  and  my  advancement  unto  credit  in  the  world  :  I 
know  that  in  following  the  same  I  had  exceeded  the  reason 
of  my  conceite.  Those  which  commonly  say  against  my) 
profession,  that  what  I  terme  liberty,  simplicity  and  plaine- 
nesse  in  my  behaviour,  is  arte,  cunning  and  subtilty :  and 
rather  discretion,  then  goodnesse  ;  industry  then  nature ; 
good  wit,  then  good  hap  ;  doe  mee  more  honour,  then 
shame.  But  truely  they  make  my  cunning  overcunning.  ^ 
And  whosoever  hath  traced  mee  and  nearely  looked  into  my 
humours,  He  loose  a  good  wager  if  hee  confesse  not,  that 
there  is  no  rule  in  their  schoole,  could,  a  midde  such 
crooked  pathes  and  divers  windings,  square  and  report  this 
naturall  motion,  and  maintaine  an  apparance  of  liberty  and 
licence,  so  equall  and  inflexible  ;  and  that  all  their  attention 
and  wit,  is  not  of  power  to  bring  them  to  it.  The  way  to") 
trueth  is  but  one  and  simple  ;  that  of  particular  profit  and 
benefit  of  affaires  a  man  hath  in  charge,  double,  uneven  and 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  accidentall.     I  have  often  seene  these  counterfet  and  arti- 
1  ficiall  liberties  in  practise,  but  most  commonly  without  suc- 

Of  profit  and  cesse      They  savour  of  JEsopes  Asse  :  who  in  emulation  of 

S  y      the  dogge,  layde  his  two  fore-feete  very  jocondly  upon  his 

masters  shoulders :  but  looke  how  many  blandishments  the 

prety  dogge  received,  under  one,  so  many  bastinadoes  were 

Cic.  Off.  i.  redoubled  upon  the  poore  Asses  backe.  Id  maxime  quemque 
decet :  quod  est  cuiusque  suum  maxime :  c  that  becomes  every 
1  man  especially,  which  is  his  owne  especially1:  I  will  not 
deprive  cousinage  of  her  ranke,  that  were  to  understand  the 
world  but  ill  :  I  know  it  hath  often  done  profitable  service, 
I  it  supporteth,  yea  and  nourisheth  the  greatest  part  of  mens 
vacations. 

There  are  some  lawfull  vices  :  as  many  actions,  or  good  or 
excusable  unlawfull.  Justice  in  it  selfe  naturall  and  univer- 
sall  is  otherwise  ordered,  and  more  nobly  distributed,  then 
this  other  especiall,  and  nationall  justice,  restrained  and 

Ib.  iii.  suted  to  the  neede  of  our  pollicie  :    Veri  juris  germanceque 

justitice  solidam  et  expressam  effigiem  nullam  tenemus :  umbra 
et  imaginibus  utimur.  'Wee  have  no  lively  nor  life-like 
j  '  purtraiture  of  upright  law  and  naturall  justice  :  wee  use 
'  but  the  shaddowes  and  colours  of  them.'  So  that  wise 
Dandamys,  hearing  the  lives  of  Socrates,  Pythagoras  and 
Diogenes  repeated,  in  other  things,  judged  them  great  and 
worthy  men,  but  overmuch  subjected  to  the  reverence  of  the 
Jawes  :  which  to  authorize  and  second,  true  vertue  is  to 
decline  very  much  from  his  naturall  vigor :  and  not  onely 
by  their  permission,  but  perswasions  divers  vicious  actions 
are  committed  and  take  place.  Ex  Senatus  consultis  plebis- 
que  scitis  scelera  exercentur.  '  Even  by  decrees  of  counsell, 
'  and  by  statute-laws  are  mischief es  put  in  practise."*  I 
follow  the  common  phrase,  which  makes  a  difference  be- 
tweene  profitable  and  honest  things :  terming  some  naturall 
actions  which  are  not  onely  profitable  but  necessary,  dis 
honest  and  filthy.  But  to  continue  our  examples  of  treason. 
Two  which  aspired  unto  the  kingdome  of  Thrace,  were  falne 
into  controversie  for  their  right.  The  Emperor  hindred 
them  from  falling  together  by  the  eares :  the  one  under 
colour  of  contriving  some  friendly  accord  by  an  enterview 
inviting  the  other  to  a  feast  in  his  house,  imprisoned  and 
12 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

murthred  him.     Justice  required,  that  the  Romanes  should  CHAPTER 
be  satisfied  for  this  outrage  :   some    difficulties  empeached  I 

the  ordinary  course.  What  they  could  not  lawfully  doe  Of  hp™**.and 
without  warre  and  hazard,  they  attempted  to  accomplish 
by  treason  :  what  they  coulde  not  honestly  atchieve,  they} 
profitably  compassed.  For  exployting  whereof,  Pomponius 
Flaccus  was  thought  most  fitte ;  who  trayning  the  fellow 
into  his  Nettes  by  fained  wordes  and  sugred  assurances ;  in 
Hew  of  the  favour  and  honour  hee  promised  him,  sent  him 
bound  hand  and  foote  to  Rome.  One  traytor  over-reached  * 
another,  against  common  custome :  For,  they  are  all  full  of 
distrust,  and  'tis  very  hard  to  surprize  them  in  their  owne 
arte :  witnesse  the  heavy  and  dismall  experience  we  have 
lately  felt  of  it.  Let  who  liste  bee  Pomponius  Flaccus  ;  and 
there  are  too-too  many  that  will  bee  so.  As  for  my  part,  both 
my  word  and ;  faith,  are  as  the  rest;  pieces  of  this  common 
body  :  their  best  effect  is  the  publicke  service :  that 's  ever 
presupposed  with  mee.  But  as,  if  one  should  command  mee 
to  take  the  charge  of  the  Rolles  or  Recordes  of  the  Pallace, 
I  would  answere  :  I  have  no  skill  in  them  :  or  to  bee  a  leader 
of  Pioners,  I  would  say ;  I  am  called  to  a  worthier  office : 
Even  so,  who  would  goe  about  to  employ  mee,  not  to  mtirther^ 
or  poyson,  but*  to  lye,  betraye,  and  forsweare  my  selfe,  I 
would"  tell  him  ;  If  I  have  robbed  or  stolne  any  thing  from 
any  man,  send  mee  rather  to  the  Gallies.  For,  a  Gentleman 
may  lawfully  speake  as  did  the  Lacedemonians,  defeated  by 
Antipater,  upon  the  points  of  their  agreement :  '  You  may 
4  impose  as  heavy  burdens,  and  harmefull  taxes  upon  us  as  you 
'  please  ;  but  you  lose  your  time,  to  command  us  any  shame- 
4  full  or  dishonest  things.1  Every  man  should  give  himselfe 
the  oath,  which  the  ^Egyptian  Kings,  solemnly  and  usually 
presented  to  their  judges;  Not  to  swarve  from  their  con 
sciences,  what  command  soever  they  should  receive  from  them 
selves  to  the  contrary.  In  such  commissions  there  is  an  evident 
note  of  ignominie  and  condemnation.  And  whosoever  gives 
them  you,  accuseth  you  ;  and  if  you  conceive  them  right, 
gives  you  them  as  a  trouble  and  burthen.  As  much  as  the! 
publike  affaires  amend  by  your  endevours,  your  owne  em-' 
paireth  :  the  better  you  do,  so  much  the  worse  doe  you. 
And  it  shall  not  bee  newe,  nor  peradventure  without  shadowe 

13 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  of  justice,  that  hee  who  setteth  you  a  worke,  becommeth 
I.  your  ruine.     If  treason  bee  in  any  case  excusable,  it  is  onely 

>f  honwtv1"1  then>  when  'tis  emPloyed.to  punish  and  betray  treason.  Wee 
shall  finde  many  treacheries,  to  have  beene  not  refused,  but 
punished  by  them,  in  whose  favour  they  were  undertaken. 
Who  knowes  not  the  sentence  of  Fabritius,  against  Pyrrus 
his  Physition  ?  And  the  commaunder  hath  often  severely 
revenged  them  on  the  partie  hee  employed  in  them,  refusing 
so  unbridled  a  credite  and  power,  and  disavowing  so  lewde  and 
so  vile  an  obedience.  laropelc  Duke  of  Russia,  sollicited  an 
Hungarian  Gentleman,  to  betraye  Boleslaus  King  of  Polonia, 
in  contriving  his  death,  or  furnishing  the  Russians  with 
meanes  to  work  him  some  notable  mischiefe.  This  gallant, 
presently  bestirres  him  in  it,  and  more  then  ever  apply 
ing  himselfe  to  the  Kings  service  obtained  to  bee  of  his 
counsell,  and  of  those  hee  most  trusted.  By  which  advan 
tages,  and  with  the  opportunity  of  his  masters  absence,  hee 
betrayed  Vicilicia,  a  great  and  rich  citie  to  the  Russians  : 
which  was  whollie  sakt  and  burnt  by  them,  with  a  generall 
slaughter,  both  of  the  inhabitans,  of  what  sexe  or  age  soever, 
and  a  great  number  of  nobility  thereabouts,  whom  to  that 
purpose  he  had  assembled.  laropelc  his  anger  thus  asswaged 
with  revenge,  and  his  rage  mitigated  (which  was  not  without 
pretext,  for  Boleslaus  had  mightily  wronged  and  in  like 
manner  incensed  him)  and  glutted  with  the  fruite  of  treason, 
examining  the  uglinesse  thereof,  naked  and  alone,  and  with 
impartiall  eyes  beholding  the  same,  not  distempered  by  pas 
sion,  conceived  such  a  remorse,  and  tooke  it  so  to  heart, 
that  hee  forthwith  caused  the  eyes  of  his  instrumental! 
executioner  to  be  pulled  out,  and  his  tongue  and  privy 
parts  to  be  cut  off.  Antigonus  perswaded  the  Argyraspides 
soldiers,  to  betray  Eumenes  their  generall,  and  his  adversarie, 
unto  him,  whom  when  they  had  delivered,  and  he  had  caused 
to  be  slaine;  himselfe  desired  to  be  the  Commissary  of  divine 
justice,  for  the  punishment  of  so  detestable  a  trecherie:  and 
resigning  them  into  the  hands  of  the  Governor  of  the  Pro 
vince,  gave  him  expresse  charge,  in  what  manner  soever  it 
were,  to  rid  himselfe  of  them,  and  bring  them  to  some  mis- 
chievious  end.  Whereby,  of  that  great  number  they  were, 
not  one  ever  after  sawe  the  smoake  of  Macedon.  The  better 
14 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

they  served  his  turne,  the  more  wicked  hee  judged  them,  CHAPTER 
and  the  more  worthie  of  punishment.     The  slave  that  be-  I 

traied  the  corner  wherein  his  master  P.  Sulpicius  lay  hid,  Of  Profit  and 
was  set  at  liberty,  according  to  the  promise  of  Syllas  pro 
scription  :  But  according  to  the  promise  of  common  reason, 
being  freed,  hee  was  throwne  head-long  from  off  the  Tarpeyan 
rocke.  And  Clouis  King  of  France,  in  liew  of  the  golden 
armes  he  had  promised  the  three  servants  of  Cannacre, 
caused  them  to  be  hanged,  after  they  had  by  his  solicitation 
betraide  their  maister  unto  him.  They  hang  them  up  with 
the  purse  of  their  reward  about  their  neckes.  Having  satis-  , 
fied  their  second  and  speciall  faith,  they  also  satisfie  the; 
generall  and  first.  Mahomet  the  second,  desirous  to  rid  him- 
selfe  of  his  brother  (through  jealousie  of  rule,  and  according  to 
the  stile  of  that  race)  employed  one  of  his  officers  in  it ;  who 
stifled  him,  by  much  water  powred  downe  his  throate  all  at 
once  :  which  done,  in  expiation  of  the  fact,  he  delivered  the 
murtherer  into  the  hands  of  his  brothers  mother  (for  they 
were  brethren  but  by  the  fathers  side)  shee,  in  his  presence, 
opened  his  bosome,  and  with  hir  owne  revenging  handes 
searching  for  his  heart  pluckt  it  out,  and  cast  it  unto  dogges 
to  eate.  Even  unto  vile  dispositions  (having  made  use  of  a] 
filthy  action)  it  is  so  sweete  and  pleasing,  if  they  may  with 
security,  as  it  were,  in  way  of  recompence  and  holy  correc 
tion,  sowe  one  sure  stitch  of  goodnesse,  and  justice  unto  it. 
Besides  ;  they  respect  the  ministers  of  such  horrible  crimes, 
as  people,  that  still  upbraide  them  with  them,  and  covet  by 
their  deaths  to  smother  the  knowledge,  and  cancell  the  tes 
timony  of  their  practises.  Now  if  perhaps,  not  to  frustrate 
the  publike  neede  of  that  last  and  desperate  remedy,  one 
rewarde  you  for  it :  yet,  hee  who  doth  it  (if  hee  bee  not  as 
bad  himselfe)  will  hould  you  a  most  accursed  and  execrable 
creature.  And  deemeth  you  a  greater  traytor,  then  he  whom 
you  have  betrayed :  for  with  your  owne  handes,  hee  touched^ 
the  lewdnesse  of  your  disposition,  without  disavowing,  with 
out  object.  But  employeth  you,  as  we  do  out-cast  persons 
in  the  executions  of  justice :  an  office  as  profitable  as  little 
honest.  Besides  the  basenesse  of  such  commissions,  there 
is  in  them  a  prostitution  of  conscience.  The  daughter  of 
Se janus,  could  not  in  Rome,  by  any  true  formall  course  of 

15 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  lawe,  bee  put  to  death,  because  shee  was  a  virgine  :  that  lawes 
might  have  their  due  course,  shee  was  first  deflowred  by  the 

°fl?on^and  common  hang-man,  and  then  strangled.  Not  his  handonely, 
"S  y  but  his  soule  is  a  slave  unto  publike  commodity.  When 
Amurath  the  first,  to  agravate  the  punishment  of  his  sub 
jects,  who  had  given  support  unto  his  sons  unnaturall  re 
bellion,  appointed  their  neerest  kinsmen  to  lend  their  hands 
unto  this  execution  :  I  finde  it  verie  honest  in  some  of  them, 
who  rather  chose  unjustly  to  bee  held  guiltie  of  anothers  par 
ricide,  then  to  serve  justice  with  their  owne.  And  whereas 
in  some  paltrie  townes  forced  in  my  time,  I  have  scene  base 
varlets  for  savegarde  of  their  owne  lives,  yeild  to  hang  their 
/  friends  and  companions,  I  ever  thought  them  of  worse 
/  condition,  then  such  as  were  hanged.  It  is  reported,  that 
Witoldus  Prince  of  Lituania,  introduced  an  order  with  that 
nation,  which  was  that  the  party  condemned  to  die,  should 
with  his  owne  handes  make  himselfe  away  ;  finding  it  strange, 
that  a  third  man  being  guiltlesse  of  the  fact,  shoulde  bee 
employed  and  charged  to  commit  a  murther.  When  an 
urgent  circumstance,  or  any  violent  and  unexpected  accident, 
induceth  a  Prince  for  the  necessitie  of  his  estate,  or  as  they 
say  for  state  matters,  to  breake  his  worde  and  faith,  or 
otherwise  forceth  him  out  of  his  ordinary  duty,  hee  is  to 
ascribe  that  necessity  unto  a  lash  of  Gods  rod  :  It  is  no  vice, 
for  hee  hath  quit  his  reason,  unto  a  reason  more  publike,  and 
more  powerfull,  but  surely  "'tis  ill  fortune./  So  that  to  one, 
who  asked  mee  what  remedy  ?  I  replyde,  none ;  were  hee 
truely  rackt  betweene  these  two  extreames  (Sed  videat  ne 
quceratur  latebra  periurio.  '  But  let  him  take  heede  he  seeke 
'  not  a  starting  hole  for  perjurie ')  hee  must  have  done  it ;  but 
if  hee  did  it  sans  regret  or  scruple,  if  it  greeved  him  not  to 
doe  it,  'tis  an  argument  his  conscience  is  but  in  ill  tearmes. 
Now  were  there  any  one  of  so  tender  or  cheverell  a  con 
science,  to  whome  no  cure  might  seeme  worthy  of  so  extreame 
a  remedy  :  I  should  prise  or  regard  him  no  whit  the  lesse. 
Hee  cannot  loose  himselfe  more  handsomely  nor  more  ex- 
cusablie.  Wee  cannot  doe  every  thing,  nor  bee  in  every  place. 
When  all  is  done,  thus  and  thus,  must  wee  often,  as  unto  our 
last  Anker  and  sole  refuge,  resigne  the  protection  of  our 
vessell  unto  the  onely  conduct  of  heaven.  To  what  juster 
16 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

necessity  can  hee  reserve  himselfe  ?    What  is  lesse  possible  CHAPTER 
for  him  to  do,  then  what  he  cannot  effect,  without  charge  I 

unto  his  faith,  and  imputation  to  his  honour  ?  things  which  °f  Profit  and 
peradventure  should  bee  dearer  to  him,  then  his  owne  salva 
tion,  and  the  safety  of  his  people.  When  with  enfouldedf 
armes  hee  shall  devoutly  call  on  God  for  his  ayde,  may  hee 
not  hope,  that  his  fatherlie  mercie  shall  not  refuse  the 
extraordinary  favour,  and  sinne-forgiving  grace  of  his  all 
powerfull  hand,  unto  a  pure  and  righteous  hand?  They 
are  dangerous  examples,  rare  and  erased  exceptions  to  our 
naturall  rules  :  wee  must  yeelde  unto  them,  but  with  great 
moderation,  and  heedie  circumspection.  No  private  com-"| 
modity,  may  any  way  deserve  wee  should  offer  our  conscience! 
this  wrong  the  common-wealth  may,  when  it  is  most  apparant 
and  important.  Timoleon  did  fitlie  warrant  and  warde  the 
strangenes  of  his  exploite  by  the  teares  hee  shed,  remembring 
it  was  with  a  brotherlie  hand  hee  slew  the  tyrant.  And  it 
neerely  pinched  his  selfe  gnawne  conscience,  that  hee  was 
compelled  to  purchase  the  common  good,  at  the  rate  of  his 
honestie.  The  sacred  Senate  it  selfe,  by  his  meanes  delivered 
from  thraldome,  durst  not  definitively  decide  of  so  haughtie 
an  action,  and  rend  in  two  so  urgent  and  different  sem 
blances.  But  the  Siracusans  having  opportunely  and  at  that 
very  instant  sent  to  the  Corinthians,  to  require  their  pro 
tection,  and  a  governour  able  to  re-establish  their  towne  in 
former  majestic,  and  deliver  Sicilie  from  a  number  of  pettie 
tyrants,  which  grievously  oppressed  the  same:  they  appointed 
Timoleon,  with  this  new  caveat  and  declaration :  That 
according  as  hee  should  well  or  ill  demeane  himselfe  in  his 
charge,  their  sentence  should  incline,  either  to  grace  him  as 
the  redeemer  of  his  country,  or  disgrace  him,  as  the  mur- 
therer  of  his  brother.  This  fantasticall  conclusion,  hath 
some  excuse  upon  the  danger  of  the  example,  and  importance 
of  an  act  so  different,  and  they  did  well,  to  discharge  their 
judgement  of  it,  or  to  embarke  him  some  where  else,  and  on 
their  considerations.  Now  the  proceedings  of  Timoleon  in 
his  renowned  journie  did  soone  yeelde  his  cause  the  cleerer, 
so  worthily  and  vertuously  did  hee  every  way  beare  himselfe 
therein.  And  the  good  hap,  which  ever  accompanied  him 
in  the  encombrances  and  difficulties  hee  was  to  subdue  in  the 
C  17 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  achievement  of  his  noble  enterprise,  seemed  to  bee  sent  him 
1 .          by  the  Gods,  conspiring  to  second,  and  consenting  to  favour 

)f  profit  and  n-§  justification:  This  mans  end  is  excusable,  if  ever  any 
could  bee.  But  the  encrease  and  profit  of  the  publike 
revenues,  which  served  the  Roman  Senate  for  a  pretext  of 
the  ensuing-foule  conclusion  I  purpose  to  relate,  is  not  of 
sufficient  force  to  warrant  such  injustice.  Certaine  cities  had 
by  the  order  and  permission  of  the  Senate,  with  mony  pur 
chased  their  libertie,  at  the  hands  of  L.  Sylla.  The  matter 
comming  in  question  againe,  the  Senate  condemned  them,  to 
be  fineable  and  taxed  as  before  :  and  the  mony  they  had 
employed  for  their  ransome,  should  bee  deemed  as  lost  and 
forfeited.  Civill  warres  do  often  produce  such  enormous 
examples :  That  we  punish  private  men,  forsomuch  as  they 
j  have  beleeved  us,  when  wee  were  other  then  now  wee  are. 
And  one  same  magistrate  doth  lay  the  penalty  of  his  change 
on  such  as  cannot  do  withal.  The  Schoolemaster  whippeth 
his  scholler  for  his  docility,  and  the  guide  striketh  the  blinde 
man  he  leadeth.  A  horrible  image  of  justice.  Some  rules 
in  Philosophy  are  both  false  and  faint.  The  example  pro 
posed  unto  us  of  respecting  private  utility  before  faith  given, 
hath  not  sufficient  power  by  the  circumstance  they  adde  unto 
it.  Theeves  have  taken  you,  and  on  your  oath  to  pay  them 
a  certaine  sum  of  money,  have  set  you  at  liberty  againe : 
They  erre,  that  say,  an  honest  man  is  quit  of  his  worde  and 
faith  without  paying,  beeing  out  of  their  hands  ;  There  is  no 
such  matter.  What  feare  and  danger  hath  once  forced  mee 
to  will  and  consent  unto,  I  am  bound  to  will  and  performe 
being  out  of  danger  and  feare.  And  although  it  have  but 
forced  my  tongue,  and  not  my  will,  yet  am  I  bound  to  make 
my  worde  good,  and  keepe  my  promise.  For  my  part,  when  it 
hath  sometimes  unadvisedly  over-runne  my  thought,  yet  have 
I  made  a  conscience  to  disavowe  the  same.  Otherwise  wee 
should  by  degrees  come  to  abolish  all  the  right  a  third  man 
taketh  and  may  challenge  of  our  promises.  Quasi  verb  forti 
viro  vis  possit  adhiberi.  '  As  though  any  force  could  be  used 
'  upon  a  valiant  man.'  'Tis  onely  lawfull  for  our  private"? 
interest  to  excuse  the  breache  of  promise,  if  wee  have  rashlie 
promised  things  in  themselves  wicked  and  unjust.  For,  the 
right  of  vertue  ought  to  over-rule  the  right  of  our  bond.  I 
18 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

have   heretofore  placed  Epaminondas  in  the  first  ranke  of  CHAPTEF 
excellent  men,  and  now  recant  it  not.    Unto  what  high  pitch  I 

raised  hee  the  consideration  of  his  particular  duty?  who  never  Profit  an 
slew  man  hee  had  vanquished  ;  who  for  that  un valuable  good 
of  restoring  his  country  hir  liberty,  made  it  a  matter  of  con 
science,  to  murther  a  Tyrant  or  his  complices,  without  a  due 
and  formall  course  of  lawe  :  and  who  judged  him  a  bad  man,1 
how  good  a  citizen  soever,  that  amongest  his  enemies  and  in 
the  fury  of  a  battle,  spared  not  his  friend,  or  his  hoste. 
Loe  here  a  minde  of  a  rich  composition.  Hee  matched  unto 
the  most  violent  and  rude  actions  of  men,  goodnesse  and 
courtesie,  yea  and  the  most  choise  and  delicate,  that  may  be 
found  in  the  schoole  of  Philosophie.  This  so  high -raised 
courage,  so  swelling  and  so  obstinate  against  sorow,  death 
and  povertie,  was  it  nature  or  arte,  made  it  relent,  even  to 
the  utmost  straine  of  exceeding  tendernesse  and  debonarety 
of  complexion  ?  Being  cloathed  in  the  dreadfull  livery  of  steele 
and  blood,  hee  goeth  on  crushing  and  brusing  a  nation,  invin 
cible  to  all  others,  but  to  himselfe :  yet  mildely  relenteth  in 
the  midst  of  a  combat  or  confusion,  when  he  meets  with  his 
host  or  with  his  friend.  Verily,  this  man  was  deservedly  fit 
to  command  in  warre,  which  in  the  extremest  furie  of  his 
innated  rage,  made  him  to  feele  the  sting  of  courtesie,  and 
remorse  of  gentlenesse :  then  when  all  inflamed,  it  foamed 
with  furie,  and  burned  with  murder.  'Tis  a  miracle,  to  be 
able  to  joyne  any  shew  of  justice  with  such  actions.  But  it 
only  belongeth  to  the  unmatched  courage  of  Epaminondas, 
in  that  confused  plight,  to  joyne  mildnesse  and  facility  of 
the  most  gentle  behaviour  that  ever  was,  unto  them,  yea  and 
pure  innocency  it  selfe.  And  whereas  one  told  the  Mamertins, 
that  statutes  were  of  no  force  against  armed  men  :  another  to 
the  Tribune  of  the  people,  that  the  time  of  justice  and  warre, 
were  two :  a  third,  that  the  confused  noise  of  warre  and 
clangor  of  armes,  hindred  him  from  understanding  the  sober 
voice  of  the  lawes  :  This  man  was  not  so  much  as  empeached 
from  conceiving  the  milde  sound  of  civilitie  and  kindnesse. 
Borrowed  hee  of  his  enemies  the  custome  of  sacrificing  to  the 
muses  (when  he  went  to  the  warres)  to  qualifie  by  their 
sweetnesse  and  mildnesse,  that  martiall  furie,  and  hostile  sur- 
linesse  ?  Let  us  not  feare.  after  so  great  a  master,  to  hold 

19 


Of  profit  and 
honesty 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  that  some  things  are  unlawfull,  even  against  our  fellest^ 
enemies :  that  publike  interest,  ought  not  to  challenge  all 
of  all,  against  private  interest :  Manente  memoria  etiam  in 
dissidio  publicorum  fcederum  privati  juris :  'Some  memorie 
c  of  private  right  continuing  even  in  disagreement  of  publike 
'  contracts.1 

OVID.  Pont.  — et  nutta  potentia  vires 

i.  El.  viii.  37.  Prcestandi,  ne  quid  peccet  amicus,  habet: 

No  power  hath  so  great  might, 
To  make  friends  still  goe  right. 

And  that  all  things  be  not  lawfull  to  an  honest  man,  for  1 
the  service  of  his  King,  the  generall  cause  and  defence  of  the 
Cic.  Off.  iii.  lawes.  Non  enim  patria  prcestat  omnibus  qfficijs,  et  ipsi  con- 
ducit  pios  habere  cives  in  parentes.  '  For  our  countrey  is  not 
'  above  all  other  duties :  it  is  good  for  the  country  to  have 
'  her  inhabitans  use  pietie  toward  their  parents.'  "Tis  an 
instruction  befitting  the  times  :  wee  need  not  harden  our 
courages  with  these  plates  of  iron  and  steele ;  it  sufficeth  our 
shoulders  be  armed  with  them :  it  is  enough  to  dippe  our 
pens  in  inke,  too  much,  to  die  them  in  blood.  If  it  be  great 
nesse  of  courage,  and  th'  effect  of  a  rare  and  singular  vertue, 
to  neglect  friendship,  despise  private  respects  and  bonds, 
ones  word  and  kindred,  for  the  comon  good  and  obedience 
of  the  Magistrate  :  it  is  verily  able  to  excuse  us  from  it,  if 
we  but  alledge,  that  it  is  a  greatnesse  unable  to  lodge  in 
the  greatnesse  of  Epaminondas  his  courage.  I  abhorre  the 
enraged  admonitions  of  this  other  unruly  spirit. 

LUCAN.  vii.  — dumtela  micant,  non  vos  pietatis  imago 

320.  Caes.  Vila,  nee  aduersa  conspecti  fronte  parentes 

Commoveant,  vultus  gladio  tarbante  verendos. 

While  swords  are  brandisht,  let  no  shew  of  grace 
Once  moove  you,  nor  your  parents  face  to  face, 
But  with  your  swords  disturbe  their  reverend  grace. 

Let  us  bereave  wicked,  bloodie  and  traiterous  dispositions, 
of  this  pretext  of  reason  :  leave  we  that  impious  and  exor 
bitant  justice,  and  adhere  unto  more  humane  imitations. 
Oh  what  may  time  and  example  bring  to  passe !  In  an 
encounter  of  the  civill  warres  against  Cinna,  one  of  Pom- 
peyes  souldiers,  having  unwittingly  slaine  his  brother,  who 

20 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

was  on  the  other  side,  through  shame  and  sorrow  presently  CHAPTER 

killed  himselfe  ;  and  some  yeeres  after,  in  another  civill  warre  J 

of  the  said  people,  a  souldier  boldly  demanded  a  reward  °f      £™  gtand 

his  Captaines  for  killing  his  owne  brother.     Falsly  doe  wee 

argue  honour,  and  the  beautie  of  an  action,  by  it's  profit  : 

and  conclude  as  ill,  to  thinke  every  one  is  bound  unto  it,  and 

that  it  is  honest,  if  it  be  commodious. 


Omnia  non  pariter  rerum  sunt  omnibus  apta. 

All  things  alike  to  all 
Do  not  well-fitting  fall. 

Choose  we  out  the  most  necessary  and  most  beneficiall 

matter  of  humane  society,  it  will  be  a  mariage  :  yet  is  it, 

that  the  Saints  counsell  findeth  and  deemeth  the  contrary 

side  more  honest,  excluding  from  it  the  most  reverend 

vocation  of  men  :  as  wee  to  our  races  assigne  such 

beasts  as  are  of  least  esteeme. 


Ov.  Ep.  iii.  El. 
viii.     « 


THE    SECOND    CHAPTER 

Of  Repenting. 

HERS  fashion  man,  I  repeat  him ;  and 
represent  a  particular  one,  but  ill  made  ; 
and  whom  were  I  to  forme  a  new,  he 
should  be  far  other  then  he  is ;  but  he  is 
now  made.  And  though  the  lines  of  my 
picture  change  and  vary,  yet  loose  they 
not  themselves.  The  world  runnes  all  on 
wheeles.  All  things  therein  moove  with 
out  intermission  ;  yea  the  earth,  the  rockes  of  Caucasus,  and 
the  Pyramides  of  ^Egypt,  both  with  the  publike  and  their 
own  motion.  Constancy  it  selfe  is  nothing  but  a  languish 
ing  and  wavering .  dance.  I  cannot  settle  my  object;  it 
goeth  so  unquietly  and  staggering,  with  a  natnrall  drunken- 
nesse.  I  take  it  in  this  plight,  as  it  is  at  th1  instant  I 
ammuse  my  selfe  about  it.  I  describe  not  the  essence,  but 
the  passage ;  not  a  passage  from  age  to  age,  or  as  the  people 
reckon,  from  seaven  yeares  to  seaven,  but  from  day  to  day, 

21 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  from  minute  to  minute.     My  history  must  be  fitted  to  the 
II  present.     I  may  soone  change,  not  onely  fortune,  but  inten- 

Repentmg  J.-Qn  j^.  jg  &  COUnter-roule  of  divers  and  variable  accidents, 
and  irresolute  imaginations,  and  sometimes  contrary  :  whether 
it  be  that  my  selfe  am  other,  or  that  I  apprehend  subjects, 
by  other  circumstances  and  considerations.  Howsoever,  I 
may  perhaps  gaine-say  my  selfe,  but  truth  (as  Demades  said) 
I  never  gaine-say :  Were  my  mind  setled,  I  would  not  essay, 
but  resolve  my  selfe.  It  is  still  a  Prentise  and  a  probationer. 
I  propose  a  meane  life,  and  without  luster  :  "Tis  all  one. 
They  fasten  all  morall  Philosophy  as  well  to  a  popular  and 
private  life,  as  to  one  of  richer  stuffe.  Every  man  beareth 
the  whole  stampe  of  humane  condition.  Authors  com 
municate  themselves  unto  the  world  by  some  speciall  and 
strange  marke  ;  I  the  first,  by  my  generall  disposition  ;  as 
Michael  de  Montaigne  ;  not  as  a  Grammarian,  or  a  Poet,  or 
a  Lawyer.  If  the  world  complaine,  I  speake  too  much  of 
my  selfe,  I  complaine,  it  thinkes  no  more  of  it  selfe.  But  is 
it  reason,  that  being  so  private  in  use,  I  should  pretend  to 
make  my  selfe  publike  in  knowledge  ?  Or  is  it  reason,  I 
should  produce  into  the  world,  where  fashion  and  arte  have 
such  sway  and  command,  the  raw  and  simple  effects  of 
nature  ;  and  of  a  nature  as  yet  exceeding  weake  ?  To  write 
bookes  without  learning,  is  it  not  to  make  a  wall  without 
stone  or  such  like  thing  ?  Conceits  of  musicke  are  directed 
by  arte  ;  mine  by  hap.  Yet  have  I  this  according  to  learn 
ing,  that  never  man  handled  subject,  he  understood  or  knew, 
better  then  I  doe  this  I  have  undertaken  ;  being  therein  the 
cunningest  man  alive. 

Secondly,  that  never  man  waded  further  into  his  matter, 
nor  more  distinctly  sifted  the  parts  and  dependances  of  it, 
nor  arrived  more  exactly  and  fully  to  the  end  he  proposed 
unto  himselfe.  To  finish  the  same,  I  have  neede  of  naught 
but  faithfulnesse :  which  is  therein  as  sincere  and  pure  as 
may  be  found.  I  speake  truth,  not  my  belly- full,  but  as 
much  as  I  dare  :  and  I  dare  the  more,  the  more  I  grow  into 
yeares :  for  it  seemeth,  custome  alloweth  old  age  more 
liberty  to  babbel,  and  indiscretion  to  talke  of  it  selfe.  It 
cannot  herein  be,  as  in  trades  :  where  the  Crafts-man  and 
his  worke  doe  often  differ.  Being  a  man  of  so  sound  and 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

honest  conversation,  writ  he  so  foolishly  ?    Are  such  learned  CHAPTER 
writings  come  from  a  man  of  so  weake  a  conversation  ?    who  H 

hath  but  an  ordinary  conceit,  and  writeth  excellently,  one  Of  Repenting 
may  say  his  capacitie  is  borrowed,  not  of  himselfe.  A  skil- 
full  man,  is  not  skilfull  in  all  things  :  But  a  sufficient  man, 
is  sufficient  every  where,  even  unto  ignorance.  Here  my 
booke  and  my  selfe  march  together,  and  keepe  one  pace. 
Else- where  one  may  commend  or  condemne  the  worke,  with 
out  the  worke-man  ;  heere  not :  who  toucheth  one  toucheth 
the  other.  He  who  shall  judge  of  it  without  knowing  him, 
shal  wrong  himself  more  then  me,  he  that  knows  it,  hath 
wholly  satisfied  mee.  Happie  beyond  my  merite,  if  I  get 
this  onely  portion  of  publike  approbation,  as  I  may  cause 
men  of  understanding  to  thinke,  I  had  beene  able  to  make  use 
and  benefit  of  learning,  had  I  beene  endowed  with  any :  and 
deserved  better  helpe  of  memorie  :  excuse  wee  here  what  I 
often  say,  that  I  seldome  repent  my  selfe,  and  that  my  con 
science  is  contented  with  it  selfe ;  not  of  an  Angels  or  a 
horses  conscience,  but  as  of  a  mans  conscience.  Adding  ever 
this  clause,  not  of  ceremonie,  but  of  true  and  essential!  sub 
mission  ;  that  I  speake  inquiring  and  doubting,  meerely  and 
simply  referring  my  selfe,  from  resolution,  unto  common 
and  lawfull  opinions.  I  teach  not  ;  I  report  :  No  vice  is 
absolutely  vice,  which  offendeth  not,  and  a  sound  judgement 
accuseth  not :  For,  the  deformitie  and  incommoditie  thereof 
is  so  palpable,  as  peradventure  they  have  reason,  who  say,  it 
is  chiefly  produced  by  sottishnesse  and  brought  forth  by 
ignorance  ;  so  hard  is  it,  to  imagine  one  should  know  it 
without  hating  it.  Malice  sucks  up  the  greatest  part  of  her 
owne  venome,  and  therewith  impoysoneth  herselfe.  Vice 
leaveth,  as  an  ulcer  in  the  flesh,  a  repentance  in  .the  soule, 
which  still  scratcheth  and  bloodieth  it  selfe.  For  reason 
effaceth  other  griefes  and  sorrowes,  but  engendereth  those  of 
repentance  :  the  more  yrkesome,  because  inward  :  As  the 
colde  and  heate  of  agues  is  more  offensive  then  that  which 
comes  outward.  I  account  vice  (but  each  according  to  their 
measure)  not  onely  those  which  reason  disalowes,  and  nature 
condemnes,  but  such  as  mans  opinion  hath  forged  as  false  and 
erronious,  if  lawes  and  custome  authorize  the  same.  In  like 
manner  there  is  no  goodnesse  but  gladdeth  an  honest  dis- 

23 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  position.  There  is  truely  I  wot  not  what  kinde  of  congratu- 
I]  .  lation,  of  well  doing,  which  rejoyceth  in  our  selves ;  and  a 
m^  generous  jollitie,  that  accompanieth  a  good  conscience.  A 
minde  couragiously  vicious,  may  happily  furnish  it  selfe  with 
security,  but  shee  cannot  be  fraught,  with  this  selfe-joyning 
delight  and  satisfaction.  It  is  no  smal  pleasure,  for  one  to 
feele  himselfe  preserved  from  the  contagion  of  an  age  so 
infected  as  ours,  and  to  say  to  himselfe  ;  Could  a  man  enter 
and  see  even  into  my  soule,  yet  shold  he  not  finde  me 
guilty,  either  of  the  affliction  or  ruine  of  any  body,  nor 
culpable  of  envie  or  revenge,  nor  of  publike  offence  against 
the  lawes,  nor  tainted  with  innovation,  trouble  or  sedition  ; 
nor  spotted  with  falsifying  of  my  word  :  and  although  the 
libertie  of  times  alowed  and  taught  it  every  man,  yet  could 
I  never  be  induced  to  touch  the  goods  or  dive  into  the  purse 
of  any  French  man,  and  have  alwayes  lived  upon  mine  own, 
as  wel  in  time  of  war,  as  peace :  nor  did  I  ever  make  use  of 
any  poore  mans  labor,  without  reward.  These  testimonies 
of  an  unspotted  conscience  are  very  pleasing,  which  n at u rail 
joy  is  a  great  benefit  unto  us  :  and  the  onely  payment  never 
faileth  us.  To  ground  the  recompence  of  vertuous  actions 
upon  the  approbation  of  others,  is  to  undertake  a  most  un- 
certaine  or  troubled  foundation,  namely  in  an  age  so  corrupt 
and  times  so  ignorant,  as  this  is  :  the  vulgar  peoples  good 
opinion  is  injurious.  Whom  trust  you  in  seeing  what  is 
commendable  :  God  keepe  me  from  being  an  honest  man, 
according  to  the  description  I  dayly  see  made  of  honour,  each 
one  by  himselfe.  Quce  Juerant  vitia,  mores  mnt.  '  What 
6  earst  were  vices  are  now  growne  fashions.1*  Some  of  my 
friends,  have  sometimes  attempted  to  schoole  me  roundly, 
and  sift  me  plainly,  either  of  their  owne  motion,  or  envited 
by  me,  as  to  an  office,  which  to  a  well  composed  minde,  both 
in  profit  and  lovingnesse,  exceedeth  all  the  duties  of  sincere 
amity.  Such  have  I  ever  entertained  with  open  armes  of 
curtesie,  and  kinde  acknowledgement.  But  now  to  speake 
from  my  conscience  I  often  found  so  much  false  measure  in 
their  reproaches  and  praises,  that  I  had  not  greatly  erred  if 
I  had  rather  erred,  then  done  well  after  their  fashion.  Such 
as  we  especially,  who  live  a  private  life  not  exposed  to  any 
gaze  but  our  owne,  ought  in  our  hearts  establish  a  touch- 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

stone,  and  there  to  touch  our  deedes  and  try  our  actions  ;  CHAPTER 

and  accordingly,  now  cherish  and  now  chastise  our  selves.     I  II 

have  my  owne  lawes  and  tribunal!,  to  judge  of  mee,  whither  Of  Repenting 

I  addresse  my  selfe  more  then  any  where  els.    I  restraine  my 

actions  according  to  other  but  extend  them  according  to  my 

selfe.      None  but  your  self  knows  rightly  whether  you  be 

demiss  and  cruel,  or  loyal  and  devout.     Others  see  you  not, 

but  ghesse  you  by  uncertaine  conjectures.     They  see  not  so 

much  your  nature  as  your  arte.     Adhere  not  then  to  their 

opinion,  but  hold   unto  your  owne.      Tuo   tibi  judicio  est  Cic.  Nat.  Deor. 

utendum.      Virtutis  et  viciorum  grave  ipsius  conscientice  pon-  *"• 

dus  est :  qua  sublatajacent  omnia ;  'You  must  use  your  owne 

4  judgement.     The  weight  of  the  very  conscience  of  vice  and 

'  vertues  is  heavy  :  take  that  away,  and  al  is  downed     But 

whereas  it  is  said,  that  repentance  neerely  followeth  sin, 

seemeth  not  to  imply  sinne  placed  in  his  rich  aray,  which 

lodgeth  in  us  as  in  his  proper  mansion.     One  may  disavow 

and  disclaime  vices,  that  surprise  us,  and  whereto  our  passions 

transport  us  :  but  those,  which  by  long  habite  are  rooted  in 

a  strong,  and  ankred  in  a  powerfull  will,  are  not  subject  to 

contradiction.      Repentance  is  but  a  denying  of  our  will, 

and  an  opposition   of  our  fantasies  which  diverts  us  here 

and  there.     It  makes  some  disavow  his  former  vertue  and 

continencie. 

Quce  mens  est  hodie,  cur  eadem  non  puerofuit,  HOR.  Car.  iv. 

Vel  cur  his  animis  incolumes  non  redeunt  gence?  Od.  x.  7. 

Why  was  not  in  a  youth  same  minde  as  now  ? 
Or  why  beares  not  this  mind  a  youthfull  brow  ? 

That  is  an  exquisite  life,  which  even  in  his  owne  private 
keepeth  it  selfe  in  awe  and  order.  Every  one  may  play  the 
jugler,  and  represent  an  honest  man  upon  the  stage;  but 
within,  and  in  bosome,  where  all  things  are  lawfull,  where  all 
is  concealed ;  to  keepe  a  due  rule  or  formall  decorum,  that 's 
the  point.  The  next  degree,  is  to  be  so  in  ones  owne  home, 
and  in  his  ordinary  actions,  whereof  we  are  to  give  accoumpt 
to  no  body  :  wherein  is  no  study,  nor  art.  And  therefore  Bias 
describing  the  perfect  state  of  a  family,  whereof  (saith  he) 
the  maister,  be  such  inwardly  by  himseffe,  as  he  is  outwardly, 
for  feare  of  the  lawes,  and  respect  of  mens  speaches.  And 
it  was  a  worthy  saying  of  lulius  Drusus,  to  those  worke-men, 

D  25 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which  for  three  thousand  crownes,  offered  so  to  reforme  his 
H  house,  that  his  neighbours  should  no  more  over  looke  into 

Of  Repenting  -j. .  j  W-Q  gjye  vou  gjxe  thousand  (said  he)  and  contrive  it 
so,  that  on  all  sides  every  man  may  looke  into  it.  The  cus- 
tome  of  Agesilaus  is  remembred  with  honour,  who  in  his 
travaile  was  wont  to  take  up  his  lodging  in  churches,  that  the 
people,  and  Gods  themselves  might  pry  into  his  private 
actions.  Some  have  beene  admirable  to  the  world,  in  whom 
nor  his  wife,  nor  his  servants  ever  noted  any  thing  remarke- 
able.  Few  men  have  beene  admired  of  their  familiars.  No 
man  hath  beene  a  Prophet,  not  onely  in  his  house,  but  in  his 
owne  country,  saith  the  experience  of  histories.  Even  so  in 
things  of  nought.  And  in  this  base  example,  is  the  image 
of  greatnesse  discerned.  In  my  climate  of  Gascoigne  they 
deeme  it  a  jest  to  see  mee  in  print.  The  further  the  know 
ledge  which  is  taken  of  mee  is  from  my  home,  of  so  much 
more  woorth  am  I.  In  Guienne  I  pay  Printers ;  in  other 
places  they  pay  mee.  Upon  this  accident  they  ground, 
who  living  and  present  keepe  close-lurking,  to  purchase 
credit  when  they  shall  be  dead  and  absent.  I  had  rather 
have  lesse.  And  I  cast  not  my  selfe  into  the  world,  but  for 
the  portion  I  draw  from  it.  That  done,  I  quit  it.  The 
people  attend  on  such  a  man  with  wonderment,  from  a  pub- 
like  act,  unto  his  owne  doores :  together  with  his  roabes  hee 
leaves  of  his  part ;  falling  so  much  the  lower,  by  how  much 
higher  hee  was  mounted.  View  him  within,  there  all  is 
turbulent,  disordered  and  vile.  And  were  order  and  for 
mality  found  in  him,  a  lively,  impartiall  and  well  sorted 
judgement  is  required,  to  perceive  and  fully  to  discerne  him 
in  these  base  and  private  actions.  Considering  that  order  is 
but  a  dumpish  and  drowsie  vertue  :  To  gaine  a  Battaile,  per- 
fourme  an  Ambassage,  and  governe  a  people,  are  noble  and 
woorthy  actions ;  to  chide,  laugh,  sell,  pay,  love,  hate,  and 
mildely  and  justly  to  converse  both  with  his  owne  and  with 
himselfe ;  not  to  relent,  and  not  gaine-say  himselfe,  are 
thinges  more  rare,  more  difficult  and  lesse  remarkeable. 

Retired  lives  sustaine  that  way,  what  ever  some  say,  offices 

as  much  more  crabbed,  and  extended,  then  other  lives  doe. 

And  private  men  (saith  Aristotle)  serve  vertue  more  hardly, 

and  more  highly  attend  her,  then  those  which  are  magistrates 

26 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

or  placed  in  authority.     Wee  prepare  our  selves  unto  eminent  CHAPTER 
occasions,  more  for  glory  then  for  conscience.     The  nearest  H 

way  to  come  unto  glory,  were  to  doe  that  for  conscience,  tiepentmg 
which  wee  doe  for  glory.  And  me  seemeth  the  vertue  of 
Alexander  representeth  much  lesse  vigor  in  her  large  Theater, 
then  that  of  Socrates,  in  his  base  and  obscure  excercitation. 
I  easily  conceive  Socrates,  in  the  roome  of  Alexander ;  Alex 
ander  in  that  of  Socrates  I  cannot.  If  any  aske  the  one, 
what  hee  can  do,  he  will  answere,  '  Conquer  the  world ' ; 
let  the  same  question  bee  demanded  of  the  other,  he  will 
say,  '  Leade  my  life  conformably  to  ifs  naturall  condition ' ; 
A  science  much  more  generous,  more  important,  and  more 
law  full. 

The  woorth  of  the  minde  consisteth  not  in  going  high,  but 
in  marching  orderly.  Her  greatnesse  is  not  excercised  in 
greatnesse;  in  mediocritye  it  is.  As  those,  which  judge  and 
touch  us  inwardely,  make  no  great  accoumpt  of  the  bright- 
nesse  of  our  publique  actions :  and  see  they  are  but  streakes 
and  poyntes  of  cleare  Water,  surging  from  a  bottome,  other 
wise  slimie  and  full  of  mud :  So  those  who  judge  us  by  this 
gay  outward  apparance,  conclude  the  same  of  our  inward 
constitution,  and  cannot  couple  popular  faculties  as  theirs 
are,  unto  these  other  faculties,  which  amaze  them  so  farre 
from  their  levell.  So  do,  we  attribute  savage  shapes  and 
ougly  formes  unto  divels.  As  who  doeth  not  ascribe  high- 
raised  eye-browes,  open  nostrils,  a  sterne  frightfull  visage, 
and  a  huge-body  unto  Tamberlaine,  as  is  the  forme  or  shape 
of  the  imagination  we  have  fore-conceived  by  the  bruite  of 
his  name  ?  Had  any  heretofore  shewed  me  Erasmus,  I  could 
hardly  had  bin  induced  to  think,  but  whatsoever  he  had  said 
to  his  boy  or  hostes,  had  been  Adages  and  Apothegmes. 
We  imagine  much  more  fitly  an  Artificer  upon  his  close 
stoole  or  on  his  wife,  then  a  great  judge,  reverend  for  his 
carriage  and  regardfull  for  his  sufficiencie ;  we  think,  that 
from  those  high  thrones  they  should  not  abase  themselves 
so  low,  as  to  live.  As  vitious  mindes  are  often  incited  to 
do  well  by  some  strange  impulsion,  so  are  vertuous  spirits 
mooved  to  do  ill.  They  must  then  be  judged  by  their  settled 
estate,  when  they  are  neare  themselves,  and  as  we  say,  at 
home,  if  at  any  time  they  be  so  ;  or  when  they  are  nearest 

27 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  unto  rest,  and  in  their  naturall  seate.     Naturall  inclinations 

II  are  by  institution  helped  and  strengthned,  but  they  neither 

Repenting  cjiange  nOr  exceed.     A  thousand  natures  in  my  time,  have 

a  thwart,  a  contrary  discipline  escaped  toward   vertue  or 

toward  vice. 

LUCAN.  iv.237.  Sic  ubi  desuetce  silvis  in  carcere  clausce, 

Mansuevereferce,  et  vultus  posuere  minaces, 
Atque  hominem  didicere  pati,  si  torrida  paruus 
Venit  in  or  a  cruor,  redeunt  rabiesquefurorque, 
Admonitatque  tument  gustato  sanguine  fauces, 
Fervet,  et  a  trepido  via  abstinet  irce  magistro. 

So  when  wilde  beasts,  disused  from  the  wood, 
Fierce  lookes  laid-downe,  grow  tame,  closde  in  a  cage, 
Taught  to  beare  man,  if  then  a  little  blood 
Touch  their  hot  lips,  furie  returnes  and  rage  ; 
Their  j  awes  by  taste  admonisht  swell  with  vaines, 
Rage  boyles,  and  from  faint  keeper  scarse  abstaines. 

These  originall  qualities  are  not  grubd  out,  they  are  but 
covered,  and  hidden :  The  Latine  tongue  is  to  me  in  a 
manner  naturall ;  I  understand  it  better  then  French ;  but 
it  is  now  fortie  yeares,  I  have  not  made  use  of  it  to  speake, 
nor  much  to  write :  yet  in  some  extreame  emotions  and  sud- 
daine  passions,  wherein  I  have  twice  or  thrice  falne,  since  my 
years  of  discretion  ;  and  namely  once,  when  my  father  being 
in  perfect  health,  fell  all  along  upon  me  in  a  swoune,  I  have 
ever,  even  from  my  very  hart  uttered  my  first  words  in  latine  : 
Nature  rushing  and  by  force  expressing  it  selfe,  against  so 
long  a  custome ;  the  like  example  is  alleadged  of  divers 
others.  Those  which  in  my  time,  have  attempted  to  correct 
the  fashions  of  the  world  by  new  opinions,  reforme  the  vices 
of  apparance  ;  those  of  essence  they  leave  untouched  if  they 
encrease  them  not :  And  their  encrease  is  much  to  be  feared. 
We  willingly  protract  al  other  well-doing  upon  these  exter- 
nall  reformations,  of  lesse  cost,  and  of  greater  merit ;  whereby 
we  satisfie  good  cheape,  other  naturall  consubstantiall  and 
intestine  vices.  Looke  a  little  into  the  course  of  our  experi 
ence.  There  is  no  man  (if  he  listen  to  himselfe)  that  doth 
not  discover  in  himselfe  a  peculiar  forme  of  his,  a  swaying 
forme,  which  wrestleth  against  the  institution,  and  against 
the  tempests  of  passions,  which  are  contrary  unto  him.  As 
for  me,  I  feele  not  my  selfe  much  agitated  by  a  shocke ;  I 

28 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

commonly  finde  my  selfe  in  mine  owne  place,  as  are  sluggish  CHAPTER 
and  lumpish  bodies.     If  I  am  not  close  and  neare  unto  my  H 

selfe,  I  am  never  farre-off:  My  debauches  or  excesses  trans-  ^ *  Repenting 
port  me  not  much.  There  is  nothing  extreame  and  strange  : 
yet  have  I  sound  fits  and  vigorous  lusts.  The  true  con 
demnation,  and  which  toucheth  the  common  fashion  of  our 
men,  is,  that  their  very  retreate  is  full  of  corruption  and 
filth  :  The  Idea  of  their  amendment  blurred  and  deformed  ; 
their  repentance  crazed  and  faultie  very  neere  as  much  as 
their  sinne.  Some,  either  because  they  are  so  fast  and 
naturally  joyned  unto  vice,  or  through  long  custome,  have 
lost  all  sense  of  its  uglinesse.  To  others  (of  whose  ranke  I 
am)  vice  is  burthenous,  but  they  counter-ballance  it  with 
pleasure,  or  other  occasions  :  and  suffer  it,  and  at  a  certaine 
rate  lend  themselves  unto  it,  though  basely  and  viciously. 
Yet  might  happily  so  remote  a  disproportion  of  measure  bee 
imagined,  where  with  justice,  the  pleasure  might  excuse  the 
offence,  as  we  say  of  profit.  Not  onely  being  accidentall,  and 
out  of  sinne,  as  in  thefts,  but  even  in  the  very  exercise  of  it, 
as  in  the  acquaintance  or  copulation  with  women  ;  where  the 
provocation  is  so  violent,  and  as  they  say,  sometime  unresist- 
able.  In  a  towne  of  a  kinsman  of  mine,  the  other  day,  being 
in  Armignac,  I  saw  a  country  man,  commonly  sirnamed  the 
Theefe  :  who  himselfe  reported  his  life  to  have  beene  thus. 
Being  borne  a  begger,  and  perceiving,  that  to  get  his  bread 
by  the  sweate  of  his  browe  and  labour  of  his  hands,  would 
never  sufficiently  arme  him  against  penury,  he  resolved  to 
become  a  Theefe  ;  and  that  trade  had  employed  all  his  youth 
safely,  by  meanes  of  his  bodily  strength  :  for  he  ever  made 
up  Harvest  and  Vintage  in  other  mens  grounds  ;  but  so  farre 
off,  and  in  so  great  heapes,  that  it  was  beyond  imagination, 
one  man  should  in  one  night  carry  away  so  much  upon  his 
shoulders :  and  was  so  carefull  to  equal!  the  pray,  and  dis- 
perce  the  mischiefe  he  did,  that  the  spoile  was  of  lesse  import 
to  every  particular  man. 

Hee  is  now  in  old  yeares  indifferently  rich  ;  for  a  man  of 
his  condition  (Godamercy  his  trade)  which  he  is  not  ashamed 
to  confesse  openly.  And  to  reconcile  himselfe  with  God,  he 
affirmeth,  to  be  dayly  ready,  with  his  gettings,  and  other 
good  turnes,  to  satisfie  the  posterity  of  those  hee  hath 

29 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  heretofore  wronged  or  robbed  ;  which  if  himselfe  bee  not  of 
II  abilitie  to  performe  (for  hee  cannot  do  all  at  once)  hee  will 

f  Repenting  c]iarge  his  heires  withall,  according  to  the  knowledge  he 
hath,  of  the  wrongs  by  him  done  to  every  man.  By  this 
description,  bee  it  true  or  false,  he  respecteth  theft,  as  a  dis 
honest  and  unlawfull  action,  and  hateth  the  same  :  yet  lesse 
then  pinching  want :  He  repents  but  simply  ;  for  in  regard 
it  was  so  counterbalanced  and  recompenced,  he  repenteth 
not.  That  is  not  that  habit  which  incorporates  us  unto  vice, 
and  confirmeth  our  understanding  in  it ;  nor  is  it  that  boys- 
terous  winde,  which  by  violent  blastes  dazeleth  and  troubleth 
our  mindes,  and  at  that  time  confoundes,  and  overwhelmes 
both  us,  our  judgement,  and  all  into  the  power  of  vice. 
What  I  doe,  is  ordinarily  full  and  compleate,  and  I  march 
(as  wee  say)  all  in  one  pace  :  I  have  not  many  motions,  that 
hide  themselves  and  slinke  away  from  my  reason,  or  which 
very  neare  are  not  guided  by  the  consent  of  all  my  partes, 
without  division,  or  intestine  sedicion  :  my  judgement  hath 
the  whole  blame,  or  commendation  ;  and  the  blame  it  hath 
once,  it  hath  ever  :  for,  almost  from  it's  birth,  it  hath  beene 
one  of  the  same  inclination,  course  and  force.  And  in 
matters  of  generall  opinions,  even  from  my  infancy,  I  ranged 
my  selfe  to  the  point  I  was  to  hold.  Some  sinnes  there  are 
outragious,  violent  and  suddaine  ;  leave  we  them. 

But  those  other  sinnes,  so  often  reassumed,  determined 
and  advised  upon,  whether  they  be  of  complexion,  or  of  pro 
fession  and  calling,  I  cannot  conceive  how  they  should  so 
long  be  settled  in  one  same  courage,  unlesse  the  reason  and 
conscience  of  the  sinner  were  thereunto  inwardly  privie  and 
constantly  willing.  And  how  to  imagine  or  fashion  the  re 
pentance  therof,  which  he  vanteth,  doth  some  times  visit 
him,  seemeth  somewhat  hard  unto  me.  I  am  not  of  Pytha 
goras  Sect,  that  men  take  a  new  soule,  when  to  receive 
Oracles,  they  approach  the  images  of  Gods,  unlesse  he  would 
say  with  all,  that  it  must  be  a  strange  one,  new,  and  lent 
him  for  the  time  :  our  owne,  giving  so  little  signe  of  puri 
fication,  and  cleanesse  worthie  of  that  office.  They  doe 
altogether  against  the  Stoycall  precepts,  which  appoint  us 
to  correct  the  imperfections  and  vices  we  finde  in  our  selves, 
but  withall  forbid  us  to  disturbe  the  quiet  of  our  minde. 
30 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

They  make  us  beleeve,  they  feele  great  remorse,  and  are  CHAPTER 
inwardly  much   displeased  with  sinne  ;  but  of  amendment,  H 

correction  or  intermission,  they  shew  us  none.  Surely  there  Repenting 
can  be  no  perfect  health,  where  the  disease  is  not  perfectly 
remooved.  Were  repentance  put  in  the  scale  of  the  ballance, 
it  would  weigh  downe  sinne.  I  finde  no  humour  so  easie  to 
be  counterfeited  as  Devotion  :  If  one  conforme  not  his  life 
and  conditions  to  it,  her  essence  is  abstruse  and  concealed, 
her  apparance  gentle  and  stately. 

For  my  part,  I  may  in  generall  wish  to  be  other  then  I 
am  ;  I  may  condemne  and  mislike  my  universall  forme  ;  I 
may  beseech  God  to  grant  me  an  undefiled  reformation,  and 
excuse  my  naturall  weakenesse  ;  but  meeseemeth  I  ought 
not  to  tearme  this  repentance  no  more  then  the  displeasure 
of  being  neither  Angell  nor  Cato.  My  actions  are  squared 
to  what  I  am  and  confirmed  to  my  condition.  I  cannot  doe 
better  :  And  repentance  doth  not  properly  concerne  what  is 
not  in  our  power  ;  sorrow  doth.  I  may  imagine  infinite  dis 
positions  of  a  higher  pitch,  and  better  governed  then  myne, 
yet  doe  I  nothing  better  my  faculties  ;  no  more  then  mine 
arme  becommeth  stronger,  or  my  wit  more  excellent,  by  con 
ceiving  some  others  to  be  so.  If  to  suppose  and  wish  a  more 
nobler  working  then  ours,  might  produce  the  repentance  of 
our  owne,  wee  should  then  repent  us  of  our  most  innocent 
actions  :  for  so  much  as  we  judge  that  in  a  more  excellent 
nature,  they  had  beene  directed  with  greater  perfection  and 
dignity  ;  and  our  selves  would  doe  the  like.  When  I  consult 
with  my  age  of  my  youthes  proceedings,  I  finde  that  com 
monly,  (according  to  my  opinion)  I  managed  them  in  order. 
This  is  all  my  resistance  is  able  to  performe,  I  flatter  not  my 
selfe  r  in  like  circumstances,  I  should  ever  be  the  same.  It 
is  not  a  spot,  but  a  whole  dye  that  staynes  mee.  I  acknow 
ledge  no  repentance,  this  is  superficiall,  meane  and  ceremo 
nious.  It  must  touch  me  on  all  sides,  before  I  can  terme  it 
repentance.  It  must  pinch  my  entrailes,  and  afflict  them  as 
deepely  and  throughly,  as  God  himselfe  beholds  mee.  When 
in  negotiating,  many  good  fortunes  have  slipt  me  for  want 
of  good  discretion,  yet  did  my  projects  make  good  choyce, 
according  to  the  occurrences  presented  unto  them.  Their 
manner  is  ever  to  take  the  easier  and  surer  side.  I  finde  that 

31 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  in  my  former  deliberations,  I  proceeded,  after  my  rules,  dis- 
II  creetely  for  the  subjects  state  propounded  to  mee  ;  and  in 

Of  Repenting  ^e  occasionSj  would  proceede  alike  a  hundred  yeares  hence. 
I  respect  not  what  now  it  is,  but  what  it  was,  when  I  con 
sulted  of  it.  The  consequence  of  all  dessignes  consists  in  the 
seasons  ;  occasions  passe,  and  matters  change  uncessantly.  I 
have  in  my  time  runne  into  some  grosse,  absurde  and  im 
portant  errors  ;  not  for  want  of  good  advise,  but  of  good 
happe.  There  are  secret  and  indivinable  parts  in  the  objects 
men  doe  handle  ;  especially  in  the  nature  of  men  and  mute 
conditions,  without  shew,  and  sometimes  unknowne  of  the 
very  possessors,  produced  and  stirred  up  by  suddaine  oc 
casions.  If  my  wit  could  neyther  finde  nor  presage  them, 
I  am  not  offended  with  it ;  the  function  thereof  is  contained 
within  it's  owne  limits.  If  the  successe  beare  me,  and  favour 
the  side  I  refused  ;  there  is  no  remedy  ;  I  fall  not  out  with 
my  selfe  :  I  accuse  my  fortune,  not  my  endevour :  that 's  not 
called  repentance.  Phocion  had  given  the  Athenians  some 
counsell,  which  was  not  followed  :  the  matter,  against  his 
opinion,  succeeding  happily :  How  now  Phocion,  (quoth 
one)  art  thou  pleased  the  matter  hath  thrived  so  well? 
Yea  (said  hee)  and  I  am  glad  of  it,  yet  repent  not  the 
advise  I  gave. 

When  any  of  my  friends  come  to  me  for  counsell,  I  bestow 
it  francklie  and  clearelie,  not  (as  well-nigh  all  the  world  doth,) 
wavering  at  the  hazard  of  the  matter,  whereby  the  contrary 
of  my  meaning  may  happen  :  that  so  they  may  justly  finde 
fault  with  my  advise  :  for  which  I  care  not  greatly.  For 
they  shall  doe  me  wrong,  and  it  became  not  mee  to  refuse 
them  that  dutie.  I  have  no  body  to  blame  for  my  faults  or 
misfortunes,  but  my  self.  For  in  effect  I  seldome  use  the 
advise  of  other  unlesse  it  be  for  complement  sake,  and  where 
I  have  need  of  instruction  or  knowledge  of  the  fact.  Marry 
in  things  wherein  nought  but  judgement  is  to  be  employed  ; 
strange  reasons  may  serve  to  sustaine,  but  not  to  divert 
me.  I  lend  a  favourable  and  courteous  eare  unto  them  all. 
But  (to  my  remembrance)  I  never  beleeved  any  but  mine 
owne.  With  me  they  are  but  Flyes  and  Moathes,  which 
distract  my  will.  I  little  regard  mine  owne  opinions,  other 
mens  I  esteeme  as  little  :  Fortune  payes  mee  accordingly. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

If  I  take  no  counsell  I  give  as  little.     I  am  not  much  sought  CHAPTER 
after  for  it,  and  lesse  credited  when  I  give  it :  Neither  know  II 

I  any  enterprise,  either  private  or  publike,  that  my  advise  f  RePentin£ 
hath  directed  and  brought  to  conclusion.  Even  those  whom 
fortune  had  some-way  tyde  thereunto,  have  more  willingly 
admitted  the  direction  of  others  conceits,  then  mine.  As 
one  that  am  as  jealous  of  the  rights  of  my  quiet,  as  of  those 
of  my  authority  ;  I  would  rather  have  it  thus. 

Where  leaving  me,  they  jumpe  with  my  profession,  which 
is,  wholly  to  settle  and  containe  me  in  my  selfe.  It  is  a 
pleasure  unto  mee,  to  bee  disinteressed  of  other  mens  affayres, 
and  disingaged  from  their  contentions.  When  sutes  or 
businesses  bee  over-past,  how-so-ever  it  bee,  I  greeve  little 
at  them.  For,  the  imagination  that  they  must  necessarily 
happen  so,  puts  mee  out  of  paine  ;  Behould  them  in  the 
course  of  the  Vniverse,  and  enchained  in  Stoycall  causes. 
Your  fantazie  cannot  by  wish  or  imagination,  remoove  one 
point  of  them,  but  the  whole  order  of  things  must  reverse  both 
what  is  past,  and  what  is  to  come.  Moreover,  I  hate  that 
accidentall  repentance  which  olde  age  brings  with  it. 

Hee  that  in  ancient  times  said,  he  was  beholden  to  yeares, 
because  they  had  ridde  him  of  voluptuousnesse,  was  not  of 
mine  opinion.  I  shall  never  give  impuissance  thankes,  for 
any  good  it  can  do  me.  Nee  tain  aversa  unquam  videbitur 
ab  opere  suo  providentia,  ut  debilitas  inter  optima  inuenta  sit. 
'  Nor  shall  fore  sight  ever  bee  scene  so  averse  from  hir  owne 
'  worke,  that  weakenesse  bee  found  to  bee  one  of  the  best 
'  things."  Our  appetites  are  rare  in  olde-age  :  the  blowe 
overpassed,  a  deepe  saciety  seazeth  upon  us  :  Therein  I  see 
no  conscience.  Fretting  care  and  weakenesse,  imprint  in  us 
an  effeminate  and  drowzie  vertue. 

Wee  must  not  suffer  our  selves  so  fully  to  bee  carried  into 
naturall  alterations,  as  to  corrupt  or  adulterate  our  judge 
ment  by  them.  Youth  and  pleasure  have  not  heretofore 
prevailed  so  much  over  me,  but  I  could  ever  (even  in  the 
midst  of  sensualities)  discerne  the  ugly  face  of  sinne :  nor 
can  the  distaste  which  yeares  bring  on  me,  at  this  instant, 
keepe  mee  from  discerning  that  of  voluptuousnesse  in  vice. 
Now  I  am  no  longer  in  it,  I  judge  of  it  as  if  I  were  still 
there.  I  who  lively  and  attentively  examine  my  reason, 

E  33 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  finde  it  to  be  the  same  that  possessed  me  in  my  most  dis- 
H  ,  solute  and  licentious  age  ;  unlesse  perhaps,  they  being  en- 
m^  feebled  and  empayred  by  yeares,  doe  make  some  difference  : 
And  finde,  that  what  delight  it  refuseth  to  affoorde  mee  in 
regarde  of  my  bodilie  health,  it  would  no  more  denie  mee, 
then  in  times  past,  for  the  health  of  my  soule.  To  see  it 
out  of  combate,  I  holde  it  not  the  more  couragious.  My 
temptations  are  so  mortified  and  crazed,  as  they  are  not 
worthy  of  it's  oppositions  ;  holding  but  my  hand  before 
me,  I  be-calme  them.  Should  one  present  that  former  con 
cupiscence  unto  it,  I  feare  it  would  be  of  lesse  power  to 
sustaine  it  than  heretofore  it  hath  beene.  I  see  in  it,  by  it 
selfe  no  increase  of  judgement,  nor  accesse  of  brightnesse  ; 
what  it  now  judgeth,  it  did  then.  Wherefore  if  there  be 
any  amendment,  "'tis  but  diseased.  Oh  miserable  kinde  of 
remedie,  to  bee  beholden  unto  sicknesse  for  our  health.  It 
is  not  for  our  mishap,  but  for  the  good  successe  of  our 
judgement  to  performe  this  office.  Crosses  and  afflictions, 
make  me  doe  nothing  but  curse  them.  They  are  for  people, 
that  cannot  bee  awaked  but  by  the  whip :  the  course  of  my 
reason  is  the  nimbler  in  prosperity;  It  is  much  more  dis 
tracted  and  busied  in  the  digesting  of  mischiefes,  than  of 
delights.  I  see  much  clearer  in  faire  weather.  Health  fore- 
warneth  me,  as  with  more  pleasure,  so  to  better  purpose 
than  sicknesse.  I  approached  the  nearest  I  could  unto 
amendment  and  regularity,  when  I  should  have  enjoyed  the 
same ;  I  should  be  ashamed  and  vexed,  that  the  misery  and 
mishap  of  my  old  age  could  exceede  the  health,  attention 
and  vigor  of  my  youth  :  and  that  I  should  be  esteemed,  not 
for  what  I  have  beene,  but  for  what  I  am  leaft  to  be.  The 
happy  life  (in  my  opinion)  not  (as  said  Antisthenes)  the  happy 
death,  is  it  that  makes  mans  happinesse  in  this  world. 

I  have  not  preposterously  busied  my  selfe  to  tie  the  taile 
of  a  Philosopher,  unto  the  head  and  bodie  of  a  varlet :  nor 
that  this  paultrie  end  should  disavow  and  belie  the  fairest, 
soundest,  and  longest  part  of  my  life.  I  will  present  my 
selfe,  and  make  a  generall  muster  of  my  whole,  every  where 
uniformally.  Were  I  to  live  againe,  it  should  be  as  I  have 
already  lived.  I  neither  deplore  what  is  past,  nor  dread 
what  is  to  come  :  and  if  I  be  not  deceived,  the  inward  parts 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

have  neerely  resembled  the  outward.     It  is  one  of  the  chief-  CHAPTER 

est  points  wherein  I  am  beholden  to  fortune,   that  in  the     ,     H 

course  of  my  bodies  estate,  each  thing  hath  beene  carried       Repenting 

in  season.     I  have  scene  the  leaves,  the  blossomes,  and  the 

fruit  ;    and    now    see   the    drooping    and   withering    of    it. 

Happily,    because    naturally,   I   beare   my  present    miseries 

the    more   gently,  because   they    are    in    season,    and    with 

greater  favour  make  me  remember  the  long  happinesse  of 

my  former  life.      In  like  manner,  my  discretion   may  well 

bee  of  like  proportion  in  the  one  and  the  other  time  :  but 

sure  it  was  of  much  more  performance,  and  had  a  better 

grace  being  fresh,  jolly  and   full  of  spirit,   then  now  that 

it  is  worne,  decrepite  and  toylesome. 

I  therefore  renounce  these  casuall  and  dolourous  reforma 
tions.  God  must  touch  our  heartes ;  our  conscience  must 
amende  of  it  selfe,  and  ti&  by  re-inforcement  of  our  reason, 
nor  by  the  enfeebling  of  our  appetites.  Voluptuousnesse  in 
it  selfe  is  neither  pale  nor  discouloured,  to  bee  discerned  by 
bleare  and  troubled  eyes.  Wee  should  affect  temperance 
and  chastity  for  it  selfe,  and  for  Gods  cause,  who  hath 
ordained  them  unto  us :  that  which  Catars  bestow  upon  us, 
and  which  I  am  beholden  to  my  chollicke  for,  is  neither 
temperance  nor  chastitie.  A  man  cannot  boast  of  contemn 
ing  or  combating  sensuality,  if  hee  see  her  not,  or  know  not 
her  grace,  her  force  and  most  attractive  beauties.  I  know 
them  both,  and  therefore  may  speake  it.  But  mee  thinks 
our  soules  in  age  are  subject  unto  more  importunate  diseases 
and  imperfections,  then  they  are  in  youth.  I  said  so  being 
young,  when  my  beardlesse  chinne  was  upbraided  me ;  and  I 
say  it  againe,  now  that  my  gray  beard  gives  me  authority. 
We  entitle  wisdome,  the  frowardnesse  of  our  humours,  and 
the  distaste  of  present  things ;  but  in  truth  wee  abandon 
not  vices,  so  much  as  we  change  them ;  and  in  mine  opinion 
for  the  worse.  Besides  a  sillie  and  ruinous  pride,  comber- 
some  tattle,  wayward  and  unsotiable  humours,  superstition 
and  a  ridiculous  carking  for  wealth,  when  the  use  of  it  is 
well-nigh  lost,  I  finde  the  more  envie,  injustice  and  leaud- 
nesse  in  it.  It  sets  more  wrinckles  in  our  mindes,  then  on 
our  foreheads  :  nor  are  there  any  spirits,  or  very  rare  ones, 
which  in  growing  old  taste  not  sowrely  and  mustily.  Man 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  marcheth  entirely  towards  his  increase  and  decrease.     View 
but  the  wisedome  of  Socrates,  and  divers  circumstances  of 
f  Repenting  j^  conc[emnation,  I  dare  say  he  something  lent   himselfe 
•     unto  it  by  prevarication  of  purpose :  being  so  neere,  and  at 
the  age  of  seventy,  to  endure  the  benumming  of  his  spirits 
richest  pace,  and  the  dimming  of  his  accustomed  brightneese. 
What  Metamorphoses  have  I  scene  it  daily  make  in  divers 
of  mine  acquaintances  ?     It  is  a  powerful!  maladie,  which 
naturally  and  imperceptibly  glideth  into  us :    There  is  re 
quired   great  provision  of  study,  heed  and   precaution,  to 
avoid   the   imperfections  wherewith   it  chargeth  us ;    or  at 
least  to  weaken  their  further  progresse.     I  finde  that  not 
withstanding  all   my  entrenchings,    by  little   and   little    it 
getteth  ground  upon  me :  I  hold  out  as  long  as  I  can, 
but  know  not  whither  at  length  it  will  bring  me. 
Happe  what  happe  will,  I  am -pleased  the  world 
know  from  what  height  I  tumbled. 


THE     THIRD     CHAPTER 

Of  three  commerces  or  societies. 

E  must  not  cleave  so  fast  unto  our  humours 
and  dispositions.  Our  chiefest  sufficiency 
is,  to  apply  our  selves  to  divers  fashions. 
It  is  a  being,  but  not  a  life,  to  bee  tied 
and  bound  by  necessity  to  one  onely 
course.  The  goodliest  mindes  are  those 
that  have  most  variety  and  pliablenesse 
in  them.  Behold  an  honourable  testi- 
Liv.  Bel.  Mac.  mony  of  old  Cato  :  Huic  versatile  ingenmm  sic  pariter  ad 
omniajuit,  ut  natum  ad  id  unum  diceres,  quodcunque  ageret. 
6  He  had  a  wit  so  turn  cable  for  all  things  alike,  as  one  would 
'  say  hee  had  beene  onely  borne  for  that  hee  went  about  to 
'  do.1  Were  I  to  dresse  my  selfe  after  mine  owne  manner, 
there  is  no  fashion  so  good,  whereto  I  would  be  so  affected 
or  tied,  as  not  to  know  how  to  leave  and  loose  it.  Life  is  a 
motion  unequall,  irregular  and  multiforme.  It  is  not  to  bee 
the  friend  (lesse  the  master)  but  the  slave  of  ones  selfe  to 
36 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

follow  uncessantly,  and  bee  so  addicted  to  his  inclinations,  CHAPTER 
as  hee  cannot  stray  from  them,  nor  wrest  them.  This  I  say  HI 
now,  as  being  extreamly  pestred  with  the  importunity  of  my  jj^gg  C°™~ 
minde,  forsomuch  as  shee  cannot  amrnuse  her  selfe,  but  societies 
whereon  it  is  busied ;  nor  employ  it  selfe,  but  bent  and 
whole.  How  light  soever  the  subject  is  one  gives  it,  it 
willingly  amplifieth,  and  wire-drawes  the  same,  even  unto 
the  highest  pitch  of  toile.  It's  idlenesse  is  therefore  a 
painefull  trade  unto  mee,  and  offensive  to  my  health.  Most 
wits  have  neede  of  extravagant  stuffe,  to  un-benumme  and 
exercise  themselves  :  mine  hath  neede  of  it,  rather  to  settle 
and  continue  it  selfe  :  Vitia  otij  negotio  discutienda  sunt>  SEN.  Ep.  Ivi. 
'The  vices  of  idlenesse  should  bee  shaken  off'  with  busi- 
'  nesse ' :  For,  the  most  laborious  care  and  principall  studie 
of  it,  is,  to  studie  it  selfe.  Bookes  are  one  of  those  busi 
nesses  that  seduce  it  from  studie.  At  the  first  thoughts  that 
present  themselves,  it  rouzeth  up  and  makes  proofe  of  all 
the  vigour  it  hath.  It  exerciseth  it's  function  sometimes 
toward  force ;  sometimes  towards  order  and  comelinesse,  it 
rangeth,  moderates  and  fortifieth.  It  hath  of  it  selfe  to 
awaken  the  faculties  of  it :  Nature  having  given  it,  as  unto 
all  other,  matter  of  it's  owne  for  advantage,  subjects  fit 
enough  whereon  to  devise  and  determine.  Meditation  is  a 
large  and  powerfull  study  to  such  as  vigorously  can  taste  and 
employ  themselves  therein.  I  had  rather  forge  then  furnish 
my  minde. 

There  is  no  office  or  occupation  either  weaker  or  stronger, 
then  that  of  entertaining  of  ones  thoughts  according  to  the 
mind,  whatsoever  it  be.  The  greatest  make  it  their  vacation, 
QiLibus  muere  est  cogitare,  '  to  whom  it  is  all  one  to  live  and 
'  to  meditate.'  Nature  hath  also  favoured  it  with  this  privi- 
ledge,  that  there  is  nothing  we  can  do  so  long  :  nor  action, 
whereto  we  give  our  selves  more  ordinarily  and  easily.  It 
is  the  worke  of  Gods  (saith  Aristotle)  whence  both  their 
happinesse  and  ours  proceedeth.  Reading  serves  mee 
especially,  to  awake  my  conceit  by  divers  objects :  to  busie 
my  judgement,  not  my  memory.  Few  entertainements 
then,  stay  mee  without  vigour  and  force.  'Tis  true  that 
courtesie  and  beautie  possesse  mee,  as  much  or  more,  then 
waight  and  depth.  And  because  I  slumber  in  all  other  com- 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  munications,  and  lend  but  the  superficial!  parts  of  my  atten- 
III  tion  unto  them,  it  often  befalleth  mee,  in  such  kinde  of 
hree  com-  wea^e  an(j  absurd  discourses,  (discourses  of  countenance)  to 
'societies1*  blurt  out  and  answer  ridiculous  toies,  and  fond  absurdities, 
unworthy  a  childe  ;  or  wilfully  to  hold  my  peace  ;  therewithall 
more  foolishly  and  incivilly.  I  have  a  kind  of  raving  fancie- 
full  behaviour,  that  retireth  mee  into  my  selfe  ;  and  on  the 
other  side,  a  grosse  and  childish  ignorance  of  many  ordinary 
things  ;  by  meanes  of  which  two  qualities,  I  have  in  my  daies 
committed  five  or  six  as  sottish  trickes,  as  any  one  whosoever  ; 
which  to  my  derogation  may  bee  reported.  But  to  follow 
my  purpose,  this  harsh  complexion  of  mine  makes  me  nice  in 
conversing  with  men  (whom  I  must  picke  and  cull  out  for 
the  nonce,  and  unfit  for  common  actions.  Wee  live  and 
negotiate  with  the  people  :  If  their  behaviour  importune 
us,  if  wee  disdaine  to  lend  our  selves  to  base  and  vulgar 
spirits,  which  often  are  as  regular  as  those  of  a  finer  mould  ; 
and  all  wisedome  is  unsavourie,  that  is  not  conformed  to 
common  insipience.  Wee  are  no  longer  to  intermeddle  either 
with  our,  or  other  mens  affaires :  and  both  publicke  and 
private  forsake  such  kinde  of  people. 

The  least  wrested,  and  most  naturall  proceedings  of  our 
minde,  are  the  fairest ;  the  best  occupations,  those  which  are 
least  forced.  Good  God,  how  good  an  office  doth  wisedome 
unto  those,  whose  desires  she  squareth  according  to  their 
power  !  There  is  no  science  more  profitable.  '  As  one  may,"* 
was  the  burden  and  favoured  saying  of  Socrates  :  A  sentence 
of  great  substance.  Wee  must  addresse  and  stay  our  desires, 
to  things  most  easie  and  neerest.  Is  it  not  a  fond-peevish 
humour  in  mee,  to  disagree  from  a  thousand  ;  to  whom  my 
fortune  joineth  mee,  without  whom  I  cannot  live,  to  adhere 
unto  one  or  two,  that  are  out  of  my  commerce  and  conver 
sion  ;  or  rather  to  a  fantasticall  conceit,  or  fancie-full  desire, 
for  a  thing  I  cannot  obtaine  ?  My  soft  behaviours  and  milde 
manners,  enemies  to  all  sharpenesse  and  foes  to  all  bitter- 
nesse,  may  easily  have  discharged  mee  from  envie  and  con 
tention.  To  bee  beloved,  I  say  not,  but  not  to  be  hated, 
never  did  man  give  more  occasion.  But  the  coldnesse  of  my 
conversation,  hath  with  reason  robd  mee  of  the  good  will  of 
many  ;  which  may  bee  excused,  if  they  interpret  the  same  to 
38 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

other,  or  worse  sense.     I  am  most  capable  of  getting  rare  CHAPTER 
amities,  and  continuing  exquisite  acquaintances.     For  so  as          III 
with  so  greedie  hunger  I  snatch  at  such  acquaintances  as  Of  three  co™~ 
answer  my  taste  and  square  with  my  humour,  I  so  greedily 
produce  and  headlong  cast  my  selfe  upon  them,  that  I  do  not 
easily  misse  to  cleave  unto  them,  and  where  I  light  on,  to 
make  a  steady  impression ;  I  have  often  made  happie  and 
successefull  triall  of  it. 

In  vulgar  worldly  friendships,  I  am  somewhat  cold  and 
barren  :  for  my  proceeding  is  not  naturall,  if  not  unresisted 
and  with  hoised-full  sailes.  Moreover,  my  fortune  having 
enured  and  allured  mee,  even  from  my  infancie,  to  one  sole 
singular  and  perfect  amitie,  hath  verily,  in  some  sort,  dis 
tasted  mee  from  others :  and  over  deeply  imprinted  in  my 
fantasie,  that  it  is  a  beast  sociable  and  for  companie,  and  not 
of  troupe,  as  said  an  ancient  writer.  So  that  it  is  naturally 
a  paine  unto  mee,  to  communicate  my  selfe  by  halves,  and 
with  modification  :  and  that  servile  or  suspicious  wisedome, 
which  in  the  conversation  of  these  numerous  and  imperfect 
amities,  is  ordained  and  proposed  unto  us  :  Prescribed  in 
these  dayes  especially,  wherein  one  cannot  speake  of  the 
world  but  dangerously  or  falsely.  Yet  I  see,  that  who  (as  I 
do)  makes  for  his  ende,  the  commodities  of  his  life  (I  meane 
essentiall  commodities)  must  avoide  as  a  plague,  these  diffi 
culties  and  quaintnesse  of  humour. 

I  should  commend  a  high-raysed  minde,  that  could  both 
bende  and  discharge  it  selfe :  that  where-ever  hir  fortune 
might  transport  hir,  shee  might  continue  constant  :  that 
could  discourse  with  hir  neighbours  of  all  matters,  as  of  hir 
building,  of  hir  hunting  and  of  any  quarrell ;  and  entertaine 
with  delight  a  Carpenter  or  a  Gardiner.  I  envie  those  which 
can  be  familiar  with  the  meanest  of  their  followers,  and 
vouchsafe  to  contract  friendship,  and  frame  discourse  with 
their  owne  servants.  Nor  do  I  like  the  advise  of  Plato,  ever 
to  speake  imperiously  unto  our  attendants,  without  blithnesse 
and  sance  any  familiarity :  be  it  to  men  or  women  servants. 
For,  besides  my  reason,  it  is  inhumanity,  and  injustice,  to 
attribute  so  much  unto  that  prerogative  of  fortune  :  and  the 
governement,  where  lesse  inequality  is  permitted  betweene 
the  servant  and  master,  is,  in  my  conceite  the  more  indif- 

39 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ferent.     Some  other  study  to  rouze  and  raise  their  minde  ; 
but  I  to  abase  and   prostrate  mine  :    it  is  not  faulty  but 


Of  three  com 
merces  or 
societies 


Ital.  Prov. 


IUVEN.  Sat. 
vi.  189. 


Narras  et  genus  JEaci,  HOR.  Car.  iii. 

Et  pugnata  sacro  bella  sub  Ilio.  3>  Od.  xix. 

Quo  Chi  urn  pretio  cadum 

Mercemur,  quis  aquam  temperet  ignibus, 

Quo  prcebente  domum,  et  quota 

Pelignis  caream  frigoribus  ,  taces. 

You  tell  of  jEacus  the  pedegree  ; 
The  warres  at  sacred  Troye  you  do  display, 
You  tell  not  at  what  price  a  hogs-head  we 
May  buy  of  the  best  Wine  ;  who  shall  allaye 
Wine-fire  with  water,  at  whose  house  to  holde, 
At  what  a-clockj  I  may  be  kept  from  colde. 

Even  as  the  Lacedemonian  valour  had  neede  of  modera 
tion,  and  of  sweet  and  pleasing  sounds  of  Flutes,  to  flatter 
and  allay  it  in  time  of  warre,  least  it  should  runne  head-long 
into  rashnesse  and  fury  :  whereas  all  other  nations  use  com 
monly  pearcing  sounds  and  strong  shouts,  which  violently 
excite,  and  enflame  their  souldiers  courage  :  so  thinke  I 
(against  ordinary  custome)  that  in  the  imployment  of  our 
spirit,  wee  have  for  the  most  part  more  need  of  leade  then 
wings  ;  of  coldnesse  and  quiet,  then  of  heate  and  agitation. 
Above  all,  in  my  mind,  the  onely  way  to  playe  the  foole 
well,  is  to  seeme  wise  among  fooles  :  to  speake  as  though 
ones  tongue  were  ever  bent  to  Fauelar  in  punta  diforchetta, 
'  To  syllabize  or  speake  minsingly.'  One  must  lend  himselfe 
unto  those  hee  is  with,  and  sometimes  affect  ignorance  :  Set 
force  and  subtiltie  aside  ;  In  common  employments  'tis 
enough  to  reserve  order  ;  dragge  your  selfe  even  close  to 
the  ground,  they  will  have  it  so.  The  learned  stumble  will 
ingly  on  this  blocke  :  making  continuall  muster,  and  open 
show  of  their  skill,  and  dispersing  their  bookes  abroade  : 
And  have  in  these  dayes  so  filled  the  closets,  and  possessed 
the  eares  of  Ladyes,  that  if  they  retaine  not  their  substance, 
at  least  they  have  their  countenance  :  using  in  all  sorts  of 
discourse  and  subject  how  base  or  popular  soever,  a  newe,  an 
effected  and  learned  fashion  of  speaking  and  writing. 

Hoc  sermone  pavent,  hoc  iram,  gaudia,  curas, 
Hoc  cuncta  effundunt  animi  secreta,  quid  ultra  ? 
Concumbunt  docte. 
40 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

They  in  this  language  feare,  in  this  they  fashion  CHAPTER 

Their  joyes,  their  cares,  their  rage,  their  inward  passion  ;  jjj 

What  more  ?  they  learned  are  in  copulation.  Of  three  com- 

And  alledge  Plato,  and  Saint  Thomas  for  things,  which 
the  first  man  they  meete  would  decide  as  well,  and  stand  for 
as  good  a  witnesse.  Such  learning  as  could  not  enter  into 
their  minde,  hath  staid  on  their  tongues.  If  the  well-borne 
will  give  any  credit  unto  me,  they  shall  be  pleased  to  make 
their  own  and  naturall  riches  to  prevaile  and  be  of  worth  : 
They  hide  and  shroud  their  formes  under  forraine  and  bor 
rowed  beauties :  It  is  great  simplicity,  for  any  body  to 
smoother  and  conceale  his  owne  brightnesse,  to  shine  with  a 
borrowed  light :  They  are  buried  and  entombed  under  the 
Arte  of  CAPSVLA  TOT^E.  It  is  because  they  do  not 
sufficiently  know  themselves  :  the  world  containes  nothing 
of  more  beauty :  It  is  for  them  to  honour  Artes,  and  to 
beautifie  embellishment.  What  neede  they  more  then  to  live 
beloved  and  honoured  ?  They  have,  and  know  but  too  much 
in  that  matter.  There  needes  but  a  little  rouzing  and 
enflaming  of  the  faculties  that  are  in  them. 

When  I  see  them  medling  with  Rhetoricke,  with  Law,  and 
with  Logicke,  and  such  like  trash,  so  vaine  and  unprofitable 
for  their  use :  I  enter  into  feare,  that  those  who  advise  them 
to  such  things,  doe  it,  that  they  may  have  more  law  to 
governe  them  under  that  pretence.  For,  what  other  excuse 
can  I  devise  for  them  ?  It  is  sufficient,  that  without  us,  they 
may  frame,  or  roule  the  grace  of  their  eyes,  unto  cheereful- 
nesse,  unto  severity,  and  unto  mildnesse :  and  season  a  '  No ' 
with  frowardnesse,  with  doubt  and  with  favour  ;  and  require 
not  an  interpreter  in  discourses  made  for  their  service.  With 
this  learning  they  command  without  controule,  and  over-rule 
both  Regents  and  Schooles.  Yet  if  it  offend  them  to  yeeld 
us  any  preheminence  and  would  for  curiosity  sake  have  part 
in  bookes  also  :  Poesie  is  a  study  fit  for  their  purpose  :  being 
a  wanton,  ammusing,  subtill,  disguised,  and  pratling  Arte  ; 
all  in  delight,  all  in  shew,  like  to  themselves.  They  may  also 
select  divers  commodities  out  of  History.  In  Morall  Philo 
sophy,  they  may  take  the  discourses  which  enable  them  to 
judge  of  our  humours,  to  censure  our  conditions,  and  to 
avoide  our  guiles  and  treacheries  ;  to  temper  the  rashnesse 

F  41 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  of  their  owne  desires,  to  husband  their  liberty  :  lengthen  the 
HI          delights  of  life,  gently  to  beare  the  inconstancy  of  a  servant, 

°rnerceeesCorl"  ^e  peevishnesse  or  rudenesse  of  a  husband,  the  importunity 

societies      °^  Jeares?  the    unwelcornnesse   of  wrinkles,  and   such    like 

minde-troubling  accidents.     Loe  here  the  most  and  greatest 

share  of  learning  I  would  assigne  them.     There  are  some 

particular,  retired  and  close  dispositions. 

My  essentiall  forme  is  fit  for  communication,  and  proper 
for  production  :  I  am  all  outward  and  in  apparance  ;  borne 
for  society  and  unto  friendship.  The  solitude  I  love  and 
commend,  is  especially  but  to  retire  my  affections  and 
redeeme  my  thoughts  unto  my  selfe  :  to  restraine  and  close 
up,  not  my  steppes,  but  my  desires  and  my  cares,  resigning 
all  forraigne  solicitude  and  trouble,  and  mortally  shunning 
all  manner  of  servitude  and  obligation  ;  and  not  so  much 
the  throng  of  men  as  the  importunity  of  affaires.  Locall 
solitarinesse  (to  say  trueth)  doth  rather  extend  and  enlarge 
me  outwardly ;  I  give  my  selfe  to  State-businesse,  and  to  the 
world,  more  willingly  when  I  am  all  alone.  At  the  court, 
and  in  presse  of  people,  I  close  and  slinke  into  mine  owne 
skinne.  Assemblies  thrust  mee  againe  into  my  selfe.  And 
I  never  entertaine  my  selfe  so  fondly,  so  licentiously,  and  so 
particularly,  as  in  places  of  respect,  and  ceremonious  discre 
tion.  Our  follies  make  mee  not  laugh,  but  our  wisdomes 
doe.  Of  mine  owne  complexion,  I  am  no  enemy  to  the 
agitations  and  stirrings  of  our  Courts  :  I  have  there  past 
great  part  of  my  life  :  and  am  inured  to  bee  merry  in  great 
assemblies,  so  it  be  by  intermission,  and  sutable  to  my 
humour. 

But  this  tendernesse  and  coinesse  of  judgement  (whereof  I 
speake)  doth  perforce  tie  me  unto  solitarinesse.  Yea  even 
in  mine  owne  house,  in  the  middest  of  a  numerous  family 
and  most  frequented  houses,  I  see  people  more  then  a  good 
many,  but  seldome  such  as  I  love  to  converse  or  communi 
cate  with  all.  And  there  I  reserve,  both  for  my  selfe,  and 
others,  an  unaccustomed  liberty  ;  making  truce  with  cere 
monies,  assistance,  and  invitings,  and  such  other  troublesome 
ordinances  of  our  courtesies  (O  servile  custome  and  impor 
tunate  manner)  there  every  man  demeaneth  himselfe  as  hee 
pleaseth,  and  entertaineth  what  his  thoughts  affect :  whereas 
42 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

I  keepe  my  selfe  silent,  meditating  and  close,  without  offence  CHAPTER 
to  my  guests  or  friends. 

The  men  whose  familiarity  and  society  I  hunt  after,  are  Of  three  com" 
those  which  are  called  honest,  vertuous  and  sufficient :  the     ^ocietiesT 
image  of  whom  doth  distaste  and  divert  mee  from   others. 
It  is  (being  rightly  taken)  the  rarest  of  our  formes  ;   and  a 
forme  or  fashion  chiefly  due  unto  nature. 

The  end   or  scope  of  this  commerce,  is  principally  and 
simply  familiarity,  conference  and  frequentation :  the  exer 
cise  of  mindes,  without  other  fruite.     In  our  discourses,  all 
subjects  are  alike  to  me  :  I  care  not  though  they  want  either 
waight  or  depth  ;   grace  and  pertinency  are  never  wanting  ;  I 
all  therein  is  tainted  with  a  ripe  and  constant  judgement,  . 
and    commixt  with    goodnesse,   liberty,  cheerefulnesse,  and  * 
kindnesse.      It   is   not  onely  in    the   subject  of  Laws  and 
affaires  of  Princes,  that  our  spirit  sheweth  it's  beautie,  grace 
and  vigor  :  It  sheweth  them  as  much  in  private  conferences. 
I  know  my  people  by  their  very  silence  and  smyling,  and 
peradventure  discover  them  better  at  a  Table,  then  sitting 
in  serious  counsell. 

Hippomacus  said,  hee  discerned  good  Wrestlers  but  by 
seeing  them  march  through  a  Street.  If  learning  vouchsafe 
to  step  into  our  talke,  shee  shall  not  be  refused  ;  yet  must 
not  shee  be  sterne,  mastring,  imperious  and  importunate, 
as  commonly  shee  is ;  but  assistant,  and  docile  of  hir  selfe. 
Therein  wee  seeke  for  nothing  but  recreation  and  pastime  : 
when  we  shall  looke  to  be  instructed,  taught  and  resolved, 
we  will  go  seeke  and  sue  to  hir  in  hir  Throne.  Let  hir  if 
she  please  keepe  from  us  at  that  time  ;  for,  as  commodious 
and  pleasing  as  shee  is  :  I  presume  that  for  a  neede  we  could 
spare  hir  presence,  and  doe  our  businesse  well-enough  without 
hir.  Wits  well  borne,  soundly  bred  and  exercised  in  the  prac 
tise  and  commerce  of  men,  become  gracious  and  plausible  of 
themselves.  Arte  is  but  the  Checke-roule,  and  Register  of 
the  Productions  uttered,  and  conceites  produced  by  them. 

The  company  of  faire,  and  society  of  honest  women  is  like 
wise   a  sweet   commerce   for   me :    Nam  nos  quoque  oculos  Cic.  Farad, 
eruditos  habemus,  '  For  we  also  have  learned  eyes."     If  the 
minde  have  not  so  much  to  solace  hir-selfe,  as  in  the  former; 
the  corporall  sences,  whose  part  is  more  in  the  second,  bring 

48 


merces  or 
societies 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  it  to  a  proportion  neere  unto  the  other  ;  although  in  mine 
111          opinion  not  equall.     But  it  is  a  society  wherein  it  behooveth 
Of  three  com- a  man  somewhat  to  stand  upon  his  guard  :   and  especially 

movooc    rn*  ,  ,      O  1  •/ 

those  that  are  of  a  strong  constitution,  and  whose  body  can 
do  much,  as  in  me.  In  my  youth  I  heated  my  selfe  therein 
and  was  very  violent :  and  indured  all  the  rages  and  furious 
assaults,  which  Poets  say  happen  to  those  who  without  order 
or  discretion  abandon  themselves  over-loosly  and  riotously 
unto  it.  True  it  is  indeed,  that  the  same  lash  hath  since 
stood  me  instead  of  an  instruction. 

OVID.  Trist.  Quicunque  Argolico  de  classe  Caphareafugit, 

i.  El.  i.  83.  Semper  ab  Euboicis  vela  retorquet  aquis. 

Greeke  Sailers  that  Capharean  Rockes  did  fly, 
From  the  Euboean  Seas  their  sailes  still  ply. 

It  is  folly  to  fasten  all  ones  thoughts  upon  it,  and  with  a 
furious  and  indiscreet  affection  to  engage  himselfe  unto  it : 
But  on  the  otherside,  to  meddle  with  it  without  love  or 
bond  of  affection,  as  Comedians  do,  to  play  a  common  part 
of  age  and  manners,  without  ought  of  their  owne  but  bare- 
conned  words,  is  verily  a  provision  for  ones  safety  :  and  yet 
but  a  cowardly  one  ;  as  is  that  of  him,  who  would  forgoe  his 
honour,  his  profit  or  his  pleasure  for  feare  of  danger  ;  for  it 
is  certaine  that  the  practisers  of  such  courses,  cannot  hope 
for  any  fruite  able  to  moove  or  satisfie  a  worthy  minde. 

One  must  very  earnestly  have  desired  that,  whereof  he 
would  enjoy  an  absolute  delight :  I  meane,  though  fortune 
should  unjustly  favour  their  intention  :  which  often  hapneth, 
because  there  is  no  woman,  how  deformed  and  unhandsome 
soever,  but  thinkes  hir-selfe  lovely,  amiable  and  praise 
worthy,  either  for  hir  age,  hir  haire  or  gate  (for  there  are 
generally  no  more  faire  then  foule  ones).  And  the  Brach- 
manian  maides  wanting  other  commendations  ;  by  Proclama 
tion  for  that  purpose,  made  shew  of  their  matrimoniall 
parts  unto  the  people  assembled,  to  see  if  thereby  at  least 
they  might  get  them  husbands.  By  consequence  there  is 
not  one  of  them,  but  upon  the  first  oath  one  maketh  to 
serve  her,  will  very  easily  be  perswaded  to  thinke  well  of 
her  selfe.  Now  this  common  treason  and  ordinary  pro 
testations  of  men  in  these  dayes,  must  needes  produce  the 

44 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

effects,  experience  already  discovereth  :  which  is,  that  either  CHAPTER 
they  joyne  together,  and  cast  away  themselves  on  themselves,          HI 

to  avoid  us,  or  on  their  side  follow  also  the  example  wee  ^f  three  com" 

,  .  •        ,  i     •  c  ,  i         -i  • ,  i  •  merces  or 

give  them  ;  acting  their  part  of  the  play,  without  passion  ;      societies 

without  care,  and  without  love  lending  themselves  to  this 
entercourse  :  Neque  ajfectui  suo  aut  alieno  obnoxice :  £  Neither 
'  liable  to  their  own  nor  other  folkes  affection.1  Thinking, 
according  to  Lysias  perswasions  in  Plato,  they  may  so  much 
the  more  profitably  and  commodiously  yeeld  unto  us  ;  by 
how  much  lesse  we  love  them  :  Wherein  it  will  happen  as  in 
Comedies,  the  spectators  shall  have  as  much  or  more  pleasure, 
as  the  Comedians.  For  my  part,  I  no  more  acknowledge 
Venus  without  Cupid,  then  a  mother-hood  without  an  off 
spring  :  They  are  things  which  enterlend  and  enter-owe  one 
another  their  essence.  Thus  doth  this  cozening  rebound  on 
him  that  useth  it ;  and  as  it  cost  him  little,  so  gets  he  not 
much  by  it.  Those  which  made  Venus  a  goddesse,  have 
respected  that  her  principall  beautie  was  incorporeall  and 
spirituall.  But  shee  whom  these  kinde  of  people  hunt  after, 
is  not  so  much  as  humane,  nor  also  brutall ;  but  such  as 
wilde  beasts,  would  not  have  her  so  filthy  and  terrestriall. 
We  see  that  imagination  enflames  them,  and  desire  or  lust 
urgeth  them,  before  the  body  :  We  see  in  one  and  other  sex, 
even  in  whole  heards,  choise  and  distinctions  in  their  affec 
tions,  and  amongst  themselves  acquaintances  of  long  con 
tinued  good-will  and  liking.  And  even  those  to  whom  age 
denieth  bodily  strength,  doe  yet  bray,  neigh,  roare,  skip  and 
wince  for  love.  Before  the  deed  we  see  them  full  of  hope 
and  heat ;  and  when  the  body  hath  plaid  his  part,  even 
tickle  and  tingle  themselves  with  the  sweetenesse  of  that 
remembrance  :  some  of  them  swell  with  pride  at  parting 
from  it,  others  all  weary  and  glutted,  ring  out  songs  of  glee 
and  triumph.  Who  makes  no  more  of  it  but  to  discharge  his 
body  of  some  naturall  necessitie,  hath  no  cause  to  trouble 
others  with  so  curious  preparation.  It  is  no  food  for  a 
greedy  and  clownish  hunger.  As  one  that  would  not  be 
accounted  better  then  I  am,  thus  much  I  will  display  of 
my  youths  wanton-errors  :  Not  onely  for  the  danger  of  ones 
health  that  followes  that  game  (yet  could  I  not  avoid  two, 
though  light  and  cursorie  assaults)  but  also  for  contempt, 

45 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  I  have  not  much  beene  given  to  mercenarie  and  common 

m          acquaintances.      I    have   coveted    to    set  an   edge   on    that 

Of  three  com-  sensuau  pleasure  by  difficultie,  by  desire,  and  for  some  glory. 

merces  or  ,  ,.,    r,  ^^      .     J,  .    f    ,  .  i      •     i  •  •  j 

societies      And  hked  Tiberius  his  fashions,  who  in  his  amours  was  swaied 

as  much  by  modesty  and  noblenesse,  as  by  an}  other  quality. 
And  Floras  humour,  who  would  prostitute  her  selfe  to  none 
worse  then  Dictators,  Consuls,  or  Censors,  and  tooke  delight 
in  the  dignitie  and  greatnesse  of  her  lovers,  doth  some-what 
sute  with  mine.  Surely  glittering  pearles  and  silken  cloathes 
adde  some-thing  unto  it,  and  so  doe  titles,  nobilitie  and  a 
worthie  traine.  Besides  which,  I  made  high  esteeme  of  the 
minde,  yet  so  as  the  body  might  not  justly  be  found  fault 
withall :  For,  to  speake  my  conscience,  if  either  of  the  two 
beauties  were  necessarily  to  be  wanting,  I  would  rather  have 
chosen  to  want  the  mentall,  whose  use  is  to  be  emploied  in 
better  things.  But  in  the  subject  of  love  ;  a  subject  that 
chiefly  hath  reference  unto  the  two  senses  of  seeing  and 
touching,  some  thing  may  be  done  without  the  graces  of  the 
minde,  but  little  or  nothing  without  the  corporall.  Beautiel 
is  the  true  availefull  advantage  of  women  :  It  is  so  peculiarly* 
theirs,  that  ours  though  it  require  some  features  and  different 
allurements,  is  not  in  her  right  kue,  or  true  bias,  unlesse  con 
fused  with  theirs  ;  childish  and  beardlesse.  It  is  reported, 
that  such  as  serve  the  great  Turke  under  the  title  of  beautie 
(whereof  the  number  is  infinite)  are  dismissed  at  furthest 
when  they  once  come  to  the  age  of  two  and  twenty  yeeres. 
Discourse,  discretion,  together  with  the  offices  of  true  amitie, 
are  better  found  amongst  men  :  and  therefore  governe  they 
the  worlds  affaires.  These  two  commerces  or  societies  are 
accidentall,  and  depending  of  others  ;  the  one  is  troublesome 
and  tedious  for  it's  raritie  ;  the  other  withers  with  old  age  : 
nor  could  they  have  sufficiently  provided  for  my  lives 
necessities.  That  of  bookes,  which  is  the  third,  is  much 
more  solid-sure  and  much  more  ours ;  some  other  advantages 
it  yeeldeth  to  the  two  former  :  but  hath  for  her  share  con- 
stancie  and  the  facilite  of  her  service.  This  accosteth  and 
secondeth  all  my  course,  and  every  where  assisteth  me  :  It 
comforts  me  in  age,  and  solaceth  me  in  solitarinesse :  It 
easeth  mee  of  the  burthen  of  a  weary-some  sloth  :  and  at 
all  times  rids  me  of  tedious  companies  :  it  abateth  the  edge 
46 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

of  fretting  sorrow,  on  condition  it  be  not  extreme  and  over  CHAPTER 
insolent.  To  divert  me  from  any  importunate  imagination  or  HI 
insinuating  conceit,  there  is  no  better  way  then  to  have  re-  ^f  three  com" 
course  unto  bookes  :  with  ease  they  allure  mee  to  them,  and  societies 
with  facility  they  remoove  them  all.  And  though  they  per 
ceive  I  neither  frequent  nor  seeke  them,  but  wanting  other 
more  essentiall,  lively,  and  more  naturall  commodities,  they 
never  mutinie  or  murmur  at  mee;  but  still  entertaine  mee  with 
one  and  selfe-same  visage.  '  He  may  well  walke  a  foote,  that 
4  leades  his  horse  by  the  bridle,1  saith  the  proverbe.  And 
our  lames  king  of  Naples  and  Sicilie,  who  being  faire,  young, 
healthy,and  in  good  plight, caused  himselfe  to  be  caried  abroad 
in  a  plaine  wagon  or  skreene,  lying  upon  an  homely  pillow  of 
course  feathers,  cloathed  in  a  sute  of  home  spunne  gray,  and 
a  bonet  of  the  same,  yet  royally  attended  on  by  a  gallant 
troupe  of  Nobles,  of  Litters,  Coches,  and  of  all  sorts  of  choice 
led-horses,  a  number  of  gentlemen,  and  officers,  represented 
a  tender  and  wavering  austerity.  The  sicke  man  is  not  to 
be  moaned,  that  hath  his  health  in  his  sleeve.  In  the  ex 
perience  and  use  of  this  sentence,  which  is  most  true,  con- 
sisteth  all  the  commoditie  I  reape  of  bookes.  In  effect  I 
make  no  other  use  of  them,  then  those  who  know  them  not. 
I  enjoy  them,  as  a  miser  doth  his  gold  ;  to  know,  that  I  may 
enjoy  them  when  I  list ;  my  minde  is  setled  and  satisfied 
with  the  right  of  possession.  I  never  travel  without  bookes, 
nor  in  peace  nor  in  warre  ;  yet  doe  I  passe  many  dayes  and 
moneths  without  using  them.  It  shall  be  anon,  say  I,  or  to 
morrow,  or  when  I  please  ;  in  the  meane  while  the  time 
runnes  away,  and  passeth  without  hurting  me.  For  it  is 
wonderfull,  what  repose  I  take,  and  how  I  continue  in  this 
consideration,  that  they  are  at  my  elbow  to  delight  me  when 
time  shall  serve  ;  and  in  acknowledging  what  assistance  they 
give  unto  my  life.  This  is  the  best  munition  I  have  found 
in  this  humane  peregrination,  and  I  extremely  bewaile  those 
men  of  understanding  that  want  the  same.  I  accept  with 
better  will  all  other  kindes  of  ammusements,  how  slight  so 
ever,  forsomuch  as  this  cannot  faile  me.  At  home  I  betake 
me  somwhat  the  oftner  to  my  library,  whence  all  at  once  I 
command  and  survay  all  my  houshold  ;  It  is  seated  in  the 
chiefe  entrie  of  my  house,  thence  I  behold  under  me  my 

47 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  garden,  my  base  court,  my  yard,  and  looke  even  into  most 

HI          roomes  of  my  house.    There  without  order,  without  method, 

f  three  com- an(j  ^     peece-meales  I  turne  over  and  ransacke,  now   one 

merces  or     n       -,     J    r,  .,  0         ..  T  ,'  T 

societies      booke  and  now  another.    Sometimes  I  muse  and  rave ;  and 

walking  up  and  downe  I  endight  and  enregister  these  my 
humours,  these  my  conceits.  It  is  placed  on  the  third  storie 
of  a  tower.  The  lowermost  is  my  Chapell ;  the  second  a 
chamber  with  other  lodgings,  where  I  often  lie,  because  I 
would  be  alone.  Above  it  is  a  great  ward-robe.  It  was  in 
times  past  the  most  unprofitable  place  of  all  my  house. 
There  I  past  the  greatest  part  of  my  lives  dayes,  and  weare 
out  most  houres  of  the  day.  I  am  never  there  a  nights  : 
Next  unto  it  is  a  handsome  neat  cabinet,  able  and  large 
enough  to  receive  fire  in  winter,  and  very  pleasantly  win- 
dowen.  And  if  I  feared  not  care,  more  then  cost ;  (care 
which  drives  and  diverts  me  from  all  businesse)  I  might  easily 
joyne  a  convenient  gallerie  of  a  hundred  paces  long,  and 
twelve  broad,  on  each  side  of  it,  and  upon  one  floore  ;  having 
already,  for  some  other  purpose,  found  all  the  walles  raised 
unto  a  convenient  height.  Each  retired  place  requireth  a 
walke.  My  thoughts  are  prone  to  sleepe,  if  I  sit  long.  My 
minde  goes  not  alone  as  if  ledges  did  moove  it.  Those  that 
studie  without  bookes,  are  all  in  the  same  case.  The  forme 
of  it  is  round,  and  hath  no  flat  side,  but  what  serveth  for 
my  table  and  chaire :  In  which  bending  or  circling  manner, 
at  one  looke  it  offreth  me  the  full  sight  of  all  my  books,  set 
round  about  upon  shelves  or  desks,  five  rancks  one  upon 
another.  It  hath  three  bay-windowes,  of  a  farre-extending, 
rich  and  unresisted  prospect,  and  is  in  diameter  sixteene 
paces  void.  In  winter  I  am  lesse  continually  there  :  for  my 
house  (as  the  name  of  it  importeth)  is  pearched  upon  an 
over-pearing  hillocke  ;  and  hath  no  part  more  subject  to 
all  wethers  then  this  :  which  pleaseth  me  the  more,  both 
because  the  accesse  unto  it  is  somwhat  troublesome  and 
remote,  and  for  the  benefit  of  the  exercise  which  is  to  be 
respected  ;  and  that  I  may  the  better  seclude  my  selfe  from 
companie,  and  keepe  incrochers  from  me  :  There  is  my  seat, 
that  is  my  throne.  I  endevour  to  make  my  rule  therein 
absolute,  and  to  sequester  that  only  corner  from  the  eom- 
munitie  of  wife,  of  children  and  of  acquaintaince.  Else- 
48 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

where  I  have  but  a  verball  authoritie,  of  confused  essence.  CHAPTER 
Miserable,  in  my  minde  is  he,  who  in  his  owne  home,  hath          ^ 
no  where  to  be  to  himselfe  ;    where   hee   may  particularly     me^g™™" 
court,  and  at  his  pleasure  hide  or  with-draw  himself.     Ambi-      societies 
tion  paieth  her  followers  well,  to  keepe  them  still  in  open 
view,  as  a  statue  in  some  conspicuous  place.     Magna  ser-  SEN.  Cons,  ad 
vitus  est  magna  fortuna :  '  A  great  fortune  is  a  great  bond-  p°l-  c-  XXV1*  P- 
4  age/     They  cannot  bee  private  so  much  as  at  their  privie. 
I  have  deemed  nothing  so  rude  in  the  austerity  of  the  life, 
which  our  Church-men  affect,  as  that  in  some  of  their  com 
panies  they  institute  a  perpetuall  societie  of  place,  and  a 
numerous  assistance  amongst  them  in  any  thing  they  doe. 
And  deeme  it  somewhat  more  tolerable  to  be  ever  alone, 
then  never  able  to  be  so.     If  any  say  to  me,  It  is  a  kinde  of 
vilifying  the  Muses,  to  use  them  onely  for  sport  and  recrea 
tion,  he  wots  not  as  I  doe,  what  worth,  pleasure,  sport  and 
passe-time  is   of:    I  had  well  nigh   termed  all  other  ends 
rediculous.     I  live  from  hand  to  mouth,  and  with  reverence 
be  it   spoken,   I  live  but  to  my  selfe  :    there  end  all  my 
designes.     Being  young  I  studied  for  ostentation ;  then  a 
little  to  enable  my  selfe  and  become  wiser  ;  now  for  delight 
and  recreation,  never  for  gaine.     A  vaine  conceit  and  lavish 
humour  I  had  after  this  kinde  of  stuffe  ;  not  only  to  provide 
for  my  need,  but  somewhat  further  to  adorne  and  embellish 
my  selfe  withall :  I  have  since  partlie  left  it.    Bookes  have  and 
containe  divers  pleasing  qualities  to  those  that  can  duly 
choose  them.     But  no  good  without  paines  ;  no  Roses  with 
out  prickles.     It  is  a  pleasure  not  absolutely  pure  and  neate, 
no  more  then  all  others  ;  it  hath  his  inconveniences  attending 
on  it  and  somtimes  waighty  ones  :    The  minde  is  therein 
exercised,  but  the  body  (the  care  whereof  I  have  not  yet 
forgotten)    remaineth    there-whilst    without   action,  and    is 
wasted,  and  ensorrowed.    I  know  no  excesse  more  hurtfull  for 
me,  nor  more  to  be  avoided  by  me,  in  this  declining  age. 
Loe  here  my  three  most  favoured  and  particular 
employments.     I  speake  not  of  those  I  owe 
of  dutie  to  the  world. 


G  49 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


IUVEN.  Sat.  vi. 
273- 


THE    FOURTH    CHAPTER 

Of  diverting  and  diversions. 

WAS  once  employed  in  comforting  of  a 
truely-afflicted  Ladie:  the  greatest  part 
of  their  discourses  are  artificiall  and  cere 
monious. 

I  beribus  semper  Zachrimis,  semperque  paratis, 
In  statione  sua,  atque  expectantibus  illam, 
Quo  jubeat  manare  modo. 

With  plenteous  teares ;  still  readie  in  their 

stand,, 

Expecting  still  their  Mistresses  commaund, 
How  they  must  flow,  when  they  must  goe. 

Men  do  but  ill  in  opposing  themselves  against  this  passion  ; 
for  opposition  doth  but  incense  and  engage  them  more  to 
sorrow  and  quietnesse  :  The  disease  is  exasperated  by  the 
jealousie  of  debate.  In  matters  of  common  discourse,  we 
see,  that  what  I  have  spoken  without  heede  or  care,  if  one 
come  to  contest  with  me  about  it,  I  stifly  maintaine  and 
make  good  mine  owne  ;  much  more  if  it  be  a  thing  wherein 
I  am  interessed.  Besides,  in  so  dooing,  you  enter  but  rudely 
into  your  matter,  whereas  a  Physitions  first  entertainment  of 
his  patient  should  be  gracious,  cheerefull  and  pleasing.  An 
uglie  and  froward  Physition  wrought  never  any  good  effect. 
On  the  contrary  then,  we  must  at  first  assist  and  smoothe 
their  laments,  and  witnesse  some  approbation  and  excuse 
thereof.  By  which  meanes  you  get  credit  to  go  on,  and  by 
an  easie  and  insensible  inclination,  you  fall  into  more  firme 
and  serious  discourses  and  fit  for  their  amendment.  But  I, 
who  desired  chiefly  to  gull  the  assistants,  that  had  their  eyes 
cast  on  me,  meant  to  salve  their  mischiefe  :  I  verily  finde  by 
experience,  that  I  have  but  an  ill  and  unfruitful!  vaine  to 
perswade.  I  present  my  reasons  either  too  sharpe,  or  too 
drie,  or  too  stirringly  or  too  carelesly.  After  I  had  for  a 
while  applyed  my  selfe  to  hir  torment,  I  attempted  not  to 
cure  it  by  strong  and  lively  reasons :  either  because  I  want 
them,  or  because  I  suppose  I  might  otherwise  effect  my  pur- 

50 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

pose  the  better.  Nor  did  I  cull  out  the  severall  fashions  of  CHAPTER 
comfort  prescribed  by  philosophy  :  That  the  thing  lamented 
is  not  ill,  as  Cleanthes  :  or  but  a  little  ill,  as  the  Peripatetikes  :  ° 
That  to  lament  is  neither  just,  nor  commendable,  as  Chry-  sons 
sippus  :  Nor  this  Epicurus,  most  agreeing  with  my  manner, 
to  translate  the  conceit  of  yrkesome  into  delightsome  things  : 
Nor  to  make  a  loade  of  all  this  masse,  dispensing  the  same, 
as  one  hath  occasion,  as  Cicero.  But  faire  and  softly  de 
clining  our  discourses,  and  by  degrees  bending  them  unto 
subjects  more  neare  ;  then  a  little  more  remote,  even  as  shee 
more  or  lesse  enclined  to  mee.  I  unperceaveably  remooved 
those  dolefull  humours  from  hir  :  so  that  as  long  as  I  was 
with  her,  so  long  I  kept  her  in  cheerefull  countenance ;  and 
untroubled  fashion,  wherein  I  used  diversion.  Those  which 
in  the  same  service  succeded  mee,  found  her  no  whit  amended  : 
the  reason  was,  I  had  not  yet  driven  my  wedge  to  the  roote. 
I  have  peradventure  else  where,  glaunced  at  some  kindes  of 
publike  diversions.  And  the  militarie  customes  used  by 
Pericles  in  the  Peloponesian  warre,  and  a  thousand  others 
else  where,  to  divert  or  withdrawe  the  armie  of  an  enemie 
from  their  owne  country,  is  too  frequent  in  histories.  It  was 
an  ingenious  diverting,  where-with  the  Lord  of  Himbercourt 
saved  both  himselfe  and  others  in  the  towne  of  Liege,  into 
which  the  Duke  of  Burgondie,  who  beleagred  the  same,  had 
caused  him  to  enter,  to  performe  the  covenants  of  their 
accorded  yeelding.  The  inhabitants  thereof,  to  provide  for 
it,  assembled  by  night,  and  began  to  mutinie  against  their 
former  agreement,  determining  upon  this  advantage  to  set 
upon  the  Negotiators,  now  in  their  power.  Hee  perceiving 
their  intent,  and  noise  of  this  shoure  readie  to  fall  upon  him, 
and  the  danger  his  lodging  was  in,  forth-with  rushed  out 
upon  them  two  cittizens  (whereof  he  had  divers  with  him) 
furnished  with  most  plausible  and  new  offers  to  be  pro 
pounded  to  their  counsell ;  but  indeed  forged  at  that  in 
stant  to  serve  his  turne  withall,  and  to  ammuse  them.  These 
two  stayes  the  first  approaching  storme,  and  carryed  this  in 
censed  Hydra-headed-monster  multitude  backe  to  the  towne- 
house,  to  heare  their  charge,  and  accordingly  to  determine  of 
it.  The  conclusion  was  short ;  when  loe  a  second  tempest 
came  rushing  on,  more  furiously  inraged  then  the  former ;  to 

51 


. 

iver  ing 
and  diver- 
sions 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  whom  lie  immediately  dispatched  foure  new  and  semblable 
intercessors,  with  protestations  that  now  they  were  in  earnest 
J.Q  prOpOSe  anc[  Declare  new  and  farre  more  ample  conditions 

.     ,  ,     .  i      .•/»,.  i 

unto  them,  wholly  to  their  content  and  satisfaction  ;  whereby 

this  disordered  rout  was  againe  drawne  to  their  Conclave  and 
Senate-house.  In  summe,  he  by  such  a  dispensation  of 
amusements,  diverting  their  headlong  fury,  and  dissipating 
the  same  with  vaine  and  frivolous  consultations,  at  length 
lulled  them  into  so  secure  a  sleep,  that  he  gained  the  day, 
which  was  his  chiefest  drift  and  only  aymed  scope.  This 
other  storie  is  also  of  the  same  predicament.  Atalanta  a 
maid  of  rare  surpassing  beautie,  and  of  a  wondrous  strange 
disposition  to  ridde  herselfe  from  the  importunate  pursuit  of 
a  thousand  amorous  sutors,  who  sollicited  her  for  mariage, 
prescribed  this  law  unto  them  ;  that  shee  would  accept  of 
him  that  should  equall  her  in  running  :  on  condition  those 
she  shold  overcome  might  lose  their  lives.  Some  there  were 
found,  who  deemed  this  prize  worthie  the  hazard,  and  who 
incurred  the  penaltie  of  so  cruell  a  match.  Hippomenes 
comming  to  make  his  assay  after  the  rest,  devoutly  addressed 
himselfe  to  the  divine  protectresse  of  all  amorous  delights, 
earnestly  invoking  her  assistance  :  who  gently  listning  to  his 
hearty  prayers,  furnished  him  with  three  golden  Apples,  and 
taught  him  how  to  use  them.  The  scope  of  the  race  being 
plaine,  according  as  Hippomenes  perceived  his  swift-footed 
mistresse  to  approch  his  heeles,  he  let  fall  (as  at  unawares) 
one  of  his  Apples  :  the  heedlesse  maiden  gazing  and  won- 
dring  at  the  alluring  beautie  of  it,  failed  not  to  turne  and 
take  it  up. 

Obstupuit  virgo,  nitidique  cupidine  pomi, 
Declinat  cursus,  aurumque  volubile  tollit. 

The  maid  amaz'd,,  desiring  that  faire  gold, 
Turnes  by  her  course,  takes  it  up  as  it  rold. 

The  like  he  did  (at  his  need)  with  the  second  and  third, 
untill  by  this  digressing  and  diverting,  the  goale  and  advan 
tage  of  the  course  was  judged  his.  When  Physitians  cannot 
purge  the  rheume,  they  divert  and  remoove  the  same  unto 
some  lesse  dangerous  part.  I  also  perceive  it  to  be  the  most 
ordinary  receit  for  the  mindes  diseases.  Abducendus  etiam 
nonnunquam  animus  est  ad  aliena  studia,  sollicitudmes^  euros 

52 


OVID.  Met.  x 
666. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

negotia :    Loci  denique  mutatione,  tanquam  ocgroti  non  con-  CHAPTER 
vale  scent es^  scope  curandus  est :  'Our  minde  also  is  sometimes          IV 
4  to  be  diverted  to  other  studies,  cogitations,  cares  and  busi-     a 
'  nesses  :  and  lastly  to  be  cured  by  change  of  place,  as  sicke 
6  folkes  use,  that  otherwise  cannot  get  health."1     We  make  it 
seldome  to  shocke  mischiefes  with  direct  resistance  :  we  make 
it  neither  to  beare  nor  to  break,  but  to  shun  or  divert,  the 
blow.     This  other  lesson  is  too  high,  and  over-hard.     It  is 
for  him  of  the  first  ranke,  meerely  to  stay  upon  the  thing  it 
selfe,  to  examine  and  judge  it.     It  belongth  to  one  onely 
Socrates,  to  accost  and  entertaine  death  with  an  undaunted 
ordinary  visage,  to  become  familiar  and  play  with  it.     He 
seeketh  for  no  comfort  out  of  the  thing  it  selfe.     To  die 
seemeth    unto    him    a   naturall    and    indifferent    accident  : 
thereon  he  wishly  fixeth  his  sight,  and  thereon  he  resolveth 
without  looking  else-where.     Hegesias  his  disciples,  who  with 
hunger  starved  themselves  to  death,  incensed  thereunto  with 
the  perswading  discourses  of  his  lessons  ;  and  that  so  thicke 
as  King  Ptolomey  forbad  him  any  longer  to  entertaine  his 
schoole  with  such  murtherous  precepts.     Those   considered 
not  death  in  it  selfe,  they  judged  it  not :  This  was  not  the 
limit  of  their  thoughts,  they  run  on,  and  ayme  at  another 
being.     Those  poore  creatures  we  see  on   scaffolds,  fraught 
with  an  ardent  devotion,  therein  to  the  uttermost  of  their 
power,  employing  al  their  sences  ;  their  eares  attentive  to 
such  instructions  as  Preachers  give  them,  their  hands  and 
eyes  lift  up  towards  heaven ;  their  voice  uttering  loud  and 
earnest   praiers ;    all    with    an   eager   and    continuall    ruth- 
moo  ving  motion  ;    doe  verily  what  in  such  an  unavoydable 
exigent   is  commendable  and   convenient.       One  may  well 
commend  their  religion,  but  not  properly  their  constancy. 
They  shunne  the  brunt ;  they  divert  their  consideration  from 
death  ;  as  we  use   to  dandle  and  busie  children,  when  we 
would  lance  them  or  let  them  bloud.     I  have  seen  some,  who 
if  by  fortune  they  chanced  to  cast  their   eyes  towards  the 
dreadful  preparations  of  death,  which  were  round  about  them, 
fal  into  trances,   and  with  fury  cast  their  cogitations  else 
where.     Wee  teach  those  that  are  to  passe  over  some  steepy 
downe  fall  or  dreadfull  abisse,  to  shut  or  turne  aside  their 
eies.     Subrius  Flavius,  being  by  the  appointment  of  Nero  to 

53 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  be  put  to   death  by  the  hands  of  Niger,  both   chiefe  com- 
IV    m      manders  in  war :  when  he  was  brought  unto  the  place  where 

diy.ertm£  the  execution  should  be  performed,  seeing  the  pit  Niger  had 
and  diver-  -,.         ,  „      ,*;  ,    °,        ,r        ,  &        , 

sions         caused  to  be  digged  lor  him  uneven  and  unhandsomely  made  : 

6  Nor  is  this  pit '  (quoth  he  to  the  souldiers  that  stood  about 
him)  '  according  to  the  true  discipline  of  war ' :  And  to  Niger, 
who  .willed  him  to  hold  his  head  steddy, '  I  wish  thou  wouldest 
'  strike  as  steddily."1  He  guessed  right ;  for  Nigers  arme 
trembling,  he  had  divers  blowes  at  him  before  he  could 
strike  it  off.  This  man  seemeth  to  have  fixed  his  thoughts 
surely  and^directly  on  the  matter.  He  that  dies  in  the  fury 
of  a  battle,  with  weapons  in  hand  thinkes  not  then  on  death, 
and  neither  feeleth,  nor  considereth  the  same :  the  heate  of 
the  fight  transports  him.  An  honest  man  of  my  acquaint 
ance,  falling  downe  in  a  single  combate,  and  feeling  himselfe 
stab'd  nine  or  ten  times  by  his  enemy,  was  called  unto  by 
the  by  standers  to  call  on  God  and  remember  his  conscience  : 
but  he  told  me  after,  that  albeit  those  voices  came  unto  his 
eares,  they  had  no  whit  mooved  him,  and  that  he  thought 
on  nothing,  but  how  to  discharge  and  revenge  himselfe.  In 
which  combat  he  vanquished  and  slew  his  adversary. 

He  who  brought  L.  Svllanus  his  condemnation,  did  much 
for  him  :  in  that  when  he  heard  him  answer  he  was  prepared 
to  die,  but  not  by  the  hands  of  base  villaines,  ran  upon  him 
with  his  souldiers  to  force  him ;  against  whom  obstinately 
defending  himself  though  unarmed  with  fists  and  feet : 
he  was  slaine  in  the  conflict  :  dispercing  with  a  ready  and 
rebellious  choller  the  painefull  sence  of  a  long  and  fore-pre 
pared  death  :  to  which  he  was  assigned.  We  ever  thinke  on 
somewhat  else :  either  the  hope  of  a  better  life  doth  settle 
and  support  us,  or  the  confidence  of  our  childrens  worth,  or 
the  future  glory  of  our  name,  or  the  avoyding  of  these  lives 
mischieves,  or  the  revenge  hanging  over  their  heads  that 
have  caused  and  procured  our  death : 

VIRG.  ALn.  iv.  Spero  equidem  medijs,  si  quid  pia  numina  possunt, 

382.  Supplicia  hausurum  scopulis,  et  nomine  Dido 

'  Scepe  vocaturum. 

287.  Audiam,  et  hcec  manes  veniet  mihifama  sub  imos. 

I  hope,  if  powers  of  heaven  have  any  power, 
On  rockes  he  shall  be  punisht,  at  that  houre, 
54 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

He  oft  on  Didoes  name  shall  pittilesse  exclaime,  CHAPTER 

This  shall  I  heare,  and  this  report,  shall  to  me  IV 

in  my  grave  resort.  Of    diverting 

Xenophon  sacrificed  with  a  crowne  on  his  head,  when  one  a  .diver- 
came  to  tell  him  the  death  of  his  sonne  Gryllus  in  the  battell 
of  Mantinea.  At  the  first  hearing  whereof  he  cast  his  crowne 
to  the  ground,  but  finding  upon  better  relation  how  valiantly 
he  died,  he  tooke  it  up  and  put  it  on  his  head  againe.  Epi 
curus  also  at  his  death  comforted  himselfe  in  the  eternitie 
and  worth  of  his  writings.  Omnes  clari  et  nobilitati  labores  Cic.  Tusc.  \\. 
fiunt  tolerablles.  '  All  glorious  and  honourable  labours  are 
4  made  tolerable.1  And  the  same  wound,  and  the  same  toile 
(saith  Xenophon)  toucheth  not  a  Generall  of  an  armie,  as  it 
doth  a  private  souldier.  Epaminondas  tooke  his  death  much 
the  more  cheerefully,  being  informed  that  the  victorie  re 
mained  on  his  side.  Hcec  sunt  solatia,  hcec  fomenta  sum-  Ibid. 
morum  dolorum :  '  These  are  the  comforts,  these  the  eases 
6  of  most  grievous  paines."  And  such  other  like  circumstances 
ammuse,  divert  and  remoove  us  from  the  consideration  of  the 
thing  in  it  selfe.  Even  the  arguments  of  Philosophic,  at 
each  clappe  wrest  and  turne  the  matter  aside,  and  scarcely 
wipe  away  the  scabbe  thereof.  The  first  man  of  the  first 
Philosophicall  Schoole  and  Superintendent  of  the  rest,  that 
great  Zeno,  against  death,  cried  out ;  '  No  evill  is  honour- 
'  able ;  death  is :  therefore  is  death  no  evill.'  Against 
drunkennesse  :  '  No  man  entrusts  his  secrets  to  a  drunkard  ; 
'  every  one  to  the  wise  :  therefore  the  wise  will  not  be 
6  drunke.'  Is  this  to  hit  the  white  ?  I  love  to  see,  that  these 
principall  wits  cannot  rid  themselves  of  our  company.  As 
perfect  and  absolute  as  they  would  be,  they  still  are  but 
grosse  and  simple  men.  Revenge  is  a  sweet-pleasing  passion, 
of  a  great  and  naturall  impression  :  I  perceive  it  well,  albeit 
I  have  made  no  triall  of  it.  To  divert  of  late  a  young  prince 
from  it,  I  told  him  not,  he  was  to  offer  the  one  side  of  his 
cheeke,  to  him,  who  had  stroke  him  on  the  other,  in  regard 
of  charity  ;  nor  displaid  I  unto  him  the  tragicall  events 
Poesie  bestoweth  upon  that  passion.  There  I  left  him,  and 
strove  to  make  him  taste  the  beautie  of  a  contrary  image  : 
the  honour,  the  favour  and  the  good-will  he  should  acquire 
by  gentlenesse  and  goodnesse :  I  diverted  him  to  ambition. 

55 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Behold  how  they  deale  in  such  cases.  If  your  affection  in  love 

IV          be  over-powerfull,  disperse  or  dissipate  the  same,  say  they  ; 
Of    diverting       d  tj  t          f      j  h          oft         with          fit  made  tri  u 

and  diver-        „  .          J      /     .       »  ,  f    '  „**,  «      ,.  , 

sions        °*  l^  •  -oreake  it  by  the  vertue  01  severall  desires,  or  which 

one  may  be  Regent  or  chiefe  Master,  if  you  please  ;  but  for 
feare  it  should  misuse  and  tyrannize  you,  weaken  it  with 
dividing,  and  protract  it  with  diverting  the  same. 

PERS.  Sat.  vi.  Cum  morosa  vago  singultlet  inguine  vena, 

73-  Conjicito  humor  em  collectum  in  corpora  quceque. 

LUCR.  iv.  1056.  When  raging-  lust  excites  a  panting  tumor, 

To  divers  parts  send  that  collected  humor. 

And  looke  to  it  in  time,  lest  it  vex  you,  if  it  have  once 
seized  on  you. 

LUCR.  iv.  1061.  Si  non  prima  novis  conturbes  vulnera  plagis, 

Folgivagdque  vagus  Venere  ante  recentia  cures. 

Unlesse  the  first  wounds  with  new  wounds  you  mix, 
And  ranging  cure  the  fresh  with  common  tricks. 

I  was  once  neerely  touched  with  a  heavy  displeasure, 
according  to  my  complexion  ;  and  yet  more  just  then  heavie: 
I  had  perad venture  lost  my  selfe  in  it,  had  I  only  relied 
upon  mine  owne  strength.  Needing  a  vehement  diversion  to 
with-draw  me  from  it ;  I  did  by  Arte  and  studie  make  my 
selfe  a  Lover,  whereto  my  age  assisted  me ;  love  discharged 
and  diverted  me  from  the  inconvenience,  which  good-wil 
and  amitie  had  caused  in  me.  So  is  it  in  all  things  else. 
A  sharpe  conceit  possesseth,  and  a  violent  imagination 
holdeth  me  :  I  finde  it  a  shorter  course  to  alter  and  divert, 
then  to  tame  and  vanquish  the  same  :  if  I  cannot  substi 
tute  a  contrary  unto  it,  at  least  I  present  another  unto 
it.  Change  ever  easeth,  Varietie  dissolveth,  and  shifting 
dissipateth.  If  I  cannot  buckle  with  it,  I  flie  from  it : 
and  in  shunning  it,  I  stray  and  double  from  it.  Shifting 
of  place,  exercise  and  company,  I  save  my  selfe  amid  the 
throng  of  other  studies  and  ammusements,  where  it  loseth 
my  tracke,  and  so  I  slip  away.  Nature  proceedeth  thus, 
by  the  benefit  of  inconstancy :  For,  the  time  it  hath 
bestowed  on  us,  as  a  soveraigne  physition  of  our  passions, 
chiefly  obtaines  his  purpose  that  way,  when  fraughting  our 
conceits  with  other  and  different  affaires,  it  dissolveth  and 

56 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

corrupteth  that  first  apprehension,  how  forcible  soever  it  be.  CHAPTER 
A  wise  man  seeth  little  lesse  his  friend  dying  at  the  end  of  *v 
five  and  twenty  yeeres,  then  at  the  beginning  of  the  first  fnd  dfver^ 
yeere ;  and  according  to  Epicurus,  nothing  lesse  :  for  he  sions 
ascribed  no  qualification  of  perplexities,  either  to  the  foresight 
or  antiquitie  of  them.  But  so  many  other  cogitations,  crosse 
this,  that  it  languisheth,  and  in  the  end  groweth  weary.  To 
divert  the  inclination  of  vulgar  reports,  Alcibiades  cut  off 
his  faire  dogs  eares  and  taile,  and  so  drove  him  into  the 
market  place;  that  giving  this  subject  of  prattle  to  the 
people,  they  might  not  meddle  with  his  other  actions.  I 
have  also  seen  some  women,  who  to  divert  the  opinions  and 
conjectures  of  the  babling  people,  and  to  divert  the  fond 
tatling  of  some,  did  by  counterfet  and  dissembled  affections, 
overshadow  and  cloak  true  affections.  Amongst  which  I 
have  noted  some,  who  in  dissembling  and  counterfeiting 
have  suffered  themselves  to  be  intrapped  wittingly  and  in 
good  earnest;  quitting  their  true  and  originall  humour  for 
the  fained  :  of  whom  I  learne,  that  such  as  finde  them 
selves  well  seated,  are  very  fooles  to  yeelde  unto  that  maske. 
The  common  greetings,  and  publike  entertainements  being 
reserved  unto  that  set  or  appointed  servant,  beleeve  there  is 
little  sufficiency  in  him,  if  in  the  end  he  usurpe  not  your 
roome  and  send  you  unto  his.  This  is  properly  to  cut  out 
and  stitch  up  a  shoe,  for  another  to  put  on.  A  little  thing 
doth  divert  and  turne  us  ;  for  a  small  thing  holds  us.  We 
do  not  much  respect  subjects  in  grosse  and  alone  :  they  are 
circumstances,  or  small  and  superficiall  images  that  moove 
and  touch  us ;  and  vaine  rindes  which  rebound  from  subjects. 

Folliculos  ut  nunc  teretes  (estate  cicada:  LUCR.  v.  812. 

Linquunt. 

As  grasse-hoppers  in  summer  now  forsake 

The  round-grown  sheafes,  which  they  in  time  should  take. 

Plutarke  himselfe  bewailes  his  daughter  by  the  fopperies 
of  his  childehood.  The  remembrance  of  a  farewell,  of  an 
action,  of  a  particular  grace,  or  of  a  last  commendation, 
afflict  us.  Caesars  gowne  disquieted  all  Rome,  which  his 
death  had  not  done ;  The  very  sound  of  names,  which 
gingleth  in  our  eares,  as,  Oh  my  poore  master ;  or,  Alas  my 

H  57 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  deare   friend;    Oh    my   good    father;    or,  Alas    my    sweete 

IV          daughter.     When  such  like  repetitions  pinch  me,  and  that 

Of    diverting  j  looke  more  nearely  to  them,  I  finde  them  but  grammati- 


ne       call  laments,  the  word  and  the  tune  wound  me.     Even  as 


Preachers  exclamations  do  often  move  their  auditory  more, 
then  their  reasons  :  and  as  the  pittifull  groane  of  a  beast 
yerneth  us  though  it  be  killed  for  our  use  :  without  poising 
or  entring  there-whilest,  into  the  true  and  massie  essence  of 
my  subject. 

LUCAN.  ii.  His  se  stimulis  dolor  ipse  lacessit. 

Griefe  by  these  provocations,, 
Puts  it  selfe  in  more  passions. 

They  are  the  foundations  of  our  mourning.  The  conceipt 
of  the  stone,  namely  in  the  yard,  hath  sometime  for  three  or 
foure  dayes  together,  so  stopped  my  urine,  and  brought  me 
so  neare  deaths-doore  that  it  had  beene  meere  folly  in  me, 
to  hope,  nay  to  desire,  to  avoyd  the  same,  considering  what 
cruell  pangs  that  painefull  plight  did  seaze  me  with.  Oh 
how  cunning  a  master  in  the  murthering  arte,  or  hangmans 
trade,  was  that  good  Emperour,  who  caused  malefactors  yards 
to  bee  fast-tide,  that  so  hee  might  make  them  dye  for  want 
of  pissing.  In  which  ill  plight  finding  my  selfe,  I  considered 
by  how  slight  causes  and  frivolous  objects,  imagination 
nourished  in  me  the  griefe  to  lose  my  life:  with  what 
Atonies  the  consequence  and  difficulty  of  my  dislodging  was 
contrived  in  my  minde :  to  what  idle  conceits  and  frivolous 
cogitations  we  give  place  in  so  waighty  a  case  or  important 
affaire.  A  Dogge,  a  Horse,  a  Hare,  a  Glasse,  and  what  not  ? 
were  corrupted  in  my  losse.  To  others,  their  ambitious 
hopes,  their  purse,  their  learning  :  In  my  minde  as  sottishly. 
I  view  death  carelessely  when  I  behould  it  universally  as  the 
end  of  life.  I  over-whelme  and  contemne  it  thus  in  great, 
by  retayle  it  spoiles  and  proules  me.  The  teares  of  a 
Lacquey,  the  distributing  of  my  cast  sutes,  the  touch  of  a 
knowne  hand,  an  ordinary  consolation :  doth  disconsolate 
and  intender  me.  So  do  the  plaints  and  fables  of  trouble 
vex  our  mindes  :  and  the  wailing  laments  of  Dydo,  and 
Ariadne  passionate  even  those,  that  beleeve  them  not  in 
Virgill,  nor  in  Catullus :  It  is  an  argument  of  an  obstinate 

58 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

nature,  and  indurate  hart,  not  to  be  moved  therewith  :  as  CHAPTER 
for  a  wonder,   they  report  of  Polemon :    who  was  not   so  IV 

much  as  appaled,  at  the  biting  of  a  Dog,  who  tooke  away  an(j 
the  braun  or  calfe  of  his  leg.  And  no  wisedome  goeth  so  sions 
far,  as  by  the  due  judgement  to  conceive  aright  the  evident 
cause  of  a  Sorrow  and  griefe,  so  lively  and  wholly,  that  it 
suffer  or  admit  no  accession  by  presence,  when  eies  and  eares 
have  their  share  therein :  parts  that  cannot  be  agitated  but 
by  vaine  accidents.  Is  it  reason,  that  even  arts  should  serve 
their  purposes,  and  make  their  profit  of  our  imbecillity  and 
naturall  blockishnes  ?  An  Orator  (saith  Rhetorick)  in  the 
play  of  his  pleading,  shall  be  moved  at  the  sound  of  his 
owne  voice,  and  by  his  fained  agitations :  and  suffer  himselfe 
to  be  cozoned  by  the  passion  he  representeth  :  imprinting 
a  lively  and  essentiall  sorrow,  by  the  jugling  he  acteth,  to 
transferre  it  into  the  judges,  whom  of  the  two  it  concerneth 
lesse :  As  the  persons  hired  at  our  funerals  who  to  aide  the 
ceremony  of  mourning,  make  sale  of  their  teares  by  measure, 
and  of  their  sorrow  by  waight.  For  although  they  strive  to 
act  it  in  a  borrowed  forme,  yet  by  habituating  and  ordering 
their  countenance,  it  is  certaine  they  are  often  wholly  trans 
ported  into  it,  and  entertaine  the  impression  of  a  true  and 
unfained  melancholly.  I  assisted  amongst  divers  others  of  his 
friends,  to  convay  the  dead  corpes  of  the  Lord  of  Grammont 
from  the  siege  of  Laferre,  where  he  was  untimely  slaine,  to 
Soissons.  I  noted  that  every  where  as  we  passed  a  long,  we 
filled  with  lamentation  and  teares  all  the  people  we  met,  by 
the  onely  shew  of  our  convoies  mourning  attire ;  for  the 
deceased  mans  name  was  not  so  much  as  known,  or  heard  of 
about  those  quarters.  Quintilian  reporteth,  to  have  scene 
Comedians  so  farre  ingaged  in  a  sorrowfull  part,  that  they 
wept  after  being  come  to  their  lodgings  :  and  of  himselfe, 
that  having  undertaken  to  move  a  certaine  passion  in 
another  :  he  had  found  himselfe  surprised  not  only  with 
shedding  of  teares,  but  with  a  palenesse  of  countenance,  and 
behaviour  of  a  man  truly  dejected  with  griefe.  In  a  country 
neare  our  Mountaines,  the  women  say  and  unsay,  weepe  and 
laugh  with  one  breath  :  as  Martin  the  Priest ;  for,  as  for 
their  lost  husbands  they  encrease  their  waymentings  by 
repetition  of  the  good  and  gracefull  parts  they  were  en- 

59 


MONTAIGNE S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  dowed  with,  there  withall  under  one  they  make  publike 
IV  relation  of  those  imperfections;  to  work,  as  it  were  some 
^  1T-ertm8'  recompence  unto  themselves,  and  transchange  their  pitty 
unto  disdaine;  with  a  much  better  grace  then  we,  who  when 
we  loose  a  late  acquaintance,  strive  to  loade  him  with  new 
and  forged  prayses,  and  to  make  him  farre  other,  now  that 
we  are  deprived  of  his  sight,  then  hee  seemed  to  be  when 
we  enjoied  and  beheld  him.  As  if  mourning  were  an  in 
structing  party ;  or  teares  cleared  our  understanding  by 
washing  the  same.  I  renounce  from  this  time  forward  all 
the  favourable  testimonies  any  man  shall  affoord  me,  not 
because  I  shall  deserve  them,  but  because  I  shall  be  dead. 
If  one  demand  that  fellow,  what  interest  he  hath  in  such  a 
siege ;  The  interest  of  example  (will  he  say)  and  common 
obedience  of  the  Prince,  I  nor  looke,  nor  pretend  any  benefit 
thereby  ;  and  of  glory  I  know  how  small  a  portion  commeth 
to  the  share  of  a  private  man,  such  as  I  am.  I  have  neither 
passion  nor  quarrell  in  the  matter  ;  yet  the  next  day  shall 
you  see  him  all  changed,  and  chafing,  boiling  and  blushing 
with  rage,  in  his  ranke  of  battaile,  ready  for  the  assault. 
It  is  the  glaring  reflecting  of  so  much  steele,  the  flashing 
thundering  of  the  Canon,  the  clang  of  trumpets,  and  the 
ratling  of  Drummes,  that  have  infused  this  new  fury,  and 
rankor  in  his  swelling  vaines.  A  frivolous  cause,  will  you 
say.  How  a  cause  ?  There  needeth  none  to  excite  our 
minde.  A  doating  humour  without  body,  without  substance 
overswayeth  and  tosseth  it  up  and  downe.  Let  me  thinke 
of  building  Castles  in  Spayne,  my  imagination  will  forge  me 
commodities  and  afford  me  meanes  and  delights  wherewith 
my  minde  is  really  tickled  and  essentially  gladded.  How 
often  do  we  pester  our  spirits  with  anger  or  sadnesse  by 
such  shaddowes,  and  entangle  our  selves  into  fantasticall 
passions  which  alter  both  our  mind  and  body  ?  what  asto 
nished,  flearing  and  confused  mumpes  and  mowes  doth  this 
dotage  stirre  up  in  our  visages  ?  what  skippings  and  agita 
tions  of  members  and  voice,  seemes  it  not  by  this  man  alone, 
that  he  hath  false  visions  of  a  multitude  of  other  men  with 
whom  he  doth  negotiate ;  or  some  inwarde  Goblin  that  tor 
ments  him  ?  Enquire  of  your  selfe,  where  is  the  object  of 
this  alteration  ?  Is  there  any  thing  but  us  in  nature,  except 
60 


sons 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

subsisting  nullity  ?  over  whom  it  hath  any  power  ?     Because  CHAPTER 

Cambyses    dreamed   that   his   brother   should    be    King   of          IV 

Persia,  he  put  him  to  death  :  a  brother  whom  he  loved,  and     ^ 

ever  trusted.     Aristodemus  King  of  the  Messenians  killed 

himself  e,  upon  a  conceite  he  tooke  of  some  ill  presage,  by,  I 

know  not  what  howling  of  his  Dogs.     And  King  Midas  did 

asmuch,  being  troubled  and  vexed  by  a  certaine  unpleasing 

dreame  of  his  owne.     It  is  the  right  way  to  prize  ones  life 

at  the  right  worth  of  it,  to  forgo  it  for  a  dreame.     Here 

notwithstanding  our  mindes  triumph  over  the  bodies  weake- 

nesses  and  misery  :  in  that  it  is  the  prey  and  marke  of  all 

wrongs  and  alterations,  to  feede  on  and  aime  at.     It  hath 

surely  much  reason  to  speake  of  it. 

0  prima  infmlix  fingenti  terra  Prometheo  : 
Ille  parum  cauti  pectoris  egit  opus. 
Corpora  disponens,  mentem  non  vidit  in  arte  : 
Recta  animi  primum  debuit  esse  via. 

Unhappy  earth  first  by  Prometheus  formed, 
Who  of  small  providence  a  worke  performed  : 
He  framing  bodies  saw  in  arte  no  minde  ; 
The  mindes  way  first  should  rightly  be  assign'd. 


PROP.  iii.  El. 
iv.  7« 


THE    FIFTH    CHAPTER 

Upon  some  verses  of  Virgil. 

ROFITABLE  thoughts,  the  more  full  and 
solide  they  are,  the  more  combersome  and 
heavy  are  they  ;  vice,  death,  poverty  and 
diseases,  are  subjects  that  waigh  and 
grieve.  We  must  have  our  minde  in 
structed  with  meanes  to  sustaine  and  corn- 
bate  mischiefes,  and  furnished  with  rules 
how  to  live  well  and  believe  right :  and 
often  rouze  and  exercise  it  in  this  goodly  study.  But  to  a 
minde  of  the  common  stampe,  it  must  be  with  intermission 
and  moderation ;  it  groweth  weake,  by  being  continually 
over- wrested  :  When  I  was  young,  I  had  neede  to  be  adver 
tised,  and  sollicited  to  keepe  my  selfe  in  office  :  Mirth  and 
health  (saies  one)  sute  not  so  well  with  these  serious  and 

61 


some 
verses  of 
Virgil 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  grave  discourses.  I  am  now  in  another  state.  The  con- 
V  ditions  of  age  do  but  over-much  admonish,  instruct,  and 

Upon  some  preach  unto  me<  From  the  excesse  of  jollity,  I  am  falne 
into  the  extreame  of  severity  :  more  peevish  and  more  un 
toward.  Therefore,  I  do  now  of  purpose  somewhat  give  way 
unto  licentious  allurements ;  and  now  and  then  employ  my 
minde  in  wanton  and  youthfull  conceits,  wherein  she  recreates 
hir  selfe.  I  am  now  but  to  much  setled  ;  too  heavy  and 
too  ripe.  My  yeares  read  me  daily  a  lesson  of  coldnesse  and 
temperance.  My  body  shunneth  disorder,  and  feares  it : 
it  hath  his  turne  to  direct  the  minde  toward  reformation ; 
his  turne  also  to  rule  and  SAvay ;  and  that  more  rudely  and 
imperiously.  Be  I  awake  or  a  sleepe,  it  doth  not  permit  me 
one  houre  but  to  ruminate  on  instruction,  on  death,  on 
patience,  and  on  repentance.  As  I  have  heretofore  defended 
my  selfe  from  pleasure,  so  I  now  ward  my  selfe  from  temper 
ance  :  it  haleth  me  too  far  back,  and  even  to  stupidity.  I 
will  now  every  way  be  master  of  my  selfe.  Wisdome  hath 
hir  excesses,  and  no  lesse  need  of  moderation,  then  follie.  So 
that  least  I  should  wither,  I  varnish  and  over  cloy  my  selfe 
with  prudence,  in  the  intermissions  my  evils  affoord  mee ; 

M ens  intenta  suis  ne  siet :  usque  malls. 

Still  let  not  the  conceit  attend, 
The  ils  that  it  too  much  offend. 

I  gently  turne  aside,  and  steale  mine  eyes  from  viewing 
that  tempestuous  and  cloudy  skie,  I  have  before  me ;  which 
(thankes  be  to  God)  I  consider  without  feare,  but  not  without 
contention  and  study.  And  ammuse  my  selfe  with  the  re 
membrance  of  passed  youth-tricks : 

— animus  quod  perdidit,  optat, 
Atque  In  prceterita  se  totus  imagine  versat. 

The  minde,  what  it  hath  lost,  doth  wish  and  cast, 
And  turne  and  wind  in  Images  forepast. 

That  infancy  looketh  forward,  and  age  backward ;  was  it 
not  that  which  lanus  his  double  visage  signified  ?  yeares 
entraine  me  if  they  please :  but  backward.  As  far  as  mine 
eyes  can  discerne  that  faire  expired  season,  by  fits  I  turne 
them  thitherward.  If  it  escape  my  bloud  and  veines,  yet 
will  I  not  roote  the  image  of  it  out  of  my  memory : 

62 


OVID.  Trist. 

iv.  EL  i.  4. 


PETRON. 
Sat. 


ARE. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

— hoc  est,  MART.  x.  Epig.       CHAPTER 

Viuere  bis,  vita  posse  priorefrui.  xxiii.  7-  V 

This  is  the  way  for  any  to  live  twise,  UPon    some 

Who  can  of  former  life  enjoy  the  price.  verses  of 

Virgil 

Plato  appoints  old  men  to  be  present  at  youthfull  exercises, 
dances  and  games,  to  make  them  rejoice  at  the  bodies  agility 
and  comlines  of  others,  which  is  now  no  longer  in  them  ;  and 
call  to  their  remembrance,  the  grace  and  favour  of  that 
blooming  age :  and  willeth  them  to  give  the  honour  of  the 
victory  to  that  young  man,  who  hath  gladded  and  made 
most  of  them  mery.  I  was  heretofore  wont  to  note  sullen 
and  gloomy  daies,  as  extraordinary  :  now  are  they  my  ordi 
nary  ones  :  the  extraordinary  are  my  faire  and  cleere  dayes. 
I  am  ready  to  leape  for  joy,  as  at  the  receaving  of  some 
unexspected  favour,  when  nothing  grieveth  me.  Let  me 
tickle  my  selfe,  I  can  now  hardly  wrest  a  bare  smile  from 
this  wretched  body  of  mine.  I  am  not  pleased  but  in  con- 
ceite  and  dreaming,  by  sleight  to  turne  aside  the  way-ward 
cares  of  age  :  but  sure  there  is  need  of  other  remedies,  then 
dreaming.  A  weake  contention  of  arte  against  nature.  It  is 
meere  simplicity,  as  most  men  do,  to  prolong  and  anticipate 
humane  incomrnodities.  I  had  rather  be  lesse  while  olde,  then 
old  before  my  time.  I  take  hold  even  of  the  least  occasions 
of  delight  I  can  meet  withall.  I  know  now  by  heare-say 
divers  kindes  of  wise,  powerfull  and  glorious  pleasures  :  but 
opinion  is  not  of  sufficient  force  over  me,  to  make  me  long 
for  them.  I  would  not  have  them  so  stately,  lofty  and  dis- 
dainfull :  as  pleasant,  gentle  and  ready.  A  natura  dwcedimus;  SEN.  Ep.  xcix. 
populo  nos  damns,  null'ms  rei  bono  auctori ,-  6  We  forsake 
'  nature,  wee  follow  the  people  author  of  no  good."1  My 
Philosophy  is  in  action,  in  naturall  and  present,  little  in 
conceit.  What  if  I  should  be  pleased  to  play  at  cob-nut, 
or  whip  a  top  ? 

Non  ponebat  enim  rumores  ante  salutem.  ENNIUS. 

He  did  riot  prize  what  might  he  said, 
Before  how  all  might  safe  be  laid. 

Voluptuousnesse  is  a  quality  little  ambitious  ;  it  holds  it 
selfe  rich  enough  of  it  selfe  without  any  accesse  of  reputa 
tion  ;  and  is  best  affected  where  it  is  most  obscured.  That 

63 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  young  man  should  deserve  the  whip,  who  would  spend  his 
v  time  in  choosing  out  the  neatest  Wine  and  best  sauces. 

Upon  some  There  is  nothing  I  ever  knew  or  esteemed  lesse :  I  now 
V  Virgil°  beginne  to  learne  it.  I  am  much  ashamed  of  it,  but  what 
can  I  do  withall  ?  and  am  more  ashamed  and  vexed,  at  the 
occasions  that  compell  me  to  it.  It  is  for  us  to  dally,  doate 
and  trifle  out  the  time ;  and  for  youth  to  stand  upon  nice 
reputation,  and  hold  by  the  better  end  of  the  staffe.  That 
creepeth  towards  the  world  and  marcheth  toward  credite ; 

Cic.  DeSene.  we  come  from  it.  Sibi  arma,  sibi  equos,  sibi  hastas,  sibi 
clauam^  sibi  pilam,  sibi  nationes  et  cursus  habeant :  nobis 
senibus,  ex  lusionibus  multis,  talos  relinquant,  et  tesseras ; 
4  Let  them  keepe  their  armor,  their  horses,  their  lances,  their 
4  polaxes,  their  tennis,  their  swimming,  and  their  running  ; 
4  and  of  their  many  games,  let  them  put  over  to  us  old 
4  men  the  tables  and  the  cardes/  The  very  lawes  send  us 
home  to  our  lodgings.  I  can  do  no  lesse  in  favour  of  this 
wretched  condition,  whereto  my  age  forceth  mee,  then  fur 
nish  it  with  somewhat  to  dandle  and  ammuse  it  selfe,  as  it 
were  childehood ;  for  when  all  is  done  we  fall  into  it  againe. 
And  both  wisedome  and  folly  shall  have  much  a  do,  by  enter- 
change  of  offices  to  support  and  succour  me  in  this  calamity 
of  age. 

HOR.  iv.  Od.  Misce  stultitiam  consilijs  breuem. 

With  short-like-foolish  tricks, 
Thy  gravest  counsels  mixe. 

Withal  I  shun  the  lightest  pricklings ;  and  those  which 

heretofore  could  not  have  scratcht  me,  do  now  transpearce 

me.      So  wilingly  my  habite  doth  now  begin  to  apply  it  selfe 

Cic.  De  Sene.    to  evil :    in  fragili  corpore  odiosa  omuls  ojfensio  est :    4  all 

4  offence  is  yrkesome  to  a  erased  body/ 

OVID.  Pont.  Mensque  pati  durum  sustinet  cegra  nihiL 

A  sicke  minde  can  endure, 
No  hard  thing  for  hir  cure. 

I  have  ever  beene  ticklish  and  nice  in  matters  of  offence,  at 
this  present  I  am  more  tender,  and  every  where  open. 
IB.  Trist.  iii.  jgy  minima  vires  frangere  quassa  valent. 

Least  strength  can  breake, 
Things  worne  and  weake. 
64 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Well  may  my  judgement  hinder  me  from  spurning  and  CHAPTER 
repining  at  the  inconveniences  which   nature   allots  me  to  V 

indure  ;  from  feeling  them  it  cannot.  I  could  finde  in  my  uPon  S01"e 
heart  to  runne  from  one  ende  of  the  world  to  another,  to  V° 
searche  and  purchase  one  yeare  of  pleasing  and  absolute  tran 
quillity  ;  I  who  have  no  other  scope,  then  to  live  and  be 
mery.  Drouzie  and  stupide  tranquillity  is  sufficiently  to  be 
found  for  me,  but  it  makes  me  drouzy  and  dizzie  :  therefore 
I  am  not  pleased  with  it.  If  there  be  any  body,  or  any  good 
company  in  the  cuntry,  in  the  citty,  in  France,  or  any  where 
els,  resident,  travelling,  that  likes  of  my  conceites,  or  whose 
humours  are  pleasing  to  me,  they  neede  but  hold  up  their 
hand,  or  whistle  in  their  fiste,  and  I  will  store  them  with 
Essayes,  of  pithe  and  substance,  with  might  and  maine. 
Seeing  it  is  the  mindes  priviledge  to  renew  and  recover  it 
selfe  on  old  age,  I  earnestly  advise  it  to  do  it  :  let  it  bud, 
blossome,  and  flourish  if  it  can,  as  Misle-toe  on  a  dead  tree. 
I  feare  it  is  a  traitor  ;  so  straightly  is  she  clasped,  and  so  hard 
doth  she  cling  to  my  body,  that  every  hand-while  she  for 
sakes  me ;  to  follow  hir  in  hir  necessities.  I  flatter  hir  in 
private,  I  urge  hir  to  no  purpose ;  in  vaine  I  offer  to  divert 
hir  from  this  combination,  and  bootlesse  it  is  for  me  to  pre 
sent  hir  Seneca  or  Catullus,  or  Ladies,  or  stately  dances  ;  if 
hir  companion  have  the  chollicke,  it  seemes  she  also  hath  it. 
The  very  powers  or  faculties  that  are  particular  and  proper 
to  hir,  cannot  then  rouze  themselves :  they  evidently  seeme 
to  be  en-rheumed  :  there  is  no  blithnes  in  hir  productions,  if 
there  be  none  in  the  body.  Our  schollers  are  to  blame,  who 
serching  the  causes  of  our  mindes  extraordinary  fits  and 
motions,  besides  they  ascribe  some  to  a  divine  fury,  to  love, 
to  warre-like  fiercenesse,  to  Poesie,  and  to  Wine  ;  if  they 
have  not  also  allotted  health  her  share.  A  health  youthful!, 
lusty,  vigorous,  full,  idle,  such  as  heretofore  the  Aprill  of  my 
yeares  and  security  offorded  me  by  fittes.  That  fire  of 
jocondnesse  stirreth  up  lively  and  bright  sparkles  in  our 
mind,  beyond  our  naturall  brightnesse  and  amongst  the 
most  working  if  not  the  most  desperate  Enthusiasmes  or 
inspirations.  Well,  it  is  no  wonder  if  a  contrary  estate 
clogge  and  naile  my  spirit,  and  drawe  from  it  a  contrary 
effect. 

I  65 


CHAPTER 
V 

Upon     some 

verses   of 

Virgil 


HOR.  Epod.  i. 
37- 


MART.  vii. 
Epig.  Ivii.  9. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

COR.  GAL.    Ad  nullum  consurgit  opus,  cum  corpore  languet. 
El.  i.  125.     jt  to  no  worke  doth  rise^ 
When  body  fainting  lyes. 

And  yet  would  have  me  beholden  to  him,  for  lending  (as 
he  sayth)  much  lesse  to  this  consent,  then  beareth  the 
ordinary  custome  of  men.  Let  us  at  least  whilst  we  have 
time,  chase  all  evils,  and  expell  all  difficulties  from  our 
society. 

Dum  licet  obducta  soluatur  fronte  senectus : 
With  wrinckled  wimpled  forhead  let  old  yeares, 
While  we  may,,  be  resolv'd  to  merrie  cheere. 

Tetrica  sunt  amosnanda  jocularibus,  '  Unpleasant  things, 
'  and  sowre  matters  should  be  sweetned  and  made  pleasant 
'  with  sportefull  mixtures."  I  love  a  lightsome  and  civill  dis 
cretion,  and  loathe  a  roughnes  and  austerity  of  behaviour : 
suspecting  every  peevish  and  way  ward  countenance. 

Tristemque  vultus  tetrici  arrogantiam. 

Of  austere  countenance, 
The  sad  soure  arrogance. 

Et  habet  tristis  quoque  turba  cyneedos. 

Fidlers  are  often  had, 
Mongst  people  that  are  sad. 

I  easily  beleeve  Plato,  who  saieth,  that  easie  or  hard 
humors,  are  a  great  prejudice  unto  the  mindes  goodnesse  or 
badnesse.  Socrates  had  a  constant  countenance,  but  light 
some  and  smyling :  not  frowardly  constant,  as  old  Crassus, 
who  was  never  scene  to  laugh.  Vertue  is  a  pleasant  and 
buxom  quality.  Few,  I  know  will  snarle  at  the  liberty  of 
my  writings,  that  have  not  more  cause  to  snarle  at  their 
thoughts-loosenes.  I  comforme  my  selfe  unto  their  courage, 
but  I  offend  their  eies.  It  is  a  well  ordered  humour  to  wrest 
Platos  writings,  and  straine  his  pretended  negotiations  with 
Phedon,  Dion,  Stella,  Archeanassa.  Non  pudeat  dicere,  quod 
non  pudeat  sentire.  '  Let  us  not  bee  ashamed  to  speake, 
4  what  we  shame  not  to  thinke."*  I  hate  a  way  ward  and 
sad  disposition,  that  glideth  over  the  pleasures  of  his  life, 
and  fastens  and  feedes  on  miseries.  As  flyes  that  cannot 
cleave  to  smooth  and  sleeke  bodies,  but  seaze  and  holde  on 

66 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

rugged  and  uneven   places.      Or  as   Cupping  glasses,  that  CHAPTER 
affect  and  suck  none  but  the  worst  bloud.     For  my  part  I  V 

am  resolved  to  dare  speake  whatsoever  I  dare  do :  And  am  ^.^ess°jf e 
displeased  with  thoughts  not  to  be  published.  The  worst  of  Virgil 
my  actions  or  condicions  seeme  not  so  ugly  unto  me,  as  I 
finde  it  both  ugly  and  base  not  to  dare  to  avouch  them. 
Every  one  is  wary  in  the  confession  ;  we  should  be  as  heedy 
in  the  action.  The  bouldnes  of  offending  is  somewhat  re 
compensed  and  restrained  by  the  bouldnes  of  confessing.  He 
that  should  be  bound  to  tell  all,  should  also  bind  himselfe  to 
do  nothing  which  one  is  forced  to  conceale.  God  graunt  this 
excesse  of  my  licence  draw  men  to  freedom,  beiond  these 
cowardly  and  squeamish  vertues,  sprung  from  our  imperfec 
tions  ;  and  that  by  the  expence  of  my  immoderation,  I  may 
reduce  them  unto  reason.  One  must  survay  his  faultes  and 
study  them,  ere  he  be  able  to  repeat  them.  Those  which 
hide  them  from  others,  commonly  conceale  them  also  from 
themselves ;  and  esteme  them  not  sufficiently  hidden,  if  them 
selves  see  them.  They  withdraw  and  disguise  them  from 
their  owne  consciences.  Quare  vicia  confitetur  ?  Quia  etiam  SEN.  Ep.  v.  3. 
mine  in  illis  est,  somnium  narrare  vigilantis  est.  '  Why  doth  m- 
'  no  man  confesse  his  faults  ?  Because  hee  is  yet  in  them  ; 
6  and  to  declare  his  dreame,  is  for  him  that  is  waking.*1  The 
bodies  evils  are  discerned  by  their  increase.  And  now  we 
finde  that  to  be  the  gout  which  we  termed  the  rheume  or  a 
bruse.  The  evils  of  the  mind  are  darkened  by  their  own 
force;  the  most  infected  feeleth  them  least.  Therefore  is 
it,  that  they  must  often  a  day  be  handled,  and  violently  be 
opened  and  rent  from  out  the  hollow  of  our  bosome.  As  in 
the  case  of  good ;  so  of  bad  offices,  only  confession  is  some 
times  a  satisfaction.  Is  there  any  deformity  in  the  error, 
which  dispenseth  us  to  confesse  the  same  ?  It  is  a  paine  for 
me  to  dissemble :  so  that  I  refuse  to  take  charge  of  other 
mens  secrets,  as  wanting  hart  to  disavow  my  knowledge.  I 
cannot  conceale  it ;  but  deny  it  I  cannot,  without  much  a  do 
and  some  trouble.  To  be  perfectly  secret,  one  must  be  so  by 
nature  ;  not  by  obligation.  It  is  a  small  matter  to  be  secret 
in  the  Princes  service,  if  one  be  not  also  a  liar.  He  that  de 
manded  Thales  Milesius,  whether  he  should  solemnly  deny 
his  lechery  ;  had  he  come  to  me,  I  would  have  answered  him, 

67 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  he  ought  not  do  it:  for  a  ly  is  in  mine  opinion,  worse  then 
V  lechery.     Thales  advised  him  otherwise,  bidding  him  sweare, 

Upon  some  thereby  to  warrant  the  more  by  the  lesse.  Yet  was  not  his 
V  Virffil  counseil  so  much  the  election,  as  multiplication  of  vice. 
Whereupon  we  sometimes  use  this  by-word,  that  we  deale 
wel  with  a  man  of  conscience,  when  in  counterpoise  of  vice 
we  propose  some  difficulty  unto  him  ?  but  when  he  is  in 
closed  betweene  two  vices,  he  is  put  to  a  hard  choise.  As 
Origen  was  dealt  with  al,  either  to  commit  idolatry,  or  suffer 
himselfe  to  be  Sodomatically  abused  by  a  filthy  Egiptian 
slave,  that  was  presented  unto  him ;  he  yeilded  to  the  first 
condition,  and  viciously,  saith  one.  Therefore  should  not 
those  women  be  distasted,  according  to  their  error,  who  of 
late  protest,  that  they  had  rather  charge  their  conscience 
with  ten  men,  then  one  Masse  :  If  it  be  indiscretion  so  to 
divulge  ones  errors,  ther  is  no  danger  though  it  come  into 
example  and  use.  For  Ariston  said,  '  That  the  winds  men 
4  feare  most,  are  those  which  discover  them.'  Wee  must  tuck 
up  this  homely  rag  that  cloaketh  our  manners.  They  send 
their  conscience  to  the  stews,  and  keepe  their  countenance 
in  order.  Even  traitors  and  murtherers  observe  the  laws 
of  complements,  and  thereto  fixe  their  endevors.  So  that 
neither  can  injustice  complaine  of  incivility,  nor  malice  of 
indiscretion.  Tis  pitty  a  bad  man  is  not  also  a  foole,  and 
that  decency  should  cloak  his  vice.  These  pargettings  belong 
only  to  good  and  sound  wals,  such  as  deserve  to  be  whited, 
to  be  preserved.  In  favour  of  Hugonots,  who  accuse  our 
auricular  and  private  confession,  I  confesse  my  selfe  in  pub- 
like  ;  religiously  and  purely.  Saint  Augustine,  Origine,  and 
Hippocrates,  have  published  their  errors  of  their  opinions ; 
I  likewise  of  my  maners.  I  greedily  long  to  make  my  selfe 
knowne  ;  nor  care  I  at  what  rate,  so  it  be  truly  :  or  to  say 
better,  I  hunger  for  nothing  ;  but  I  hate  mortally  to  be  mis 
taken  by  such  as  shall  happen  to  know  my  name.  He  that 
doth  all  for  honor  and  glory,  what  thinks  he  to  gaine  by  pre 
senting  himselfe  to  the  world  in  a  maske,  hiding  his  true 
being  from  the  peoples  knowledge  ?  Commend  a  crook-back 
for  his  comely  stature,  he  ought  to  take  it  as  an  injury  :  if  you 
be  a  coward,  and  one  honoreth  you  for  a  valiant  man,  is  it  of 
you  he  speaketh  ?  you  are  taken  for  another :  I  should  like 
68 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

as  well,  to  have  him  glory  in  the  courtesies  andlowtings  that  CHAPTER 
are  shewed  him,  supposing  himselfe  to  be  ring-leader  of  a  v 

troupe  when  he  is  the  meanest  folower  of  it.    Archelaus  King   UPon    sor? e 

„  T.  /  •  IT  ,  &      verses   or 

of  Macedon,  passing  through  a  street  som  body  cast  water        Virgil 

upon  him,  was  advised  by  his  followers  to  punish  the  party : 
Yea  but  (quoth  he)  who  ever  it  was,  he  cast  not  the  water  upon 
me,  but  upon  him  he  thought  I  was.  Socrates  to  one  that 
told  him  he  was  railed  upon  and  ill  spoken  of :  Tush  (said 
he)  there  is  no  such  thing  in  me.  For  my  part,  should  one 
commend  me  to  be  an  excellent  Pilote,  to  be  very  modest,  or 
most  chaste,  I  should  owe  him  no  thanks.  Likewise  should 
any  man  call  me  traitour,  theefe  or  drunkard,  I  would  deeme 
my  selfe  but  little  wronged  by  him.  Those  who  misknow 
themselves,  may  feed  themselves  with  false  approbations  ;  but 
not  I,  who  see  and  search  my  selfe  into  my  very  bowels,  and 
know  full  well  what  belongs  unto  me.  I  am  pleased  to  be 
lesse  commended,  provided  I  be  better  knowne.  I  may  be 
esteemed  wise  for  such  conditions  of  wisedome,  that  I  account 
meere  follies.  It  vexeth  me,  that  my  Essayes  serve  Ladies 
in  liew  of  common  ware  and  stuffe  for  their  hall :  this  Chap, 
wil  preferre  me  to  their  cabinet :  I  love  their  society  some 
what  private ;  their  publike  familiarity  wants  favor  and 
savor.  In  farewels  we  heate  above  ordinary  our  affections 
to  the  things  we  forgo.  I  here  take  my  last  leave  of  this 
worlds  pleasures :  loe  here  our  last  embraces.  And  now  to 
our  theame.  Why  was  the  acte  of  generation  made  so 
naturall,  so  necessary  and  so  just,  seeing  we  feare  to  speake 
of  it  without  shame,  and  exclude  it  from  our  serious  and 
regular  discourses  ?  we  prononce  boldly,  to  rob,  to  murther,  to 
betray ;  and  this  we  dare  not  but  betweene  our  teeth.  Are 
we  to  gather  by  it,  that  the  lesse  we  breath  out  in  words  the 
more  we  are  allowed  to  furnish  our  thoughts  with  ?  For  words 
least  used,  least  writen  and  least  concealed  should  best  be 
understood,  and  most  generally  knowne.  No  age,  no  condi 
tion  are  more  ignorant  of  it,  then  of  their  bread.  They  are 
imprinted  in  each  one,  without  expressing,  without  voice  or 
figure.  And  the  sexe  that  doth  it  most,  is  most  bound  to 
suppresse  it.  It  is  an  action  we  have  put  in  the  precincts  of 
silence,  whence  to  draw  it  were  an  offence  :  not  to  accuse  or 
judge  it.  Nor  dare  we  beare  it  but  in  circumlocution  and 

69 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  picture.  A  notable  favour,  to  a  criminal  offender,  to  be  so 
V  execrable,  that  justice  deem  it  injustice  to  touch  and  behold 

Upon  some  him<)  freed  and  saved  by  the  benefit  of  this  condemnations 
vey^s.j°  severity.  Is  it  not  herein  as  in  matters  of  books,  which  being 
once  called-in  and  forbidden  become  more  saleable  and 
publik  ?  As  for  me,  I  will  take  Aristotle  at  his  word  that 
bashfullnesse  is  an  ornament  to  youth,  but  a  reproach  to  age. 
These  verses  are  preached  in  the  old  schoole  ;  a  schoole  of 
which  I  hold  more  then  of  the  moderne :  her  vertues  seeme 
greater  unto  me,  her  vices  lesse. 

Deux  qui  par  tropfuiant  Venus  estrivent 
Faillent  autant  que  ceux  qui  trop  la  suivent. 

Who  strive  ore  much  Venus  to  shunne,  offends 
Alike  with  him,,  that  wholy  hir  intends. 

Tu  dea,  tu  rerum  naturam  sola  gubernus, 
Nee  sine  te  quicquam  dias  in  luminis  oram 
Exoritur,  nequefit  Icetum,  nee  amabile  quicquam. 

Goddesse,  thou  rul'st  the  nature  of  all  things. 
Without  thee  nothing  into  this  light  springs. 
Nothing  is  lovely^  nothing  pleasures  brings. 

I  know  not  who  could  set  Pallas  and  the  Muses  at  oddes 
with  Venus,  and  make  them  cold  and  slow  in  affecting  of 
love  ;  as  for  me,  I  se  no  Deities  that  better  sute  together,  nor 
more  endebted  one  to  another.  Who-ever  shal  go  about  to 
remove  amourous  imaginations  from  the  Muses,  shall  deprive 
them  of  the  best  entertainement  they  have,  and  of  the  noblest 
subject  of  their  work  :  and  who  shall  debarre  Cupid  the 
service  and  conversation  of  Poesie,  shall  weaken  him  of  his 
best  weapons.  By  this  meanes  they  caste  upon  the  God  of 
acquaintance,  of  amitie  and  goodwill ;  and  upon  the  God 
desses,  protectresses  of  humanity,  and  justice,  the  vice  of 
ingratitude,  and  imputation  of  churlishnesse.  I  have  not  so 
long  beene  cashiered  from  the  state  and  service  of  this  God, 
but  that  my  memory  is  still  acquainted  with  the  force  of  his 
worth  and  valour. 

— agnosco  veteris  vestigia  flammce . 

I  feele  and  feeling  know,  How  my  old  flames  regrow. 

There  commonly  remaine   some  reliques  of  shivering  and 
heate  after  an  ague. 
70 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 


Nee  mihi  deficiat  calor  hie,  hyemantibus  annis.  CHAPTER 

When  Winter  yeares  com-on,  " 

Let  not  this  heate  be  gon.  uPon    so™e 

verses   of 

As  drie,  as  sluggish  and  as  unwieldy  as  I  am,  I  feele  yet        Virgil 
some  warme  cinders  of  my  passed  heate. 

Quaf  I'  alto  JEgeo  perche  Aquiloneo  Noto 
Cessi  che  tuto  prima  il  volse  e  scoffe, 
Non  s'accheta  ei  pero,  ma  il  suono  el  moto, 
Ritien  deli  onde  anco  gitate  e  grosse. 

As  graund  ^Egean  Sea,  because  the  voice 
Of  windes  doth  cease,  which  it  before  enraged, 
Yet  doth  not  calme,  but  stil  retaines  the  noise 
And  motion  of  huge  billowes  unasswaged. 

But  for  so  much  as  I  know  of  it,  the  power  and  might  of 
this  God,  are  found  more  quick  and  lively  in  the  shadowe 
of  the  Poesie,  then  in  their  owne  essence. 

Et  versus  digitos  habet.  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Verses  have  full  effect,         Of  fingers  to  erect.  vi-  J97- 

It  representeth  a  kinde  of  aire  more  lovely  then  love  it 
selfe.  Venus  is  not  so  faire,  nor  so  alluring  all  naked,  quick 
and  panting,  as  she  is  here  in  Virgill. 

Dixerat,  et  niveis  hinc  atque  hinc  diua  lacertis  Y?.RG>  ^n- 

Cunctantem  amplexu  molli  fouet  :  Ille  repente  vi»-  3%7- 

Accepit  solitamflammam,  notusque  medullas 
Intrauit  calor,  et  lobe  facto,  per  ossa  cucurrit. 
Non  secus  atque  olim  tonitru  cum  rupta  corusco 
Ignea  rima  micans  percurrit  lumine  nimbos. 

So  said  the  Goddesse,  and  with  soft  embrace, 

Of  Snow-white  arme,  the  grim-fire  doth  enchase, 

He  straight  tooke  wonted  fire,  knowne  heate  at  once, 

His  marrow  pearc't,  ranne  through  his  weakned  bones  ; 

As  fierie  flash  with  thunder  doth  divide, 

With  radiant  lightning  through  a  storme  doth  glide. 

—  ea  verba  loquutus,  /^.  404. 

Optatos  dedit  amplexus,  placidumque  petivit. 
Conjugis  infusus  gremio  per  membra  soporem. 

A  sweet  embrace,  when  he  those  words  had  said 
He  gave,  and  his  lims  pleasing-rest  he  praid 
To  take  in  his  wives  bosome  lolling  laid. 

What  therein  I   finde  to  be  considered,  is,  that  he  de- 

71 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  painteth  her  somewhat  stirring  for  a  maritall  Venus.     In 
V  this  discreete  match,  appetites  are  not  commonly  so  fond- 

i  soine  ling  ;  but  drowsie  and  more  sluggish.  Love  disdaineth  a 
Virgil  man  should  hold  of  other  then  himselfe,  and  dealeth  but 
faintly  with  acquaintances  begun  and  entertained  under  an 
other  title ;  as  mariage  is.  Alliances,  respects  and  meanes, 
by  all  reason,  waigh  as  much  or  more,  as  the  grace  and 
beauty.  A  man  doth  not  marry  for  himselfe,  whatsoever 
he  aleageth  ;  but  as  much  or  more  for  his  posteritie  and 
familie.  The  use  and  interest  of  mariage  concerneth  our 
off-spring,  a  great  way  beyond  us.  Therefore  doth  this 
fashion  please  me,  to  guide  it  rather  by  a  third  hand,  and  by 
anothers  sence,  then  our  owne  :  All  which,  how  much  doth 
it  dissent  from  amorous  conventions  ?  Nor  is  it  other  then 
a  kinde  of  incest,  in  this  reverent  alliance  and  sacred  bond, 
to  employ  the  efforts  and  extravagant  humor  of  an  amorous 
licentiousnes,  as  I  thinke  to  have  said  else-were.  One 
should  (saith  Aristotle)  touch  his  wife  soberly,  discreetly  and 
severely,  least  that  tickling  too  lasciviously  pleasure  trans 
port  her  beyond  the  bounds  of  reason.  What  he  speaketh 
for  conscience,  Phisitions  alledge  for  health  :  saying  that 
pleasure  excessively  whotte,  voluptuous  and  continuall, 
altereth  the  seede,  and  hindereth  conception.  Some  other 
say,  besides  that  to  a  languishing  congression  (as  naturally 
that  is)  to  store  it  with  a  convenient,  and  fertile  heat,  one 
must  but  seldome,  and  by  moderate  intermissions  present 
himselfe  unto  it. 


VIRG.  Georg. 
iii.  137. 


Quo  rapiet  sitiens  venerem  interjusque  recondant. 

Thirsting  to  snatch  a  fit, 
And  inly  harbour  it. 

I  see  no  manages  faile  sooner,  or  more  troubled,  then 
such  as  are  concluded  for  beauties  sake,  and  hudled  up  for 
amorous  desires.  There  are  required  more  solide  founda 
tions,  and  more  constant  grounds,  and  a  more  warie  march 
ing  to  it :  this  earnest  youthly  heate  serveth  to  no  purpose. 
Those  who  thinke  to  honour  marriage,  by  joyning  love  unto 
it,  (in  mine  opinion)  doe  as  those,  who  to  doe  vertue  a 
favour,  holde,  that  nobilitie  is  no  other  thing  then  Vertue. 
Indeed  these  things  have  affmitie;  but  therewithall  great 

72 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

difference  :  their  names  and  titles  should  not  thus  be  com-  CHAPTER 
mixt :  both  are  wronged  so  to  be  confounded.     Nobilitie  is  V 

a  worthy,  goodly  quality,  and  introduced  with  good  reason,  uPon  so™e 
but  in  as  much  as  it  dependeth  on  others,  and  may  fall  to  V6s 
the  share  of  my  vicious  and  worthlesse  fellowe,  it  is  in 
estimation  farre  shorte  of  vertue.  If  it  be  a  vertue,  it  is 
artificiall  and  visible ;  relying  both  on  time  and  fortune  ; 
divers  in  forme,  according  unto  countries :  living  and 
mortall :  without  birth,  as  the  river  Nilus  genealogicall  and 
common  :  by  succession  and  similitude  :  drawne  along  by 
consequence,  but  a  very  weake  one.  Knowledge,  strength, 
goodnesse,  beauty,  wealth  and  all  other  qualities  fall  within 
compasse  of  commerce  and  communication  :  whereas  this 
consumeth  it  selfe  in  it  selfe,  of  no  emploiment  for  the 
service  of  others.  One  proposed  to  one  of  our  Kings  the 
choise  of  two  competitors  in  one  office,  the  one  a  Gentleman, 
the  other  a  Yeoman  :  hee  appointed  that  without  respect 
unto  that  quality,  he  who  deserved  best  shold  be  elected  : 
but  were  their  valour  or  worth  fully  a-like,  the  Gentleman 
should  be  regarded,  this  was  justlie  to  give  nobilitie  her 
right  and  ranke.  Antigonus,  to  an  unknowne  young-man, 
who  sued  unto  him  for  his  fathers  charge,  a  man  of  valour 
and  who  was  lately  deceased  :  '  My  friend  '  (quoth  hee)  '  in 
'  such  good  turnes,  I  waigh  not  my  souldiers  noble  birth,  so 
6  much  as  their  sufficiencies  Of  truth  it  should  not  be  here 
in,  as  with  the  officers  of  Spartan  kings  ;  Trumpeters,  Musi- 
tions,  Cookes,  in  whose  roome  their  children  succeeded,  how 
ignorant  soever,  before  the  best  experienced  in  the  trade. 
Those  of  Calicut  make  of  their  nobility  a  degree  above 
humane.  Marriage  is  interdicted  them,  and  all  other  voca 
tions  saving  warre.  Of  Concubines  they  may  have  as  many 
as  they  list,  and  women  as  many  lechardes,  without  lealousie 
one  of  another.  But  it  is  a  capital  crime,  and  unremissible 
offence  to  contract  or  marry  with  any  of  different  condition  : 
Nay  they  deeme  themselves  disparaged  and  polluted,  if  they 
have  but  touched  them  in  passing  by.  And  as  if  their 
honour  were  much  injured  and  interressed  by  it  they  kil  those 
who  approach  somewhat  too  neare  them.  In  such  sort,  that 
the  ignoble  are  bound  to  cry  as  they  walke  along,  like  the 
Gondoliers  or  Water  men  of  Venice  along  the  streetes,  least 
K  73 


verses  of 

Virgil 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  they  should  justle  with  them  :   and  the   nobles    command 
V  them  to  what  side  of  the  way  they  please.      Thereby  do 

Upon    some  ^nese  avoyde  an  obloquie  which  they  esteeme  perpetual ;  and 

ir£J1*Ci-1t3         f\T  *  _1l  _  m      **  |»  •  f* 

those  an  assured  death.  No  continuance  of  time,  no  favour 
of  Prince,  no  office,  no  vertue,  nor  any  wealth  can  make  a 
clown  to  become  a  gentleman.  Which  is  much  furthered  by 
this  custome,  that  marriages  of  one  trade  with  another  are 
strictly  forbidden.  A  Shoo-maker  cannot  marry  with  the 
race  of  a  Carpenter  ;  and  parents  are  precisely  bound  to 
traine  up  orphanes  in  their  fathers  trade,  and  in  no  other. 
Whereby  the  difference,  the  distinction  and  continuance, 
of  their  fortune  is  maintained.  A  good  marriage  (if  any 
there  be)  refuseth  the  company  and  conditions  of  love  ;  it  en- 
devoureth  to  present  those  of  amity.  It  is  a  sweete  society 
of  life,  full  of  constancy,  of  trust,  and  an  infinite  number  of 
profitable  and  solid  offices,  and  mutuall  obligations  :  No 
woman  that  throughly  and  impartially  tasteth  the  same, 


CATUL.  Com. 
Ber.  79. 


(Optato  quam  junxit  lumine  tceda. 

Whom  loves-fire  joyned  in  double  band^ 
With  wished  light  of  marriage  brand) 


would  foregoe  her  estate  to  be  her  husbands  master.  Be  she 
lodged  in  his  affection,  as  a  wife,  she  is  much  more  honour 
ably  and  surely  lodged.  Be  a  man  passionately  entangled 
in  any  unlawfull  lust  or  love,  let  them  then  be  damned  on 
whom  he  would  rather  have  some  shame  or  disgrace  to 
alight ;  eyther  on  his  lawfull  wife,  or  on  his  lechard  mistris 
whose  misfortune  wold  afflict  him  most,  and  to  whom  he 
wisheth  greater  good  or  more  honour.  These  questions 
admit  no  doubt  in  an  absolute  sound.  The  reason  we  see 
so  few  good,  is  an  apparant  signe  of  it's  worth,  and  a  testi 
mony  of  it's  price.  Perfectly  to  fashion  and  rightly  to  take 
it,  is  the  worthiest  and  best  part  of  our  societie.  We  cannot 
be  without  it :  and  yet  we  disgrace  and  vilifie  the  same.  It 
may  be  compared  to  a  cage,  the  birds  without  dispaire  to 
get  in,  and  those  within  dispaire  to  get  out.  Socrates  being 
demanded,  whether  was  most  commodeous,  to  take,  or  not, 
to  take  a  wife  ;  '  Which  soever  a  man  doth '  (quoth  he)  '  he 
ERAS  Chil  i  '  snall  repent  it.1  It  is  a  match  wherto  may  well  be  applied 
cent,  clxix.  70.  the  common  saying,  Homo  homml  aut  Deus,  ant  Lupus. 
74 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

'Man  unto    man  is  either  a  God  or  a  Wolfe,"  to  the  per-  CHAPTER 
feet  erecting  whereof  are  the  concurrences  of  divers  qualities  V 

required :  It  is  now  a  dayes  found  most  fit  or  commodious     verses^of  ^ 
for    simple    mindes    and    popular    spirits    whom    dainties,        Virgil 
curiosity  and  idlenes  do  not  so  much  trouble.     Licentious 
humours,  debaushed  conceits  (as  are    mine)  who    hate  all 
manner  of  duties,  bondes,  or  observances  are  not  so  fit,  so 
proper,  and  so  sutable  for  it. 

Et  mihi  dulce  magis  resoluto  vivere  cotto.  COR.  GAL.  El. 

Sweeter  it  is  to  me,  with  loose  necke  to  live  free. 

Of  mine  owne  disposition,  would  wisedome  it  selfe  have 
had  me,  I  should  have  refused  to  wed  her.  But  we  may  say 
our  pleasure ;  the  custome  and  use  of  common  life  over- 
beareth  us.  Most  of  my  actions  are  guided  by  example,  and 
not  by  election  :  Yet  did  I  not  properly  envite  my  selfe  unto 
it,  I  was  led  and  brought  thereunto  by  strange  and  unex 
pected  occasions.  For,  not  onely  incommodious  things,  but 
foule,  vicious  and  inevitable,  may  by  some  condition  and 
accident  become  acceptable  and  allowed.  So  vairie  is  mans 
posture  and  defence.  And  truely  I  was  then  drawne  unto 
it,  being  but  ill  prepared  and  more  backeward,  then  now  I 
am  that  have  made  triall  of  it.  And  as  licencious  as  the 
world  reputes  me,  I  have  (in  good  truth)  more  stricktly 
observed  the  lawes  of  wedlock,  then  either  I  had  promised 
or  hoped.  It  is  no  longer  time  to  wince  when  one  hath 
put  on  the  shackles.  A  man  ought  wisely  to  husband  his 
liberty  :  but  after  he  hath  once  submitted  himselfe  unto 
bondage,  he  is  to  stick  unto  it  by  the  lawes  of  common  duty 
or  at  least  enforce  himselfe  to  keepe  them.  Those  which 
undertake  that  covenant  to  deale  therein  with  hate  and  con 
tempt,  do  both  injustly  and  incommodiously.  And  that 
goodly  rule  I  see  passe  from  hand  to  hand  among  women, 
as  a  sacred  Oracle, 

Sers  ton  mary  comme  maistre : 
Et  t'en  garde  comme  dun  traistre. 

Your  husband  as  your  master  serve  yee  : 
From  him  as  from  false  friend  preserve  yee^ 

which  is  as  much  to  say ;  Beare  thy  selfe  toward  him  with  a 

75 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  constrained,  enemy  and   distrustfull   reverence   (a    stile    of 
v  warre,  and  cry  of  defiance)  is  likewise  injurious  and  difficult. 

Upon    some  j  am  to  milde  for  such  crabbed  dissignes :  To  say  truth,  I 
verses  of  M  t?     ,•          f      rr*  •  i          •    , 

Virgil  am  n°t  yet  come  to  that  perfection  01  sumciency  and  quamt- 
nesse  of  wit,  as  to  confound  reason  with  injustice  :  and 
laugh  or  scoffe  at  each  order  or  rule,  that  jumps  not  with 
my  humour.  To  hate  superstition,  I  do  not  presently  cast 
my  selfe  into  irreligion.  If  one  do  not  alwaies  discharge  his 
duty,  yet  ought  he  at  least  ever  love,  ever  acknowledge  it  : 
It  is  treason  for  one  to  marry  unlesse  he  wed.  But  go  we 
on.  Our  Poet  describeth  a  marriage  full  of  accord  and  good 
agreement,  wherein  notwithstanding  there  is  not  much 
loyalty.  Did  he  meane  it  was  not  possible  to  performe 
loves  rights,  and  yet  reserve  some  rights  toward  marriage ; 
and  that  one  may  bruse  it,  without  altogether  breaking  it  ? 
A  servant  may  picke  his  masters  purse,  and  yet  not  hate 
him.  Beauty,  opportunity,  destiny,  (for  destiny  hath  also  a 
hand  therm) 

IUVEN.  Sat.  ix.  —fatum  est  in  partibus  illis. 

32.  Quas  sinus  abscondit ;  nam  si  tibi  sidera  cassent, 

Nilfaciet  longi  mensura  incognita  nerui. 

In  those  parts  there  is  fate,  which  hidden  are  ; 
If  then  thou  be  not  wrought-for  by  thy  starre, 
The  measure  of  long  nerves,  unknowne  to  nothing  serves, 

have  entangled  a  woman  to  a  stranger,  yet  peradventure  not 
so  absolutely,  but  that  some  bond  may  be  left  to  hold  her 
to  her  husband.  They  are  two  dissignes,  having  severall 
and  unconfounded  pathes  leading  to  them.  A  woman  may 
yeeld  to  such  a  man,  whom  in  no  case  she  would  have  mar 
ried.  I  meane  not  for  the  conditions  of  his  fortune,  but  for 
the  qualities  of  his  person.  Few  men  have  wedded  their 
sweet  hearts,  their  paramours  or  mistresses,  but  have  come 
home  by  weeping  Crosse,  and  ere  long  repented  their  bar- 
gaine.  And  even  in  the  other  world,  what  an  unquiet  life 
leades  lupiter  with  his  wife,  whom  before  hee  had  secretly 
knowen,  and  lovingly  enjoyed  ?  This  is  as  they  say,  to 
beray  the  panier,  and  then  put  it  on  your  head.  My  selfe 
have  seene  in  some  good  place,  love,  shamefully  and  dis 
honestly  cured  by  mariage  :  the  considerations  are  too  much 
different.  We  love  without  disturbance  to  our  selves,  two 
76 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

divers  and  in   themselves  contrary  things.     Isocrates  said,  CHAPTER 
that  the  towne  of  Athens  pleased  men,  even  as  Ladies  doe  V 

whom  wee  serve  for  affection.  Every  one  loved  to  come  uPon  so™e 
thither,  to  walke  and  passe  away  the  time  :  but  none  ^ViSi]0 
affected  to  wed  it :  that  is  to  say,  to  endenison,  to  dwell 
and  habituate  himselfe  therein.  I  have  (and  that  to  my 
spight  and  griefe)  scene  husbands  hate  their  wives,  onely 
because  themselves  wronged  them  :  Howsoever,  wee  should 
not  love  them  lesse  for  our  faults ;  at  least  for  repentance 
and  compassion  they  ought  to  be  dearer  unto  us.  These  are 
different  ends  (saith  he)  and  yet  in  some  sort  compatible. 
Wedlocke  hath  for  his  share  honour,  justice,  profit  and  con- 
stancie  :  a  plaine,  but  more  generall  delight.  Love  melts 
in  onely  pleasure  ;  and  truly  it  hath  it  more  ticklish  ;  more 
lively,  more  quaint,  and  more  sharpe  :  a  pleasure  inflamed  by 
difficulty :  there  must  be  a  kinde  of  stinging,  tingling  and 
smarting.  It  is  no  longer  love,  be  it  once  without  Arrowes, 
or  without  fire.  The  liberality  of  Ladies  is  to  profuse  in 
marriage,  and  blunts  the  edge  of  affection  and  desire.  To 
avoide  this  inconvenience,  see  the  punishment  inflicted  by 
the  lawes  of  Lycurgus  and  Plato.  But  Women  are  not 
altogether  in  the  wrong,  when  they  refuse  the  rules  of  life 
prescribed  to  the  World,  forsomuch  as  onely  men  have 
established  them  without  their  consent.  There  is  com 
monly  brauling  and  contention  between  them  and  us.  And 
the  nearest  consent  we  have  with  them,  is  but  stormy  and 
tumultuous.  In  the  opinion  of  our  Authour,  we  heerin  use 
them  but  inconsiderately.  After  we  have  knowen,  that 
without  comparison  they  are  much  more  capable  and  violent 
in  Loves-effects  then  we,  as  was  testified  by  that  ancient 
Priest,  who  had  beene  both  man  and  woman,  and  tried  the 
passions  of  both  sexes. 

Venus  huic  erat  utraque  nota :  OVID.  Meta. 

Of  both  sortes  he  knew  venery.  ^:  323- 

We  have  moreover  learned  by  their  owne  mouth,  what  tryall 
was  made  of  it,  though  in  divers  ages,  by  an  Emperour  and 
an  Empresse  of  Rome,  both  skilful  and  famous  masters  in 
lawlesse  lust  and  unruly  wantonnesse ;  for  he  in  one  night 
deflowred  ten  Sarmatian  virgines,  that  were  his  captives ; 

77 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  but  shee  really  did  one  night  also,  answere  five  and  twenty 
v  severall  assaults,  changing  her  assailants  as  she  found  cause 

Upon   some  t    supplv  her  neede,  or  fitte  her  taste, 
verses  of  r  J 

— adhuc  ardens  rigidce  tentigine  vulua  IUVEN.  Sat. 

Et  lassata  viris,  nondum  satiata  recessit.  vi.  127. 

And  that  upon  the  controversie  happened  in  Catalogne, 
betweene  a  wife  and  a  husband ;  shee  complaining  on  his 
over  violence  and  continuance  therein,  not  so  much  in  my 
conceit,  because  she  was  thereby  overlabored  (for  but  by 
faith  I  beleeve  not  miracles)  as  under  this  pretext,  to 
abridge  and  bridle  the  authority  of  husbands  over  their 
wives,  which  is  the  fundamental  part  of  marriage  :  And  to 
shew  that  their  frowning,  sullennesse  and  peevishnesse  exceede 
the  very  nuptiall  bed,  and  trample  under-foote  the  very 
beauties,  graces  and  delights  of  Venus  :  (to  whose  complaint 
her  husband,  a  right  churlish  and  rude  fellow  answered,  that 
even  on  fasting  dayes  he  must  needes  do  it  ten  times  at 
least)  was  by  the  Queene  of  Aragon  given  this  notable 
sentence :  by  which  after  mature  deliberation  of  counsel,  the 
good  Queen  to  establish  a  rule  and  imitable  example  unto 
all  posterity,  for  the  moderation  and  required  modesty  in  a 
lawfull  marriage,  ordained  the  number  of  sixe  times  a  day, 
as  a  lawfull,  necessary  and  competent  limit.  Releafing  and 
diminishing  a  great  part  of  her  sexes  neede  and  desire :  to 
establish  (quoth  she)  an  easie  forme,  and  consequently  per 
manent  and  immutable.  Hereupon  doctors  cry  out ;  what 
is  the  appetite  and  lust  of  women,  when  as  their  reason, 
their  reformation  and  their  vertue,  is  retailed  at  such  a 
rate?  considering  the  divers  judgement  of  our  desires:  for 
Solon  master  of  the  lawiers  schoole  alloweth  but  three  times 
a  month  because  this  matrimoniall  entercourse  should  not 
decay  or  faile.  Now  after  we  beleeved  (say  I)  and  preached 
thus  much,  we  have  for  their  particular  portion  allotted 
them  continency  ;  as  their  last  and  extreame  penalty. 
There  is  no  passion  more  importunate  then  this,  which  we 
would  have  them  only  to  resist :  Not  simply,  as  a  vice  in  it 
self,  but  as  abhomination  and  execration,  and  more  then 
irreligion  and  parricide ;  whilst  we  our  selves  without  blame 
or  reproach  offend  in  it  at  our  pleasure.  Even  those 
78 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

amongst  us,  who  have  earnestly  labored  to  overcome  lust,  CHAPTER 
have  sufficiently  veiwed,  what  difficulty,  or  rather  unresist-  v 

able   impossibilitie   they    found    in   it,    using   neverthelesse     yerses^of6 
material!  remedies,  to  tame,  to  weaken  and  coole  the  body.        Virgil 
And  we  on  the  other  side  would  have  them  sound,  healthy, 
strong,  in  good  liking,  wel-fed  and  chaste  together,  that  is 
to  say,  both  hot  and  colde.     For  marriage  which  we  averre 
should  hinder  them  from  burning,  affords  them  but  smal 
refreshing,  according  as  our  manners  are.     If  they  meet  with 
a  husband,  whose  force  by  reason  of  his  age  is  yet  boyling, 
he  will  take  a  pride  to  spend  it  else-where. 

Sit  tandem  pudor,  aut  eamus  in  ius,  MART.  xii. 

Multis  mentula  millibus  redempta,  EP{S'  xcix- IO- 

Non  est  hcec  tua,  Basse,  vendidisti. 

The  Philosopher  Polemon  was  justly  called  in  question  by 
his  wife,  for  sowing  in  a  barren  fielde  the  fruit  due  to  the 
fertile.  But  if  they  match  with  broken  stuffe  in  ful  wed- 
locke,  they  are  in  worse  case,  then  either  virgins  or  widowes. 
Wee  deeme  them  sufficiently  furnished,  if  they  have  a  man 
lie  by  them.  As  the  Romans  reputed  Clodia  Leta  a  vestall 
virgine  defloured,  whom  Caligula  had  touched,  although  it 
was  manifestly  prooved  he  had  but  approached  her :  But  on 
the  contrary,  their  need  or  longing  is  thereby  encreased ;  for 
but  the  touch  or  company  of  any  man  whatsoever  stirreth 
up  their  heate,  which  in  their  solytude  was  husht  and  quiet, 
and  lay  as  cinders  raked  up  in  ashes.  And  to  the  end,  as  it 
is  likely,  to  make  by  this  circumstance  and  consideration 
their  chastitie  more  meritorious :  Boleslaus  and  Kinge  his 
wife,  King  and  Queene  of  Poland,  lying  together,  the  first 
day  of  their  mariage  vowed  it  with  mutuall  consent,  and  in 
despight  of  all  wedlocke  commoditie  of  nuptiall  delightes, 
maintained  the  same.  Even  from  their  infancy  wee  frame 
them  to  the  sports  of  love :  their  instruction,  behaviour, 
attire,  grace,  learning  and  all  their  words  aimeth  onely  at 
love,  respects  onely  affection.  Their  nurces  and  their 
keepers  imprint  no  other  thing  in  them,  then  the  lovelinesse 
of  love,  were  it  but  by  continually  presenting  the  same  unto 
them,  to  distaste  them  of  it :  My  daughter  (al  the  children 
I  have)  is  of  the  age  wherein  the  lawes  excuse  the  forwardest 

79 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  marry.     She  is  of  a  slowe,  nice  and  milde  complexion, 
v  and  hath  accordingly  beene  brought  up  by  hir  mother,  in  a 

Upon    some  re^re(j  anc[  particular  manner :  so  that  shee  beginneth  but 
verses  of  ,  "«•     i  M  i-  i       •        T   •••         ™ 

Virgil  now  to  put-oft  childish  simplicitie.  she  was  one  day  read 
ing  a  French  booke  before  me,  an  obscene  word  came  in  her 
way  (more  bawdie  in  sound  then  in  effect,  it  signifieth  the 
name  of  a  Tree  and  another  thing)  the  woman  that  lookes 
to  hir,  staid  her  presently,  and  somwhat  churlishly  making 
her  step  over  the  same  :  I  let  hir  alone,  because  I  would  not 
crosse  their  rules,  for  I  medle  nothing  with  this  government : 
womens  policie  hath  a  mysticall  proceeding,  we  must  be 
content  to  leave  it  to  them.  But  if  I  be  not  deceived,  the 
conversation  of  twenty  lacqueis  could  not  in  six  moneths 
have  setled  in  her  thoughts,  the  understanding,  the  use 
and  consequences  of  the  sound  belonging  to  those  filthy 
sillables,  as  did  that  good  olde  woman  by  her  checke  and 
interdiction. 

HOR.  Car.  iii.  Motus  doceri  gaudet  louicos. 

Od.  vi.  21.  Matura  virgo,  et  fingitur  artubus 

lam  nunc,  et  incestos  amores 

De  tenero  meditatur  ungui. 

Maides  mariage-ripe  straight  to  be  taught  delight 
lonique  daunces,  fram'de  by  arte  aright 
In  every  joynt,  and  ev'n  from  their  first  haire 
Incestuous  loves  in  meditation  beare. 

Let  them  somwhat  dispence  with  ceremonies,  let  them  fal 
into  free  libertie  of  speach  ;  we  are  but  children,  we  are  but 
guiles,  in  respect  of  them,  about  any  such  subject.  Heare 
them  relate  how  we  sue,  how  we  wooe,  how  we  sollicitie,  and 
how  we  entertaine  them,  they  will  soone  give  you  to  under 
stand,  that  we  can  say,  that  we  can  doe,  and  that  we  can 
bring  them  nothing,  but  what  they  already  knew,  and  had 
long  before  digested  without  us.  May  it  be  (as  Plato  saith) 
because  they  have  one  time  or  other  beene  themselves 
wanton,  licentious  and  amorous  lads  ?  Mine  eares  hapned  one 
day  in  a  place,  where  without  suspicion  they  might  listen 
and  steale  some  of  their  private,  lavish  and  bould  discourses ; 
O  why  is  it  not  lawful  for  me  to  repeate  them  ?  Birlady 
(quoth  I  to  my  selfe)  It  is  high  time  indeed  for  us  to  go 
studie  the  phrases  of  Amadis,  the  metaphors  of  Aretine, 

80 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

and  eloquence  of  Boccace,  thereby  to  become  more  skilful],  CHAPTER 
more  ready  and  more  sufficient  to  confront  them  :  surely  we  V 

bestow  our  time  wel ;  there  is  nor  quaint  phrase,  nor  choise     verses^of G 
word,   nor  ambiguous  figure,   nor  patheticall  example,  nor        Virgil 
love-expressing  gesture,  nor  alluring  posture,  but  they  know 
them  all  better  then  our  bookes  :    It  is  a  cunning  bred  in 
their  vaines  and  will  never  out  of  the  flesh, 

Et  mentem  Venus  ipsa  dedit.  VIRG.  Georg. 

Venus  her  selfe  assignee  iiL  267- 

To  them  both  meanes  and  minde, 

which  these  skill  infusing  Schoole-mistresses  nature,  youth, 
health  and  opportunitie,  are  ever  buzzing  in  their  eares, 
ever  whispering  in  their  minds :  They  need  not  learn,  nor 
take  paines  about  it ;  they  beget  it,  with  them  it  is  borne. 

Nee  tantum  niveo  gauim  est  nutta  columbo  CATUL.  Eleg. 

Compar,  vel  si  quid  dicitur  improUus,  iv-  I25- 

Oscula  mordenti  semper  decerpere  rostro  : 
Quantum  prcecipue  multivola  est  mulier. 

No  pigeons  hen,,  or  paire,  or  what  worse  name 
You  list,,  makes  with  hir  Snow-white  cock  such  game. 
With  biting  bill  to  catch  when  she  is  kist, 
As  many-minded  women  when  they  list. 

Had  not  this  naturall  violence  of  their  desires  beene  som- 
what  held  in  awe,  by  feare  and  honor,  wherewith  they  have 
beene  provided,  we  had  all  beene  defamed.  All  the  worlds 
motions  bend  and  yeeld  to  this  conjunction,  it  is  a  matter 
every -where  infused;  and  a  Centre  whereto  all  lines  come,  all 
things  looke.  The  ordinances  of  ancient  and  wise  Rome, 
ordained  for  the  service,  and  instituted  for  the  behoofe  of 
love,  are  yet  to  be  scene  :  together  with  the  precepts  of 
Socrates  to  instruct  courtizans. 

Nee  non  libelli  Stoici  inter  sericos  HOR.  Epod. 

lacere  puluillos  amant.  viii.  15. 

Ev'n  Stoicks  books  are  pleas'd 
Amidst  silke  cushions  to  be  eas'd. 

Zeno    among  other  laws,  ordered  also   the  struglings,   the 

opening  of  legges,  and  the  actions,  which  happen  in  the  de- 

flowring  of  a  virgin.     Of  what  sense  was  the  book  of  Strato 

L  81 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  Philosopher,  of  carnall  copulation  ?  And  whereof  treated 
V  Theophrastus  in  those  he  entitled,  one  The  Lover,  the  other, 

Upon  some  QJ-  Love  ?  Whereof  Aristippus  in  his  volume  Of  ancient 
V&  deliciousnesse  or  sports  ?  What  implied  or  what  imported 

the  ample  and  lively  descriptions  in  Plato,  of  the  loves  prac 
tised  in  his  dayes  ?  And  the  lover  of  Demetrius  PJialereus  ? 
And  Clinias,  or  the  forced  lover  of  Heraclides  Ponticus  ? 
And  that  of  Antisthenes,  of  the  getting  of  children,  or  of 
weddings  ?  And  the  other,  Of  the  Master,  or  of  the  lover  ? 
And  that  of  Aristo  Of '  amorous  exercises  ?  Of  Clean thes,  one 
of  love,  another  of  the  Art  of  love  ?  The  amorous  dialogues 
of  Spherus  ?  And  the  filthy  intolerable,  and  without  blush 
ing  not  to  be  uttered  fable  of  lupiter  and  luno,  written  by 
Chrysippus  ?  And  his  so  lascivious  fifty  Epistles  ?  I  will 
omit  the  writings  of  some  Philosophers,  who  have  followed 
the  sect  of  Epicurus,  protectresse  of  all  maner  of  sensuality 
and  carnall  pleasure.  Fifty  severall  Deities  were  in  times 
past  allotted  to  this  office.  And  there  hath  beene  a  nation 
found,  which  to  allay  and  coole  the  lustfull  concupiscence  of 
such  as  came  for  devotion,  kept  wenches  of  purpose  in  their 
temples  to  be  used ;  and  it  was  a  point  of  religion  to  deale 
with  them  before  one  went  to  prayers.  Nimirum  propter 
continentiam  incontinentia  necessaria  est,  incendium  igniuus 
extinguitur.  '  Belike  we  must  be  incontinent  that  we  may 
6  be  continent,  burning  is  quenched  by  fire.'  In  most  places 
of  the  world,  that  part  of  our  body  was  deified.  In  that 
same  province,  some  flead  it  to  offer,  and  consecrated  a  peece 
thereof;  others  offred  and  consecrated  their  seed.  In  another 
the  young  men  did  publikely  pierce,  and  in  divers  places 
open  their  yard  between  flesh  and  skin,  and  thorow  the  holes 
put  the  longest  and  biggest  stickes  they  could  endure,  and  of 
those  stickes  made  afterward  a  fire,  for  an  offring  to  their 
Gods,  and  were  esteemed  of  small  vigour  and  lesse  chastity, 
if  by  the  force  of  that  cruell  paine  they  shewed  any  dismay. 
Else-where,  the  most  sacred  magistrate  was  reverenced  and 
acknowledged  by  those  parts.  And  in  divers  ceremonies 
the  portraiture  thereof  was  carried  and  shewed  in  pompe 
and  state,  to  the  honour  of  sundry  Deities.  The  ^Egyptian 
Dames  in  their  Bacchanalian  feasts  wore  a  wodden  one  about 
their  necks,  exquisitly  fashioned,  as  huge  and  heavy  as  every 
82 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

one  could  conveniently  beare :  besides  that  which  the  statue  CHAPTER 
of  their  God  represented,  which  in  measure  exceeded  the  V 

rest  of  his  body.  The  maried  women  here-by,  with  their  UPon  so™e 
Coverchefs  frame  the  figure  of  one  upon  their  forheads  ;  to  Virgil 
glory  themselves  with  the  enjoying  they  have  of  it ;  and 
comming  to  be  widowes,  they  place  it  behind,  and  hide  it 
under  their  quoifes.  The  greatest  and  wisest  matrons  of 
Rome,  were  honoured  for  offring  flowers  and  garlands  to  God 
Priapus.  And  when  their  Virgins  were  maried,  they  (during 
the  nuptials)  were  made  to  sit  upon  their  privities.  Nor  am 
I  sure,  whether  in  my  time,  I  have  not  scene  a  glimps  of  like 
devotion.  What  meant  that  laughter-moving,  and  maids 
looke-drawing  peece  our  Fathers  wore  in  their  breeches,  yet 
extant  among  the  Switzers  ?  To  what  end  is  at  this  present 
day  the  shew  of  our  formall  peeces  under  our  Gascoine  hoses  ? 
and  often  (which  is  worse)  above  their  naturall  greatnesse,  by 
falshood  and  imposture  ?  A  little  thing  would  make  me  be 
lieve,  that  the  said  kinde  of  garment  was  invented  in  the  best 
and  most  upright  ages,  that  the  world  might  not  be  deceived, 
and  all  men  should  yeeld  a  publike  account  of  their  suffi 
ciency.  The  simplest  nations  have  it  yet  somewhat  resembling 
the  true  forme.  Then  was  the  worke-mans  skill  instructed, 
how  it  is  to  be  made,  by  the  measure  of  the  arme  or  foot. 
That  good-meaning  man,  who  in  my  youth,  thorowout  his 
great  city,  caused  so  many  faire,  curious  and  ancient  statues 
to  be  guelded,  lest  the  sense  of  seeing  might  be  corrupted, 
following  the  advice  of  that  other  good  ancient  man, 

Flagitij  principium  est  nudare  inter  cives  corpora :  Cic.  Tusc.  iv. 

Mongst  civill  people  sinne,  En. 

By  baring  bodies  we  beginne, 

should  have  considered,  how  in  the  mysteries  of  the  good 
Goddesse,  all  apparance  of  man  was  excluded  ;  that  he  was 
no  whit  neerer,  if  he  did  not  also  procure  both  horses  and 
asses,  and  at  length  nature  her  selfe  to  be  guelded. 

Omne  adeo  genus  in  terris,  hominumqueferarumque,  VIRG.  Georg. 

Et  genus  cequoreum,  pecudes,  pictceque  volucres,  iii.  244. 

In  f arias  ignemque  ruunt. 

All  kindes  of  things  on  earth,  wilde  beast,  mankinde. 
Field-beasts,  faire-fethered  fowle,  and  fish  (we  finde) 
Into  loves  fire  and  furv  run  by  kinde. 

83 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  The  Gods  (saith  Plato)  have  furnished  man  with  a  dis- 
v  obedient,  skittish,  and  tyrannicall  member;  which  like  an 

Up°raesS°ofe  untamed  furious-beast,  attempteth  by  the  violence  of  his 
V  Virgil°  appetite  to  bring  all  things  under  his  becke.  So  have  they 
allotted  women  another  as  insulting,  wilde  and  fierce ;  in 
nature  like  a  greedy,  devouring,  and  rebellious  creature,  who 
if  when  he  craveth  it,  hee  bee  refused  nourishment,  as  im 
patient  of  delay,  it  enrageth  ;  and  infusing  that  rage  into 
their  bodies,  stoppeth  their  conduicts,  hindreth  their  respira 
tion,  and  causeth  a  thousand  kindes  of  inconveniences  ;  untill 
sucking  up  the  fruit  of  the  generall  thirst,  it  have  largely 
bedewed  and  enseeded  the  bottome  of  their  matrix.  Now 
my  law-giver  should  also  have  considered,  that  peradventure 
it  were  a  more  chaste  and  commodiously  fruitfull  use,  betimes 
to  give  them  a  knowledge  and  taste  of  the  quicke  ;  then 
according  to  the  liberty  and  heat  of  their  fantasie,  suffer  them 
to  ghesse  and  imagine  the  same.  In  lieu  of  true  essentiall 
parts,  they  by  desire  surmise,  and  by  hope  substitute  others, 
three  times  as  extravagant.  And  one  of  my  acquaintance 
was  spoiled,  by  making  open  shew  of  his  in  place,  where  yet 
it  was  not  convenient  to  put  them  in  possession  of  their 
more  serious  use.  What  harme  cause  not  those  huge 
draughts  or  pictures,  which  wanton  youth  with  chalke  or 
coales  draw  in  each  passage,  wall,  or  staires  of  our  great 
houses  ?  whence  a  cruell  contempt  of  our  naturall  store  is 
bred  in  them.  Who  knoweth,  whether  Plato  ordaining 
amongst  other  well-instituted  Common-wealths,  that  men  and 
women,  old  and  yoong,  should  in  their  exercises  or  Gymnas- 
tickes,  present  themselves  naked  one  to  the  sight  of  another, 
aimed  at  that  or  no  ?  The  Indian  women,  who  daily  without 
interdiction  view  their  men  all  over,  have  at  least  wherewith 
to  asswage  and  coole  the  sense  of  their  seeing.  And  whatso 
ever  the  women  of  that  great  kingdome  of  Pegu  say,  who 
from  their  waste  downward,  have  nothing  to  cover  themselves 
but  a  single  cloth  slith  before ;  and  that  so  straight,  that 
what  nice  modestie,  or  ceremonious  decencie  soever  they 
seeme  to  affect,  one  may  plainly  at  each  step  see  what  God 
hath  sent  them  :  that  it  is  an  invention  or  shift  devised  to 
draw  men  unto  them,  and  with-draw  them  from  other  men 
or  boies,  to  which  unnaturall  brutish  sinne  that  nation  is 
84 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

wholly  addicted :  it  might  be  said,  they  lose  more  then  they  CHAPTER 
get :  and  that  a  full  hunger  is  more  vehement,  then   one  v 

which  hath  beene  glutted,  be  it  but  by  the  eyes.     And  Livia  UPon   so™e 

.,,,,,  i    j  •  verses  of 

said,  that  to  an  honest  woman,  a  naked  man  is  no  more  then       Virgil 

an  Image.  The  Lacedemonian  women,  more  virgin-wives, 
then  are  our  maidens,  saw  every  day  the  young  men  of  their 
citie,  naked  at  their  exercises  :  themselves  nothing  precise  to 
hide  their  thighes  in  walking,  esteeming  themselves  (saith 
Plato)  sufficiently  cloathed  with  their  vertue,  without  var- 
dingall.  But  those,  of  whom  S.  Augustine  speaketh,  have  at 
tributed  much  to  nakednesse,  who  made  a  question,  whether 
women  at  the  last  day  of  judgement  should  rise  againe  in 
their  proper  sex,  and  not  rather  in  ours,  lest  even  then 
they  tempt  us  in  that  holy  state.  In  summe,  we  lure  and 
every  way  flesh  them  :  we  uncessantly  enflame  and  encite 
their  imagination  :  and  then  we  cry  out,  '  But  oh,  but  oh  the 
4  belly.1  Let  us  confesse  the  truth,  there  are  few  amongst  us, 
that  feare  not  more  the  shame  they  may  have  by  their  wives 
offences,  then  by  their  owne  vices ;  or  that  cares  not  more 
(oh  wondrous  charity)  for  his  wives,  then  his  own  conscience ; 
or  that  had  not  rather  be  a  theefe  and  church-robber,  and 
have  his  wife  a  murderer  and  an  heretike,  then  not  more 
chaste  then  himselfe.  Oh  impious  estimation  of  vices.  Both 
wee  and  they  are  capable  of  a  thousand  more  hurtfull  and 
unnaturall  corruptions,  then  is  lust  or  lasciviousnesse.  But 
we  frame  vices  and  waigh  sinnes,  not  according  to  their 
nature,  but  according  to  our  interest ;  whereby  they  take  so 
many  different  unequall  formes.  The  severity  of  our  lawes 
makes  womens  inclination  to  that  vice,  more  violent  and 
faulty,  then  it's  condition  beareth  ;  and  engageth  it  to  worse 
proceedings  then  is  their  cause.  They  will  readily  offer 
rather  to  follow  the  practise  of  law,  and  plead  at  the  barre 
for  a  fee,  or  go  to  the  warres  for  reputation,  then  in  the 
midst  of  idlenesse  and  deliciousnesse  be  tied  to  keepe  so  hard 
a  Sentinell,  so  dangerous  a  watch.  See  they  not  plainly,  how 
there  is  neither  Merchant,  Lawyer,  Souldier,  or  Church-man, 
but  will  leave  his  accounts,  forsake  his  client,  quit  his  glory, 
and  neglect  his  function,  to  follow  this  other  businesse  ? 
And  the  burden-bearing  porter,  souterly  cobbler,  and  toile- 
full  labourer,  all  harassed,  all  besmeared,  and  all  bemoiled, 

85 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  through  travell,  labour  and  trudding,  will  forget  all,  to  please 

V  himselfe  with  this  pleasing  sport. 

Upon    some 

verses  of  Num  tu  qua  tenuit  dives  Achcemenes,  HOR.  Car.  ii. 

Virgil  Aut  pinguis  Phrygice  Mygdonias  opes,  Od.  xii.  21. 

Permutare  veils  crine  Licinlce, 

Plenas  aut  Arabum  domos, 
Dum  fragrantia  detorquet  adoscula 
Cervicem,  autfaclli  sceuitia  negat, 
QUCB  poscente  magis  gaudeat  eripi, 
Interdum  rapere  occupet  ? 

Would  you  exchange  for  your  faire  mistresse  haire, 

All  that  the  rich  Achsemenes  did  hold, 

Or  all  that  fertill  Phrygias  soile  doth  beare, 

Or  all  th'  Arabians  store  of  spice  and  gold  ? 

Whilst  she  to  fragrant  kisses  turnes  her  head, 

Or  with  a  courteous  coinesse  them  denies  ; 

Which  more  then  he  that  speeds  she  would  have  sped, 

And  which  sometimes  to  snatch  she  formost  hies  ? 

I  wot  not  whether  Caesars  exploits,  or  Alexanders  atchive- 
ments  exceed  in  hardinesse  the  resolution  of  a  beautious 
young  woman,  trained  after  our  manner,  in  the  open  view 
and  uncontrolled  conversation  of  the  world,  sollicited  and  bat 
tered  by  so  many  contrary  examples,  exposed  to  a  thousand 
assaults  and  continuall  pursuits,  and  yet  still  holding  her 
selfe  good  and  unvanquished.  There  is  no  point  of  doing  more 
thorny,  nor  more  active,  then  this  of  not  doing.  I  finde  it 
easier,  to  beare  all  ones  life  a  combersome  armour  on  his  backe, 
then  a  maiden-head.  And  the  vow  of  virginity,  is  the  noblest 
HIERON.  of  all  vowes,  because  the  hardest.  Diaboli  virtus  in  lumbis  est: 

4  The  divels  master-point  lies  in  our  loines,'  saith  S.  Jerome. 
Surely  we  have  resigned  the  most  difficult  and  vigorous 
devoire  of  mankinde  unto  women,  and  quit  them  the  glory 
of  it,  which  might  stead  them  as  a  singular  motive  to 
opinionate  themselves  therein :  and  serve  them  as  a  worthy 
subject  to  brave  us,  and  trample  under  feet  that  vaine  pre- 
heminence  of  valour  and  vertue  we  pretend  over  them.  They 
shall  finde  (if  they  but  heed  it)  that  they  shall  thereby  not 
only  be  highly  regarded,  but  also  more  beloved.  A  gallant 
undaunted  spirit  leaveth  not  his  pursuits  for  a  bare  refusall ; 
so  it  bee  a  refusall  of  chastitie,  and  not  of  choise.  Wee  may 
sweare,  threaten  and  wailingly  complaine  ;  we  lie,  for  we  love 
them  the  better.  There  is  no  enticing  lure  to  wisdome  and 
86 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

secret  modestie ;   so  it  be  not  rude,  churlish,  and  froward.  CHAPTER 
It  is  blockishnesse  and  basenesse  to  be  obstinately  willfull  v 

against  hatred  and  contempt :  But  against  a  vertuous  and  U^°^  gs°™ e 
constant  resolution,  matched  with  an  acknowledging  minde,  Virgil 
it  is  the  exercise  of  a  noble  and  generous  minde.  They  may 
accept  of  our  service  unto  a  certaine  measure,  and  make 
us  honestly  perceive  how  they  disdaine  us  not :  for  the 
law  which  enjoineth  them  to  abhorre  us,  because  we  adore 
them  ;  and  hate  us,  forsomuch  as  we  love  them  :  is  doubtlesse 
very  cruell,  were  it  but  for  it's  difficultie.  Why  may  they 
not  listen  to  our  offers,  and  not  gaine-say  our  requests,  so 
long  as  they  containe  themselves  within  the  bounds  of 
modestie  ?  Wherefore  should  we  imagine,  they  inwardly 
affect  a  freer  meaning  ?  A  Queene  of  our  time  said  wittily, 
that  to  refuse  mens  kinde  summons,  is  a  testimony  of  much 
weaknesse,  and  an  accusing  of  ones  owne  facility  :  and  that 
an  unattempted  Lady  could  not  vaunt  of  her  chastitie. 
Honours  limits  are  not  restrained  so  short :  they  may  some 
what  be  slacked,  and  without  offending  somewhat  dispensed 
withall.  At  the  end  of  his  frontiers,  there  is  left  a  free, 
indifferent,  and  newter  space.  He  that  could  drive  and  force 
his  mistresse  into  a  corner,  and  reduce  her  into  her  fort,  hath 
no  great  matter  in  him,  if  he  be  not  content  with  his  fortune. 
The  price  or  honor  of  the  conquest  is  rated  by  the  difficultie. 
Will  you  know  what  impression  your  merits,  your  services 
and  worth  have  made  in  her  heart  ?  ludge  of  it  by  her 
behaviour  and  disposition. 

Some  one  may  give  more,  that  (all  things  considered) 
giveth  not  so  much.  The  obligation  of  a  benefit  hath  wholly 
reference  unto  the  will  of  him  that  giveth  :  other  circum 
stances  which  fall  within  the  compasse  of  good-turnes,  are 
dumbe,  dead  and  casuall.  That  little  she  giveth  may  cost 
her  more,  then  all  her  companion  hath.  If  rarenesse  be 
in  any  thing  worthy  estimation,  it  ought  to  be  in  this. 
Respect  not  how  little  it  is,  but  how  few  have  it  to  give. 
The  value  of  money  is  changed  according  to  the  coine, 
stampe  or  marke  of  the  place.  Whatsoever  the  spight  or 
indiscretion  of  some,  may  upon  the  excesse  of  their  discon 
tentment,  make  them  say ;  Vertue  and  truth  doe  ever 
recover  their  advantage.  I  have  knowen  some,  whose  repu- 

87 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  tation    hath    long   time    beene   impeached   by    wrong,    and 
V  interessed  by  reproach,  restored  unto  all  mens  good  opinion 

verses80©?6  anc^  genera^  approbation,  without  care  or  Art,  onely  by 
Virgil  their  constancie  ;  each  repenting  and  denying  what  he 
formerly  beleeved.  From  wenches  somewhat  suspected, 
they  now  hold  the  first  ranke  amongst  honourable  Ladies. 
Some  told  Plato,  that  all  the  world  spake  ill  of  him  ;  '  Let 
'  them  say  what  they  list '  (quoth  hee)  '  I  will  so  live,  that 
'  He  make  them  recant  and  change  their  speeches/  Besides 
the  feare  of  God,  and  the  reward  of  so  rare  a  glory,  which 
should  incite  them  to  preserve  themselves,  the  corruption  of 
our  age  enforceth  them  unto  it :  and  were  I  in  their  clothes, 
there  is  nothing  but  I  would  rather  doe,  then  commit  my 
reputation  into  so  dangerous  hands.  In  my  time,  the 
pleasure  of  reporting  and  blabbing  what  one  hath  done  (a 
pleasure  not  much  short  of  the  act  it  selfe  in  sweetnesse) 
was  only  allowed  to  such  as  had  some  assured,  trustie  and 
singular  friend ;  whereas  now-a-daies,  the  ordinary  enter- 
tainements  and  familiar  discourses  of  meetings  and  at  tables, 
are  the  boastings  of  favours  received,  graces  obtained,  and 
secret  liberalities  of  Ladies.  Verily  it  is  too  great  an  abjec 
tion,  and  argueth  a  basenesse  of  heart,  so  fiercely  to  suffer 
those  tender,  daintie,  delicious  joyes,  to  be  persecuted, 
pelted,  and  foraged  by  persons  so  ungratefull,  so  undiscreet, 
and  so  giddy-headed.  This  our  immoderate  and  lawlesse 
exasperation  against  this  vice,  proceedeth  and  is  bred  of 
jealousie  ;  the  most  vaine  and  turbulent  infirmitie  that  may 
afflict  mans  minde. 

OVID.  Art.  Quis  vetat  apposito  lumen  de  lumine  sumi  ? 

Amand.  iii.  93.  Dent  licet  assidue,  nil  tamen  inde  perit. 

To  borrow  light  of  light,  who  would  deny  ? 
Though  still  they  give,  nothing  is  lost  thereby. 

That,  and  Envie  her  sister,  are  (in  mine  opinion)  the 
fondest  of  the  troupe.  Of  the  latter,  I  cannot  say  much  ;  a 
passion  which  how  effectuall  and  powerfull  soever  they  set 
foorth ;  of  her  good  favour  she  medleth  not  with  me.  As 
for  the  other,  I  know  it  only  by  sight.  Beasts  have  some 
feeling  of  it.  The  shepheard  Gratis  being  fallen  in  love  with 
a  shee  Goat,  her  Bucke  for  jealousie  beat  out  his  braines  as 

88 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

hee  lay  asleepe.     Wee  have  raised  to  the  highest  straine  the  CHAPTER 
excesse  of  this  moodie  feaver,  after  the  example  of  some  bar- 
barous  nations  :    The  best  disciplined  have  therewith  beene 
tainted,  it  is  reason  ;  but  not  carried  away  by  it :  Virgil 

Ense  maritali  nemo  confossus  adulter, 
Purpureo  stygias  sanguine  tinxit  aquas. 

With  husbands  sword  yet  no  adulter  slaine, 
With  purple  blood  did  Stygian  waters  staine. 

Lucullus,  Caesar,  Pompey,  Anthony,  Cato,  and  divers  other 
gallant  men  were  Cuckolds,  and  knew  it,  though  they  made 
no  stirre  about  it.  There  was  in  all  that  time  but  one 
gullish  coxcombe  Lepidus,  that  died  with  the  anguish  of  it. 

Ah  turn  te  miserum  maliquefati,  CATUL.  Lyr. 

Quern  attractis  pedibus  patente  porta,  Epig.w.  17. 

Percurrent  mugilesque  raphanique. 

Ah  thee  then  wretched,,  of  accursed  fate, 
Whom  Fish- wives,,  Redish-wives  of  base  estate, 
Shall  scoffing  over-runne  in  open  gate. 

And  the  God  of  our  Poet,  when  he  surprised  one  of  his 
companions  napping  with  his  wife,  was  contented  but  to 
shame  them  : 

Atque  aliquis  de  dis  non  tristibus  optat,  OVID.  Met.  iv. 

Sic  fieri  turpis.  187. 

Some  of  the  merier  Gods  doth  wish  in  heart, 
To  share  their  shame,  of  pleasure  to  take  part  : 

And  yet  forbeareth  not  to  be  enflamed  with  the  gentle 
dalliances,  and  amorous  blandishments  she  offereth  him, 
complaining  that  for  so  slight  a  matter  he  should  distrust 
her  to  him  deare-deare  affection  : 

Quid  causas  petis  ex  alto  ?  fiducia  cessit  VIRG.  sEn. 

Quo  tibi  Diva  mei  ?  viii.  395. 

So  farre  why  fetch  you  your  pleas  pedigree  ? 
Whither  is  fled  the  trust  you  had  in  mee  ? 

And  which  is  more,  she   becomes  a  suiter  to  him  in  the 
behalfe  of  a  bastard  of  hers. 

Arma  rogo  genitrix  nato.  ibid.  382. 

A  mother  for  a  sonne,  I  crave, 
An  armor  he  of  you  may  have. 

M  89 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Which  is  freely  granted  her  :  And  Vulcan  speakes  honourably 
V  of  ^Eneas  : 

Upon    some  Arma  acrifacienda  viro.  ViRG.^w.viii. 

verses  of 

Virgil  An  armour  must  be  hammered  out, 

For  one  of  courage  sterne  and  stout. 

In  truth  with  an  humanity,  more  then  humane.  And  which 
excesse  of  goodnesse  by  my  consent  shall  onely  be  left  to 
the  Gods  : 

CATUL.  Eleg.  Nee  dims  fiominis  componier  cequum  est. 

lv-  I41'  Nor  is  it  meet,  that  men  with  Gods 

Should  be  compar'd,,  there  is  such  ods. 

As  for  the  confusion  of  children,  besides  that  the  gravest 
law-makers  appoint  and  affect  it  in  their  Common-wealths, 
it  concerneth  not  women,  with  whom  this  passion  is,  I  wot 
not  how  in  some  sort  better  placed,  fitter  seated. 

Ibid.  138.  Scepe  etiam  luno  maxima  ccelicolum 

Conjugis  inculpa  flagravit  quotidiana. 

Ev'n  luno  chiefe  of  Goddesses  oft-time,, 
Hath  growne  hot  at  her  husbands  daily  crime. 

When  jealousie  once  seazeth  on  these  silly,  weake,  and  unre 
sisting  soules,  'tis  pitifull,  to  see,  how  cruelly  it  tormenteth, 
insultingly  it  tyrannizeth  them.  It  insinuateth  it  selfe  under 
colour  of  friendship  :  but  after  it  once  possesseth  them,  the 
same  causes  which  served  for  a  ground  of  good-will,  serve 
for  the  foundation  of  mortall  hatred.  Of  all  the  mindes 
diseases,  that  is  it,  whereto  most  things  serve  for  sustenance, 
and  fewest  for  remedy.  The  vertue,  courage,  health,  merit 
and  reputation  of  their  husbands,  are  the  firebrands  of  their 
despight,  and  motives  of  their  rage. 

PROPt  "•  El.  Nulled  sunt  inimicitiff  nisi  amoris  acerbcv. 

No  enmities  so  bitter  prove,, 

And  sharpe,  as  those  which  spring  of  love. 

This  consuming  feaver  blemisheth  and  corrupteth  all  that 
otherwise  is  good  and  goodly  in  them.  And  how  chaste  or 
good  a  huswife  soever  a  jealous  woman  is,  there  is  no  action 
of  hers,  but  tasteth  of  sharpnesse  and  smaks  of  importunity. 
It  is  a  furious  perturbation,  a  moody  agitation,  which 

90 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

throwes  them  into  extremities,  altogether  contrary  to  the  CHAPTER 
cause.     The  successe  of  one  Octavius  in  Rome  was  strange,  V 

who   having  layen   with,  and   enjoied   the   love    of  Pontia  Upon    some 
_»     , ,         .    &.      J         i  i  •/»»,•     J  i  -      •        i  i    -          verses  of 

Posthumia,  increased  his  affection  by  enjoying  her,  and  in-        Virgil 

stantly  sued  to  mary  her ;  but  being  unable  to  perswade  her, 
his  extreme  passionate  love  precipitated  him  into  effects  of  a 
most  cruell,  mortall  and  inexorable  hatred,  whereupon  he 
killed  her.  Likewise  the  ordinary  Symptomes  or  passions  of 
this  other  amorous  disease,  are  intestine  hates,  slie  Mono 
polies,  close  conspiracies  : 

Notumque,furens  quidfcemina  possit.  VIRG.  sEn.  v. 

It  is  knowne  what  a  woman  may,, 
Whose  raging  passions  have  no  stay. 

And  a  raging  spight,  which  so  much  the  more  fretteth  it 
selfe,  by  being  forced  to  excuse  it  selfe  under  pretence  of 
good-will.  Now  the  duty  of  chastitie  hath  a  large  extension 
and  farre-reaching  compasse.  Is  it  their  will,  we  would  have 
them  to  bridle  ?  That 's  a  part  very  pliable  and  active.  It 
is  very  nimble  and  quick-rolling  to  bee  staled.  What  ?  If 
dreames  do  sometimes  engage  them  so  farre,  as  they  cannot 
dissemble  nor  deny  them  ;  It  lieth  not  in  them  (nor  perhaps 
in  chastitie  it  selfe,  seeing  she  is  a  female)  to  shield  them 
selves  from  concupiscence  and  avoid  desiring.  If  only  their 
will  interesse  and  engage  us,  where  and  in  what  case  are  we  ? 
Imagine  what  great  throng  of  men  there  would  bee,  in 
pursuit  of  this  privilege,  with  winged-speed  (though  without 
eies  and  without  tongue)  to  be  conveied  upon  the  point  of 
every  woman  that  would  buy  him.  The  Scythian  women 
were  wont  to  thrust  out  the  eies  of  all  their  slaves  and 
prisoners  taken  in  warre,  thereby  to  make  more  free  and 
private  use  of  them.  Oh  what  a  furious  advantage  is 
opportunitie  !  He  that  should  demand  of  me,  what  the 
chiefe  or  first  part  in  love  is,  I  would  answer,  '  To  know  how 
'  to  take  fit  time ' ;  even  so  the  second,  and  likewise  the  third. 
It  is  a  point  which  may  doe  all  in  all.  I  have  often  wanted 
fortune,  but  sometimes  also  enterprise.  God  shield  him 
from  harme,  that  can  yet  mocke  himselfe  with  it.  In  this 
age  more  rashnesse  is  required  ;  which  our  youths  excuse 
under  colour  of  heat.  But  should  our  women  looke  neerer 

91 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  unto  it,  they  might  finde,  how  it  rather  proceedeth  of  con- 
V  tempt.  I  superstitiously  feared  to  offend  ;  and  what  I  love, 

UversesS°of 6  *  w^ngly  respect.  Besides  that,  who  depriveth  this  mer- 
Virgil  chandize  of  reverence,  defaceth  all  luster  of  it.  I  love  that 
a  man  should  therein  somewhat  play  the  childe,  the  dastard 
and  the  servant.  If  not  altogether  in  this,  yet  in  some  other 
things  I  have  some  aires  or  motives  of  the  sottish  bashful- 
nesse,  whereof  Plutarch  speaketh  ;  and  the  course  of  my  life 
hath  diversly  beene  wounded  and  tainted  by  it :  a  qualitie 
very  ill  beseeming  my  universall  forme.  And  what  is  there 
amongst  us,  but  sedition  and  jarring  ?  Mine  eyes  be  as 
tender  to  beare  a  refusall  as  to  refuse  ;  and  it  doth  so  much 
trouble  me  to  be  troublesome  to  others,  that  where  occasions 
force  me  or  dutie  compelleth  me  to  trie  the  will  of  any  one, 
be  it  in  doubtfull  things,  or  of  cost  unto  him,  I  do  it  but 
faintly  and  much  against  my  will :  But  if  it  be  for  mine 
owne  private  businesse  (though  Homer  say  most  truly,  that 
in  an  indigent  or  needy  man,  bashfulnesse  is  but  a  fond 
vertue)  I  commonly  substitute  a  third  party,  who  may  blush 
in  my  roome  :  and  direct  them  that  employ  mee,  with  like 
difficulty  :  so  that  it  hath  sometimes  befallen  me,  to  have 
the  will  to  deny,  when  I  had  not  power  to  refuse.  It  is  then 
folly,  to  go  about  to  bridle  women  of  a  desire,  so  fervent  and 
so  naturall  in  them.  And  when  I  heare  them  bragge  to  have 
so  virgin-like  a  will  and  cold  mind,  I  but  laugh  and  mocke  at 
them.  They  recoile  too  farre  backward.  If  it  be  a  tooth- 
lesse  beldame  or  decrepit  grandame,  or  a  young  drie  pthisicke 
starveling  ;  if  it  be  not  altogether  credible,  they  have  at 
least  some  colour  or  apparence  to  say  it.  But  those  which 
stirre  about,  and  have  a  little  breath  left  them,  marre  but 
their  market  with  such  stuffe  :  forsomuch  as  inconsiderate 
excuses  are  no  better  then  accusations.  As  a  Gentleman  my 
neighbour,  who  was  suspected  of  insufficiencie, 

CATUL.  El.  Languidior  tenera  cui  pendens  sicula  beta, 

iii-  21-  Nunquam  se  mediam  sustulit  ad  tunicam, 

to  justifie  himselfe,  three  or  foure  dayes  after  his  mariage, 
swore  confidently,  that  the  night  before,  he  had  performed 
twenty  courses  :  which  oath  hath  since  served  to  convince 
him  of  meere  ignorance,  and  to  divorce  him  from  his  wife. 
92 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Besides,  this  allegation  is  of  no  great  worth  :   For,  there  is  CHAPTER 
nor  continencie,  nor  vertue,  where  no  resistance  is  to  the  v 

contrary.  It  is  true,  may  one  say,  but  I  am  not  ready  to  yerses^of & 
yeeld.  The  Saints  themselves  speake  so.  This  is  understood  Virgil 
of  such  as  boast  in  good  earnest  of  their  coldnesse  and  in 
sensibility,  and  would  be  credited  with  a  serious  counte 
nance  :  for,  when  it  is  from  an  affected  looke  (where  the  eyes 
give  words  the  lie)  and  from  the  faltring  speech  of  their 
profession  (which  ever  workes  against  the  wooll)  I  allow  of 
it.  I  am  a  duteous  servant  unto  plainnesse,  simplicity  and 
liberty  :  but  there  is  no  remedie,  if  it  be  not  meerely  plaine, 
simple  or  infantine  ;  it  is  fond,  inept  and  unseemely  for 
Ladies  in  this  commerce  :  it  presently  inclineth  and  bendeth 
to  impudence.  Their  disguisings,  their  figures  and  dissimula 
tions  cozen  none  but  fooles  ;  their  lying  sitteth  in  the  chaire 
of  honour ;  it  is  a  by-way,  which  by  a  false  posterne  leads  us 
unto  truth.  If  we  cannot  containe  their  imaginations,  what 
require  we  of  them  ?  the  effects  ?  Many  there  be,  who  are 
free  from  all  strangers-communication,  by  which  chastitie 
may  be  corrupted,  and  honestie  defiled. 

Ittud  scepefacit,  quod  sine  testefacit.  MART.  vii. 

What  she  doth  with  no  witnesse  to  it,  EP&  lxi-  6- 

She  often  may  be  found  to  do  it. 

And  those  whom  we  feare  least,  are  perad venture  most  to  be 
feared  :  their  secret  sins  are  the  worst. 

Offendor  mcecha  simpliciore  minus.  Ibid.  vi.  Epig. 

Pleas'd  with  a  whores  simplicity,  vii-  6. 

Offended  with  her  riicitie. 

There  are  effects,  which  without  impuritie  may  lose  them 
their  pudicitie  ;  and  which  is  more,  without  their  knowledge. 
Obstetrix  virginis  cuiusdam  integritatem  manu  velut  explorans, 
sive  malevolentia,  sive  inscitia,  sive  cam,  dum  inspirit,  per- 
didit :  '  A  Midwife  searching  with  her  finger  into  a  certaine 
'  maidens  virginity,  either  for  ill  will,  or  of  unskilfulnesse,  or 
'  by  chance,  whilest  shee  seekes  and  lookes  into  it,  shee  lost 
'  and  spoiled  it.1  Some  one  hath  lost  or  wronged  her 
virginity  in  looking  or  searching  for  it ;  some  other  killed 
the  same  in  playing  with  it.  Wee  are  not  able  precisely  to 

93 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  circumscribe  them  the  actions  we  forbid  them  :    Our  law 
*  must  be  conceived   under  generall  and   uncertaine  termes. 

versesS°of 6  ^^e  V61T  Idea  we  forge  unto  their  chastity  is  ridiculous. 
Virgil  For,  amongst  the  extremest  examples  or  patternes  I  have  of 
it,  it  is  Fatua  the  wife  of  Faunas  ;  who  after  shee  was  maried, 
would  never  suffer  her  selfe  to  be  scene  of  any  man  whatso 
ever.  And  Hierons  wife,  that  never  felt  her  husbands  stink 
ing  breath,  supposing  it  to  be  a  quality  common  to  all  men. 
It  were  necessary,  that  to  satisfie  and  please  us,  they  should 
become  insensible  and  invisible.  Now  let  us  confesse,  that  the 
knot  of  the  judgement  of  this  duty  consisteth  principally  in 
the  will.  There  have  beene  husbands  who  have  endured  this 
accident,  not  only  without  reproach  and  offence  against  their 
wives,  but  with  singular  acknowledgement,  obligation  and 
commendation  to  their  vertue.  Some  one  that  more  esteemed 
her  honestie  then  she  loved  her  life,  hath  prostituted  the 
same  unto  the  lawlesse  lust  and  raging  sensuality  of  a  mortall 
hatefull  enemy,  thereby  to  save  her  husbands  life  ;  and  hath 
done  that  for  him,  which  she  could  never  have  beene  induced 
to  do  for  her  selfe.  This  is  no  place  to  extend  these 
examples  :  they  are  too  high  and  over-rich,  to  be  presented 
in  this  luster  :  let  us  therefore  reserve  them  for  a  nobler  seat. 
But  to  give  you  some  examples  of  a  more  vulgar  stampe  : 
Are  there  not  women  daily  seene  amongst  us,  who  for  the 
only  profit  of  their  husbands,  and  by  their  expresse  order 
and  brokage,  make  sale  of  their  honesty  ?  And  in  old  times 
Phaulius  the  Argian,  through  ambition  offred  his  to  King 
Philip.  Even  as  that  Galba,  who  bestowed  a  supper  on 
Mecenas,  perceiving  him  and  his  wife  beginne  to  bandy  eie- 
trickes  and  signes,  of  civility  shrunke  downe  upon  his  cushion, 
as  one  expressed  with  sleepe ;  to  give  better  scope  unto  their 
love  ;  which  he  avouched  as  pretily  :  for  at  that  instant,  a 
servant  of  his  presuming  to  lay  hands  on  the  plate  which  was 
on  the  table,  he  cried  outright  unto  him  ;  '  How  now  varlet  ? 
6  Seest  thou  not  I  sleepe  only  for  Mecenas  ? '  One  may  be 
of  a  loose  behaviour,  yet  of  purer  will  and  better  reformed, 
then  another  who  frameth  her  selfe  to  a  precise  apparance. 
As  some  are  seene  complaine  because  they  vowed  chastitie 
before  yeeres  of  discretion  or  knowledge :  so  have  I  seene 
others  unfainedly  bewaile  and  truly  lament  that  they  were 
94 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

vowed  to  licentiousnesse  and  dissolutenes  before  the  age  of  CHAPTER 
judgement  and  distinction.     The  parents  leaudnesse  may  be  V 

the  cause  of  it ;  or  the  force  of  impulsive  necessity,  which  uPon  some 
is  a  shrewd  counsellor,  and  a  violent  perswader.  Though  Virgil 
chastity  were  in  the  East  Indias  of  singular  esteeme,  yet  the 
custome  permitted,  that  a  maried  wife  might  freely  betake 
her  selfe  to  what  man  soever  did  present  her  an  Elephant : 
and  that  which  some  glory  to  have  been  valued  at  so  high  a 
rate.  Phedon  the  Philosopher,  of  a  noble  house,  after  the 
taking  of  his  country  Elis,  professed  to  prostitute  the  beauty 
of  his  youth  to  all  commers,  so  long  as  it  should  continue,  for 
money  to  live  with  and  beare  his  charges.  And  Solon  was  the 
first  of  Grece  (say  some)  who  by  his  lawes,  gave  women  liberty, 
by  the  price  of  their  honestie,  to  provide  for  their  necessities  : 
A  custome  which  Heroditus  reporteth,  to  have  beene  enter 
tained  before  him  in  divers  Common- wealths.  And  moreover, 
what  fruit  yeelds  this  carefull  vexation  ?  For,  what  j  ustice 
soever  be  in  this  passion,  yet  should  we  note  whether  it 
harrie  us  unto  our  profit  or  no.  Thinkes  any  man  that  he 
can  ring  them  by  his  industrie  ? 

Pone  seram,  cohibe ;  sed  quis  cmtodiet  ipsos  IUVEN.  Sat.  vi. 

Custodes  ?  cauta  est,  et  ab  illis  incipit  uxor.  247. 

Keepe  her  with  locke  and  key  :  but  from  her  who  shall 

keepe 
Her  Keepers  ?    She  begins  with  them,  her  wits  so  deepe. 

What  advantage  sufficeth  them  not,  in  this  so  skilfull  age  ? 
Curiosity  is  every  where  vicious  ;  but  herein  pernicious.  It 
is  meere  folly  for  one  to  seeke  to  be  resolved  of  a  doubt,  or 
search  into  a  mischiefe  ;  for  which  there  is  no  remedie,  but 
makes  it  worse,  but  festereth  the  same :  the  reproach  where 
of  is  increased,  and  chiefely  published  by  jealousie  :  and  the 
revenge  whereof  doth  more  wound  and  disgrace  our  children, 
then  it  helpeth  or  graceth  us.  You  waste  away  and  die  in 
pursuit  of  so  concealed  a  mysterie,  of  so  obscure  a  verifica 
tion.  Whereunto  how  pitiously  have  they  arrived,  who  in 
my  time  have  attained  their  purpose  ?  If  the  accuser,  or 
intelligencer  present  not  withall  the  remedy  and  his  assist 
ance,  his  office  is  injurious,  his  intelligence  harmefull,  and 
which  better  deserveth  a  stabbe,  then  doth  a  lie.  Wee  flout 

95 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  him  no  lesse,  that  toileth  to  prevent  it,  then  laugh  at  him 
V"  that  is  a  Cuckold  and  knowes  it  not.  The  character  of 

Upon  some  cuckoldrie  is  perpetuall ;  on  whom  it  once  fastneth,  it  hold- 
Virgil  e^n  f°r  ever.  The  punishment  bewraieth  it  more  then  the 
fault.  It  is  a  goodly  sight,  to  draw  our  private  misfortunes 
from  out  the  shadow  of  oblivion  or  dungeon  of  doubt,  for  to 
blazon  and  proclaime  them  on  Tragicall  Stages  :  and  mis 
fortunes  which  pinch  us  not,  but  by  relation.  For  (as  the 
saying  is)  she  is  a  good  wife,  and  that  a  good  mariage,  not 
that  is  so  indeed,  but  whereof  no  man  speaketh.  Wee  ought 
to  be  wittly-wary  to  avoid  this  irksome,  this  tedious  and  un 
profitable  knowledge.  The  Romans  were  accustomed,  when 
they  returned  from  any  journey,  to  send  home  before,  and 
give  their  wives  notice  of  their  comming,  that  so  they  might 
not  surprize  them.  And  therefore  hath  a  certaine  nation 
instituted  the  Priest  to  open  the  way  unto  the  Bridegroome, 
on  the  wedding  day,  thereby  to  take  from  him  the  doubt 
and  curiosity  of  searching  in  this  first  attempt,  whether 
shee  come  a  pure  virgin  to  him,  or  be  broken  and  tainted 
with  any  former  love.  But  the  world  speakes  of  it.  I  know 
a  hundred  Cockolds,  which  are  so,  honestly  and  little  un- 
decently.  An  honest  man  and  a  gallant  spirit,  is  moaned, 
but  not  disesteemed  by  it.  Cause  your  vertue  to  suppresse 
your  mishap ;  that  honest-minded  men  may  blame  the 
occasion,  and  curse  the  cause  ;  that  he  which  offends  you, 
may  tremble  with  onely  thinking  of  it.  And  moreover, 
what  man  is  scot-free,  or  who  is  not  spoken  of  in  this  sense, 
from  the  meanest  unto  the  highest  ? 

LucR.iii.  1070.  — tot  qui  legionibus  imperitauit, 

Et  melior  quam  tu  multis  fuit,  improbe,  rebus. 

He  that  so  many  bands  of  men  commanded, 

Thy  better  much,  sir  knave,  was  much  like  branded. 

Seest  thou  not  how  many  honest  men,  even  in  thy  presence, 
are  spoken  of  and  touched  with  this  reproach  ?  Imagine 
then  they  will  be  as  bold  with  thee,  and  say  as  much  of  thee 
else-where.  For  no  man  is  spared.  And  even  Ladies  will 
scoffe  and  prattle  of  it.  And  what  do  they  now  adaies  more 
willingly  flout  at,  then  at  any  well  composed  and  peaceable 
mariage  ?  There  is  none  of  you  all  but  hath  made  one 

96 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Cuckold  or  other  :  Now  nature  stood  ever  on  this  point,  '  Kae  CHAPTER 
'  mee  He  kae  thee,1  and  ever  ready  to  bee  even  alwaies  on  v 

recompences  and  vicissitude  of  things,  and  to  give  as  good  as  UP°^    so™e 
one  brings.     The  long-continued  frequence  of  this  accident,        Vire-il 
should  by  this  time  have  seasoned  the  bitter  taste  thereof : 
It  is  almost  become  a  custome.     Oh  miserable  passion,  which 
hath  also  this  mischiefe,  to  be  incommunicable. 

Fors  etiam  nostris  inmdit  qucestibus  aure$.  CATUL.  her. 

Fortune  ev'n  eares  envied,  Argon.  170. 

To  heare  us  when  we  cried. 

For,  to  what  friend  dare  you  entrust  your  grievances,  who, 
if  hee  laugh  not  at  them,  will  not  make  use  of  them,  as  a 
direction  and  instruction  to  take  a  share  of  the  quarie  or 
bootie  to  himselfe  ?  As  well  the  sowrenesse  and  inconve 
niences,  as  the  sweetnesse  and  pleasures  incident  to  mariage, 
are  secretly  concealed  by  the  wiser  sort.  And  amongst  other 
importunate  conditions  belonging  to  wedlocke,  this  one,  unto 
a  babling  fellow  as  I  am,  is  of  the  chiefest ;  that  tyrannous 
custome  makes  it  uncomely  and  hurtfull,  for  a  man  to  com 
municate  with  any  one  all  hee  knowes  and  thinkes  of  it.  To 
give  women  advice  to  distaste  them  from  jealousie,  were  but 
time  lost  or  labour  spent  in  vaine  :  Their  essence  is  so  in 
fected  with  suspicion,  with  vanity  and  curiosity,  that  we  may 
not  hope  to  cure  them  by  any  lawfull  meane.  They  often 
recover  of  this  infirmitie  by  a  forme  of  health,  much  more  to 
be  feared,  then  the  disease  it  selfe.  For  even  as  some  in- 
chantment  cannot  ridde  away  an  evill,  but  with  laying  it  on 
another,  so  when  they  lose  it,  they  transferre  and  bestow  this 
maladie  on  their  husbands.  And  to  say  truth,  I  wot  riot 
whether  a  man  can  endure  any  thing  at  their  hands  worse 
then  jealousie  :  of  all  their  conditions  it  is  most  dangerous, 
as  the  head  of  all  their  members.  Pittacus  said,  that  every 
man  had  one  imperfection  or  other:  his  wives  curst  pate 
was  his  ;  and  but  for  that,  he  should  esteeme  himselfe  most 
happy.  It  must  needs  be  a  weightie  inconvenience,  where 
with  so  just,  so  wise  and  worthy  a  man,  felt  the  state  of  his 
whole  life  distempered  :  what  shall  wee  petie  fellowes  doe 
then  ?  The  Senate  of  Marceille  had  reason  to  grant  and 
enroll  his  request  who  demanded  leave  to  kill  himselfe, 

N  97 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Upon    some 

verses  of 

Virgil 


CHAPTER  thereby  to  free  and  exempt  himselfe  from  his  wives  tempes- 
V  tuous  scolding  humor,  for  it  is  an  evill,  that  is  never  cleane 

rjj  awaV)  but  by  removing  the  whole  peece  :  and  hath  no 
other  composition  of  worth,  but  flight  or  sufferance  ;  both 
too-too  hard,  God  knowes.  And  in  my  conceit,  he  under 
stood  it  right,  that  said,  a  good  mariage  might  be  made 
betweene  a  blinde  woman  and  a  deafe  man.  Let  us  also 
take  heed,  lest  this  great  and  violent  strictnesse  of  obliga 
tion  we  enjoine  them,  produce  not  two  effects  contrary  to 
our  end  :  that  is  to  wit,  to  set  an  edge  upon  their  suiters 
stomacks,  and  make  women  more  easie  to  yeeld.  For,  as 
concerning  the  first  point,  enhancing  the  price  of  the  place, 
we  raise  the  price  and  endeare  the  desire  of  the  conquest. 
Might  it  not  be  Venus  her  selfe,  who  so  cunningly  enhanced 
the  market  of  her  ware,  by  the  brokage  or  panderizing  of 
the  lawes  ?  knowing  how  sottish  and  tastlesse  a  delight  it 
is,  were  it  not  enabled  by  opinion,  and  endeared  by  dearnes  ? 
To  conclude,  it  is  all  but  hogges  flesh,  varied  by  sauce,  as 
said  Flaminius  his  hoast.  Cupid  is  a  roguish  God  ;  his  sport 
is  to  wrestle  with  devotion  and  to  contend  with  justice.  It 
is  his  glory,  that  his  power  checketh  and  copes  all  other 
might,  and  that  all  other  rules  give  place  to  his. 


OVID.  Trist. 
iv.  El.  i.  34. 


TER.  Eunuc. 
act.  iv.  see.  6. 


Materiam  culpce  prosequiturque  suce. 

He  prosecutes  the  ground,, 
Where  he  is  faulty  found. 

And  as  for  the  second  point  ;  should  wee  not  be  lesse 
Cuckolds  if  we  lesse  feared  to  be  so  ?  according  to  womens 
conditions  :  whom  inhibition  inciteth,  and  restraint  inviteth. 

Vbi  veils  nolunt,  ubi  nolis  volunt  ultro  : 

They  will  not  when  you  will, 
When  you  will  not,,  they  will. 

LUCAN.  ii.  445.  Concessd  pudet  ire  via. 

They  are  asham'd  to  passe 
The  way  that  granted  was. 

What  better  interpretation  can  we  finde  concerning  Mes- 
salinas  demeanor  ?  In  the  beginning  she  made  her  silly 
husband  Cuckold,  secretly  and  by  stealth  (as  the  fashion  is) 
but  perceiving  how  uncontrolled  and  easily  she  went  on  with 

98 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

her  matches,  by  reason  of  the  stupidity  that  possessed  him,  CHAPTER 
shee    presently    contemned    and   forsooke  that  course,   and  V 

began  openly  to  make  love,  to  avouch  her  servants,  to  enter-  ^pon  so™e 
taine  and  favour  them  in  open  view  of  all  men  ;  and  would  ^viSi]0 
have  him  take  notice  of  it,  and  seeme  to  be  distasted  with  it : 
but  the  silly  gull  and  senselesse  coxcombe  awaked  not  for  all 
this,  and  by  his  over-base  facility,  by  which  hee  seemed  to 
authorize  and  legitimate  her  humours,  yeelding  her  pleasures 
weerish,  and  her  amours  tastelesse  :  what  did  shee  ?  Being 
the  wife  of  an  Emperour,  lustie,  in  health  and  living  ;  and 
where  ?  In  Rome,  on  the  worlds  chiefe  Theater,  at  high 
noone-day,  at  a  stately  feast,  in  a  publike  ceremonie ;  and 
which  is  more,  with  one  Silius,  whom  long  time  before  she 
had  freely  enjoied,  she  was  solemnly  maried  one  day  that  her 
husband  was  out  of  the  Citie.  Seemes  it  not  that  shee  tooke 
a  direct  course  to  become  chaste,  by  the  retchlesnesse  of  her 
husband  ?  or  that  she  sought  another  husband,  who  by 
jealousie  might  whet  her  appetite,  and  who  insisting  might 
incite  her  ?  But  the  first  difficultie  she  met  with,  was  also 
the  last.  The  drowzie  beast  rouzed  himselfe  and  suddenly 
started  up.  One  hath  often  the  worst  bargaines  at  the  hands 
of  such  sluggish  logger  heads.  I  have  scene  by  experience, 
that  this  extreme  patience  or  long-sufferance,  if  it  once  come 
to  be  dissolved,  produceth  most  bitter  and  outragious  re 
venges  :  for,  taking  fire  all  at  once,  choller  and  fury  hudling 
all  together,  becomming  one  confused  chaos,  clattereth  foorth 
their  violent  effects  at  the  first  charge. 

Irarumque  omnes  effundit  habenas.  VIRG.  ALn.  xii. 

It  quite  lets  loose  the  raine, 
That  anger  should  restraine. 

He  caused  both  her  and  a  great  number  of  her  instruments 
and  abettors  to  be  put  to  death  ;  yea  such  as  could  not  doe 
withall,  and  whom  by  force  of  whipping  shee  had  allured 
to  her  adulterous  bed.  What  Virgill  saith  of  Venus  and 
Vulcan,  Lucretius  had  more  sutably  said  it  of  a  secretly- 
stolne  enjoying  betweene  her  and  Mars. 

— bellifera  munera  Mavors  LUCRET.  i.  33. 

Armipotens  regit,  in  gremium  qui  scepe  tuum  se 
Reijcit,  ceterno  devinctus  vulnere  amoris : 
Pascit  amove  avidos  inhians  in  te  Dea  visus, 

99 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Eque  tuo  pendet  resupinl  vpiritus  ore  : 

V  Hunc  tu  Diva  tuo  recubantem  corpore  sancto 

Upon    some  Circunfusa  super,  suaveis  ex  ore  loquelas 

verses  of  Funds. 

Mars  mighty-arm'd,  rules  the  fierce  feats  of  armes, 
Yet  often  casts  himselfe  into  thine  armes, 
Oblig'd  thereto  by  endlesse  wounds  of  love,, 
Gaping  on  thee  feeds  greedy  sight  with  love,, 
His  breath  hangs  at  thy  mouth  who  upward  lies  ; 
Goddesse  thou  circling  him,  while  he  so  lies, 
With  thy  celestiall  body,  speeches  sweet 
Powre  from  thy  mouth  (as  any  Nectar  sweet). 

When  I  consider  this,  reijcit,  pascit,  inhians,  molti,  fovet, 
medullas,  labefacta,  pendet,  percurrit,  and  this  noble  circun- 

tfusa,  mother  of  gentle  infusus,  I  am  vexed  at  these  small 
points  and  verball  allusions,  which  since  have  sprung  up. 
To  those  well-meaning  people,  there  needed  no  sharpe  en 
counter  or  witty  equivocation  :  Their  speech  is  altogether 
full  and  massie,  with  a  naturall  and  constant  vigor :  They 
are  all  epigram  ;  not  only  taile,  but  head,  stomacke  and  feet. 
There  is  nothing  forced,  nothing  wrested,  nothing  limping  ; 
all  marcheth  with  like  tenour.  Contextus  totus  virilis  est, 
non  sunt  circa  Jlosculos  occupati.  '  The  whole  composition  or 
'  text  is  manly,  they  are  not  bebusied  about  Rhetorike 
'  flowers."  This  is  not  a  soft  quaint  eloquence,  and  only 
without  offence,  it  is  sinnowie,  materiall,  and  solid  ;  not 
so  much  delighting,  as  filling  and  ravishing,  and  ravisheth 
most  the  strongest  wits,  the  wittiest  conceits.  When  I  be 
hold  these  gallant  formes  of  expressing,  so  lively,  so  nimble, 
so  deepe :  I  say  not  this  is  to  speake  well,  but  to  think  wel. 
It  is  the  quaintnesse  or  livelinesse  of  the  conceit,  that 
elevateth  and  puffes  up  the  words.  Pectus  est  quod  disertum 

facit.  '  It  is  a  mans  owne  brest,  that  makes  him  eloquent/ 
Our  people  terme  judgement,  language  ;  and  full  conceptions, 
fine  words.  This  pourtraiture  is  directed  not  so  much  by  the 
hands  dexterity,  as  by  having  the  object  more  lively  printed 
in  the  minde.  Gallus  speakes  plainly,  because  he  con- 
ceiveth  plainly.  Horace  is  not  pleased  with  a  sleight  or 
superficiall  expressing,  it  would  betray  him  ;  he  seeth  more 
cleere  and  further  into  matters :  his  spirit  pickes  and  ran- 
saketh  the  whole  store-house  of  words  and  figures,  to  shew 
100 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

id  present  himselfe  ;  and  he  must  have  them  more  then  CHAPTER 
"dinary,  as  his  conceit  is  beyond  ordinary.     Plutarch  saith,     T      V 

.hat  he  discerned  the  Latine  tongue  by  things.     Here  like-   UP011    son]e 

,.    ,  ,       .,  T  &        TJ     ,i     ii  verses  of 

wise  the  sense   enlightneth  and  produceth  the  words  :    no        Virgil 

longer  windy  or  spongy,  but  of  flesh  and  bone.  They  signifie 
more  then  they  utter.  Even  weake  ones  shew  some  image  of 
this.  For,  in  Italic,  I  spake  what  I  listed  in  ordinary  dis 
courses,  but  in  more  serious  and  pithy,  I  durst  not  have  dared 
to  trust  to  an  Idiome,  which  I  could  not  winde  or  turne 
beyond  it's  common  grace,  or  vulgar  bias.  I  will  be  able  to 
adde  and  use  in  it  somewhat  of  mine  owne.  The  managing 
and  emploiment  of  good  wits,  endeareth  and  giveth  grace 
unto  a  tongue :  Not  so  much  innovating  as  filling  the  same 
with  more  forcible  and  divers  services,  wresting,  straining  and 
enfolding  it.  They  bring  no  words  unto  it,  but  enrich  their 
owne,  waigh-downe  and  cramme-in  their  signification  and 
custome  ;  teaching  it  unwonted  motions  ;  but  wisely  and 
ingenuously.  Which  skill  how  little  it  is  given  to  all, 
may  plainly  bee  discerned  by  most  of  our  moderne  French 
Writers.  They  are  over-bold  and  scornefull,  to  shunne  the 
common  trodden  path  :  but  want  of  invention  and  lacke  of 
discretion  looseth  them.  There  is  nothing  to  be  seene  in 
them  but  a  miserable  strained  affectation  of  strange  Inke-pot 
termes  ;  harsh,  cold  and  absurd  disguisements,  which  in  stead 
of  raising,  pull  downe  the  matter.  So  they  may  gallantize 
and  flush  it  in  noveltie,  they  care  not  for  efficacie.  To  take 
hold  of  a  new  farre-fetcht  word,  they  neglect  the  usuall, 
which  often  are  more  significant,  forcible  and  sinnowy.  I 
finde  sufficient  store  of  stuffe  in  our  language,  but  some  defect 
of  fashion.  For  there  is  nothing  but  could  be  framed  of 
our  Hunters  gibbrish  words  or  strange  phrases,  and  of  our 
Warriours  peculiar  tearmes  ;  a  fruitfull  and  rich  soile  to  bor 
row  of.  And  as  hearbes  and  trees  are  bettered  and  fortified 
by  being  transplanted,  so  formes  of  speach  are  embellished 
and  graced  by  variation.  I  finde  it  sufficiently  plenteous, 
but  not  sufficiently  plyable  and  vigorous.  It  commonly 
faileth  and  shrinketh  under  a  pithy  and  powerfull  concep 
tion.  If  your  march  therein  be  far  extended,  you  often  feele 
it  droope  and  languish  under  you,  unto  whose  default  the 
Latine  doth  now  and  then  present  his  helping  hand,  and  the 

101 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Greeke  to  some  others.     By  some  of  these  words  which  I  have 
v  culled  out,  we  more  hardly  perceive  the  Energie  or  effectuall 

versesS°of 6  oPera^i°n  of  them,  forsomuch  as  use  and  frequencie  have  in 
Virgil  some  sort  abased  the  grace  and  made  their  beauty  vulgar. 
As  in  our  ordinary  language,  we  shall  sometimes  meete  with 
excellent  phrases,  and  quaint  metaphors,  whose  blithenesse 
fadeth  through  age,  and  colour  is  tarnish  by  too  common 
using  them.  But  that  doth  nothing  distaste  those  of  sound 
judgement,  nor  derogate  from  the  glory  of  those  ancient 
Authors,  who,  as  it  is  likely,  were  the  first  that  brought  these 
words  into  luster,  and  raised  them  to  that  straine.  The 
Sciences  handle  this  over  finely,  with  an  artificiall  maner, 
and  different  from  the  vulgar  and  naturall;  forme.  My 
Page  makes  love,  and  understands  it  feelingly ;  Read  Leon 
Hebreeus  or  Ficinus  unto  him ;  you  speake  of  him,  of  his 
thoughts  and  of  his  actions,  yet  understands  he  nothing  what 
you  meane.  I  nor  acknowledge  nor  discerne  in  Aristotle, 
the  most  part  of  my  ordinary  motions.  They  are  clothed  with 
other  robes,  and  shrouded  under  other  vestures,  for  the  use 
of  Academicall  schooles.  God  send  them  well  to  speed  :  but 
were  I  of  the  trade,  I  would  naturalize  Arte,  as  much  as  they 
Artize  nature.  Benbo  and  Equicola.  When  I  write,  I  can 
well  omit  the  company,  and  spare  the  remembrance  of  books  ; 
for  feare  they  interrupt  my  forme.  And  in  truth,  good 
Authours  deject  me  too-too  much,  and  quaile  my  courage. 
I  willingly  imitate  that  Painter,  who  having  bungler-like 
drawn,  and  fondly  represented  some  Cockes,  forbad  his  boies 
to  suffer  any  live  Cocke  to  come  into  his  shop.  And  to  give 
my  selfe  some  luster  or  grace  have  rather  neede  of  some  of 
Antinonydes  the  Musicians  invention  ;  who  when  he  was  to 
play  any  musick,  gave  order  that  before  or  after  him,  some 
other  bad  musicians  should  cloy  and  surfet  his  auditory.  But 
I  can  very  hardly  be  without  Plutark  ;  he  is  so  universall  and 
so  full,  that  upon  all  occasions,  and  whatsoever  extravagant 
subject  you  have  undertaken,  he  intrudeth  himselfe  into  your 
work,  and  gently  reacheth  you  a  helpe-affording  hand,  fraught 
with  rare  embelishments,  and  inexhaustible  of  precious  riches. 
It  spights  me,  that  he  is  so  much  exposed  unto  the  pillage 
of  those  which  haunt  him.  He  can  no  sooner  come  in  my 
sight,  or  if  I  cast  but  a  glance  upon  him,  but  I  pull  some 
102 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

legge  or  wing  from  him.     For  this  my  dissignement,  it  much  CHAPTER 
fitteth  my  purpose,  that  I  write  in  mine  owne  house,  in  a  wild  V 

country,  where  no  man  helpeth  or  releeveth  me ;  where  I  ^P011  sonje 
converse  with  no  body  that  understands  the  Latine  of  his  Virgil 
Pater  noster  and  as  little  of  French.  I  should  no  doubt  have 
done  it  better  else  where,  but  then  the  worke  had  beene  lesse 
mine :  whose  principall  drift  and  perfection,  is  to  be  exactly 
mine  ;  I  could  mend  an  accidentall  errour,  whereof  I  abound 
in  mine  unwary  course  ;  but  it  were  a  kinde  of  treason  to  re 
move  the  imperfections  from  me,  which  in  me  are  ordinary 
and  constant.  When  any  body  else,  or  my  selfe  have  said 
unto  my  selfe  :  Thou  art  too  full  of  figures  or  allegories ; 
here  is  a  word  meerely-bred  Gaskoyne ;  that 's  a  dangerous 
phrase  :  (I  refuse  none  that  are  used  in  the  frequented  streets 
of  France ;  those  that  will  combat  use  and  custome  by  the 
strict  rules  of  Grammar  do  but  jest)  there's  an  ignorant  dis 
course,  that  "s  a  paradoxicall  relation:  or  there's  a  foolish 
conceit :  thou  doest  often  but  dally  :  one  will  thinke  thou 
speakest  in  earnest,  what  thou  hast  but  spoken  in  jest.  Yea 
(say  I)  but  I  correct  unadvised,  not  customarie  errors.  Speake 
I  not  so  every  where  ?  Doe  I  not  lively  display  my  selfe  ? 
that  sufficeth  :  I  have  will :  All  the  world  may  know  me  by 
my  booke,  and  my  booke  by  me  :  But  I  am  of  an  Apish  and 
imitating  condition.  When  I  medled  with  making  of  verses 
(and  I  never  made  any  but  in  Latine)  they  evidently  accused 
the  Poet  I  came  last  from  reading :  And  of  my  first  Essay es, 
some  taste  a  little  of  the  stranger.  At  Paris  I  speake  some 
what  otherwise  then  at  Montaigne.  Whom  I  behold  with 
attention,  doth  easily  convay  and  imprint  something  of  his 
in  me.  What  I  heedily  consider,  the  same  I  usurpe  :  a  foolish 
countenance,  a  crabbed  looke,  a  ridiculous  manner  of  speach. 
And  vices  more :  Because  they  pricke  mee,  they  take  fast 
hold  upon  mee,  and  leave  mee  not,  unlesse  I  shake  them  off. 
I  have  more  often  beene  heard  to  sweare  by  imitation,  then 
by  complexion.  Oh  injurious  and  dead-killing  imitation  : 
like  that  of  those  huge  in  greatnesse  and  matchlesse  in 
strength  Apes,  which  Alexander  met  wit  hall  in  a  certaine 
part  of  India :  which  otherwise  it  had  beene  hard  to  van 
quish.  But  by  this  their  inclination  to  counterfeit  whatso 
ever  they  saw  done,  they  afforded  the  meanes.  For,  thereby 

103 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  Hunters  learrft  in  their  sight  to  put  on  shooes,  and  tie 
v  them   with  many  strings  and  knots ;  to  dresse  their  heads 

verses^of 6  with  divers  strange  attires,  full  of  sliding-knots ;  and  dis- 
Virgil  semblingly  to  rub  their  eyes  with  Glew,  or  Birde-lime.  So 
did  those  silly  harmelesse  beasts  indiscreetly  employ  their 
Apish  disposition.  They  ensnared,  glewed,  entrameled, 
haltred  and  shackled  themselves.  That  other  faculty  of 
Extempore  and  wittily  representing  the  gestures  and  words  of 
another,  which  often  causeth  sport  and  breedeth  admiring,  is 
no  more  in  me  then  in  a  blocke.  When  I  sweare  after  mine 
owne  fashion,  it  is  onely  by  God  ;  the  directest  of  all  oathes. 
They  report  that  Socrates  swore  by  a  Dogge ;  Zeno  by  that 
interjection  (now  a  daies  used  amongst  the  Italics)  Capari; 
and  Pithagoras  by  water  and  by  aire.  I  am  so  apt  at  un 
awares  to  entertaine  these  superficiall  impressions,  that  if  but 
for  three  daies  together  I  use  my  selfe  to  speake  to  any 
Prince  with  your  Grace  or  your  Highnesse,  for  eight  daies 
after  I  so  forget  my  selfe,  that  I  shall  still  use  them  for  your 
Honour  or  your  Worship  :  and  what  I  am  wont  to  speake 
in  sport  or  jest  the  next  day  after  I  shall  speake  in  good 
serious  earnest.  Therefore  in  writing  I  assume  more  un 
willingly  much  beaten  arguments,  for  feare  I  handle  them 
at  others  charges.  All  arguments  are  alike  fertile  to  me.  I 
take  them  upon  any  trifle.  And  I  pray  God  this  were  not 
undertaken  by  the  commandement  of  a  minde  as  fleeting. 
Let  me  begin  with  that  likes  me  best,  for  all  matters  are 
linked  one  to  another.  But  my  conceit  displeaseth  me,  for 
somuch  as  it  commonly  produceth  most  foolish  dotages  from 
deepest  studies ;  and  such  as  content  me  on  a  suddaine,  and 
when  I  least  looke  for  them  ;  which  as  fast  fleete  away, 
wanting  at  that  instant  some  holde  fast.  On  horse  backe,  at 
the  table,  in  my  bed  ;  but  most  on  horse-backe,  where  my 
amplest  meditations  and  my  farthest  reaching  conceits  are. 
My  speach  is  somewhat  nicely  jealous  of  attention  and 
silence ;  if  I  be  in  any  earnest  talke,  who  interrupteth  me, 
cuts  me  off.  In  travell,  even  the  necessity  of  waies  breakes 
off  discourses.  Besides  that  I  most  commonly  travell  with 
out  company,  which  is  a  great  helpe  for  continued  reasonings  : 
whereby  I  have  sufficient  leasure  to  entertaine  my  selfe.  I 
thereby  have  that  successe  I  have  in  dreames :  In  dreaming 
104 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

I  commend  them  to  my  memory  (for  what  I  dream  I  doe  it  CHAPTER 
willingly)  but  the  next  morning,  I  can  well  call  to  minde  v 

what  colour  they  were  of,  whether  blith,  sad  or  strange  :  but  Ul)on    SOI1Je 

i     .  •         i    ,  ,1  PI  verses  of 

what  in  substance,  the  more  1  labour  to  rmde  out,  the  more        Virgil 

I  overwhelme  them  in  oblivion.  So  of  casuall  and  unpre 
meditated  conceits  that  come  into  my  braine,  nought  but  a 
vaine  image  of  them  remaineth  in  my  memory  :  so  much 
onely,  as  sufficeth  unprofitably  to  make  me  chafe,  spight  and 
fret  in  pursuite  of  them.  Well  then,  leaving  bookes  aside  and 
speaking  more  materially  and  simply :  when  all  is  done :  I 
finde  that  love  is  nothing  else  but  an  insatiate  thirst  of 
enjoying  a  greedily  desired  subject.  Nor  Venus  that  good 
huswife,  other,  then  a  tickling  delight  of  emptying  ones 
seminary  vessels  :  as  is  the  pleasure  which  nature  giveth  us 
to  discharge  other  parts :  which  becommeth  faulty  by  im 
moderation,  and  defective  by  indiscretion.  To  Socrates,  love 
is  an  appetite  of  generation  by  the  mediation  of  beauty. 
Now  considering  oftentimes  the  ridiculous  tickling,  or  titila- 
tion  of  this  pleasure,  the  absurd,  giddy  and  hare-braind 
motions  wherwith  it  tosseth  Zeno,  and  agitates  Cratippus : 
that  unadvised  rage,  that  furious  and  with  cruelty  enflamed 
visage  in  loves  lustfull  and  sweetest  effects  :  and  then  a  grave, 
sterne,  severe,  surly  countenance  in  so  fond-fond  an  action, 
that  one  hath  pell-mell  lodged  our  joyes  and  filthes  together, 
and  that  the  supremest  voluptuousnesse  both  ravisheth  and 
plaineth,  as  doth  sorrow  :  I  beleeve  that  which  Plato  saies  to 
be  true,  that  man  was  made  by  the  Gods  for  them  to  toy  and 
play  with  all. 

— qucBiiam  ista  jocandi  Sauitia  ? 
What  cruelty  is  this,  so  set  on  jesting  is  ? 

And  that  Nature  in  mockery  left  us  the  most  troublesome 
of  our  actions,  the  most  common  :  thereby  to  equall  us,  and 
without  distinction  to  set  the  foolish  and  the  wise,  us  and 
beasts  all  in  one  ranke  :  no  barrell  better  Hering.  When  I 
imagine  the  most  contemplative  and  discreetly-wise-men  in 
these  tearmes  in  that  humour,  I  hold  him  for  a  cozoner,  for 
a  cheater  to  seeme  either  studiously  contemplative,  or  dis 
creetly  wise.  It  is  the  foulenesse  of  the  Peacockes  feete, 
which  doth  abate  his  pride,  and  stoope  his  gloating-eyed 
tayle ; 

O  105 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  — ridentem  dicere  verum,  HOR.  Ser.  i. 

V  Quidvetat?  Sat.  ii.  24. 

Upon    some  What  should  forbid  thee  sooth  to  say,  yet  be  as 

verses   of  mery  as  we  may. 

Virgil 

Those  which  in  playes  refuse  serious  opinions,  do  as  one 
reporteth,  like  unto  him  who  dreadeth  to  adore  the  image  of 
a  Saint,  if  it  want  a  cover,  an  aprone  or  a  tabernacle.  We 
feed  full  well,  and  drinke  like  beasts  ;  but  they  are  not 
actions  that  hinder  the  offices  of  our  mind.  In  those,  we 
hold  good  our  advantage  over  them  :  whereas  this  brings 
each  other  thought  under  subjection,  and  by  it's  imperious 
authority  makes  brutish  and  dulleth  all  Platoes  philosophy 
and  divinity  :  and  yet  he  cornplaines  not  of  it.  In  al  other 
things  you  may  observe  decorum  and  maintaine  some  de 
cency:  all  other  operations  admit  some  rules  of  honesty :  this 
cannot  onely  be  imagined,  but  vicious  or  ridiculous.  See 
whether  for  example  sake,  you  can  but  find  a  wise  or  dis- 
creete  proceeding  in  it.  Alexander  said,  that  he  knew  him- 
selfe  mortall  chiefly  by  this  action,  and  by  sleeping :  sleepe 
doth  stifle,  and  suppresseth  the  faculties  of  our  soule :  and 
that  both  endevoureth  and  dissipates  them.  Surely  it  is  an 
argument  not  onely  of  our  originall  corruption,  but  a  badge 
of  our  vanity  and  deformity.  On  the  one  side  nature  urgeth 
us  unto  it  :  having  thereunto  combined,  yea  fastned,  the 
most  noble,  the  most  profitable,  and  the  most  sensually- 
pleasing,  of  all  her  functions :  and  on  the  other  sufFereth  us 
to  accuse,  to  condemne  and  to  shunne  it,  as  insolent,  as  dis 
honest,  and  as  lewder  to  blush  at  it,  and  allow,  yea  and 
to  commend  abstinence.  Are  not  we  most  brutish,  to  terme 
that  worke  beastly  which  begets,  and  which  maketh  us  ? 
Most  people  have  concurred  in  divers  ceremonies  of  religion, 
as  sacrifices,  luminaries,  fastings,  incensings,  offrings :  and 
amongst  others,  in  condemning  of  this  action.  All  opinions 
agree  in  that,  besides  the  so  farre- ex  tended  use  of  circum 
cision.  Wee  have  perad venture  reason  ,to  blame  our  selves, 
for  making  so  foolish  a  production  as  man,  and  to  entitle 
both  the  deeds  and  parts  thereto  belonging,  shamefull  (mine 
are  properly  so  at  this  instant).  The  Esseniens,  of  whom 
Plinie  speaketh,  maintained  themselves  a  long  time  without 
nurces,  or  swathling  clothes,  by  the  arrival  of  strangers  that 

106 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

came  to  their  shoares,  who  seconding  their  fond  humor,  did  CHAPTER 
often  visit  them.  A  whole  nation  hazarding  rather  to  con-  T  v 
sume,  then  engage  themselves  to  feminine  embracements :  pon  some 
and  rather  lose  the  succession  of  all  men,  then  forge  one.  Virgil 
They  report  that  Zeno  never  dealt  with  woman  but  once  in 
all  his  life :  which  he  did  for  civility,  least  he  should  over 
obstinately  seeme  to  contemne  the  sex.  Each  one  avoideth 
to  see  a  man  borne,  but  all  runne  hastily  to  see  him  dye. 
To  destroy  him  we  seek  a  spacious  field  and  a  full  light :  but 
to  construct  him,  we  hide  our  selves  in  some  dark  corner, 
and  worke  as  close  as  we  may.  It  is  our  dutie  to  conceale 
our  selves  in  making  him  :  it  is  our  glory,  and  the  originall 
of  many  vertues  to  destroy  him,  being  framed.  The  one  is 
a  manifest  injury,  the  other  a  greater  favor:  for  Aristotle 
saith,  that  in  a  certaine  phrase,  where  he  was  borne,  to 
bonifie  or  benefit,  was  as  much  to  say  as  to  kill  one.  The 
Athenians,  to  equall  the  disgrace  of  these  two  actions,  being 
to  cleanse  the  He  of  Delos,  and  justifie  themselves  unto 
Apollo,  forbad  within  that  precinct  all  buriall  and  births. 
Nostri  nosmet  poenitet,  '  We  are  weary  of  our  selves. '  There  TER.  Phor. 
are  some  nations  that  when  they  are  eating,  they  cover  them 
selves.  I  know  a  Lady  (yea  one  of  the  greatest)  who  is  of 
opinion  that  to  chew  is  an  unseemly  thing,  which  much 
empaireth  their  grace  and  beauty  :  and  therefore  by  hir  will 
she  never  comes  abroad  with  an  appetite.  And  a  man  that 
cannot  endure  one  should  see  him  eate,  and  shunneth  all 
company  more  when  he  filleth,  then  when  he  emptieth  him- 
selfe.  In  the  Turkish  Empire  there  are  many,  who  to  excell 
the  rest,  will  not  be  scene  when  they  are  feeding,  and  who 
make  but  one  meale  in  a  weeke :  who  mangle  their  faces 
and  cut  their  limmes  :  and  who  never  speake  to  any  body, 
who  think  to  honour  their  nature,  by  disnaturing  themselves: 
oh  fantasticall  people,  that  prize  themselves  by  their  con 
tempt,  and  mend  their  empairing.  What  monstrous  beast 
is  this  that  maks  himselfe  a  horror  to  himselfe,  whom  his 
delights  displease,  who  tyes  himselfe  unto  misfortune  ?  Some 
there  are  that  conceale  their  life, 

Exilioque  domos  et  dulcia  limina  mutant.  VIRG.  Gear.  ii. 

They  change  for  banishment,  The  places  that  511- 

might  best  content, 

107 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  steale  it  from  the  sight  of  other  men:  That  eschew 
V  health,  and  shunne  mirth  as  hatefull  qualities  and  harmefull. 

Upon  some  ^o{.  oneiy  divers  Sects,  but  many  people  curse  their  birth 
°  and  blesse  their  death.  Some  there  be  that  abhorre  the 
glorious  Sunne,  and  adore  the  hidious  darkenesse.  We  are 
not  ingenious  but  to  our  own  vexation  :  It  is  the  true 
foode  of  our  spirits :  force  a  dangerous  and  most  unruly 
implement. 

COR.  GAL.  EL  0  miseri  quorum  gaudia  crimen  habent. 

l-  l%%-  O  miserable  they,  whose  joyes  in  fault  we  lay. 

Alas  poore  silly  man,  thou  hast  but  too-too  many  neces 
sary  and  unavoidable  incommodities,  without  increasing  them 
by  thine  owne  invention,  and  art  sufficiently  wretched  of 
condition  without  any  arte :  thou  aboundest  in  reall  and 
essentiall  deformities,  and  needest  not  forge  any  by  imagina 
tion.  Doest  thou  find  thy  selfe  too  well  at  ease,  unlesse 
the  moity  of  thine  ease  molest  thee  ?  Findest  thou  to  have 
supplied  or  discharged  al  necessary  offices,  wherto  nature 
engageth  thee,  and  that  she  is  idle  in  thee,  if  thou  binde  not 
thy  selfe  unto  new  offices  ?  thou  fearest  not  to  offend  hir 
universall  and  undoubted  lawes,  and  art  mooved  at  thine 
owne  partiall  and  fantasticall  ones.  And  by  how  much  more 
particular,  uncertaine,  and  contradicted  they  are,  the  more 
endevours  thou  bestowest  that  way.  The  positive  orders  of 
thy  parish  tie  thee,  those  of  the  world  do  nothing  concerne 
thee.  Runne  but  a  little  over  the  examples  of  this  con 
sideration  ;  thy  life  is  full  of  them.  The  verses  of  these  two 
Poets,  handling  lasciviousnesse  so  sparingly  and  so  discreetly, 
as  they  do,  in  my  conceit  seeme  to  discover,  and  display  it 
nearer ;  ladies  cover  their  bosome  with  networke ;  priests 
many  sacred  things  with  a  vaile,  and  painters  shadow  their 
workes,  to  give  them  the  more  luster,  and  to  adde  more  grace 
unto  them.  And  they  say  that  the  streakes  of  the  Sunne, 
and  force  of  the  winde,  are  much  more  violent  by  reflection, 
then  by  a  direct  line.  The  Egyptian  answered  him  wisely, 
that  asked  him,  what  he  had  hidden  under  his  cloake  ?  '  It  is  "* 
(quoth  he)  '  hidden  under  my  cloake,  that  thou  maiest  not 
'  know  what  it  is."  But  there  are  certaine  other  things  which 
men  conceale  to  shew  them.  Here  this  fellow  more  open. 

108 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

OVID.  Am.  Et  nudam  pressi  corpus  adusque  meum.  CHAPTER 

My  body  I  applide,  Even  to  her  naked  side.  Upon    some 

verses  of 
Me  thinkes  he  baffles  me.     Let  Martiall  at  his  pleasure        Virgil 

tuck-up  Venus,  he  makes  her  not  by  much  appeare  so  wholly. 
He  that  speakes  all  he  knows,  doth  cloy  and  distaste  us. 
Who  feareth  to  expresse  himselfe,  leadeth  our  conceite  to 
imagine  more  then  happily  he  conceiveth.  There  is  treason 
in  this  kind  of  modesty :  and  chiefly  as  these  do,  in  opening 
us  so  faire  a  path  unto  imagination  :  Both  the  action  and 
description  should  taste  of  purloyning.  The  love  of  the 
Spaniards,  and  of  the  Italians  pleaseth  me :  by  how  much 
more  respective  and  fearefull  it  is,  the  more  nicely  close 
and  closely  nice  it  is.  I  wot  not  who  in  ancient  time  wished 
his  throat  were  as  long  as  a  Cranes  neck,  that  so  hee 
might  the  longer  and  more  leasurely  taste  what  he  swal 
lowed.  That  wish  were  more  to  purpose  then  this  sud- 
daine  and  violent  pleasure  :  Namely  in  such  natures  as 
mine,  who  am  faulty  in  suddainenesse.  To  stay  her  fleeting, 
and  delay  her  with  preambles,  with  them  all  serveth  for 
favour,  all  is  construed  to  be  a  recompence ;  a  wink,  a  cast 
of  the  eye,  a  bowing,  a  word,  or  a  signe,  a  becke  is  as  good 
as  a  Dew  guard.  Hee  that  could  dine  with  the  smoake  of 
roste-meat,  might  he  not  dine  at  a  cheape  rate  ?  would  he 
not  soone  bee  rich  ?  It  is  a  passion  that  commixeth  with 
small  store  of  solide  essence,  great  quantity  of  doating  vanity, 
and  febricitant  raving  :  it  must  therefore  be  requited  and 
served  with  the  like.  Let  us  teach  Ladies,  to  know  how  to 
prevaile  ;  highly  to  esteeme  themselves ;  to  ammuse,  to  cir 
cumvent  and  cozen  us.  We  make  our  last  charge  the  first : 
we  shew  our  selves  right  French  men  :  ever  rash,  ever  head 
long.  Wire-drawing  their  favours,  and  enstalling  them  by 
retaile  :  each  one,  even  unto  miserable  old  age,  findes  some 
listes  end,  according  to  his  worth  and  merite.  He  who  hath 
no  jovissance  but  in  enjoying;  who  shootes  not  but  to  hit 
the  marke ;  who  loves  not  hunting  but  for  the  prey ;  it 
belongs  not  to  him  to  entermedle  with  our  Schoole.  The 
more  steps  and  degrees  there  are  :  the  more  delight  and 
honour  is  there  on  the  top.  We  should  bee  pleased  to  bee 
brought  unto  it,  as  unto  stately  Pallaces,  by  divers  porches, 

109 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  severall  passages,  long  and  pleasant  Galleries,  and  well  con- 
v          trived    turnings.      This   dispensation   would    in    the    end, 
versesS°of 6  red°und  to  our  benefite ;  we  should  stay  on  it,  and  longer 
Virgil        love  to  lie  at  Racke  and  Manger ;  for  these  snatches  and 
away,  marre  the  grace  of  it.    Take  away  hope  and  desire,  we 
grow  faint  in  our  courses,  we  come  but  lagging  after :  Our 
mastery  and  absolute  possession,  is  infinitely  to  bee  feared  of 
them  :    After  they  have  wholy  yeelded  themselves  to   the 
mercy  of  our  faith  and  constancy,  they  have  hazarded  some 
thing  :  They  are  rare  and  difficult  vertues :  so  soone  as  they 
are  ours,  we  are  no  longer  theirs. 

CATUL.  Arg.  — postquam  cupidce  mentis  satiata  libido  est. 

v.  147.  Verba  nihil  metuere,  nihil  perjuria  curant. 

The  lust  of  greedy  minde  once  satisfied,, 
They  feare  no  words  ;  nor  reke  othes  falsified. 

And  Thrasonides  a  young  Grecian,  was  so  religiously 
amorous  of  his  love,  that  having  after  much  sute  gained  his 
mistris  hart  and  favour,  he  was  refused  to  enjoy  hir,  least  by 
that  jovissance  he  might  or  quench,  or  satisfie,  or  languish 
that  burning  flame  and  restlesse  heat  wherwith  he  gloried, 
and  so  pleasingly  fed  himselfe.  Things  farre  fetcht  and 
dearly  bought  are  good  for  Ladyes.  It  is  the  deare  price 
makes  viands  savour  the  better.  See  but  how  the  forme  of 
salutations,  which  is  peculiar  unto  our  nation,  doth  by  it's 
facility  bastardize  the  grace  of  kisses,  which  Socrates  saith, 
to  be  of  that  consequence,  waight  and  danger,  to  ravish  and 
steale  our  hearts.  It  is  an  unpleasing  and  injurious  custome 
unto  Ladies,  that  they  must  afford  their  lips  to  any  man 
that  hath  but  three  Lackies  following  him,  how  unhandsome 
and  lothsome  soever  he  be : 

MART.  v.  Epig.  Cuius  liuida  naribus  caninis, 

xciv.  10.  Dependet  glades,  rigetque  barba: 

Centum  occurrere  malo  culilingis. 

From  whose  dog-nosthrils  black  blew  Ise  depends, 
Whose  beard  frost-hardned  stands  on  bristled  ends,  etc. 

Nor  do  we  our  selves  gaine  much  by  it :  for  as  the  world  is 
divided  into  foure  parts,  so  for  foure  faire  ones,  we  must 
kisse  fiftie  foule  :  and  to  a  nice  or  tender  stomack,  as  are 
those  of  mine  age,  one  ill  kisse  doth  surpay  one  good.  In 
110 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Italy  they  are  passionate  and   languishing   sutors   to  very  CHAPTER 
common  and  mercinarie  women  ;  and  thus  they  defend  and 


excuse  themselves,  saying  ;  That  even  in  enjoying  there  be     P°"   so™e 

certaine  degrees  ;  and  that  by  humble  services,  they  will  en-        Virgil 

devour  to  obtaine  that,  which  is  the  most  absolutely  perfect. 

They   sell  but  their  bodyes,  their  willes  cannot  be  put  to 

sale  ;  that  is  too  free,  and  too  much  it's  owne.    So  say  these, 

that  it  is  the  will  they  attempt,  and  they  have  reason  :  It 

is  the  will  one  must  serve  and  most  solicite.     I  abhor  to 

imagine  mine,  a  body  voide  of  affection.     And  me  seemeth, 

this  frenzie  hath  some  affinity  with  that  boyes  fond  humor, 

who  for  pure  love  would  wantonize  with  that  fayre  Image 

of  Venus,  which  Praxiteles   had   made  :    or  of  that  furious 

^Egyptian,  who  lusted  after  a  dead  womans  corpes   which 

he  was  enbaulming  and  stitching  up  :  which  was  the  occa 

sion  of  the  lawe  that  afterward  was  made  in  Mgypt  :  that 

the  bodies  of  faire,  young  and  nobly  borne  women,  should 

be  kept  three  dayes,  before  they  should  be  delivered  into 

the    hands   of  those    who    had    the    charge  to  provide  for 

their  funerals  and  burials.    Periander  did  more  miraculously  : 

who  extended  his  conjugall  affection  (more  regular  and  law- 

full)  unto  the  enjoying  of  Melissa  his  deceased  wife.     Seemes 

it  not  to  be  a  lunatique  humor  in  the  Moone,  being  other 

wise  unable  to  enjoy  Endimion  hir  favorite  darling,  to  lull 

him  in  a  sweete  slumber  for  many  moneths  together  ;  and 

feed  hirselfe  with  the  jovissance  of  a  boye,  that  stirred  not 

but  in  a  dreame  ?     I  say  likewise,  that  a  man  loveth  a  body 

without  a  soule,  when  he  loveth  a  body  without  his  consent 

and  desire.     All  en  joy  ings  are  not  alike.     There  are  some 

hecticke,  faint  and  languishing  ones.     A  thousand  causes, 

besides  affection  and  good  will,  may  obtaine  us  this  graunt 

of  women.     It  is  no  sufficient  testimony  of  true  affection  : 

therein  may  lurke  treason,  as  else-where  :  they  sometime  goe 

but  faintly  to  worke,  and  as  they  say  with  one  buttocke  ; 

Tanquam  thura  merumque  parent  ;  MART.  xi.  Epi. 

As  though  they  did  dispense,  civ.  12. 

Pure  Wine  and  Frankincense. 

Absentem  marmoredmve  putes.  Ibid.  Epig.  Ixi, 

Of  Marble  you  would  thinke  she  were, 
Or  that  she  were  not  present  there. 

Ill 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  I  knowe  some,  that  would  rather  lend  that,  then  their  coach  ; 

v  and  who  empart  not  themselves,  but  that  way  :  you  must 

versesS°of 6  a^so  mar^e  whether  your  company  pleaseth  them  for  some 

Virgil        other  respect,  or  for  that  end  onely,  as  of  a  lustie-strong 

grome  of  a  Stable  :  as  also  in  what  rank,  and  at  what  rate 

you  are  there  lodged  or  valued ; 

CATUL.  Eleg.  — tibi  si  datur  uni 

iv.  147.  Quo  lapide  ilia  diem  candidiore  notet. 

If  it  afforded  be  to  thee  alone, 

Whereby  she  counts  that  day  of  all  dayes  one. 

What  if  she  eate  your  bread,  with  the  sauce  of  a  more  pleas 
ing  imagination  ? 

TIHUL.  iv.  El.  Te  tenet,  absentes  alios  suspirat  amores. 

\.  1 1. 

Thee  she  retaines,  yet  sigheth  she 

For  other  loves  that  absent  be. 

What?  have  we  not  scene  some  in  our  dayes,  to  have  made  use 
of  this  action,  for  the  execution  of  a  most  horrible  revenge, 
by  that  meanes  murthering  and  empoysoning  (as  one  did)  a 
very  honest  woman?  such  as  know  Italic  will  never  wonder,  if 
for  this  subject,  I  seeke  for  no  examples  else-where.  For  the 
said  nation  may  in  that  point  be  termed  Regent  of  the  world. 
They  have  commonly  more  faire  women,  and  fewer  foule  then 
we  ;  but  in  rare  and  excellent  beauties  I  thinke  we  match 
them.  The  like  I  judge  of  their  wits  ;  of  the  vulgar  sort 
they  have  evidently  many  more.  Blockishnes  is  without  all 
comparison  more  rare  amongst  them  :  but  for  singular  wits, 
and  of  the  highest  pitch,  we  are  no  whit  behinde  them. 
Were  I  to  extend  this  comparison,  I  might  (me  thinkes)  say, 
touching  valor,  that  on  the  other-side,  it  is  in  regard  of  them 
popular  and  naturall  amongst  us  :  but  in  their  hands  one 
may  sometimes  finde  it  so  compleate  and  vigorous,  that  it 
exceedeth  all  the  most  forcible  examples  we  have  of  it.  The 
manages  of  that  countrie  are  in  this  somewhat  defective. 
Their  custome  doth  generally  impose  so  severe  observances, 
and  slavish  lawes  upon  wives,  that  the  remotest  acquaintance 
with  a  stranger,  is  amongst  them  as  capitall  as  the  nearest. 
Which  law  causeth,  that  ail  aproaches  prove  necessarily 
substanciall :  and  seeing  all  commeth  to  one  reckoning  with 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

them,  they  have  an    easie  choise :    and  have   they  broken  CHAPTER 

downe  their  hedges?    Beleeve  it,  they  will  have  fire  :  Luxuria  V 

ipsis   vinculis,   sicut  fera    bestia,    irritata,    delude    emissa :  £™e™™ 

'  Luxurie  is  like  a  wild  beast,  first  made  fiercer  with  tying,  Virgil 
4  and  then  let  loose/    They  must  have  the  reynes  given  them 
a  little. 

Vide  ego  nuper  equum  contra  suafrena  tenacem  Ovip.  Am.  Hi. 

Ore  reluctantifulminis  ire  modo.  El.  iv.  13. 

I  saw,  spite  of  his  bit,  a  resty  colt, 

Runne  head-strong  headlong  like  a  thunder-bolt. 

They  allay  the  desire  of  company,  by  giving  it  some  liberty. 
It  is  a  commendable  custome  with  our  nation,  that  our 
children  are  entertained  in  noble  houses  there,  as  in  a  schoole 
of  nobility  to  be  trained  and  brought  up  as  Pages.  And 
'tis  said  to  be  a  kinde  of  discourtesie,  to  refuse  it  a  gentle 
man.  I  have  observed  (for,  so  many  houses  so  many 
severall  formes  and  orders)  that  such  Ladies  as  have  gone 
about  to  give  their  waiting  women,  the  most  austere  rules, 
have  not  had  the  best  successe.  There  is  required  more  then 
ordinary  moderation  :  a  great  part  of  their  government  must 
bee  left  to  the  conduct  of  their  discretion  :  For,  when  all 
comes  to  all  no  discipline  can  bridle  them  in  each  point. 
True  it  is,  that  she  who  escapeth  safe  and  unpolluted  from 
out  the  schoole  of  fredome,  giveth  more  confidence  of  hirselfe, 
then  she  who  commeth  sound  out  of  the  schoole  of  severity 
and  restraint.  Our  forefathers  framed  their  daughters  coun 
tenances  unto  shamefastnesse  and  feare,  (their  inclinations  and 
desires  alwaies  alike)  we  unto  assurance.  We  understand 
not  the  matter.  That  belongeth  to  the  Sarmatian  wenches, 
who  by  their  lawes  may  lie  with  no  man,  except  with  their 
owne  hands  they  have  before  killed  another  man  in  warre. 
To  me  that  have  no  right  but  by  the  eares,  it  sufficeth,  if 
they  retaine  me  to  be  of  their  counsell,  following  the  privi- 
ledge  of  mine  age:  I  then  advise  both  them  and  us  to 
embrace  abstinence,  but  if  this  season  bee  too  much  against 
it,  at  least  modestie  and  discretion.  For,  as  Aristippus 
(speaking  to  some  young  men  who  blushed  to  see  him  go 
into  a  bawdy  house)  said,  the  fault  was  not  in  entring,  but 
in  not  comming  out  again.  She  that  will  not  exempt  hir 
P  113 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  conscience,  let  hir  exempt  hir  name  :  though  the  substance 
v  bee  not  of  worth,  yet  let  the  apparance  hould  still  good.  I 

Up°rsesS°of 6  ^ove  gradation  and  prolonging,  in  the  distribution  of  their 
Virgil  favours.  Plato  sheweth,  that  in  all  kinds  of  love,  facility 
and  readinesse  is  forbidden  to  defendants.  °"Tis  a  trick  of 
greedinesse,  which  it  behoveth  them  to  cloake  with  their 
arte,  so  rashly  and  fond-hardily  to  yeeld  themselves  in  grosse. 
In  their  distributions  of  favours,  holding  a  regular  and 
moderate  course,  they  much  better  deceive  our  desires,  and 
conceale  theirs.  Let  them  ever  be  flying  before  us  :  I  meane 
even  those  that  intend  to  bee  overtaken  as  the  Scithians  are 
wont,  though  they  seeme  to  runne  away,  they  beate  us 
more,  and  sooner  put  us  to  route.  Verily  according  to  the 
lawe  which  nature  giveth  them,  it  is  not  fit  for  them  to  will 
and  desire :  their  partis  to  beare,  to  obay  and  to  consent. 
Therefore  hath  nature  bestowed  a  perpetuall  capacity  ;  on 
us  a  seld  and  uncertaine  ability.  They  have  alwayes  their 
houre,  that  they  may  ever  be  ready  to  let  us  enter.  And 
whereas  she  hath  willed  our  appetites  should  make  apparant 
shew  and  declaration,  she  caused  theirs  to  bee  concealed  and 
inward  :  and  hath  furnished  them  with  parts  unfit  for  ostenta 
tion  ;  and  onely  for  defence.  Such  prankes  as  this,  we  must 
leave  to  the  Amazonian  liberty.  Alexander  the  great  march 
ing  through  Hircania,  Thalestris  Queen  of  the  Amazones 
came  to  meet  him  with  thre  hundred  ladies  of  her  sex,  all 
well  mounted  and  compleately  armed ;  having  left  the 
residue  of  a  great  armie,  that  followed  hir,  beyond  the 
neighbouring  mountaines.  And  thus  aloud,  that  all  might 
heare  she  bespake  him  ;  That  the  farre- resounding  fame  of 
his  victories,  and  matchles  valour,  had  brought  hir  thither  to 
see  him,  and  to  offer  him  hir  meanes  and  forces,  for  the 
advancing  and  furthering  of  his  enterprises.  And  finding 
him  so  faire,  so  young  and  strong,  she,  who  was  perfectly 
accomplished  in  all  his  qualities,  advised  him  to  lye  with  hir 
that  so  there  might  be  borne  of  the  most  valiant  woman  in 
the  world,  and  only  valiant  man  then  living,  some  great  and 
rare  creature  for  posterity.  Alexander  thanked  hir  for  the 
rest,  but  to  take  leasure  for  hir  last  demands  accomplishment, 
he  staide  thirteene  daies  in  that  place,  during  which,  he 
revelled  with  as  much  glee,  and  feasted  with  as  great  jollity 
114 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

as  possibly  could  be  devised,  in  honour  and  favour  of  so  coura-  CHAPTER 
gious  a  Princess.     Wee  are  well-nigh  in  all  things  parciall  v 

and  corrupted  Judges  of  their  action,  as  no  doubt  they  are 
of  ours.  I  allow  of  truth  as  well  when  it  hurts  me,  as  when  it  Virgil 
helps  me.  It  is  a  foule  disorder,  that  so  often  urgeth  them 
unto  change,  and  hinders  them  from  setling  their  affection  on 
any  one  subject :  as  wee  see  in  this  Goddesse,  to  whom  they 
impute  so  many  changes  and  severall  friends.  But  withall 
it  is  against  the  nature  of  love,  not  to  be  violent,  and  against 
the  condition  of  violence,  to  be  constant.  And  those  who 
wonder  at  it,  exclaime  against  it,  and  in  women  search  for 
the  causes  of  this  infirmity,  as  incredible  and  unnaturall : 
why  see  they  not  how  often,  without  any  amazement  and 
exclaiming,  themselves  are  possessed  and  infected  with  it  ? 
It  might  happily  seeme  more  strange  to  find  any  constant 
stay  in  them.  It  is  not  a  passion  meerely  corporeall.  If  no 
end  be  found  in  coveteousnesse,  nor  limit  in  ambition,  assure 
your  selfe  there  is  nor  end  nor  limit  in  letchery.  It  yet  con- 
tinueth  after  saciety  :  nor  can  any  man  prescribe  it  or  end  or 
constant  satisfaction  :  it  ever  goeth  on  beyond  it's  possession, 
beyond  it's  bounds.  And  if  constancy  be  peradventure  in 
some  sort  more  pardonable  in  them  then  in  us :  They  may 
readily  alleage  against  us,  our  ready  inclination  unto  daily 
variety  and  new  ware :  And  secondly  alleage  without  us, 
that  they  buy  a  pigge  in  a  poake.  lone  Queen  of  Naples 
caused  Andreosse  her  first  husband  to  be  strangled  and 
hanged  out  of  the  barres  of  his  window,  with  a  corde  of  Silke 
and  golde  woven  with  her  owne  hands  ;  because  in  bed  busi- 
nesse  she  found  neither  his  members  nor  endevours  answer 
able  the  hope  shee  had  conceived  of  him,  by  viewing  his 
stature,  beauty,  youth,  and  disposition,  by  which  she  had 
formerly  beene  surprised  and  abused.  That  action  hath  in 
it  more  violence  then  passion  :  so  that  on  their  part  at  least 
necessity  is  ever  provided  for  :  on  our  behalfe  it  may  happen 
otherwise.  Therefore  Plato  by  his  lawes  did  very  wisely 
establish,  that  before  marriages  the  better  to  decide  it's 
opportunity,  competent  ludges  might  be  appointed  to  take 
view  of  yong  men  which  pretended  the  same,  all  naked:  and 
of  maidens  but  to  the  waste  :  in  making  triall  of  us,  they 
happily  find  us  not  worthy  their  choise : 

115 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Experta  latus,  madidoque  simillima  faro  MARTI,  vii. 

y  Inguina,  nee  lassa  stare  coacta  manu  Epig.  lvu-  3- 

Upon    some  Deserit  imbelles  thalamos. 

vel!es.j°f     It  is  n°t  sufficient,  that  will  keepe  a  lively  course:  weake- 
nesse  and  incapacity  may  lawfully  breake  wedlock ; 

CATUL.  Eleg.  Et  quterendum  aliundv  foret  neruosius  ittud 

*"•  27-  Quod  posset  Zonam  soluere  virgineam. 

Why  not,  and  according  to  measure,  an  amorous  intel 
ligence,  more  licentious  and  more  active  ? 

VIRG.  Gear.  Si  blando  nequeat  super esse  labori. 

m*  I27-  If  it  cannot  out  last,  labor  with  pleasure  past. 

But  is  it  not  great  impudency,  to  bring  our  imperfections 
and  weakenesse,  in  place  where  we  desire  to  please,  and  leave 
a  good  report  and  commendation  behind  us  ?  for  the  little  I 
now  stand  in  need  of, 

— ad  unum 
Mollis  opus. 

Unable  to  hold  out,  one  onely  busie  bout. 
I  would  not  importune  any  one,  whom  I  am  to  reverence. 

HOR.  Car.  ii.  —fuge  suspicari, 

Od.  iv.  22.  Cuius  undenum  trepidavit  cetas 

Claudere  lustrum. 

Him  of  suspition  cleare, 

Whom  age  hath  brought  well  neare 

To  five  and  fifty  yeare. 

Nature  should  have  beene  pleased  to  have  made  this  age 
miserable,  without  making  it  also  ridiculous.  I  hate  to  see 
one  for  an  inch  of  wretched  vigor,  which  enflames  him  but 
thrice  a  week,  take-on  and  swagger  as  fiercely,  as  if  he  hath 
some  great  and  lawfull  dayes-worke  in  his  belly :  a  right 
blast  or  puffe  of  winde :  And  admire  his  itching,  so  quick 
and  nimble,  all  in  a  moment  to  be  lubberly  squat  and 
benummed.  This  appetite  should  only  belong  to  the  blos 
som  of  a  prime  youth.  Trust  not  unto  it,  thogh  you  see  it 
second  that  indefatigable,  full,  constant  and  swelling  heate, 
that  is  in  you  :  for  truly  it  will  leave  you  at  the  best,  and 
when  you  shall  most  stand  in  neede  of  it.  Send  it  rather 
116 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

to  some   tender,    irresolute    and    ignorant   girle,  which  yet  CHAPTER 

trembleth  for  feare  of  the  rod,  and  that  will  blush  at  it,  v 

Upon    some 

VIRG.  ^En.       Indum  sanguineo  veluti  violaverit  astro,  verses  of 

xii.  67.  Si  quis  ebur,  vel  mista  rubent  ubi  lilia,  multa  Virgil 

Alba  rosa. 

As  if  the  Indian  Yvory  one  should  taint, 
With  bloody  Scarlet-graine,  or  Lillies  paint, 
White  entermixt  with  red  with  Roses  enter-spred. 

Who  can  stay  untill  the  next  morrow,  and  not  die  for 
shame,  the  disdaine  of  those  love  sparkling  eyes,  privie  to 
his  faintnesse,  dastardise  and  impertinencie  ; 

Et  tacitifecere  tamen  conuitia  vultus.  OVID.  Am.  i. 

The  face  though  silent,  yet  silent  upbraydes-it ;  El-  vu-  2I- 

he  never  felt  the  sweet  contentment,  and  the  sense-mooving 
earnestnes,  to  have  beaten  and  tarnished  them  by  the  vigor 
ous  exercise  of  an  officious  and  active  night.  When  I  have 
perceived  any  of  them  weary  of  me,  I  have  not  presently 
accused  her  lightnes  :  but  made  question  whether  I  had  not 
more  reason  to  quarrell  with  nature,  for  handling  me  so 
unlawfully  and  uncivilly, 

Si  non  longa  satis,  si  non  bene  mentula  crassa :  Lus.  PRIAP. 

Nimirum  sapiunt  videntque  paruam  penul.  i ;  ib. 

MatroncR  quoque  mentulam  illibenter,  viii.  4. 

and  to  my  exceeding  hurt.  Each  of  my  pieces  are  equally 
mine,  one  as  another :  and  no  other  doth  more  properly 
make  me  a  man  then  this.  My  whole  pourtraiture  I  univer 
sally  owe  unto  the  world.  The  wisedome  and  reach  of  my 
lesson,  is  all  in  truth,  in  liberty,  in  essence :  Disdaining  in 
the  catalogue  of  my  true  duties,  these  easie,  faint,  ordinary 
and  provinciall  rules.  All  naturall ;  constant  and  generall ; 
whereof  civility  and  ceremonie,  are  daughters,  but  bastards. 
We  shall  easily  have  the  vices  of  apparance,  when  we  shall 
have  had  those  of  essence.  When  we  have  done  with  these, 
we  run  upon  others,  if  we  finde  need  of  running.  For  there 
is  danger,  that  we  devise  new  offices,  to  excuse  our  negli 
gence  toward  naturall  offices,  and  to  confound  them.  That 
it  is  so,  we  see  that  in  places  where  faults  are  bewitchings, 

117 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  bewitchings  are  but  faults.  That  among  nations,  where 
v  ^  lawes  of  seemelinesse  are  more  rare  and  slacke,  the  primitive 
versesS°of  6  ^awes  °f  common  reason  are  better  observed  :  The  innumer- 
Virgil  able  multitude  of  so  manifold  duties,  stifling,  languishing 
and  dispersing  our  care.  The  applying  of  our  selves  unto 
sleight  matters,  with-draweth  us  from  such  as  be  just.  Oh 
how  easie  and  plausible  a  course  do  these  superficiall  men 
undertake,  in  respect  of  ours.  These  are  but  shadowes 
under  which  we  shroud,  and  wherwith  we  pay  one  another. 
But  we  pay  not,  but  rather  heape  debt  on  debt,  unto  that 
great  and  dreadfull  judge,  who  tucks  up  our  clouts  and  rags 
from  about  our  privie  parts,  and  is  not  squeamish  to  view 
all  over,  even  to  our  most  inward  and  secret  deformities :  a 
beneficiall  decencie  of  our  maidenly  bashfulnesse,  could  it 
debar  him  of  this  tainted  discovery.  To  conclude,  he  that 
could  recover  or  un-besot  man,  from  so  scrupulous  and 
verball  a  superstition,  should  not  much  prejudice  the  world. 
Our  life  consisteth  partly  in  folly,  and  partly  in  wisedome. 
Hee  that  writes  of  it  but  reverently  and  regularly,  omits  the 
better  moitie  of  it.  I  excuse  me  not  unto  my  selfe,  and  if  I 
did,  I  would  rather  excuse  my  excuses,  then  any  fault  else 
of  mine  :  I  excuse  my  selfe  of  certaine  humors,  which  in 
number  I  hold  stronger,  then  those  which  are  on  my  side  : 
In  consideration  of  which  I  will  say  thus  much  more  (for  I 
desire  to  please  all  men  ;  though  it  be  a  hard  matter,  Esse 
unum  hominem  accommodatum  ad  tantam  momm,  ac  sermonum 
et  voluntatum  varietatem,  '  That  one  man  should  be  apply- 
'  able  to  so  great  variety  of  manners,  speeches  and  disposi- 
'  tions')  that  they  are  not  to  blame  me,  for  what  I  cause 
auctorities  received  and  approved  of  many  ages,  to  utter: 
and  that  it  is  not  reason,  they  should  for  want  of  ryme  deny 
me  the  dispensation,  which  ever  some  of  our  church-men 
usurpe  and  enjoy  in  this  season ;  whereof  behold  here  two, 
and  of  the  most  pert  and  cocket  amongst  them  : 

Rimula  dispeream,  ni  monogramma  tua  est. 
Vn  vit  d'amy  la  contente  et  bien  traitte. 

How  many  others  more  ?     I  love  modestie ;  nor  is  it  from 
judgement  that  I  have  made  choise  of  this  kinde  of  scandal 
ous  speech  ;    'tis  nature  hath   chosen   the   same   for  me :  I 
118 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

commend  it  no  more,  then  all  formes  contrary  unto  received  CHAPTER 
custome  :   onely  I  excuse  it ;   and  by  circumstances  aswell  V 

generall  as  particular,  would  qualifie  the  imputation.     Well,     £ ™ess°0™e 
let  us  proceed.     Whence  commeth  also  the  usurpation   of       Virgil 
soveraigne  auctority,   which  you  assume  unto  your  selves, 
over  those  that  favour  you  to  their  cost  and  prejudice, 

Sifurtiva  dedit  nigra  munuscula  node.  CATUL.  EL 

If  she  have  giv'n  by  night,  The  stolne  gift  of  delight. 

that  you  should  immediatly  invest  withall  the  interest,  the 
coldnes,  and  a  wedlock  authority  ?  It  is  a  free  bargaine, 
why  do  you  not  undertake  it  on  those  termes  you  would 
have  them  to  keepe  ?  There  is  no  prescription  upon  volun- 
tarie  things.  It  is  against  forme,  yet  it  is  true,  that  I  have 
in  my  time  managed  this  match  (so  farre  as  the  nature  of  it 
would  allow)  with  as  much  conscience  as  any  other  whatso 
ever,  and  not  without  some  colour  of  justice:  and  have 
given  them  no  further  testimony  of  mine  affection,  then  I 
sincerely  felt :  and  have  lively  displaide  unto  them  the 
declination,  vigor  and  birth  of  the  same  ;  with  the  fits  and 
deferring  of  it :  A  man  cannot  alwayes  keepe  an  even  pace, 
nor  ever  go  to  it  alike.  I  have  bin  so  sparing  to  promise, 
that  (as  I  thinke)  I  have  paid  more  then  either  I  promised 
or  was  due.  They  have  found  mee  faithfull,  even  to  the 
service  of  their  inconstancy :  I  say  an  inconstancy  avowed, 
and  sometimes  multiplied.  I  never  broke  with  them,  as  long 
as  I  had  any  hold,  were  it  but  by  a  threds-end  :  and  what 
soever  occasion  they  have  given  me  by  their  ficklenes,  I  never 
fell  off  unto  contempt  and  hatred :  for  such  familiarities, 
though  I  attaine  them  on  most  shamefull  conditions,  yet  do 
they  bind  me  unto  some  constant  good-will.  I  have  some 
time  given  them  a  taste  of  choller  and  indiscret  impatience, 
upon  occasions  of  their  wiles,  sleights,  close-convayances, 
controversies  and  contestations  betweene  us :  for,  by  com 
plexion,  I  am  subject  to  hastie  and  rash  motions,  which 
often  empeach  my  traffick,  and  marre  my  bargaines,  though 
but  meane  and  of  small  worth.  Have  they  desired  to  essay 
the  liberty  of  my  judgement,  I  never  dissembled  to  give 
them  fatherly  counsell  and  biting  advise,  and  shewed  my 
selfe  ready  to  scratch  them  where  they  itched.  If  I  have 

119 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  given  them  cause  to  complaine  of  me,  it  hath  bin  most  for 
V  finding  a  love  in  me,  in   respect  of  our  moderne  fashion, 

pon  some  foolishly  conscientious.  I  have  religiously  kept  my  word, 
Virgil  m  things,  that  I  might  easily  have  bin  dispensed  with. 
They  then  yeelded  sometimes  with  reputation,  and  under 
conditions,  which  they  would  easily  suffer  to  bee  infringed 
by  the  conqueror.  I  have  more  then  once,  made  pleasure  in 
hir  greatest  efforts  strike  saile  unto  the  interest  of  their 
honor  :  and  where  reason  urged  me,  armed  them  against 
me,  so  that  they  guided  themselves  more  safely  and  severely 
by  my  prescriptions,  if  they  once  freely  yeelded  unto  them, 
then  they  could  have  done  by  their  owne.  I  have  as  much 
as  I  could  endevored  to  take  on  my  selfe  the  charge  and 
hazard  of  our  appointments,  therby  to  discharge  them  from 
all  imputation  ;  and  ever  contrived  our  meetings  in  most 
hard,  strange  and  unsuspected  manner,  to  be  the  lesse  mis 
trusted,  and  (in  my  seeming)  the  more  accessible.  They  are 
opened,  especially  in  those  parts,  where  they  suppose  them 
selves  most  concealed.  Things  lest  feared  are  lest  defended 
and  observed.  You  may  more  securely  dare,  what  no  man 
thinks  you  would  dare,  which  by  difficulty  becometh  easie. 
Never  had  man  his  approches  more  impertinently,  genitale. 
This  way  to  love,  is  more  according  to  discipline.  But  how 
ridiculous  unto  our  people,  and  of  how  small  effect,  who 
better  knowes  then  I  ?  yet  will  I  not  repent  me  of  it ;  I 
have  no  more  to  lose  by  the  matter. 

— me  tabula  sacer 
Votiua  paries,  indicat  uvida, 
Suspendisse  potenti 
Vestimenta  maris  Deo. 

By  tables  of  the  vowes  which  I  did  owe 
Fastned  thereto  the  sacred  wall  doth  showe  ; 
I  have  hung-up  my  garments  water-wet, 
Unto  that  God  whose  power  on  seas  is  great. 

It  is  now  high  time  to  speake  plainely  of  it.  But  even  as  to 
another,  I  would  perhaps  say  ;  My  friend  thou  dotest,  the 
love  of  thy  times  hath  small  affinity  with  faith  and  honesty ; 


HOR.  Car.  i. 
Od.  v.  13. 


TER.  Etmuc. 
act.  i.  sc.  I. 


120 


— hcec  si  tu  postules 
Ratione  certafacere,  nihilo  plus  agas, 
Qudm  si  des  operam,  ut  cum  rations  insanias, 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

If  this  you  would  by  reason  certaine  make,,  CHAPTER 

You  do  no  more,,  then  if  the  paines  you  take,  V 

To  be  starke  mad,  and  yet,  to  thinke  it  reason  fit.  Upon    some 

VGFSGS  of 
And  yet  if  I  were  to  beginne  anew,  it  should  bee  by  the  very        Virgil 

same  path  and  progresse,  how  fruitlesse  soever  it  might  proove 
unto  me.  Insufficiency  and  sottishnesse  are  commendable  in 
a  discommendable  action.  As  much  as  I  separate  my  selfe 
from  their  humour  in  that,  so  much  I  approach  unto  mine 
owne.  Moreover,  I  did  never  suffer  my  selfe  to  bee  wholly 
given  over  to  that  sport ;  I  therewith  pleased,  but  forgot  not 
my  selfe.  I  ever  kept  that  little  understanding  and  discre 
tion,  which  nature  hath  bestowed  on  me,  for  their  service 
and  mine ;  some  motion  towards  it,  but  no  dotage.  My  con 
science  also  was  engaged  therein,  even  unto  incontinency 
and  excesse,  but  never  unto  ingratitude,  treason,  malice  or 
cruelty.  I  bought  not  the  pleasure  of  this  vice  at  all  rates  ; 
and  was  content  with  it's  owne  and  simple  cost.  Nullum  SEN.  Epi.  xcv. 
intrase  vitium  est,  '  There  is  no  vice  contained  in  it  selfe.1  I 
hate  almost  alike  a  crouching  and  dull  lasinesse,  and  a 
toilesome  and  thorny  working.  The  one  pincheth,  the 
other  dulleth  mee.  I  love  wounds  as  much  as  bruses,  and 
blood  wipes  as  well  as  dry-blowes.  I  had  in  the  practise  of 
this  solace,  when  I  was  fitter  for  it,  an  even  moderation 
betweene  these  two  extremities.  Love  is  a  vigilant,  lively 
and  blithe  agitation  :  I  was  neither  troubled  nor  tormented 
with  it,  but  heated  and  distempred  by  it :  There  wee  must 
make  a  stay ;  It  is  only  hurtfull  unto  fooles.  A  young 
man  demanded  of  the  Philosopher  Panetius,  whether  it 
would  beseeme  a  wise  man  to  be  in  love  ;  'Let  wisemen  alone ' 
(quoth  he)  6  but  for  thee  and  me  that  are  not  so,  it  were  best 
6  not  to  engage  our  selves  into  so  stirring  and  violent  a 
4  humour,  which  makes  us  slaves  to  others  and  contemptible 
4  unto  our  selves.1  He  said  true,  for  we  ought  not  entrust  a 
matter  so  dangerous,  unto  a  minde  that  hath  not  wherewith 
to  sustaine  the  approaches  of  it,  nor  effectually  to  quaile 
the  speach  of  Agesilaus ;  That  wised ome  and  love  cannot 
live  together :  It  is  a  vaine  occupation  ("'tis  true)  unseemely, 
shamefull  and  lawlesse :  But  using  it  in  this  manner,  I 
esteeme  it  wholsome  and  fit  to  rouze  a  dull  spirit  and  a 
heavy  body  :  and  as  a  physitian  experienced,  I  would  pre- 
Q  121 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  scribe  the  same  unto  a  man  of  my  complexion  and  forme,  as 

v  soone  as  any  other   receipt,  to    keepe    him  awake  and  in 

verses™ &  strength,  when  he  is  well  in  yeares ;  and  delay  him  from  the 

Virgil        gripings  of  old  age.     As  long  as  we  are  but  in  the  suburbes 

of  it,  and  that  our  pulse  yet  beateth, 

JUVEN.  Sat.  Dum  noua  canities,  dum  prima,  et  recta  senectus, 

iii.  26.  Dum  superest  Lachesi  quod  torqueat,  et  pedibus  me 

Porto  meis,  nullo  dextram  subeunte  bacillo. 

While  hoarie  haires  are  new,  and  ould-age  fresh  and  straight, 
While  Lachesis  hath  yet  to  spin,  while  I  my  waight 
Beare  on  my  feete,  and  stand,  without  staffe  in  my  hand, 

we  had  need  to  bee  sollicited  and  tickled,  by  some  biting 
agitation,  as  this  is.  See  but  what  youth,  vigour  and  jollity 
it  restored  unto  wise  Anacreon.  And  Socrates,  when  hee  was 
elder  then  I  am,  speaking  of  an  amourous  object:  leaning 
(saies  hee)  shoulder  to  shoulder,  and  approaching  my  head 
unto  his,  as  were  both  together  looking  upon  a  booke,  I 
felt,  in  truth,  a  sudden  tingling  or  prickling  in  my  shoulder, 
like  the  biting  of  some  beast,  which  more  then  five  daies 
after  tickled  mee,  whereby  a  continuall  itching  glided  into 
my  heart.  But  a  casuall  touch,  and  that  but  in  a  shoulder, 
to  enflame,  to  distemper  and  to  distract  a  minde,  enfeebled, 
tamed  and  cooled  through  age  ;  and  of  all  humane  mindes 
the  most  reformed.  And  why  not  I  pray  you  ?  Socrates 
was  but  a  man,  and  would  neither  be  nor  seeme  to  bee 
other.  Philosophie  contends  not  against  naturall  delights, 
so  that  due  measure  bee  joyned  therewith  ;  and  alloweth 
the  moderation,  not  the  shunning  of  them.  The  efforts  of 
her  resistance  are  employed  against  strange  and  bastard  or 
lawlesse  ones.  She  saith,  that  the  bodies  appetites  ought 
not  to  be  encreased  by  the  minde.  And  wittily  adviseth  us, 
that  we  should  not  excite  our  hunger  by  sacietv  ;  not  to 
stuffe,  insteed  of  filling  our  bellies :  to  avoide  all  jovissance 
that  may  bring  us  to  want :  and  shunne  all  meat  and  drink, 
which  may  make  us  hungry  or  thirstie.  As  in  the  service 
of  love,  shee  appoints  us  to  take  an  object,  that  onely  may 
satisfie  the  bodies  neede,  without  once  moving  the  mind  : 
which  is  not  there  to  have  any  doing,  but  only  to  follow  and 
simply  to  assist  the  body.  But  have  I  not  reason  to  thinke, 
122 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

that  these  precepts,  (which  in  mine  opinion  are  elsewhere  CHAPTER 
somewhat  rigorous)  have  reference  unto  a  body  which  doth  V 

his  office;  and  that  a  dejected  one,  as  a  weakned  stomack, 
may  be  excused  if  he  cherish  and  sustaine  the  same  by  arte, 
and  by  the  entercourse  of  fantazie,  to  restore  it  the  desires, 
the  delights  and  blithnesse,  which  of  it  selfe  it  hath  lost  ? 
May  we  not  say,  that  there  is  nothing  in  us,  during  this 
earthly  prison,  simply  corporall,  or  purely  spirituall?  and  that 
injuriously  we  dismember  a  living  man  ?  that  there  is  reason 
we  should  carrie  our  selves  in  the  use  of  pleasure,  at  least  as 
favourably  as  we  do  in  the  pangs  of  griefe  ?  For  example, 
it  was  vehement,  even  unto  perfection,  in  the  soules  of 
Saints,  by  repentance.  The  body  had  naturally  a  part 
therein,  by  the  right  of  their  combination,  and  yet  might 
have  but  little  share  in  the  cause  :  and  were  not  contented 
that  it  should  simply  follow  and  assist  the  afflicted  soule : 
they  have  tormented  the  body  it  selfe  with  convenient  and 
sharpe  punishments ;  to  the  end  that  one  with  the  other, 
the  body  and  the  soule  might  a  vie  plunge  man  into  sorrow 
so  much  the  more  saving,  by  how  much  the  more  smarting. 
In  like  case,  in  corporal  pleasures,  is  it  not  injustice  to 
quaile  and  coole  the  minde,  and  say,  it  must  thereunto  be 
entrained,  as  unto  a  forced  bond,  or  servile  necessity  ?  She 
should  rather  hatch  and  cherish  them,  and  offer  and  invite 
it  selfe  unto  them  ;  the  charge  of  swaying  rightly  belonging 
to  her.  Even  as  in  my  conceit,  it  is  her  part,  in  her  proper 
delights,  to  inspire  and  infuse  into  the  body  all  sense  or 
feeling  which  his  condition  may  beare,  and  indevour  that 
they  may  be  both  sweet  and  healthy  for  him.  For,  as  they 
say,  tis  good  reason,  that  the  body  follow  not  his  appetites 
to  the  mindes  prejudice  or  dammage.  But  why  is  it  not  like 
wise  reason,  that  the  minde  should  not  follow  hers  to  the 
bodies  danger  and  hurt?  I  have  no  other  passion  that 
keeps  mee  in  breath.  What  avarice,  ambition,  quarels, 
sutes  in  law,  or  other  contentions  worke  and  effect  in  others 
who  as  my  selfe  have  no  assigned  vacation,  or  certaine 
leisure,  love  would  performe  more  commodiously :  It  would 
restore  me  the  vigilancy,  sobriety,  grace  and  care  of  my  per 
son  ;  and  assure  my  countenance  against  the  wrinckled 
frowns  of  age  (those  deformed  and  wretched  frownes)  which 

123 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  else  would  blemish  and  deface  the  same  ;    It  would  reduce 
v  me  to  serious,  to  sound  and  wise  studies,  whereby  I  might 

pon  some  procure  mOre  love,  and  purchase  more  estimation :  It  would 
Virgil  purge  my  minde  from  despaire  of  it  selfe,  and  of  its  use, 
acquainting  the  same  againe  with  it  selfe  :  It  would  divert  me 
from  thousands  of  irksome  tedious  thoughts,  and  melancholy 
carking  cares,  wherewith  the  doting  idlenesse  and  crazed 
condition  of  our  age  doth  charge  and  comber  us  :  It  would 
restore  and  heat,  though  but  in  a  dreame,  the  blood  which 
nature  forsaketh  :  It  would  uphold  the  drooping  chinne, 
and  somewhat  strengthen  or  lengthen  the  shrunken  sinewes, 
decaied  vigour,  and  dulled  lives- blithenesse  of  silly  wretched 
man,  who  gallops  apace  to  his  ruine.  But  I  am  not  igno 
rant  how  hard  a  matter  it  is  to  attaine  to  such  a  commodity: 
Through  weakenesse  and  long  experience,  our  taste  is  growne 
more  tender,  more  choise  and  more  exquisite.  We  challenge 
most,  when  we  bring  least ;  we  are  most  desirous  to  choose, 
when  we  least  deserve  to  be  accepted  :  And  knowing  our 
selves  to  bee  such,  we  are  lesse  hardy  and  more  distrustfull : 
Nothing  can  assure  us  to  be  beloved,  seeing  our  condition 
and  their  quality.  I  am  ashamed  to  be  in  the  companie  of 
this  greene,  blooming  and  boyling  youth  ; 

HOR.  Epod.  Omus  in  indomito  constantior  inguine  neruus, 

xu-  J9-  Quam  noua  collibus  arbor  inhceret: 

Why  should  we  present  our  wretchednesse  amid  this  their 

jollity? 

HOR.  Car.  iv.  Possint  ut  iuuenes  viscere  feruidi 

Od.  xiii.  26.  Multo  non  sine  risu, 

Dilapsam  in  cineres  facem. 

That  hot  young  men  may  go  and  see, 
Not  without  sport  and  mery  glee, 
Their  fire-brands  turn'd  to  ashes  be. 

They  have  both  strength  and  reason  on  their  side  :  let  us 
give  them  place  :  we  have  no  longer  holde  fast.  This  bloome 
of  budding  beauty,  loves  not  to  be  handled  by  such  nummed, 
and  so  clomsie  hands,  nor  would  it  be  dealt-with  by  meanes 
purely  materiall  or  ordinary  stuffe.  For,  as  that  ancient 
Philosopher  answered  one  that  mocked  him,  because  hee 
could  not  obtaine  the  favour  of  a  yongling,  whom  he  suingly 
pursued  :  '  My  friend '  (quoth  he)  '  the  hooke  bites  not  at 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

'  such  fresh  cheese.'     It  is  a  commerce  needing  relation  and  CHAPTER 
mutuall   correspondency  :    other  pleasures  that  we  receive,  v 

may  be  requitted  by  recompences  of  different  nature  :  but      pon    som.e 
, ,  .J  X  ,  -Vi    ,1  i  •     i       £  verses    of 

this  cannot  be  repaid  but  with  the  very  same  kmde  of  coyne.        Virgil 

Verily,  the  pleasure  I  do  others  in  this  sport,  doth  more 
sweetly  tickle  my  imagination,  then  that  is  done  unto  me. 
Now  if  no  generous  minde,  can  receive  pleasure  where  he 
return eth  none  ;  it  is  a  base  minde  that  would  have  all  duty 
and  delights  to  feed  with  conference,  those  under  whose 
charge  he  remaineth.  There  is  no  beauty,  nor  favour,  nor 
familiarity  so  exquisite,  which  a  gallant  minde  should  desire 
at  this  rate.  Now  if  women  can  do  us  no  good  but  in  pittie, 
I  had  much  rather  not  to  live  at  all,  then  to  live  by  almes. 
I  would  I  had  the  priviledge  to  demande  of  them,  in  the 
same  stile  I  have  heard  some  beg  in  Italy  :  Fate  bene  per  voi, 
'  Do  some  good  for  your  selfe ' :  or  after  the  manner  that 
Cyrus  exhorted  his  souldiers  ;  '  Whosoever  loveth  mee,  let 
4  him  follow  mee.'  Consort  your  selfe,  will  some  say  to  me, 
with  those  of  your  owne  condition,  whom  the  company  of 
like  fortune  will  yeeld  of  more  easie  accesse.  Oh  sottish  and 
wallowish  composition  ; 

— nolo  MAR.  x.  Epig. 

Barbam  vellere  mortuo  leoni.  xc.  9. 

I  will  not  pull  (though  not  a  fearde) 
When  he  is  dead  a  Lions  beard. 

Xenophon  useth  for  an  objection  and  accusation  against 
Menon,  that  in  his  love  he  dealt  with  fading  objects.  I  take 
more  sensuall  pleasure  by  onely  viewing  the  mutuall,  even 
proporcioned  and  delicate  commixture  of  two  yong  beauties  ; 
or  onely  to  consider  the  same  in  mine  imagination,  then  if 
my  selfe  should  be  second  in  a  lumpish,  sad  and  dispropor- 
cioned  conjunction.  I  resigne  such  distasted  and  fantasticall 
appetites  unto  the  Emperour  Galba,  who  medled  with  none 
but  cast,  worne,  hard-old  flesh  ;  And  to  that  poore  slave, 

0  ego  dijfaciant  talem  te  cernere  possim,  OVID.  Pont.  i. 

Chardque  mutatis  osculaferre  comis,  El-  v-  49- 

Amplectique  meis  corpus  non  pingue  lacertis. 

Gods  graunt  I  may  beholde  thee  in  such  case,, 

And  kisse  thy  chang'd  locks  with  my  dearest  grace, 

And  with  mine  armes  thy  limmes  not  fat  embrace. 

125 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  And  amongst  blemishing-deformities,  I  deeme  artificiall  and 
forced  beautie  to  bee  of  the  chiefest.  Emanez  a  young  lad 
°^  Chios,  supposing  by  gorgeous  attires  to  purchase  the 
beauty,  which  nature  denied  him,  came  to  the  Philosopher 
Arcesilaus,  and  asked  of  him,  whether  a  wise  man  could  be 
in  love,  or  no  ?  '  Yes  marrie  "*  (quoth  he)  '  so  it  were  not 
'  with  a  painted  and  sophisticate  beauty,  as  thine  is.1  The 
fowlenesse  of  an  old  knowne  woman  is  in  my  seeming,  not  so 
aged  nor  so  ill-favoured,  as  one  that's  painted  and  sleeked. 
Shall  I  bouldly  speake  it,  and  not  have  my  throate  cut  for 
my  labour  ?  Love  is  not  properly  nor  naturally  in  season, 
but  in  the  age  next  unto  infancy. 

HOR.  Car.  ii.  Quam  si  puellarum  insereres  choro, 

Od.  v.  12.  Mille  sagaces  falleret  hospitex, 

Discrimen  obscurum  solutis 

Crinibus,  ambiguoque  vultu. 

Whom  if  you  should  in  crue  of  wenches  place, 
\Vith  haire  loose-hanging,  and  ambiguous  face, 
Strangely  the  undiscern'd  distinction  might 
Deceive  a  thousand  strangers  of  sharpe  sight. 

No  more  is  perfect  beauty.  For,  whereas  Homer  extends  it 
untill  such  time  as  the  chinne  begins  to  bud,  Plato  himselfe 
hath  noted  the  same  for  very  rare.  And  the  cause  for  which 
the  Sophister  Dion  termed  youthes  budding  hayres  Aristo- 
gitons  and  Harmodij,  is  notoriously  knowne.  In  man-hoode 
I  finde  it  already  to  bee  somewhat  out  of  date,  much  more 
in  old  age. 

Jb.  iv.  Od.  xiii.  Importunus  enim  transuolat  aridas 

9-  Quercus. 

Importune  love  doth  over  flie. 

The  Okes  with  withered  old-age  drie. 

And  Margaret  Queen  of  Navarre,  lengthens  much  (like  a 
woman)  the  priviledge  of  women  :  Ordaining  thirty  yeares  to 
be  the  season,  for  them  to  change  the  title  of  faire  into  good. 
The  shorter  possession  we  allow  it  over  our  lives,  the  better 
for  us.  Behold  it's  behaviour.  It  is  a  princock  boy,  who  in 
his  schoole,  knows  not,  how  far  one  proceeds  against  all 
order  :  study,  exercise,  custome  and  practise,  are  paths  to 
insufficiency  :  the  novices  beare  all  the  sway  ;  Amor  ordinem 
126 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

nescit,  '  Love  knowes  or  keeps  no  order."     Surely  it's  course  CHAPTER 
hath  more  garbe,  when  it  is  commixt  with  unadvisednes  and  V 

trouble  :  faults  and  contrary  successes,  give  it  edge  and  grace:   UP011    some 

...  T  ,  «{.  ..,,,      .  '°         ,,      9,i       3.  ,  verses  of 

so  it  be  eager  and  hungry,  it  little  importeth  whether  it  bee        Virgil 

prudent.  Observe  but  how  he  staggers,  stumbleth  and 
fooleth  ;  you  fetter  and  shackle  him,  when  you  guide  him  by 
arte  and  discretion  :  and  you  force  his  sacred  liberty,  when 
you  submit  him  to  those  bearded,  grim  and  tough-hard 
hands.  Moreover,  I  often  heare  them  display  this  intelli 
gence  as  absolutely  spiritual,  disdaining  to  draw  into  con 
sideration  the  interest  which  all  the  sences  have  in  the  same. 
All  serveth  to  the  purpose  :  But  I  may  say,  that  I  have  often 
seen  some  of  us  excuse  the  weakenesse  of  their  minds,  in 
favour  of  their  corporall  beauties ;  but  I  never  saw  them  yet, 
that  in  behalfe  of  the  mindes-beauties,  how  sound  and  ripe 
soever  they  were,  would  afford  an  helping  hand  unto  a  body, 
that  never  so  little  falleth  into  declination.  Why  doth  not 
some  one  of  them  long  to  produce  that  noble  Socraticall 
brood  ;  or  breed  that  precious  gem,  between  the  body  and 
the  mind,  purchasing  with  the  price  of  her  thighes  a  Philo- 
sophicall  and  spirituall  breed  and  intelligence  ?  which  is 
the  highest  rate  she  can  possibly  value  them  at.  Plato 
appointeth  in  his  laws,  that  he  who  performeth  a  notable 
and  worthy  exploite  in  warre,  during  the  time  of  that  expe 
dition,  should  not  be  denied  a  kisse  or  refused  any  other 
amorous  favour,  of  whomsoever  he  shall  please  to  desire  it, 
without  respect  either  of  his  ill-favourdnes,  deformity,  or 
age.  What  he  deemeth  so  just  and  allowable  in  commenda 
tion  of  Military  valour,  may  not  the  same  be  thought  as 
lawfull  in  commendation  of  some  other  worth  ?  and  why  is 
not  some  one  of  them  possessed  with  the  humor  to  pre- 
occupate  on  hir  companions  the  glory  of  this  chaste  love  ? 
chaste  I  may  well  say  ; 

— nam  si  quando  ad  prcelia  ventum  est,  VIRG.  Gtorg. 

Vt  quondam  stipulix  magnus  sine  viribus  ignis  "i-  9&- 

In  cassumfurit. 

If  once  it  come  to  handy-gripes  ;  as  great, 
But  force-lesse  fire  in  stubble  ;  so  his  heate 
Rageth  amaine,  but  all  in  vaine. 

Vices  smoothered  in  ones  thought,  are  not  the  woorst.     To 

127 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  conclude  this  notable  commentarie,  escaped  from  me  by  a 

v  flux  of  babling  :  a  flux  sometimes  as  violent  as  hurtfull, 

Upon    some 

verses  01  JT^  missum  sponsi  furtiuo  munere  malum, 

Virgu  Procurrit  casto  virginis  e  gremio : 

Quod  misera  oblitce  molli  sub  veste  locatum, 
Dum  aduentu  matris  prosilit,  excutitur, 

CATUL.  El.  i.  Atque  illud  prono  prtsceps  agitur  decursu, 

19.  Huic  manat  tristi  conscius  ore  rubor. 

As  when  some  fruit  by  stealth  sent  from  hir  friend, 
From  chaste  lap  of  a  virgin  doth  descend, 
Which  by  hir,  under  her  soft  aprone  plast, 
Starting  at  mothers  comming  thence  is  cast : 
And  trilling  downe  in  hast  doth  head-long  go,, 
A  guilty  blush  in  hir  sad  face  doth  flo. 

I  say,  that  both  male  and  female,  are  cast  in  one  same  moulde  ; 
instruction  and  custome  excepted,  there  is  no  great  differ 
ence  betweene  them :   Plato  calleth  them  both  indifferently 
to  the  society  of  all  studies,  exercises,  charges  and  functions 
of  warre  and  peace,  in  his  Commonwealth.     And  the  Philo 
sopher  Antisthenes  took  away  al  distinction  betweene  their 
vertue  and  ours.     It  is  much  more  easie  to  accuse  the 
one   sexe,  then  to   excuse  the   other.      It  is  that 
which    some    say  proverbially,    '  111   may  the 
'  Kill  call  the  Oven  burnt  tailed 


THE   SIXTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Coaches. 


T  is  easie  to  verifie,  that  excellent  authors, 
writing  of  causes  do  not  only  make  use  of 
those  which  they  imagine  true,  but  eft- 
soones  of  such  as  themselves  beleeve  not : 
alwayes  provided  they  have  some  inven 
tion  and  beautie.  They  speake  sufficiently, 
truly  and  profitably,  if  they  speake  in 
geniously.  We  cannot  assure  our  selves 
cause  :  we  hudle  up  a  many  together,  to  see 


of  the  chiefe 

whether  by  chance  it  shall  be  found  in  that  number. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

LUCRET.  vi.     Namque  unam  dicere  causam,  CHAPTER 
700.                   Non  satis  est,  verum  plures  unde  una  tamen  sit.  yj 

Enough  it  is  not  one  cause  to  devise,  Of  Coaches 

But  more,  whereof  that  one  may  yet  arise. 

Will  you  demand  of  me,  whence  this  custome  ariseth,  to 
blesse  an  say  God  helpe  to  those  that  sneese  ?  We  produce 
three  sortes  of  winde  ;  that  issuing  from  belowe  is  too  un- 
decent ;  that  from  the  mouth,  implieth  some  reproach  of 
gourmandise  ;  the  third  is  sneesing  :  and  because  it  commeth 
from  the  head,  and  is  without  imputation,  we  thus  kindly 
entertaine  it :  Smile  not  at  this  subtilty,  it  is  (as  some  say) 
Aristotles.  Me  seemeth  to  have  read  in  Plutarch  (who  of 
all  the  authors  I  know,  hath  best  commixt  arte  with  nature, 
and  coupled  judgement  with  learning)  where  he  yeeldeth  a 
reason,  why  those  which  travell  by  sea,  do  sometimes  feele 
such  qualmes  and  risings  of  the  stomack,  saying,  that  it  pro- 
ceedeth  of  a  kinde  of  feare :  having  found-out  some  reason, 
by  which  he  prooveth,  that  feare  may  cause  such  an  effect. 
My  selfe  who  am  much  subject  unto  it,  know  well,  that  this 
cause  doth  nothing  concerne  me.  And  I  know  it,  not  by 
argument,  but  by  necessary  experience,  without  alleaging 
what  some  have  tolde  me,  that  the  like  doth  often  happen 
unto  beasts,  namely  unto  swine,  when  they  are  farthest  from 
apprehending  any  danger :  and  what  an  acquaintance  of 
mine  hath  assured  me  of  himselfe,  and  who  is  greatly  subject 
unto  it,  that  twice  or  thrice  in  a  tempestuous  storme,  being 
surprised  with  exceeding  feare,  all  manner  of  desire  or  in 
clination  to  vomit  had  left  him.  As  to  that  ancient  good 
fellow  ;  Peius  vexabat  quam  ut  periculum  mihi  succurreret. 
4 1  was  worse  vexed  then  that  danger  could  helpe  me/  I 
never  apprehended  feare  upon  the  water ;  nor  any  where  else 
(yet  have  I  often  had  just  cause  offred  me,  if  death  it  selfe 
may  give  it)  which  either  might  trouble  or  astony  me.  It 
proceedeth  sometimes  as  well  from  want  of  judgement,  as 
from  lacke  of  courage.  All  the  dangers  I  have  had,  have 
beene  when  mine  eyes  were  wide-open,  and  my  sight  cleare, 
sound  and  perfect :  For,  even  to  feare,  courage  is  required. 
It  hath  sometimes  steaded  me,  in  respect  of  others,  to  direct 
and  keepe  my  flight  in  order,  that  so  it  might  be,  if  not 
without  feare,  at  least  without  dismay  and  astonishment. 

R  129 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Indeed  it  was  moved,  but  not  amazed  nor  distracted. 
VI  Undanted  mindes  march  further,  and  represent  flight,  not 
Coaches  onejy  temperate,  setled  and  sound,  but  also  fierce  and  bold. 
Report  we  that  which  Alcibiades  relateth  of  Socrates  his 
companion  in  armes.  I  found  (saith  he)  after  the  route  and 
discomfiture  of  our  armie,  both  him  and  Lachez  in  the  last 
ranke  of  those  that  ranne  away,  and  with  all  safety  and 
leasure  considered  him,  for  I  was  mounted  upon  an  excellent 
good  horse,  and  he  on  foote,  and  so  had  we  combated  all  day. 
I  noted  first,  how  in  respect  of  Lachez  :  he  shewed  both  dis 
creet  judgement  and  un  dan  ted  resolution :  then  I  observed  the 
undismaide  bravery  of  his  march,  nothing  different  from  his 
ordinary  pace  :  his  looke  orderly  and  constant,  duly  observ 
ing  and  heedily  judging  what  ever  passed  round  about  him  : 
sometimes  viewing  the  one,  and  sometimes  looking  on  the 
other  both  friends  and  enemies,  with  so  composed  a  manner, 
that  he  seemed  to  encourage  the  one  and  menace  the  other, 
signifying,  that  whosoever  should  attempt  his  life,  must 
purchase  the  same,  or  his  blood  at  a  high- valued  rate  ?  and 
thus  they  both  saved  themselves ;  for,  men  do  not  willingly 
graple  with  these  ;  but  follow  such  as  shew  or  feare  or  dismay. 
Lo  here  the  testimony  of  that  renowned  Captaine,  who 
teacheth  us  what  wee  daily  finde  by  experience,  that  there  is 
nothing  doth  sooner  cast  us  into  dangers,  then  an  incon 
siderate  greedinesse  to  avoide  them.  Quo  timoris  minus  est, 
eo  minus  ferme  periculi  est.  '  The  lesse  feare  there  is  most 
'  commonly,  the  lesse  danger  there  is.'  Our  people  is  to 
blame,  to  say,  such  a  one  feareth  death,  when  it  would 
signifie,  that  he  thinkes  on  it,  and  doth  foresee  the  same. 
Foresight  doth  equally  belong  as  well  to  that  which  con- 
cerneth  us  in  good,  as  touch  us  in  evill.  To  consider  and 
judge  danger,  is  in  some  sort,  not  to  bee  danted  at  it.  I  doe 
not  find  my  selfe  sufficiently  strong  to  withstand  the  blow 
and  violence  of  this  passion  of  feare,  or  of  any  other  impetu 
osity  ;  were  I  once  therewith  vanquished  and  deterred,  I  could 
never  safely  recover  my  selfe.  He  that  should  make  my  minde 
forgoe  her  footing,  could  never  bring  her  unto  her  place 
againe.  She  doth  over  lively  sound,  and  over  deepely  search 
into  her  selfe :  And  therefore  never  suffers  the  wound  which 
pierced  the  same,  to  be  throughly  cured  and  consolidated. 
130 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

It  hath  beene  happy  for  me,  that  no  infirmity  could  ever  CHAPTER 
yet  displace  her.  I  oppose  and  present  my  selfe  in  the  best  VI 
ward  I  have,  against  all  charges  and  assaults  that  beset  mee.  ( 
Thus  the  first  that  should  beare  me  away,  would  make  me 
unrecoverable.  I  encounter  not  two  :  which  way  soever  spoile 
should  enter  my  hold,  there  am  I  open,  and  remedilesly 
drowned.  Epicurus  saith,  that  a  wise  man  can  never  passe 
from  one  state  to  its  contrary.  I  have  some  opinion  answer 
ing  his  sentence,  that  he  who  hath  once  beene  a  very  foole, 
shall  at  no  time  proove  verie  wise.  God  sends  my  cold 
answerable  to  my  cloths,  and  passions  answering  the  meanes 
I  have  to  indure  them.  Nature  having  discovered  mee  on 
one  side,  hath  covered  mee  on  the  other.  Having  disarmed 
me  of  strength,  she  hath  armed  me  with  insensibility,  and  a 
regular  or  soft  apprehension.  I  cannot  long  endure  (and 
lesse  could  in  my  youth)  to  ride  either  in  coach  or  litter,  or 
to  go  in  a  boat ;  and  both  in  the  Citty  and  country  I  hate 
all  manner  of  riding,  but  a  horse-back  :  And  can  lesse  endure 
a  litter,  then  a  coach,  and  by  the  same  reason,  more  easily  a 
rough  agitation  upon  the  water,  whence  commonly  proceedeth 
feare,  then  the  soft  stirring  a  man  shall  feele  in  calme 
weather.  By  the  same  easie  gentle  motion,  which  the  oares 
give,  convaying  the  boat  under  us,  I  wot  not  how,  I  feele 
both  my  head  intoxicated  and  my  stomacke  distempered  : 
as  I  cannot  likewise  abide  a  shaking  stoole  under  me.  When 
as  either  the  saile,  or  the  gliding  course  of  the  water  doth 
equaly  carry  us  away,  or  that  we  are  but  towed,  that  gently 
gliding  and  even  agitation,  doth  no  whit  distemper  or  hurt 
me.  It  is  an  interrupted  and  broken  motion,  that  offends 
mee  ;  and  more  when  it  is  languishing.  I  am  not  able  to 
display  its  forme.  Phisitions  have  taught  mee  to  bind  and 
gird  my  selfe  with  a  napkin  or  swath  round  about  the  lower 
part  of  my  belly,  as  a  remedy  for  this  accident ;  which  as 
yet  I  have  not  tride,  beeing  accustomed  to  wrestle  and  with 
stand  such  defects  as  are  in  mee  ;  and  tame  them  by  my  selfe. 
Were  my  memory  sufficiently  informed  of  them,  I  would  not 
thinke  my  time  lost,  heere  to  set  down  the  infinite  variety, 
which  histories  present  unto  us,  of  the  use  of  coaches  in  the 
service  of  warre  :  divers  according  to  the  nations,  and  differ 
ent  according  to  the  ages  :  to  my  seeming  of  great  effect  and 

131 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  necessity.  So  that  it  is  wondrously  strange,  how  we  have 
yi  lost  all  true  knowledge  of  them  ;  I  will  onely  aleadge  this, 
Coaches  ^hat  even  lately  in  our  fathers  time,  the  Hungarians  did  very 
availefully  bring  them  into  fashion,  and  profitably  set  them 
a  work  against  the  Turks  ;  every  one  of  them  containing  a 
Targattier  and  a  Muskettier,  with  a  certaine  number  of  har 
quebuses  or  calivers,  ready  charged  ;  and  so  ranged,  that  they 
might  make  good  use  of  them  :  and  all  over  covered  with  a 
pavesado,  after  the  manner  of  a  Galliotte.  They  made  the 
front  of  their  battaile  with  three  thousand  such  coaches  :  and 
after  the  Cannon  had  playd,  caused  them  to  discharge  and 
shoote  off  a  volie  of  small  shott  upon  their  enemies,  before 
they  should  know  or  feele,  what  the  rest  of  the  forces  could 
doe :  which  was  no  small  advancement ;  or  if  not  this,  they 
mainely  drove  those  coaches  amidde  the  thickest  of  their 
enemies  squadrons,  with  purpose  to  breake,  disroute  and 
make  waie  through  them.  Besides  the  benefit  and  helpe 
they  might  make  of  them,  in  any  suspicious  or  dangerous 
place,  to  flanke  their  troupes  marching  from  place  to  place : 
or  in  hast  to  encompasse,  to  embarricado,  to  cover  or  fortifie 
any  lodgement  or  quarter.  In  my  time,  a  gentleman  of 
quality,  in  one  of  our  frontiers,  unwealdy  and  so  burly  of 
body,  that  hee  could  finde  no  horse  able  to  beare  his  waight, 
and  having  a  quarrell  or  deadly  fude  in  hand,  was  wont  to 
travaile  up  and  down  in  a  coach  made  after  this  fashion,  and 
found  much  ease  and  good  in  it.  But  leave  we  these  war 
like  coaches,  as  if  their  nullity  were  not  sufficiently  knowne 
by  better  tokens  ;  The  last  Kings  of  our  first  race  were  wont 
to  travell  in  chariots  drawne  by  foure  oxen.  Mark  Antonie 
was  the  first,  that  caused  himselfe,  accompanied  with  a  min- 
sterell  harlot  to  be  drawne  by  Lyons  fitted  to  a  coach.  So 
did  Heliogabalus  after  him,  naming  himselfe  Cibele  the 
mother  of  the  Gods  ;  and  also  by  Tigers,  counterfeiting  God 
Bacchus  :  who  sometimes  would  also  bee  drawne  in  a  coach  by 
two  Stagges :  and  an-other  time  by  foure  mastive  Dogs :  and  by 
foure  naked  wenches,  causing  himselfe  to  bee  drawne  by  them 
in  pompe  and  state,  hee  being  all  naked.  The  emperour 
Firmus,  made  his  coach  to  bee  drawne  by  Estriges  of  ex 
ceeding  greatnesse,  so  that  hee  rather  seemed  to  flye,  then  to 
roule  on  wheeles.  The  strangenesse  of  these  inventions,  doth 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

bring  this  other  thing  unto  my  fantasie.  That  it  is  a  kinde  CHAPTER 
of  pusilanimity  in  Monarkes,  and  a  testimony  that  they  doe  Y1 
not  sufficiently  know  what  they  are,  when  they  labour  to  ( 
shew  their  worth,  and  endevour  to  appeare  unto  the  world, 
by  excessive  and  intolerable  expences.  A  thing,  which  in  a 
strange  country  might  somewhat  bee  excused  ;  but  amongst 
his  native  subjects,  where  hee  swayeth  all  in  all,  hee  draweth 
from  his  dignity  the  extreamest  degree  of  honour,  that  hee 
may  possible  attaine  unto.  As  for  a  gentleman,  in  his  owne 
private  house  to  apparrel  himselfe  richly  and  curiously,  I 
deeme  it  a  matter  vaine  and  superfluous ;  his  house,  his 
houshold,  his  traine  and  his  kitchin  doe  sufficiently  answere 
for  him.  The  counsell  which  Isocrates  giveth  to  his  King 
(in  my  conceite)  seemeth  to  carry  some  reason  :  when  hee 
willeth  him  to  bee  richly-stored  and  stately  adorned  with 
mooveables  and  houshold-stuffe,  forsomuch  as  it  is  an  ex- 
pence  of  continuance,  and  which  descendeth  even  to  his  pos 
terity  or  heires :  And  to  avoyde  all  magnificences,  which 
presently  vanish  both  from  custome  and  memory.  I  loved 
when  I  was  a  yonger  brother  to  set  my  selfe  foorth  and  bee 
gaye  in  cloathes,  though  I  wanted  other  necessaires  ;  and  it 
became  mee  well :  There  are  some  on  whose  backes  their  rich 
Robes  weepe,  or  as  wee  say  their  rich  cloathes  are  lyned  with 
heavy  debts.  We  have  divers  strange  tales  of  our  auncient 
Kings  frugalitie  about  their  owne  persons,  and  in  their  gifts  : 
great  and  farre  renouned  Kings  both  in  credit,  in  valour  and 
in  fortune.  Demosthenes  mainely  combates  the  law  of  his 
Citie,  who  assigned  their  publique  money  to  be  imployed 
about  the  stately  setting  forth  of  their  playes  and  feasts : 
He  willeth  that  their  magnificence  should  bee  seene  in  the 
quantity  of  tall  ships  well  manned  and  appointed,  and  armies 
well  furnished.  And  they  have  reason  to  accuse  Theophras- 
tus,  who  in  his  booke  of  riches  established  a  contrarie 
opinion,  and  upholdeth  such  a  quality  of  expences,  to  be  the 
true  fruit  of  wealth  and  plenty.  They  are  pleasures  (saith 
Aristotle)  that  onely  touch  the  vulgar  and  basest  commun- 
alty,  which  as  soone  as  a  man  is  satisfied  with  them,  vanish 
out  of  minde ;  and  whereof  no  man  of  sound  judgement  or 
gravity  can  make  any  esteeme.  The  imployment  of  it,  as 
more  profitable,  just  and  durable  would  seeme  more  royall, 

133 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  worthy  and  commendable,  about  ports,  havens,  fortifications 
VI  anc[  walles ;  in  sumptuous  buildings,  in  churches,  hospitals, 
Coaches  colledges,  mending  of  heighwayes  and  streetes,  and  such  like 
monuments  :  in  which  things  Pope  Gregory  the  thirteenth 
shall  leave  aye-lasting  and  commendable  memory  unto  his 
name :  and  wherein  our  Queene  Catherin  should  witnes  unto 
succeeding  ages  her  naturall  liberality  and  exceeding  bounty, 
if  her  meanes  were  answerable  to  her  affection.  Fortune  hath 
much  spighted  mee  to  hinder  the  structure  and  breake-off  the 
finishing  of  our  new-bridge  in  our  great  Citty  ;  and  before 
my  death  to  deprive  mee  of  all  hope  to  see  the  great  neces 
sity  of  it  set  forward  againe.  Moreover,  it  appeareth  unto 
subjects,  spectators  of  these  triumphs,  that  they  have  a  show 
made  them  of  their  owne  riches,  and  that  they  are  feasted  at 
their  proper  charges  :  For,  the  people  doe  easily  presume  of 
their  kings,  as  wee  doe  of  our  servants  ;  that  they  should  take 
care  plenteously  to  provide  us  of  whatsoever  wee  stand  in 
neede  of,  but  that  on  their  behalfe  they  should  no  way  lay 
hands  on  it.  And  therefore  the  Emperor  Galba,  sitting  at 
supper,  having  taken  pleasure  to  heare  a  musician  play  and 
sing  before  him,  sent  for  his  casket,  out  of  which  he  tooke  a 
handful  of  Crowns  and  put  them  into  his  hand,  with  these 
wordes,  '  Take  this,  not  as  a  gift  of  the  publique  money,  but 
4  of  mine  owne  private  store/  So  is  it,  that  it  often  commeth 
to  passe,  that  the  common  people  have  reason  to  grudge,  and 
that  their  eyes  are  fedde,  with  that  which  should  feede  their 
belly.  Liberality  it  selfe,  in  a  soveraigne  hand  is  not  in  her 
owne  luster  :  private  men  have  more  right,  and  may  challenge 
more  interest  in  her.  For,  taking  the  matter  exactly  as  it  is, 
a  King  hath  nothing  that  is  properly  his  owne ;  hee  oweth 
even  himselfe  to  others.  Authority  is  not  given  in  favour  of 
the  authorising,  but  rather  in  favour  of  the  authorised.  A 
superiour  is  never  created  for  his  owne  profit,  but  rather  for 
the  benefit  of  the  inferiour  :  And  a  Phisition  is  instituted  for 
the  sicke,  not  for  himselfe.  All  Magistracie,  even  as  each 
arte,  rejecteth  her  end  out  of  her  selfe.  Nulla  ars  in  se  ver- 
satur.  '  No  arte  is  all  in  it  selfe.1  Wherefore  the  governours 
and  overseers  of  Princes  childhood  or  minority,  who  so 
earnestly  endeavor  to  imprint  this  vertue  of  bounty  and 
liberality  in  them  ;  and  teach  them  not  to  refuse  any  thing. 
134 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

and  esteeme  nothing  so  well  imployed,  as  what  they  shall  CHAPTER 

give  (an  instruction  which  in  my  dayes  I  have  scene  in  great          VI 

credit)  either  they  preferre  and  respect  more  their  owne  profit    ( 

than  their  masters ;  or  else  they  understand  not  aright  to 

whom  they   speake.     It  is    too  easie  a  matter  to  imprint 

liberality  in  him,  that  hath  wherewith  plenteously  to  satisfie 

what  he  desireth  at  other  mens  charges.     And  his  estimation 

being  directed  not  according  to  the  measure  of  the  present, 

but  according  to  the  quality  of  his  meanes,  that  exerciseth 

the  same,  it  commeth  to  prove  vaine  in  so  puissant  hands. 

They  are  found  to  bee  prodigall,  before  they  be  liberall. 

Therefore  it  is  but  of  small  commendation,   in  respect   of 

other  royall  vertues.     And   the  onely  (as  said  the  tyrant 

Dionysius)  that  agreed  and   squared  well  with  tyrannic  it 

selfe.     I  would  rather  teach   him  the  verse  of  the  ancient 

labourer. 

rfj  /ftpt  fiei  (TTTfipfiv  aXXa  p,r)  oXa>  ra>  6v\a.K(o.  PLUT.  De 

Not  whole  sackes,  but  by  the  hand  ERA"  Chil 

A  man  should  sow  his  seed  i5  the  land.  —   ce'nt  j  ^ 

That  whosoever  will  reape  any  commodity  by  it,  must  sow  32- 
with  his  hand,  and  not  powre  out  of  the  sacke  :  that  corne 
must  be  discreetly  scattered,  and  not  lavishly  dispersed  :  And 
that  being  to  give,  or  to  say  better,  to  pay  and  restore  to 
such  a  multitude  of  people,  according  as  they  have  deserved, 
he  ought  to  be  a  loyall,  faithfull,  and  advised  distributer 
thereof.  If  the  liberality  of  a  Prince  be  without  heedy  dis 
cretion  and  measure,  I  would  rather  have  him  covetous  and 
sparing.  Princely  vertue  seemeth  to  consist  most  injustice. 
And  of  all  parts  of  justice,  that  doth  best  and  most  belong 
to  Kings,  which  accompanieth  liberality.  For  they  have  it 
particularly  reserved  to  their  charge ;  whereas  all  other 
justice,  they  happily  exercise  the  same  by  the  intermission  of 
others.  Immoderate  bounty  is  a  weake  meane  to  acquire 
them  good  will :  for  it  rejecteth  more  people  than  it  obtain- 
eth  :  Quo  in  plures  usus  sis,  minus  in  multos  uti  possis.  Quid  Cic.  Off.  i. 
autem  est  stultius,  quam,  quod  libenter  facias,  curare  ut  id 
diutius  facere  non  possis?  'The  more  you  have  used  it  to 
'  many,  the  lesse  may  you  use  it  to  many  more  :  And  what 
'  is  more  fond  than  what  you  willingly  would  doe,  to  pro- 
'  vide  you  can  no  longer  doe  it  ?  "*  And  if  it  be  emploied 

135 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  without  respect  of  merit,  it  shameth  him  that  receiveth  the 
VI  same,  and  is  received  without  grace.  Some  Tyrants  have 

Of  Coaches  ^eeia  sacrificed  to  the  peoples  hatred,  by  the  very  hands 
of  those,  whom  they  had  rashly  preferred  and  wrongfully 
advanced :  such  kinde  of  men,  meaning  to  assure  the 
possession  of  goods  unlawfully  and  indirectly  gotten,  if 
they  shew  to  hold  in  contempt  and  hatred,  him  from  whom 
they  held  them,  and  in  that  combine  themselves  unto  the 
vulgar  judgement  and  common  opinion.  The  subjects  of  a 
Prince,  rashly  excessive  in  his  gifts,  become  impudently 
excessive  in  begging  :  they  adhere,  not  unto  reason,  but  unto 
example.  Verily  we  have  often  just  cause  to  blush,  for  our 
impudency.  We  are  over-paid  according  to  justice,  when 
the  recompence  equaleth  our  service  :  for,  doe  we  not  owe 
a  kinde  of  natural!  duty  to  our  Princes  ?  If  he  beare  our 
charge,  he  doth  overmuch  ;  it  sufficeth  if  hee  assist  it :  the 
over-plus  is  called  a  benefit,  which  cannot  be  exacted  ;  for 
the  very  name  of  liberality  implyeth  liberty.  After  our 
fashion  we  have  never  done;  what  is  received  is  no  more 
reckoned  of :  onely  future  liberality  is  loved  :  Wherfore  the 
more  a  Prince  doth  exhaust  himselfe  in  giving,  the  more 
friends  he  impoverisheth.  How  should  he  satisfie  intem 
perate  desires,  which  increase  according  as  they  are  replen 
ished  ?  Who  so  hath  his  minde  on  taking,  hath  it  no  more 
on  what  he  hath  taken.  Covetousnesse  hath  nothing  so 
proper,  as  to  bee  ungratefull.  The  example  of  Cyrus  shal 
not  ill  fit  this  place,  for  the  behoofe  of  our  kings  of  these 
daies,  as  a  touch-stone,  to  know  whether  their  gifts  be  wel 
or  ill  employed  ;  and  make  them  perceive  how  much  more 
happily  that  Emperour  did  wound  and  oppresse  them,  than 
they  doe.  Whereby  they  are  afterward  forced  to  exact  and 
borrow  of  their  unknowne  subjects,  and  rather  of  such  as 
they  have  wronged  and  aggrieved,  then  of  those  they  have 
enriched  and  done  good  unto  :  and  receive  no  aids,  where 
any  thing  is  gratitude,  except  the  name.  Croesus  upbraided 
him  with  his  lavish  bounty,  and  calculated  what  his  treasure 
would  amount  unto,  if  he  were  more  sparing  and  close-handed. 
A  desire  surprised  him  to  justifie  his  liberality,  and  dispatch 
ing  letters  over  all  parts  of  his  dominions,  to  such  great  men 
of  his  estate,  whom  hee  had  particularly  advanced,  intreated 
136 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

every  one  to  assist  him  with  as  much  money  as  they  could,  CHAPTER 

for  an  urgent  necessitie  of  his ;  and  presently  to  send  it  him          VI 

by  declaration  :  when  all  these  count-bookes  or  notes  were    ( 

brought  him,  each  of  his  friends  supposing  that  it  sufficed 

not,  to   offer  him   no   more  than  they  had  received  of  his 

bounteous  liberality,  but  adding  much  of  their  owne  unto  it, 

it  was  found,  that  the   said   summe  amounted   unto  much 

more  than  the  niggardly  sparing  of  Croesus.     Whereupon 

Cyrus  said,   4  I  am   no  lesse  greedy  of  riches,   than  other 

Princes,  but  I  am  rather  a  better  husband  of  them.     You 

see   with   what   small  venture   I  have  purchased   the   un- 

valuable  treasure  of  so  many  friends,  and  how  much  more 

faithfull  treasurers  they  are  to  mee,  than  mercenary  men 

would  be,  without  obligation  and  without  affection  :  and 

my  exchequer  or  treasury  better  placed  than   in   paltery 

coafers,  by  which  I  draw  upon  me  the  hate,  the  envy  and 

the  contempt  of  other  Princes/     The  ancient  Emperours 

were  wont  to  draw  som  excuse,  for  the  superfluity  of  their 

sports  and  publike  shewes,  for  so  much  as  their  authority  did 

in  some  sort  depend  (at  least  in  apparance)  from  the  will  of 

the  Romane  people  ;  which  from  all  ages  are  accustomed  to 

be  flattered  by  such  kinde  of  spectacles  and  excesse. 

But  they  were  particular  ones  who  had  bred  this  custome, 
to  gratifie  their  con-citizens  and  fellowes  :  especially  by  their 
purse,  by  such  profusion  and  magnificence.  It  was  cleane 
altered,  when  the  masters  and  chiefe  rulers  came  once  to 
imitate  the  same.  Pecuniarum  translatio  a  justis  dominis 
ad  alienos  non  debet  liber alis  videri.  4  The  passing  of  money 
4  from  right  owners  to  strangers  should  not  seeme  liberality." 
Philip,  because  his  sonne  indeavoured  by  gifts  to  purchase 
the  good  will  of  the  Macedonians,  by  a  letter  seemed  to  be 
displeased,  and  chid  him  in  this  manner  :  '  What  ?  Wouldest 
4  thou  have  thy  subjects  to  account  thee  for  their  purse- 
4  bearer,  and  not  repute  thee  for  their  King  ?  Wilt  thou 
4  frequent  and  practise  them  ?  Then  doe  it  with  the  benefits 
4  of  thy  vertue,  not  with  those  of  thy  cofers ' :  Yet  was  it  a 
goodly  thing  to  cause  a  great  quantity  of  great  trees,  all 
branchie  and  greene,  to  bee  far  brought  and  planted  in  plots 
yeelding  nothing  but  dry  gravell,  representing  a  wilde  shady 
forrest,  divided  in  due  seemely  proportion  :  And  the  first 
S  137 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  day,  to  put  into  the  same  a  thousand  Estriges,  a  thousand 
yi  Stagges,  a  thousand  wilde  Boares,  and  a  thousand  Buckes, 

Of  Coaches  yee}ding  them  over  to  bee  hunted  and  killed  by  the  com 
mon  people  :  the  next  morrow  in  the  presence  of  all  the 
assembly  to  cause  a  hundred  great  Lions,  a  hundred  Leopards, 
and  three  hundred  huge  Beares  to  be  baited  and  tugged  in 
pieces  :  and  for  the  third  day,  in  bloody  manner  and  good 
earnest  to  make  three  hundred  couple  of  Gladiators  or 
Fencers,  to  combate  and  murder  one  another  ;  as  did  the 
Emperour  Probus.  It  was  also  a  goodly  shew,  to  see  those 
huge  Amphitheaters  all  enchased  with  rich  marble,  on  the 
outside  curiously  wrought  with  curious  statues,  and  all  the 
inner  side  glittering  with  precious  and  rare  embellishments. 

Baltheus  en  gemmis,  en  illita  portions  auro. 

A  belt  beset  with  gemmes  behold, 
Behold  a  walke  bedawb'd  with  gold. 

All  the  sides  round  about  that  great  void,  replenished  and 
invironed  from  the  ground  unto  the  very  top,  with  three  or 
fourescore  rankes  of  steps  and  seates,  likewise  all  of  marble 
covered  with  faire  cushions  ; 

IUVEN.  Sat.  —exeat,  inquit, 

iii,  !  53.  Sipudor  est,  et  de  pulvino  surgat  equestri, 

Cujus  res  legi  non  sujficit. 

If  shame  there  be,  let  him  be  gone,  he  cries, 
And  from  his  knightly  cushion  let  him  rise, 
Whose  substance  to  the  law  doth  not  suffice  ; 

where  might  conveniently  bee  placed  an  hundred  thousand 
men,  and  all  sit  at  ease.  And  the  plaine-ground-worke  of 
it,  where  sports  were  to  be  acted,  first  by  Art  to  cause  the 
same  to  open  and  chap  in  sunder  with  gaps  and  cranishes, 
representing  hollow  cavernes  which  vomited  out  the  beasts 
appointed  for  the  spectacle  :  that  ended,  immediately  to 
overflow  it  all  with  a  maine  deepe  sea,  fraught  with  store 
of  sea-monsters  and  other  strange  fishes,  all  over-laid  with 
goodly  tall  ships,  ready  rigd  and  appointed  to  represent  a 
Sea-fight ;  and  thirdly,  suddenly  to  make  it  smooth  and  drie 
againe,  for  the  combate  of  Gladiators :  and  fourthly,  being 
forthwith  cleansed,  to  strewe  it  over  with  Vermilion  and 
Storax,  insteede  of  gravell,  for  the  erecting  of  a  solemne 
138 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

banket,  for  all  that  infinite  number  of  people  :  the  last  act  CHAPTER 

of  one  onely  day.  "VI 

J       J  Of  Coaches 

— quoties  nos  descendentis  arence 

Vidimus  in  paries,  ruptaque  voragine  terree 

Emersisseferas,  et  ijsdem  seepe  latebris 

Aurea  cum  croceo  creuerunt  arbuta  libro. 

Nee  solum  nobis  siluestria  cernere  monstra 

Contigit  equoreos ;  ego  cum  certantibus  urttix 

Spectaui  vitulos,  et  equorum  nomine  dignum, 

Sed  deforme  pecus. 

How  oft  have  we  beheld  wild  beasts  appeare 

From  broken  gulfes  of  earth,  upon  some  parte 

Of  sande  that  did  not  sinke  ?  how  often  there 

And  thence  did  golden  boughs  ore  saffron'd  starte  ? 

Nor  onely  saw  we  monsters  of  the  wood, 

But  I  have  seene  Sea-calves  whom  Beares  withstood, 

And  such  a  kinde  of  beast  as  might  be  named 

A  horse,,  but  in  most  foule  proportion  framed. 

They  have  sometimes  caused  an  high  steepy  mountaine  to 
arise  in  the  midst  of  the  sayd  Amphitheaters,  all  over-spred 
with  fruitfull  and  flourishing  trees  of  all  sortes,  on  the  top 
whereof  gushed  out  streames  of  water,  as  from  out  the  source 
of  a  purling  spring.  Other  times  they  have  produced  there 
in  a  great  tall  Ship  floating  up  and  downe,  which  of  it  selfe 
opened  and  split  a  sunder,  and  after  it  had  disgorged  from 
out  it's  bulke,  foure  or  five  hundred  wild  beasts  to  bee  baited, 
it  closed  and  vanished  away  of  it  selfe,  without  any  visible 
helpe.  Sometimes  from  out  the  bottome  of  it,  they  caused 
streakes  and  purlings  of  sweete  water  to  spoute  up,  bubling 
to  the  highest  top  of  the  frame,  and  gently  watring,  sprink 
ling  and  refreshing  that  infinite  multitude.  To  keepe  and 
cover  themselves  from  the  violence  of  the  wether,  they  caused 
that  huge  compasse  to  be  all  over-spred,  sometimes  with 
purple  sailes,  all  curiously  wrought  with  the  needle,  some 
times  of  silke,  and  of  some  other  colour,  in  the  twinkling  of 
an  eye,  as  they  pleased,  they  displaid  and  spred,  or  drewe 
and  pulled  them  in  againe. 

Quamuis  non  modico  caleant  spectacula  solo 
Vela  reducuntur  cum  venit  Hermogenes. 
Though  fervent  Sunne  make't  hotte  to  see  a  play, 
When  linnen  thieves  come,  sailes  are  kept  away. 

The   nets    likewise,   which   they  used   to    put  before  the 

139 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  people,  to  save  them  from  harme  and  violence  of  the  baited 

VI  lipacfc     IVPVP  wnvpn   wifli   crnlrlp 


Of  Coaches 


HOR.  Car.  iv. 
Od.  ix.  25. 


beasts,  were  woven  with  golde. 

— auro  quoque  torta  refulgent 
Retia. 

Nets  with  gold  enterlaced, 

Their  shewes  with  glittring  graced. 

If  any  thing  bee  excusable  in  such  lavish  excesse,  it  is  where 
the  invention  and  strangenesse  breedeth  admiration,  and  not 
the  costlie  charge.  Even  in  those  vanities,  wee  may  plainely 
perceive  how  fertile  and  happy  those  former  ages  were  of 
other  manner  of  wittes,  then  ours  are.  It  hapneth  of  this 
kinde  of  fertilitie  as  of  all  other  productions  of  nature.  Wee 
may  not  say  what  nature  employed  then  the  utmost  of  hir 
power.  We  goe  not,  but  rather  creepe  and  stagger  here  and 
there  :  we  goe  our  pace.  I  imagine  our  knowledge  to  bee 
weake  in  all  senses  :  wee  neither  discerne  far-forward,  nor  see 
much  backward.  It  embraceth  little,  and  liveth  not  long  : 
It  is  short  both  in  extension  of  time,  and  in  amplenesse  of 
matter  or  invention. 

Vixere  fortes  ante  Agamemnona 
Multi,  sed  omnes  illachrymabiles 
Vrgentur,  ignotique  longa 
Node. 

Before  great  Agamemnon  and  the  rest,, 
Many  liv'd  valiant,  yet  are  all  supprest, 
(Jnmoan'd,  unknowne,  in  darke  oblivions  nest. 


LUCR.  v.  326. 


Et  super  a  bellum  Trojanum  etfunera  Troice, 
Multi  alias  alij  quoque  res  cecinere  poetce. 

Beside  the  Troian  warre,  Troyes  funerall  night, 
Of  other  things  did  other  Poets  write. 

And  Solons  narration  concerning  what  he  had  learned  of  the 

^Egyptian  Priests,  of  their  states,  long-life,  and  manner  how 

to  learne  and  preserve  strange  or  forraine  histories,  in  mine 

opinion  is  not  a  testimony  to  bee  refused  in  this  consideration. 

Cic.  Nat.  Deo.  Si  interminatam  in   omnes  paries   magnitudinem  regionum 

i-  videremus,  et  temporum,  in  quam  se  inijciens  animus  et  in- 

tendens,  ita  late  longeque  peregrinatur,  ut  nullam  or  am  ultimi 

videat,  in  qua  possit  insistere :  In  hcec  immensitate  irifinita, 

vis  innumerabilium  appareret  formarum.     '  If  we  behold  an 

'  unlimited  greatnesse  on  all  sides  both  of  regions  and  times, 

140 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

'  whereupon  the  mind  casting  it  selfe  and  intentive  doth  CHAPTER 
'  travell  farre  and  neare,  so  as  it  sees  no  bounds  of  what  is  "VI 
'  last,  whereon  it  may  insist ;  in  this  infinite  immensity  * 
6  there  would  appeare  a  multitude  of  innumerable  formes.'' 
If  whatsoever  hath  come  unto  us  by  report  of  what  is  past 
were  true,  and  knowne  of  any  body,  it  would  be  lesse  then 
nothing,  in  respect  of  that  which  is  unknowne.  And  even 
of  this  image  of  the  world,  which  whilest  we  live  therein, 
glideth  and  passeth  away,  how  wretched,  weake  and  how 
short  is  the  knowledge  of  the  most  curious  ?  Not  onely  of 
the  particular  events,  which  fortune  often  maketh  exemplar 
and  of  consequence :  but  of  the  state  of  mighty  common 
wealths,  large  Monarkies  and  renowned  nations,  there 
escapeth  our  knowledge  a  hundred  times  more,  then  com- 
meth  unto  our  notice.  We  keepe  a  coile,  and  wonder  at  the 
miraculous  invention  of  our  artilerie,  and  amazed  at  the  rare 
devise  of  Printing  :  when  as  unknowne  to  us,  other  men,  and 
an  other  end  of  the  world  named  China,  knew  and  had 
perfect  use  of  both,  a  thousand  yeares  before.  If  we  sawe  as 
much  of  this  vaste  world,  as  we  see  but  a  least  part  of  it,  it 
is  very  likely  we  should  perceive  a  perpetuall  multiplicity, 
and  ever-rouling  vicissitude  of  formes.  Therein  is  nothing 
singular,  and  nothing  rare,  if  regard  bee  had  unto  nature,  or 
to  say  better,  if  relation  bee  had  unto  our  knowledge  :  which 
is  a  weake  foundation  of  our  rules,  and  which  doth  com 
monly  present  us  a  right-false  Image  of  things.  How  vainely 
do  we  now-adayes  conclude  the  declination  and  decrepitude 
of  the  world,  by  the  fond  arguments  wee  drawe  from  our 
owne  weakenesse,  drooping  and  declination  : 

lamque  adeo  affecta  est  cetas,  affectaque  tellus :  LUCR.  ii.  1159. 

And  now  both  age  and  land 
So  sicke  affected  stand. 

And  as  vainly  did  another  conclude  it's  birth  and  youth, 
by  the  vigour  he  perceiveth  in  the  wits  of  his  time,  abound 
ing  in  novelties  and  invention  of  divers  Arts  : 

Verum  ut  opinor,  habet  nouitatem,  summa,  recensque  Ib.  v.  330. 

Natura  est  mundi,  neque  pridem  exordia  cepit : 

Quare  etiam  qucedam  nunc  artes  expoliuntur, 

Nunc  etiam  augescunt,  nunc  addita  navigiis  sunt 

Multa. 

141 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  But  all  this  world  is  new,  as  I  suppose, 

VI  Worlds  nature  fresh,  nor  lately  it  arose : 

Of  Coaches  Whereby  some  arts  refined  are  in  fashion, 

And  many  things  now  to  our  navigation 
Are  added,  daily  growne  to  augmentation. 

Our  world  hath  of  late  discovered  another  (and  who  can 
warrant  us  whether  it  be  the  last  of  his  brethren,  since  both 
the  Damons,  the  Sibylles,  and  all  we  have  hitherto  been 
ignorant  of  this  ?)  no  lesse-large,  fully-peopled,  all-things- 
yeelding,  and  mighty  in  strength,  than  ours :  neverthelesse 
so  new  and  infantine,  that  he  is  yet  to  learne  his  A.B.C.  It 
is  not  yet  full  fifty  yeeres  that  he  knew  neither  letters,  nor 
waight,  nor  measures,  nor  apparell,  nor  corne,  nor  vines. 
But  was  all  naked,  simply-pure,  in  Natures  lappe,  and  lived 
but  with  such  meanes  and  food  as  his  mother-nurce  affoorded 
him.  If  wee  conclude  aright  of  our  end,  and  the  foresaid 
Poet  of  the  infancie  of  his  age,  this  late-world  shall  but 
come  to  light,  when  ours  shall  fall  into  darknesse.  The 
whole  Universe  shall  fall  into  a  palsey  or  convulsion  of 
sinnowes  :  one  member  shall  be  maimed  or  shrunken,  another 
nimble  and  in  good  plight.  I  feare,  that  by  our  contagion, 
we  shall  directly  have  furthered  his  declination,  and  hastened 
his  ruine ;  and  that  we  shall  too  dearely  have  sold  him  our 
opinions,  our  new-fangles  and  our  Arts.  It  was  an  un 
polluted,  harmelesse  infant  world  ;  yet  have  we  not  whipped 
and  submitted  the  same  unto  our  discipline,  or  schooled  him 
by  the  advantage  of  our  valour  or  naturall  forces,  nor  have 
wee  instructed  him  by  our  justice  and  integrity;  nor  subdued 
by  our  magnanimity.  Most  of  their  answers,  and  a  number 
of  the  negotiations  we  have  had  with  them,  witnesse  that 
they  were  nothing  short  of  us,  nor  beholding  to  us  for  any 
excellency  of  naturall  wit  or  perspicuitie,  concerning  per 
tinency.  The  wonderfull,  or  as  I  may  call  it,  amazement- 
breeding  magnificence  of  the  never-like  scene  Cities  of 
Cusco  and  Mexico,  and  amongst  infinite  such  like  things, 
the  admirable  Garden  of  that  King,  where  all  the  trees,  the 
fruits,  the  Hearbes  and  Plants,  according  to  the  order  and 
greatnesse  they  have  in  a  Garden,  were  most  artificially 
framed  in  gold :  as  also  in  his  Cabinet,  all  the  living 
creatures  that  his  Countrey  or  his  Seas  produced,  were  cast 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

in  gold  ;  and  the  exquisite  beauty  of  their  workes,  in  precious  CHAPTER 
Stones,  in  Feathers,  in  Cotton  and  in  Painting  :  shew  that          VI 
they  yeelded   as  little  unto  us    in    cunning   and  industrie.    Of  Coaches 
But  concerning    unfained   devotion,    awefull  observance  of 
lawes,  unspotted  integrity,  bounteous  liberality,  due  loyalty 
and  free  liberty,  it  hath  greatly  availed  us,  that  we  had  not 
so  much  as  they  :   By  which  advantage,  they  have  lost,  cast 
away,  sold,  undone  and  betraied  themselves. 

Touching  hardinesse  and  undaunted  courage,  and  as  for 
matchlesse  constancie,  unmooved  assurednesse,  and  undis- 
maied  resolution  against  paine,  smarting,  famine  and  death 
it  selfe ;  I  will  not  feare  to  oppose  the  examples  which  I  may 
easily  finde  amongst  them,  to  the  most  famous  ancient 
examples,  we  may  with  all  our  industrie  discover  in  all  the 
Annales  and  memories  of  our  knowen  old  World.  For,  as  for 
those  which  have  subdued  them,  let  them  lay  aside  the  wiles, 
the  policies  and  stratagems,  which  they  have  emploied  to 
cozen,  to  cunny-catch,  and  to  circumvent  them  ;  and  the 
just  astonishment  which  those  nations  might  justly  con 
ceive,  by  seeing  so  unexpected  an  arrivall  of  bearded  men  ; 
divers  in  language,  in  habite,  in  religion,  in  behaviour,  in 
forme,  in  countenance;  and  from  a  part  of  the  world  so 
distant,  and  where  they  never  heard  any  habitation  was : 
mounted  upon  great  and  unknowen  monsters  ;  against  those, 
who  had  never  so  much  as  scene  any  horse,  and  lesse  any 
beast  whatsoever  apt  to  beare,  or  taught  to  carry  either  man 
or  burden  ;  covered  with  a  shining  and  hard  skinne,  and 
armed  with  slicing-keene  weapons  and  glittering  armour : 
against  them,  who  for  the  wonder  of  the  glistring  of  a  look- 
ing-glasse  or  of  a  plaine  knife,  would  have  changed  or  given 
inestimable  riches  in  Gold,  Precious  Stones  and  Pearles ; 
and  who  had  neither  the  skill  nor  the  matter  wherewith  at 
any  leasure,  they  could  have  pierced  our  steele :  to  which 
you  may  adde  the  flashing-fire  and  thundring  roare  of  shotte 
and  Harguebuses ;  able  to  quell  and  daunt  even  Caesar  him- 
selfe,  had  he  beene  so  sodainely  surprised  and  as  little  ex 
perienced  as  they  were :  and  thus  to  come  unto,  and  assault 
silly-naked  people,  saving  where  the  invention  of  weaving  of 
Cotton  cloath  was  knowne  and  used  :  for  the  most  altogether 
unarmed,  except  some  bowes,  stones,  staves  and  woodden 

143 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  bucklers:  unsuspecting  poore  people,  surprised  under  colour 
VI  of  amity  and  well-meaning  faith  over-taken  by  the  curiosity 
Coaches  j.Q  gee  s^range  anj  unknowne  things  :  I  say,  take  this  dis 
parity  from  the  conquerors,  and  you  deprive  them  of  all  the 
occasions  and  cause  of  so  many  unexpected  victories.  When 
I  consider  that  sterne-untamed  obstinacy,  and  undanted 
vehemence,  wherewith  so  many  thousands  of  men,  of  women 
and  children,  do  so  infinite  times  present  themselves  unto 
inevitable  dangers,  for  the  defence  of  their  Gods  and  liberty  : 
This  generous  obstinacy  to  endure  all  extremities,  all  diffi 
culties  and  death,  more  easily  and  willingly,  then  basely  to 
yeelde  unto  their  domination,  of  whom  they  have  so  abhomin- 
ably  beene  abused  :  some  of  them  choosing  rather  to  starve 
with  hunger  and  fasting,  being  taken,  then  to  accept  food  at 
their  enemies  hands,  so  basely  victorious  :  I  perceave,  that 
whosoever  had  undertaken  them  man  to  man,  without  ods  of 
armes,  of  experience  or  of  number,  should  have  had  as  danger 
ous  a  warre,  or  perhaps  more,  as  any  we  see  amongst  us. 

Why  did  not  so  glorious  a  conquest  happen  under  Alex 
ander,  or  during  the  time  of  the  ancient  Greekes  and 
Romanes  ?  or  why  befell  not  so  great  a  change  and  alteration 
of  Empires  and  people,  under  such  hands  as  would  gently 
have  polished,  reformed  and  incivilized,  what  in  them  they 
deemed  to  be  barbarous  and  rude  :  or  would  have  nourished 
and  fostered  those  good  seedes,  which  nature  had  there 
brought  foorth  :  adding  not  onely  to  the  manuring  of  their 
grounds  and  ornaments  of  their  cities,  such  artes  as  we  had ; 
and  that  no  further  then  had  beene  necessary  for  them,  but 
there  wit  hall  joyning  unto  the  originall  vertues  of  the  country, 
those  of  the  ancient  Grecians  and  Romanes  ?  What  reputa 
tion  and  what  reformation  would  all  that  farre  spredding 
world  have  found,  if  the  examples,  demeanors  and  pollicies, 
wherewith  we  first  presented  them,  had  called  and  allured 
those  uncorrupted  nations,  to  the  admiration  and  imitation 
of  vertue,  and  had  established  betweene  them  and  us  a 
brotherly  society  and  mutuall  correspondency  ?  How  easie 
a  matter  had  it  beene,  profitably  to  reforme,  and  christianly 
to  instruct,  minds  yet  so  pure  and  new,  so  willing  to  bee 
taught,  being  for  the  most  part  endowed  with  so  docile,  so 
apt  and  so  yeelding  naturall  beginnings  ?  whereas  contrary- 

144 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

wise,  we  have  made  use  of  their  ignorance  and  inexperience,  CHAPTER 

drawe    them    more    easily    unto    treason,    fraude,    luxurie,          VI 

avarice  and  all  manner  of  inhumanity  and  cruelty,  by  the 

example  of  our  life  and   patterne  of  our  customes.     Who 

ever   raised    the    service    of    marchandize    and    benefit    of 

traffick  to  so  high  a  rate  ?    So  many  goodly  citties  ransacked 

and  razed ;  so  many  nations  destroyed  and  made  desolate ; 

so  infinite  millions  of  harmelesse  people  of  all  sexes,  states 

and  ages,  massacred,  ravaged  and   put  to  the  sword  ;  and 

the  richest,  the  fairest  and  the  best  part  of  the  world  topsi- 

turvied,  ruined  and  defaced  for  the  traffick  of  Pearles  and 

Pepper :  Oh  mechanicall  victories,  oh  base  conquest.     Never 

did  greedy  revenge,  publik  wrongs  or  generall  enmities,  so 

moodily  enrage,    and    so    passionately  incense  men   against 

men,  unto  so   horrible   hostilities,  bloody  dissipation,   and 

miserable  calamities. 

Certaine  Spaniardes  coasting  alongst  the  Sea  in  search  of 
mines,  fortuned  to  land  in  a  very  fertile,  pleasant  and  well 
peopled  country  :  unto  the  inhabitants  whereof  they  declared 
their  intent,  and  shewed  their  accustomed  perswasions  ;  say 
ing  :  That  they  were  quiet  and  well-meaning  men,  comming 
from  farre-countries,  being  sent  from  the  King  of  Castile,  the 
greatest  King  of  the  habitable  earth,  unto  whom  the  Pope, 
representing  God  on  earth,  had  given  the  principality  of 
all  the  Indies.  That  if  they  would  become  tributaries  to 
him,  they  should  bee  most  kindly  used  and  courteously 
entreated  :  They  required  of  them  victualles  for  their 
nourishment ;  and  some  gold  for  the  behoofe  of  certaine 
Physicall  experiments.  Moreover,  they  declared  unto  them, 
the  beleeving  in  one  onely  God,  and  the  trueth  of  our  reli 
gion,  which  they  perswaded  them  to  embrace,  adding  there 
to  some  minatorie  threates.  Whose  answer  was  this  :  That 
happily  they  might  be  quiet  and  well  meaning,  but  their 
countenance  shewed  them  to  be  otherwise  :  As  concerning 
their  King,  since  he  seemed  to  beg,  he  shewed  to  be  poore 
and  needy  :  And  for  the  Pope,  who  had  made  that  distri 
bution,  he  expressed  himselfe  a  man  loving  dissention,  in 
going  about  to  give  unto  a  third  man,  a  thing  which  was 
not  his  owne:  so  to  make  it  questionable  and  litigious 
amongst  the  ancient  possessors  of  it.  As  for  victualles, 

T  145 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  they  should  have  part  of  their  store:  And  for  gold,  they 
VI  had  but  little,  and  that  it  was  a  thing  they  made  very 

Of  Coaches  small  accoumpt  of,  as  meerely  unprofitable  for  the  service 
of  their  life,  whereas  all  their  care  was  but  how  to  passe 
it  happily  and  pleasantly :  and  therefore,  what  quantity 
soever  they  should  finde,  that  onely  excepted  which  was 
employed  about  the  service  of  their  Gods,  they  might 
bouldly  take  it.  As  touching  one  onely  God,  the  discourse 
of  him  had  very  well  pleased  them  :  but  they  would  by  no 
meanes  change  their  religion,  under  which  they  had  for  so 
long  time  lived  so  happily  :  and  that  they  were  not  accus 
tomed  to  take  any  counsell,  but  of  their  friends  and  acquaint 
ance.  As  concerning  their  menaces,  it  was  a  signe  of  want 
of  judgement,  to  threaten  those,  whose  nature,  condition, 
power  and  meanes  was  to  them  unknowne.  And  therefore 
they  should  with  all  speed  hasten  to  avoid  their  dominions 
(forsomuch  as  they  were  not  wont  to  admit  or  take  in 
good  part  the  kindnesses  and  remonstrances  of  armed  people, 
namely  of  strangers)  otherwise  they  would  deale  with  them 
as  they  had  done  with  such  others,  shewing  them  the  heads 
of  certaine  men  sticking  upon  stakes  about  their  Citie, 
which  had  lately  beene  executed.  Loe  here  an  example  of 
the  stammering  of  this  infancy. 

But  so  it  is,  neither  in  this,  nor  in  infinite  other  places, 
where  the  Spaniards  found  not  the  marchandise  they  sought 
for,  neither  made  stay  or  attempted  any  violence,  whatso 
ever  other  commodity  the  place  yeelded  :  witnesse  my  Cani- 
bales.  Of  two  the  most  mighty  and  glorious  Monarkes  of 
that  world,  and  perad  venture  of  all  our  Westerne  parts, 
Kings  over  so  many  Kings  :  the  last  they  deposed  and  over 
came  :  He  of  Peru,  having  by  them  been  taken  in  a  battell, 
and  set  at  so  excessive  a  ransome,  that  it  exceedeth  all  be- 
liefe,  and  that  truely  paide  :  and  by  his  conversation  having 
given  them  apparant  signes  of  a  free,  liberall,  undanted  and 
constant  courage,  and  declared  to  be  of  a  pure,  noble,  and 
well  composed  understanding ;  a  humour  possessed  the  con 
querors,  after  they  had  most  insolently  exacted  from  him  a 
Million,  three  hundred  five  and  twenty  thousand,  and  five 
hundred  waights  of  golde ;  besides  the  silver  and  other  pre 
cious  things,  which  amounted  to  no  lesse  a  summe  (so  that 

146 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

their  horses  were  all  shood  of  massive  gold)  to  discover  (what  CHAPTER 
disloyalty  or  treachery  soever  it  might  cost  them)  what  the  71 
remainder  of  this  Kings  treasure  might  be,  and  without  con- 
trolment  enjoy  what  ever  he  might  have  hidden  or  concealed 
from  them.  Which  to  compasse,  they  forged  a  false  accusa 
tion  and  proofe  against  him;  That  hee  practised  to  raise  his 
provinces,  and  intended  to  induce  his  subjects  to  some  insur 
rection,  so  to  procure  his  liberty.  Whereupon,  by  the  very 
judgement  of  those  who  had  complotted  this  forgery  and 
treason  against  him,  hee  was  condemned  to  be  publikely 
hanged  and  strangled  :  having  first  made  him  to  redeeme  the 
torment  of  being  burned  alive,  by  the  baptisme  which  at  the 
instant  of  his  execution,  in  charity  they  bestowed  upon  him. 
A  horrible  and  the  like  never  heard  of  accident :  which 
neverthelesse  he  undismaiedly  endured  with  an  unmoved 
manner,  and  truly-royall  gravity,  without  ever  contradicting 
himselfe  either  in  countenance  or  speech.  And  then,  some 
what  to  mitigate  and  circumvent  those  silly  unsuspecting 
people,  amazed  and  astonished  at  so  strange  a  spectacle, 
they  counterfeited  a  great  mourning  and  lamentation  for  his 
death,  and  appointed  his  funeralls  to  bee  solemnely  and 
sumptuously  celebrated. 

The  other  King  of  Mexico,  having  a  long  time  manfully 
defended  his  besieged  City,  and  in  the  tedious  siege,  shewed 
what  ever  pinching-sufferance,  and  resolute-perseverance  can 
effect,  if  ever  any  couragious  Prince  or  warre-like  people 
shewed  the  same;  and  his  disastrous  successe  having  delivered 
him  alive  into  his  enemies  hands,  upon  conditions  to  bee  used 
as  beseemed  a  King  :  who  during  the  time  of  his  imprison 
ment,  did  never  make  the  least  show  of  any  thing  unworthy 
that  glorious  title.  After  which  victory,  the  Spaniards  not 
finding  that  quantitie  of  gold  they  had  promised  themselves, 
when  they  had  ransacked  and  ranged  all  corners,  they  by 
meanes  of  the  cruellest  tortures  and  horriblest  torments 
they  could  possibly  devise,  beganne  to  wrest  and  draw  some 
more  from  such  prisoners  as  they  had  in  keeping.  But  un 
able  to  profit  any  thing  that  way,  finding  stronger  hearts 
than  their  torments,  they  in  the  end  fell  to  such  moody  out 
rages,  that  contrary  to  all  law  of  nations,  and  against  their 
solemne  vowes  and  promises,  they  condemned  the  King  him- 

147 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  selfe  and  one  of  the  chiefest  Princes  of  his  Court,  to  the 
VI  Racke,  one  in  presence  of  another  :  The  Prince  environed 

Of  Coaches  roun(j  wjth  hot  burning  coales,  being  overcome  with  the 
exceeding  torment,  at  last  in  most  pitious  sort  turning  his 
dreary  eyes  toward  his  Master,  as  if  hee  asked  mercy  of  him 
for  that  hee  could  endure  no  longer  ;  The  king  fixing  rigor 
ously  and  fiercely  his  lookes  upon  him,  seeming  to  upbraid 
him  with  his  remisnesse  and  pusilanimity,  with  a  sterne  and 
setled  voyce  uttered  these  few  words  unto  him ;  '  What  ? 
'  supposest  thou  I  am  in  a  cold  bath  ?  am  I  at  more  ease 
'  than  thou  art  ? '  Whereat  the  silly  wretch  immediately 
fainted  under  the  torture,  and  yeelded  up  the  ghost.  The 
king  half  rosted,  was  carried  away  :  Not  so  much  for  pitty 
(for  what  ruth  could  ever  enter  so  barbarous  mindes,  who 
upon  the  surmised  information  of  some  odde  piece  or  vessell 
of  golde,  they  intended  to  get,  would  broyle  a  man  before 
their  eyes,  and  not  a  man  onely,  but  a  king,  so  great  in  for 
tune  and  so  renowned  in  desert  ?)  but  for  as  much  as  his 
unmatched  constancy  did  more  and  more  make  their  inhu 
mane  cruelty  ashamed :  They  afterward  hanged  him,  because 
he  had  couragiously  attempted  by  armes  to  deliver  himselfe 
out  of  so  long  captivity  and  miserable  subjection  ;  where  he 
ended  his  wretched  life,  worthy  an  high  minded  and  never 
danted  Prince.  At  another  time,  in  one  same  fire,  they 
caused  to  be  burned  all  alive  foure  hundred  common  men, 
and  threescore  principall  Lords  of  a  Province,  whom  by  the 
fortune  of  warre  they  had  taken  prisoners.  These  narrations 
we  have  out  of  their  owne  bookes :  for  they  doe  not  onely 
avouch,  but  vauntingly  publish  them.  May  it  bee,  they  doe 
it  for  a  testimony  of  their  justice  or  zeale  toward  their  reli 
gion?  verily  they  are  wayes  over-different  and  enemies  to  so 
sacred  an  ende.  Had  they  proposed  unto  themselves  to 
enlarge  and  propagate  our  religion,  they  would  have  con 
sidered,  that  it  is  not  amplified  by  possession  of  lands, 
but  of  men :  and  would  have  beene  satisfied  with  such 
slaughters,  as  the  necessity  of  warre  bringeth,  without 
indifferently  adding  thereunto  so  bloody  a  butchery,  as 
upon  savage  beasts ;  and  so  universall  as  fire  or  sword 
could  ever  attaine  unto ;  having  purposely  preserved  no 
more  than  so  many  miserable  bond-slaves,  as  they  deemed 
148 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

might  suffice  for  the  digging,  working  and  service  of  their  CHAPTER 
mines:  So  that  divers  of  their  chieftains  have  beene  executed  VI 
to  death,  even  in  the  places  they  had  conquered,  by  the  ( 
appointment  of  the  Kings  of  Castile,  justly  offended  at  the 
seld-seene  horror  of  their  barbarous  demeanours,  and  well 
nigh  all  disesteemed,  contemned  and  hated.  God  hath  meri 
toriously  permitted,  that  many  of  their  great  pillages,  and 
ill  gotten  goods,  have  either  beene  swallowed  up  by  the 
revenging  Seas  in  transporting  them,  or  consumed  by  the 
intestine  warres  and  civill  broiles,  wherewith  themselves 
have  devoured  one  another ;  and  the  greatest  part  of  them 
have  been  over- whelmed  and  buried  in  the  bowels  of  the 
earth,  in  the  very  places  they  found  them,  without  any  fruit 
of  their  victory.  Touching  the  objection  which  some  make, 
that  the  receipt,  namely  in  the  hands  of  so  thrifty,  wary 
and  wise  a  Prince,  doth  so  little  answer  the  fore-conceived 
hope,  which  was  given  unto  his  predecessors,  and  the  said 
former  aboundance  of  riches,  they  met  withall  at  the  first 
discovery  of  this  new-found  world,  (for  although  they  bring- 
home  great  quantity  of  gold  and  silver,  we  perceive  the  same 
to  be  nothing,  in  respect  of  what  might  be  expected  thence) 
it  may  be  answered,  that  the  use  of  money  was  there  alto 
gether  unknowne ;  and  consequently  that  all  their  gold  was 
gathered  together,  serving  to  no  other  purpose,  than  for 
shew,  state  and  ornament,  as  a  moovable  reserved  from  father 
to  sonne  by  many  puissant  Kings,  who  exhausted  all  their 
mines,  to  collect  so  huge  a  heape  of  vessels  or  statues  for 
the  ornament  of  their  Temples,  and  embellishing  of  their 
Pallaces  :  whereas  all  our  gold  is  employed  in  commerce  and 
trafficke  betweene  man  and  man.  Wee  mince  and  alter  it 
into  a  thousand  formes  :  wee  spend,  wee  scatter  and  dis 
perse  the  same  to  severall  uses.  Suppose  our  Kings  should 
thus  gather  and  heape  up  all  the  gold  they  might  for  many 
ages  hoard  up  together,  and  keepe  it  close  and  untouched. 
Those  of  the  kingdome  of  Mexico  were  somewhat  more  en- 
civilized,  and  better  artists,  than  other  nations  of  that  world. 
And  as  wee  doe,  so  judged  they,  that  this  Universe  was  neare 
his  end  :  and  tooke  the  desolation  wee  brought  amongst 
them  as  an  infallible  signe  of  it.  They  beleeved  the  state  of 
the  world,  to  bee  divided  into  five  ages,  as  in  the  life  of  five 

149 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  succeeding  Sunnes,  whereof  foure  had  already  ended  their 
VI  course  or  time ;  and  the  same  which  now  shined  upon  them, 
Coaches  wag  the  fifth  and  kgt  The  first  perished  together  with  all 

other  creatures,  by  an  universall  inundation  of  waters.  The 
second  by  the  fall  of  the  heavens  upon  us  which  stifled  and 
overwhelmed  every  living  thing  :  in  which  age  they  affirme 
the  Giants  to  have  beene,  and  shewed  the  Spaniards  certaine 
bones  of  them,  according  to  whose  proportion  the  stature  of 
men  came  to  bee  of  the  height  of  twenty  handfuls.  The 
third  was  consumed  by  a  violent  fire,  which  burned  and 
destroyed  all.  The  fourth  by  a  whirling  emotion  of  the 
ayre  and  windes,  which  with  the  violent  fury  of  it  selfe, 
remooved  and  overthrew  divers  high  mountaines  :  saying, 
that  men  dyed  not  of  it,  but  were  transformed  into  Munkeis. 
Oh  what  impressions  doth  not  the  weakenesse  of  mans 
beliefe  admit  ?)  After  the  consummation  of  this  fourth 
Sunne,  the  world  continued  five  and  twenty  yeares  in  per- 
petuall  darkenesse  :  in  the  fifteenth  of  which  one  man  and  one 
woman  were  created,  who  renewed  the  race  of  man-kinde. 
Ten  yeares  after,  upon  a  certaine  day,  the  Sunne  appeared  as 
newly  created :  from  which  day  beginneth  ever  since  the 
calculation  of  their  yeares.  On  the  third  day  of  whose 
creation,  died  their  ancient  Gods,  their  new  ones  have  day 
by  day  beene  borne  since.  In  what  manner  this  last  Sunne 
shall  perish,  my  aucthor  could  not  learne  of  them.  But  their 
number  of  this  fourth  change,  doth  jumpe  and  meete  with 
that  great  conjunction  of  the  Starres,  which  eight  hundred 
and  odde  yeares  since,  according  to  the  Astrologians  supposi 
tion,  produced  divers  great  alterations  and  strange  novelties 
in  the  world.  Concerning  the  proud  pompe  and  glorious 
magnificence,  by  occasion  of  which  I  am  fallen  into  this  dis 
course,  nor  Grece,  nor  Rome,  nor  JEgipt,  can  (bee  it  in  profit, 
or  difficultie  or  nobility)  equall  or  compare  sundrie  and 
divers  of  their  workes.  The  cawcy  or  high-way  which  is 
yet  to  bee  scene  in  Peru,  erected  by  the  Kings  of  that 
countrie,  stretching  from  the  city  of  Quito,  unto  that  of 
Cusco  (containing  three  hundred  leagues  in  length)  straight, 
even,  and  fine,  and  twentie  paces  in  breadth  curiously  paved, 
ravsed  on  both  sides  with  goodly,  high  masonrie-walles,  all 
along  which,  on  the  inner  side  there  are  two  continuall 
150 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

running    streames,    pleasantly  beset    with  beautious    trees,  CHAPTER 
which  they  call  Moly.     In  framing  of  which,  where  they          VI 
mette  any  mountaines  or  rockes,  they  have  cut,  rased  and 
levelled  them,   and  filled  all  hollow  places  with   lime  and 
stone.    At  the  ende  of  every  dayes  journey,  as  stations,  there 
are  built  stately  great  pallaces,  plentiously  stored  with  all 
manner  of  good  victuals,  apparrell  and  armes,  as  well  for 
daylie  way-fairing  men,  as  for  such  armies  that  might  happen 
to  passe  that  way.    In  the  estimation  of  which  worke  I  have 
especially  considered  the  difficulty,  which  in   that  place  is 
particularly  to   bee    remembred.     For  they  built  with   no 
stones  that  were  lesse  then  ten  foote  square  :  They  had  no 
other  meanes  to    cary   or  transport  them,  then  by   meere 
strength  of  armes  to   draw  and  dragge  the  carriage   they 
needed  :  they  had  not  so  much  as  the  arte  to  make  scaffolds; 
nor    knew    other  devise,   then  to    raise    so    much   earth  or 
rubbish,    against    their   building,  according   as    the    worke 
riseth,  and  afterward  to  take  it  away  againe.    But  returne  we 
to  our  coaches.     In  steade  of  them,  and  of  all  other  carry 
ing  beastes  they  caused  themselves  to  be  carryed  by  men, 
and  upon  their  shoulders.     This  last  King  of  Peru,  the  same 
day  hee  was  taken,  was  thus  carried  upon  rafters  or  beanies 
of  massive  Golde,  sitting  in  a  faire  chaire  of  state,  likewise 
all  of  golde,  in  the  middle  of  his  battaile.     Looke  how  many 
of  his  porters  as  were  slaine,  to  make  him  fall  (for  all  their 
endevour  was  to  take  him  alive)  so  many  others,  and  as  it 
were  avye,  tooke  and  under-went  presently  the  place  of  the 
dead  :  so  that  they  could  never  be  brought  down  or  made  to 
fall,  what  slaughter  so  ever  was  made  of  those  kinde  of 
people,   untill  such   time   as    a   horseman  furiously 
ranne  to  take  him  by  some  part  of  his  body,  and 
so  pulled  him  to  the  ground. 


151 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

THE    SEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  incommoditie  of  greatnesse. 

INGE  we  cannot  attaine  unto  it,  let  us 
revenge  our  selves  with  railing  against  it : 
yet  is  it  not  absolute  railing,  to  finde  fault 
with  any  thing :  There  are  defects  found ) 
in  all  things,  how  faire  soever  in  show, 
and  desirable  they  be.  It  hath  generally 
this  evident  advantage,  that  when  ever  it 
pleaseth  it  will  decline,  and  hath  well- 
nigh  the  choise  of  one  and  other  condition.  For  a  man 
doth  not  fall  from  all  heights ;  divers  there  are,  whence  a 
man  may  descend  without  falling.  Verily,  me  seemeth,  that 
we  value  it  at  too  high  a  rate :  and  prize  over-deare  the 
resolution  of  those,  whom  we  have  either  seene  or  heard,  to 
have  contemned,  or  of  their  owne  motion  rejected  the  same. 
Her  essence  is  not  so  evidently  commodious,  but  a  man  may 
refuse  it  without  wonder.  Indeed  I  finde  the  labour  very 
hard  in  suffering  of  evils  ;  but  in  the  contentment  of  a  meane 
measure  of  fortune,  and  shunning  of  greatnesse,  therein  I  see 
no  great  difficulty.  In  my  conceit,  it  is  a  vertue,  whereunto 
my  selfe,  who  am  but  a  simple  ninny,  might  easily  attaine, 
and  without  great  contention.  What  shall  they  doe,  who 
would  also  bring  into  consideration,  the  glory,  which  accom- 
panieth  this  refusall,  wherein  may  fall  more  ambition,  then 
even  in  the  desire  and  absolute  enjoying  of  greatnesse  ?  For 
somuch  as  ambition  is  never  better  directed  according  to  it 
selfe,  then  by  a  straying  and  unfrequented  path,  I  sharpen 
my  courage  toward  patience,  and  weaken  the  same  against 
desire.  I  have  as  much  to  wish  for  as  another,  and  leave  my  / 
wishes  as  much  liberty  and  indiscretion  :  but  yet,  it  never 
came  into  my  minde,  to  wish  for  Empire,  for  Royalty  or 
eminency  of  high  and  commanding  fortunes.  I  aime  not  * 
that  way  :  I  love  my  selfe  too  well.  When  I  thinke  to  grow, 
it  is  but  meanly  ;  with  a  forced  and  coward  advancement ; 
fit  for  me :  yea  in  resolution,  in  wisedome,  in  health,  in 
beauty,  and  also  in  riches.  But  this  credite,  this  aspiring 
152 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

y 

reputation,  this  overswaying  authority,  suppresseth  my  CHAPTER 
imagination.  And  clean e  opposite  to  some  other,  j  should  VII 
perad venture  love  my  selfe  better,  to  be  the  second  or  third  Of  the  in- 
man  in  Perigot,  then  the  first  in  Paris  :  At  least,  without  C°™  ™£e 
faining,  I  had  rather  be  the  third  man  in  Paris,  then  the  nesse 
first  in  charge.  I  will  neither  contend  with  an  Usher  of 
a  doore,  as  a  silly  unknowen  man  :  nor  with  gaping  and 
adoration  make  a  Lane  through  the  throng  as  I  passe.  I  am 
enured  to  a  meane  calling;  mediocrity  best  fitteth  me,  as  well 
by  my  fortune,  as  by  mine  owne  humor.  And  have  shewed  by 
the  conduct  of  my  life  and  course  of  my  enterprises,  that  I 
have  rather  sought  to  avoid,  then  otherwise  to  embrace  beyond 
the  degree  of  fortune  that  at  my  birth  it  pleased  God  to  call 
me  unto.  Each  naturall  constitution,  is  equally  just  and 
easie.  My  minde  is  so  dull  and  slowe,  that  I  measure  not 
good  fortune  according  to  her  height,  but  rather  according 
to  her  facility.  And  if  my  hart  be  not  great  enough,  it  is 
ratably  free  and  open,  and  who  biddeth  me,  bouldly  to  pub 
lish  my  weaknesse.  Should  any  will  me,  on  the  one  part,  to 
conferre  and  consider  the  life  of  L.  Thurius  Balbus,  a  worthy 
gallant  man,  wise,  faire,  goodly,  healthy,  of  good  under 
standing,  richly-plentious  in  all  maner  of  commodities  and 
pleasures,  leading  a  quiet  easefull  life,  altogether  his  owne, 
with  a  minde  armed,  and  well  prepared  against  death,  super 
stition,  griefes,  cares  and  other  encombrances  of  humane 
necessity ;  dying  in  his  old  age,  in  an  honourable  battell, 
with  his  weapons  in  his  hand,  for  the  defence  of  his  countrie; 
and  on  the  other  side  the  life  of  M.  Regulus,  so  high  and 
great,  as  all  men  know,  together  with  his  admirable  and 
glorious  end  :  the  one  unmentioned  and  without  dignity, 
the  other  exemplare  and  wonderfull  renouned  :  truly  I  would 
say  what  Cicero  saith  of  it,  had  I  the  gift  of  well-speaking  as 
hee  had.  But  if  I  were  to  sute  them  unto  mine,  I  would  also 
say,  that  the  former  is  as  much  agreeing  to  my  quality,  and 
to  the  desire  I  endevour  to  conforme  my  quality  unto,  as  the 
second  is  farre  beyond  it.  That  to  this  I  cannot  attaine  but 
by  veneration ;  and  to  the  other  I  would  willingly  attaine 
by  custome.  But  returne  we  to  our  temporall  greatnesse, 
whence  we  have  digressed.  I  am  distasted  of  all  mastry, 
both  active  and  passive.  Otanes  one  of  the  seaven  that  by 
U  153 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  right  might  chalenge  the  Crowne,  or  pretend  the  Kingdome 
VII  of  Persia,  resolved  upon  such  a  resolution  as  I  should  easily 
Of  the ^  m-  have  done  tne  like  .  which  was,  that  he  utterly  renounced  all 
Co™™reat-e  maner  °f  claime  he  might  in  any  sort  pretend  unto  that 
uesse  crowne,  to  his  fellow  competitores,  were  it  either  by  election 
or  chance  :  alwayes  provided  that  both  himselfe  and  all  his, 
might  live  in  that  Empire,  free  from  all  subjections,  and 
exempted  from  all  maner  of  commandement,  except  that 
of  the  ancient  lawes :  and  might  both  challenge  all  liberty, 
and  enjoy  all  immunities,  that  should  not  prejudice  them  : 
being  as  impacient  to  command,  as  to  be  commanded.  The 
sharpest  and  most  dificile  profession  of  the  world,  is  (in  mine 
opinion)  worthily  to  act  and  play  the  King.  I  excuse  more 
of  their  faults,  then  commonly  other  men  doe :  and  that  in 
consideration  of  the  downe-bearing  waight  of  their  immense 
charge,  which  much  astonisheth  me  :  It  is  a  very  hard  task 
to  keep  a  due  measure,  in  so  unmeasurable  a  power.  Yet 
is  it,  that  even  with  those,  that  are  of  a  lesse  excellent 
nature,  it  is  a  singular  incitation  to  vertue,  to  be  seated  in 
such  a  place,  where  you  shall  doe  no  maner  of  good,  that  is 
not  registred  and  recorded  :  And  where  the  least  wel-dooing 
extendeth  to  so  many  persons :  And  where  your  sufficiency 
(as  that  of  Preachers)  is  principally  directed  to  the  people; 
a  weake  and  partiall  judge,  easily  to  be  beguiled,  and  easie 
to  be  pleased.  There  are  but  few  things,  of  which  we  may 
give  a  sincere  judgement :  for  there  be  very  few,  wherein 
in  some  sort  or  other,  we  are  not  particularly  interessed. 
Superiority  and  inferiority,  maistry  and  subjection,  are 
joyntly  tied  unto  a  naturall  kinde  of  envy  and  contestation ; 
they  must  perpetually  enter-spoile  one  another.  I  beleeve 
neither  the  one  nor  the  other,  concerning  hir  companions 
rights  :  let  us  suffer  reason  to  speake  of  it,  which  is  inflexible 
and  impassible,  when  or  how  we  shall  make  an  end.  I  was 
not  long  since  reading  of  two  Scottish  bookes  striving  upon 
this  subject.  The  popular  makes  the  King  to  be  of  worse 
condition  then  a  Carter:  and  ht  that  extolfeth  Monarchy, 
placeth  him  both  in  power  and  soveraignty,  many  steps 
above  the  Gods.  Now  the  incommodity  of  greatnesse,  which 
here  I  have  undertaken  to  note  and  speake  of,  (upon  some 
occasion  lately  befalne  mee)  is  this.  There  is  peradventure 
154 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

nothing  more  pleasing  to  the  commerce  of  men,  then  the  CHAPTER 
Essay es,   which  we  through  jealousie  of  honour  or  valour,          "VII 
make  one  against  another,  be  it  in  the  exercise  of  the  body          *^e  /"~ 
or  minde :    wherein  soveraigne  greatnesse,  hath  no  true  or    ^j^reat-6 
essentiall  part.     Verily,  it  hath  often  seemed  unto  me,  that         nesse 
through  over  much  respect,  Princes  are  therein  used  disdaine- 
fully  and  treated   injuriously  :    For,  the  thing  whereat  (in 
my  youth)  I  was  infinitely  offended,  was,  that  those  which 
were  trained  and  schooled  with  mee,  should  forbeare  to  doe 
it  in  good  earnest,  because  they  found  me  unworthy  to  bee 
withstood  or  to  resist  their  endevours.     It  is  that  we  daylyl 
see  to  happen  unto  them;  every  man  finding  himselfe  un-f 
worthy  to  force  himselfe  against  them.    If  one  perceive  them 
never  so  little  affected  to  have  the  victory,  there  is  none  but 
will  strive  to  yeeld  it  them,  and  that  will  not  rather  wrong 
his  glory,  then  offend  theirs :  No  man  imployeth  more  dili 
gence  then    needs  he  must    to  serve  their  honour.     What 
share  have  Princes  in  the  throng,  where  all  are  for  them  ? 
Mee  thinks  I  see  those  Paladines  of  former  ages,  present 
ing  themselves  in  joustes,  tiltings  and  combats,  with  bodies 
and  armes  enchanted.     Brisson  running  against  Alexander, 
counterfeited  his  course  :  Alexander  chid  him  for  it :  but  he 
should  have  caused  him  to  be  whipt.    For  this  consideration, 
was  Carneades  wont  to  say,  that  Princes  children  learn't  no 
thing  aright  but  to  mannage  and  ride  horses ;  forsomuch  as 
in  all  other  exercises,  every  man  yeeldeth,  and  giveth  them} 
the  victory  :  but  a  horse  who  is   neyther  a  flatterer  nor  a 
Courtier,  will  as  soone  throw  the  child  of  a  King  as  the  son 
of  a  base  porter.     Homer  hath  beene  forced  to  consent  that 
Venus  (so  sweet  a  saint  and  delicate  a  Goddesse)  should  be 
hurt  at  the  siege  of  Troy,  thereby  to  ascribe  courage  and 
hardinesse  unto  her  ;  qualities  never  scene  in  those  that  are 
exempted  from  danger.    The  Gods  themselves  are  fained  to  be 
angry,  to  feare,  to  be  jealous,  to  grieve,  to  shew  passion,  and 
be  subject  to  mortall  sense,  thereby  to  honour  them  with  the 
vertues  which  the  Poets  and  Philosophers  invent  amongst 
us  :  Nay,  they  are  supposed  to  runne  away,  and  to  have  a  feel 
ing  of  all  our  imperfections.    Who  doth  not  participate  both"? 
hazard  and  difficulties,  cannot  justly  pretend  interest  in  the 
honor,  or  challenge  share  in  the  pleasure,  that  followeth 

155 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  dangerous  actions    or  hazardous  attempts.       It  is   pitty  al 

VII  man  should  be  so  powerfull,  that  all  things  must  yeeld  and 

Of  the  in-  gjve  p}ace  un^o  nim>     Such  as  are  in  so  high  eminency  of 

commoditie  °  n-p  •  •,  1°  .  •      VL      < 

of  great-  greatnesse,  their  fortune  rejects  society  and  conversation  too 

nesse  farre  from  them ;  she  placeth  them  in  over  remote  and 
uncouth  places.  This  easefull  life  and  plausible  facility  to 
bring  all  under,  and  subject  mens  mindes,  is  an  enemy  to 
all  manner  of  pleasure.  It  is  a  kinde  of  sliding,  and  not  a 
going  :  It  is  to  sleepe,  and  not  to  live.  Conceive  man  accom 
panied  with  omnipotency,  you  overwhelme  him :  he  must  in 
begging  manner  crave  some  empeachment  and  resistance  of 
you.  His  being  and  his  good,  is  in  want  and  indigence. 
Their  good  qualities  are  dead  and  lost :  for,  they  are  not 
heard  but  by  comparison,  and  they  are  excluded :  they  have 
/  little  knowledge  of  true  praise,  being  beaten  with  so  con- 
tinuall  and  uniforme  an  approbation.  Have  they  to  doe 
with  the  simplest  of  their  subjects?  they  have  no  meane  to 
take  advantage  of  him,  if  he  but  say  ;  It  is  because  he  is  my 
King,  he  supposeth  to  have  sufficiently  expressed,  and  you 
must  understand,  that  in  so  saying,  he  hath  lent  a  helping 
hand  to  overthrow  himselfe.  This  quality  suppresseth  andj 
consumeth  all  other  true  and  essentiall  qualities :  they  are 
even  drowned  in  the  Royalty  ;  which  gives  them  no  leave, 
to  make  the  offices  of  their  charge  to  prevaile,  except  in 
such  actions  as  directly  concerne  and  stead  the  same.  To  be 
a  King,  is  a  matter  of  that  consequence,  that  onely  by  it  he 
is  so.  That  strange  glimmering  and  eye-dazeling  light, 
which  round  about  environeth,  overcasteth  and  hideth  from 
us :  our  weake  sight  is  thereby  bleared  and  dissipated,  as 
beeing  filled  and  obscured  by  that  greater  and  further- 
spredding  brightnesse.  The  Senate  allotted  the  honor  and  j 
prise  of  eloquence  unto  Tiberius  ;  he  refused  it,  supposing] 
that  if  it  hath  beene  true,  he  could  not  revenge  himselfe  of 
so  limited  and  partiall  judgement.  As  we  yeeld  Princes  all 
advantages  of  honor,  so  we  aucthorize  their  defects  and  sooth-  i 
up  their  vices :  not  onely  by  approbation,  but  also  by  imita- 1 
tion.  All  Alexanders  followers  bare  their  heads  sideling,  as 
he  did.  And  such  as  flattered  Dionysius,  in  his  owne  pre 
sence  did  run  and  justle  one  another,  and  either  stumbled 
at,  or  over- threw  what  ever  stood  before  their  feete,  to 
156 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

inferre,  that  they  were  as  short-sighted  or  spur-blinde,  as  he  CHAPTER 
was.    Naturall  imperfections  have  sometimes  served  for  com-          VII 
mendation  and  favour.     Nay  I  have  scene  deafnesse  affected.    ^^m^itie 
And  because  the  maister  hated  his  wife,  Plutarch  hath  seen     Of  great- 
courtiers  to  sue  a  divorce  of  theirs,  whom  they  loved  very  well.         nesse 
And  which  is  more,  paillardise  and  all  maner  of  dissolution 
hath    thereby   beene    held    in    credit;    as    also    disloyalty, 
blasphemy,  cruelty,  heresie,  superstition,  irreligion,  wanton- 
nesse  and  worse,  if  worse  may  be.     Yea  by  an  example  more 
dangerous,  then  that  of  Mithridates  his  flatterers,  who  for 
somuch  as  their  master  pretended  to  have  skill  in  phisick 
and  aspired  to  the  honor  of  a  good  Physition,  came  to  him 
to  have  their  members  incized  and  cauterized.     For  these 
others  suffer  to  have  their  soules  cauterized  ;  a  much  more 
precious  and  nobler  part  then  the  body.     But  to  end  where 
I    began :    Adrian    the   Emperor   debating   with    Favorinus 
the   Philosopher   about  the  interpretation    of  some  word  ; 
Favorinus  did  soone  yeeld  the  victory  unto  him,  his  friends 
finding  fault  with  him  for  it ;  'You  but  jest,  my  masters" 
(quoth  he)  '  would  you  not  have  him  to  be  much  wiser  then 
'  I,  who  hath  the  absolute  command   over  thirty  legions  ? ' 
Augustus  writ  some  verses  against  Asinius    Pollio,    which 
Pollio  hearing,  he  said,  '  I  will  hould  my  peace  ;  for,  it  is  no 
*  wisedome  to  contend  in  writing  with  him,  who  may  proscribe.1 
And  they  had  reason  :  For  Dionysius,  because  he  could  not 
equall  Philoxenus  in   Poesie,  nor  match  Plato  in  dis 
course,  condemned  the  one  to  the  stone-quarries, 
and   sent  the  other  to  bee  sold  as  a  slave  in 
the  He  of  ^Egina. 


157 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


THE    EIGHTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  Art  of  conferring. 

T  is  a  custome  of  our  law,  to  condemne 
some,  for  the  warning  of  others.  To  con 
demne  them  because  they  have  misdone, 
were  folly,  as  saith  Plato.  For  what  is 
once  done  can  never  be  undone :  but  they 
are  condemned  to  the  end  that  they  should 
not  offend  againe,  or  that  others  may 
avoide  the  example  of  their  offence.  He 
who  is  hanged  is  not  corrected,  but  others  by  him.  Even  so 
doe  I.  My  errors  are  sometimes  naturall,  incorrigible  and 
remedilesse.  But  whereas  honest  men  profit  the  Common 
wealth  in  causing  themselves  to  be  imitated,  I  shall  happily 
benefit  the  same,  in  making  my  selfe  to  be  evitated. 

HOR.  Ser,  i.  Nonne  vides  Albi  ut  male  vivatfilius,  utque 

sect.  iv.  109.  Barrus  inops?  magnum  documentum,  ne  patriam  rem 

Perdere  quis  velit. 

Doe  you  not  see,  how  that  mans  sonne  lives  badly, 
That  man 's  a  begger  by  his  spending  madly  ? 
A  lesson  great,  that  none  take  joy  :  His  patrimony  to 
destroy. 

By  publishing  and  accusing  my  imperfections,  some  man 
may  perad venture  learne  to  feare  them.  The  parts  I  most 
esteeme  in  my  selfe,  reape  more  honor  by  accusing,  then  by 
commending  my  selfe.  And  that 's  the  cause  I  more  often 
fall  into  them  againe,  and  rest  upon  them.  But  when  all 
the  cardes  be  told,  a  man  never  speakes  of  himselfe,  with 
out  losse.  A  mans  own  condemnations  are  ever  increased  : 
praises  ever  decreased.  There  may  be  some  of  my  com 
plexion,  who  am  better  instructed  by  contrariety  then  by 
similitude  ;  and  more  by  escaping  then  by  following.  Cato 
senior  had  a  special  regard  to  this  kind  of  discipline,  when  he 
said,  that  wisemen  have  more  to  learne  of  fooles  then  fooles 
of  wisemen.  And  that  ancient  player  on  the  Lyra,  whom 
Pausanias  reporteth,  to  have  beene  accustomed  to  compell 
his  sch oilers  sometimes  to  goe  heare  a  bad  Player,  who  dwelt 
158 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

right  over-against  him  ;  where  they  might  learne  to  hate  his  CHAPTER 
discords  and  false  measures.     The  horror  of  cruelty  drawes         VIII 

me  neerer  unto  clemency,  then  any  patterne  of  clemency  can       thfe    .rt  ot 

•  11         •  *        J    •          -  i       L       i  -IP  11  i  i    i        conferring 

possibly  win  me.     A  cunning  rider  or  skilfull  horseman  doth 

not  so  properly  teach  me,  to  sit  well  on  horsebacke,  as  doth 
one  of  our  Lawyers,  or  a  Venetian  by  seeing  him  ride.  And 
an  ill  manner  of  speech  doth  better  reforme  mine,  then  any 
well  polished  forme  of  speaking.  The  sottish  countenance  of 
another,  doth  dayly  advertise  and  forewarne  me.  That  which 
pricketh,  toucheth  and  rouzeth  better,  then  that  which  de- 
lighteth.  These  times  are  fit  to  reforme  us  backward,  more 
by  dissenting,  then  by  consenting ;  more  by  difference  then 
by  accord.  Being  but  little  instructed  by  good  examples,  I 
make  use  of  bad  :  the  lesson  of  which  is  ordinary.  I  have 
endevoured,  nay  I  have  laboured  to  yeeld  my  selfe  as  pleas 
ing  and  affable,  as  I  saw  others  peevish  and  fro  ward  :  as  con 
stant,  as  I  saw  others  variable ;  as  gentle  and  milde,  as  I 
perceived  others  intractable  and  wild  :  and  as  good  and 
honest,  as  I  discerned  others  wicked  and  dishonest.  But  I 
proposed  certaine  invincible  measures  unto  my  selfe.  The 
most  fruitfull  and  naturall  exercise  of  our  spirit,  is,  in  my 
selfe-pleasing  conceit,  conference.  The  use  whereof,  I  finde 
to  be  more  delightsome,  then  any  other  action  of  our  life  : 
And  that 's  the  reason,  why,  if  I  were  now  forced  to  choose, 
(being  in  the  minde  I  now  am  in)  I  would  rather  yeeld  to 
lose  my  sight,  then  forgoe  my  hearing  or  my  speech.  The 
Athenians  and  also  the  Romans,  did  ever  hold  this  exercise 
in  high  honor  and  reputation,  namely  in  their  Academies. 
And  at  this  day,  the  Italians  doe  yet  keepe  a  kinde  of  forme 
and  trace  of  it,  to  their  great  profit,  as  may  apparantly  be 
discerned  by  comparing  their  wits  unto  ours.  The  study 
and  plodding  on  bookes,  is  a  languishing  and  weake  kinde  of 
motion,  and  which  heateth  or  earnesteth  nothing ;  whereas 
conference  doth  both  learne,  teach  and  exercise  at  once.  If 
I  conferre  with  a  stubborne  wit,  and  encounter  a  sturdy 
wrestler,  he  toucheth  me  to  the  quicke,  hits  me  on  the  flanks, 
and  pricks  me  both  on  the  left  and  right  side  :  his  imagina 
tions  vanquish  and  confound  mine.  Jelousie,  glory  and  con 
tention  drive,  cast  and  raise  me  above  my  selfe.  And  an 
unison  or  consent,  is  a  quality  altogether  tedious  and  weari- 

159 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  some  in  conference.  But  as  our  minde  is  fortified  by  the 
VI 11  communication  of  regular  and  vigorous  spirits ;  it  cannot 
the  Art  of  we}j  j^e  expressed?  how  much  it  loseth  and  is  bastardized,  by 
the  continuall  commerce  and  frequentation,  we  have  with 
base,  weake  and  dull  spirits.  No  contagion  spreds  it  selfe 
further  then  that :  I  know  by  long  experience  what  an  ell  of  it 
is  worth.  I  love  to  contest  and  discourse,  but  not  with  many, 
and  onely  for  my  selfe.  For,  to  serve  as  a  spectacle  unto 
great  men,  and  by  way  of  contention,  for  one  to  make  a 
glorious  shew  of  his  ready  wit  and  running  tongue  :  I  deeme 
it  a  profession  farre  unfitting  a  man  of  honor.  Sottishnes  is 
an  ill  quality,  but  not  to  be  able  to  endure  it,  and  to  fret  and 
vex  at  it,  as  it  hapneth  to  me,  is  another  kinde  of  imperfec 
tion,  which  in  opportunity  is  not  much  behinde  sottishnes  : 
and  that 's  it  I  will  now  accuse  in  my  selfe  :  I  doe  with  great 
liberty  and  facility,  enter  into  conference  and  disputation  : 
forsomuch  as  opinion  h'ndes  but  a  hard  soile  to  enter  and 
take  any  deepe  roote  in  me.  No  propositions  amaze  me,  no 
conceit  woundeth  me,  what  contrariety  soever  they  have  to 
mine.  There  is  no  fantazie  so  frivolous  or  humor  so  extrava 
gant,  that  in  mine  opinion  is  not  sortable  to  the  production 
of  humane  wit.  Wee  others,  who  debarre  our  judgement  of 
the  right  to  make  conclusions,  regard  but  negligently  the 
diverse  opinions:  and  if  we  lend  it  not  our  judgement,  we 
easily  affbord  it  our  eares.  Where  one  scale  of  the  ballance 
is  altogether  empty,  I  let  the  other  waver  too  and  fro,  under 
an  old  wives  dreames.  And  me  seemeth,  I  may  well  be 
excused,  if  I  rather  accept  an  odde  number,  than  an  even  : 
Thursday  in  respect  of  Friday,  if  I  had  rather  make  a 
twelfth  or  fourteenth  at  a  table,  then  a  thirteenth  :  if  when 
I  am  travelling  I  would  rather  see  a  Hare  coasting,  then 
crossing  my  way :  and  rather  reach  my  left,  then  my  right 
foote,  to  be  shod.  All  such  fond  conceits,  now  in  credit 
about  us,  deserve  at  least  to  be  listned  unto.  As  for  me, 
they  onely  beare  away  inanity,  and  surely  they  do  so. 
Vulgar  and  casuall  opinions  are  yet  of  some  waight,  which  in 
nature  are  something  els  then  nothing.  And  who  wadeth 
not  so  far  into  them,  to  avoid  the  vice  of  superstition, 
falleth  happily  into  the  blame  of  wilfulnesse.  The  contra 
dictions  then  of  judgements,  doe  neither  oftend  nor  move, 
160 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

but  awaken  and  exercise  me.  We  commonly  shunne  correc-  CHAPTER 
tion  whereas  we  should  rather  seeke  and  present  our  selves 
unto  it,  chiefly  when  it  commeth  by  the  way  of  conference, 
and  not  of  regency.  At  every  opposition,  we  consider  not 
whether  it  be  just;  but  be  it  right  or  wrong,  how  we  may 
avoide  it :  In  stead  of  reaching  our  armes,  we  stretch  forth 
our  clawes  unto  it.  I  should  endure  to  bee  rudely  handled 
and  checked  by  my  friends,  though  they  should  call  me  foole, 
coxecombe,  or  say  I  raved.  I  love  a  man  that  doth  stoutly 
expresse  himselfe,  amongst  honest  and  worthy  men,  and 
whose  words  answere  his  thoughts.  We  should  fortifie  and 
harden  our  hearing,  against  the  tendernesse  of  the  cere 
monious  sound  of  words.  I  love  a  friendly  society  and  a  virile 
and  constant  familiarity  :  An  amitie,  which  in  the  earnest- 
nesse  and  vigor  of  it's  commerce,  flattereth  it  selfe :  as  love 
in  bitings  and  bloody  scratchings.  It  is  not  sufficiently 
generous  or  vigorous,  except  it  be  contentious  and  quarrel- 
ous :  If  she  be  civilised  and  a  skilfull  artist :  if  it  feare  a 
shocke  or  free  encounter,  and  have  hir  starting  holes  or 
forced  by-wayes.  Neque  enim  disputari  sine  reprehensione 
potest.  '  Disputation  cannot  be  held  without  reprehension.' 
When  I  am  impugned  or  contraried,  then  is  mine  attention 
and  not  mine  anger,  stirred  up :  I  advance  my  selfe  toward 
him,  that  doth  gainesay  and  instruct  me.  The  cause  of 
truth,  ought  to  be  the  common  cause,  both  to  one  and  other  : 
What  can  he  answer  ?  The  passion  of  choller  hath  already 
wounded  his  judgement :  trouble,  before  reason  hath  seized 
upon  it.  It  were  both  profitable  and  necessary,  that  the  de 
termining  of  our  disputations,  might  be  decided  by  way  of 
wagers  ;  and  that  there  were  a  materiall  marke  of  our  losses  : 
that  we  might  better  remember  and  make  more  accompt  of 
it :  and  that  my  boy  might  say  unto  me  :  Sir,  if  you  call  to 
minde  ;  your  contestation,  your  ignorance  and  your  selfe- 
wilfulnesse,  at  severall  times,  cost  you  a  hundred  crown es  the 
last  yeare :  I  feast,  I  cherish  and  I  embrace  truth,  where  and 
in  whom  soever  I  finde  it,  and  willingly  and  merily  yeeld  my 
selfe  unto  her,  as  soone  as  I  see  but  her  approach,  though  it 
be  a  farre-off,  I  lay  downe  my  weapon  and  yeeld  my  selfe 
vanquished.  And  alwayes  provided,  one  persist  not  or  pro- 
ceede  therein,  with  an  over  imperious  stiff hesse  or  command  - 
X  161 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ing  surlinesse ;  I  am  well  pleased  to  be  reprooved.  And 
VIII  I  often  accommodate  my  selfe  unto  my  accusers  more  by 
the  Art  of  reasOn  of  civility,  then  by  occasion  of  amendment :  loving  by 
in^  the  facility  of  yeelding,  to  gratifie  and  foster  their  libertie, 
to  teach  or  advertise  me.  It  is  notwithstanding  no  easie 
matter  to  draw  men  of  my  times  unto  it.  They  have  not  the 
courage  to  correct,  because  they  want  the  heart  to  endure 
correction  :  And  ever  speake  with  dissimulation  in  presence 
one  of  another.  I  take  so  great  a  pleasure  to  be  judged  and 
knowne,  that  it  is  indifferent  to  me,  in  whether  of  the  two 
formes  I  be  so.  Mine  owne  imagination  doth  so  often  con 
tradict  and  condemne  it  selfe,  that  if  another  do  it,  all  is 
one  unto  me ;  especially  seeing,  I  give  his  reprehension  no 
other  authority  then  I  list.  But  I  shall  breake  a  straw  or 
fall  at  ods  with  him,  that  keepes  himselfe  so  aloft ;  as  I 
know  some,  that  will  fret  and  chafe  if  their  opinions  be  not 
believed,  and  who  take  it  as  an  injury,  yea  and  fall  out  with 
their  best  friends,  if  they  will  not  follow  it.  And  that 
Socrates  ever  smiling,  made  a  collection  of  such  contradic 
tions  as  were  opposed  to  his  discourse,  one  might  say,  his 
force  was  cause  of  it,  and  that  the  advantage  being  assuredly 
to  fall  on  his  side,  he  tooke  them  as  a  subject  of  a  new  vic 
tory  ;  neverthelesse  we  see  on  the  contrary,  that  nothing  doth 
so  nicely  yeeld  our  sense  unto  it  as  the  opinion  of  prehemi- 
nence  and  disdaine  of  the  adversary.  And  that  by  reason, 
it  rather  befits  the  weakest  to  accept  of  opposition  in  good 
part,  which  restore  and  repaire  him.  Verily  I  seeke  more 
the  conversation  of  such  as  curbe  me,  then  of  those  that 
feare  me.  It  is  an  unsavory  and  hurtful  pleasure,  to  have  to 
doe  with  men,  who  admire  and  give  us  place.  Antisthenes 
commanded  his  children,  never  to  be  beholding  unto,  or 
thanke  any  that  should  commend  them.  I  feele  my  selfe 
more  lusty  and  cranke  for  the  victory  I  gaine  over  my  selfe, 
when  in  the  heate  or  fury  of  the  combate,  I  perceive  to  bend 
and  fall  under  the  power  of  my  adversaries  reason,  then  I  am 
pleased  with  the  victory,  I  obtaine  of  him  by  his  weakenesse. 
To  conclude,  I  receive  all  blowes  and  allow  all  attaints  given 
directly,  how  weake  soever :  but  am  very  impatient  at  such 
as  are  strucken  at  randan  and  without  order.  I  care  but  little 
for  the  matter,  and  with  me  opinions  are  all  one,  and  the 
162 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

victory  of  the  subject  in  a  manner  indifferent.     I  shall  quietly  CHAPTER 
contest  a  whole  day,  if  the  conduct  of  the  controversie  be         VIII 
followed  with  order  and  decorum.     It  is  not  force  nor  sub-  ^f  the  Art  °* 
tilty,  that  I  so  much   require,  as  forme  and  order.      The 
forme  and  order,  dayly  seene  in  the  altercations  of  Shep- 
heards,  or  contentions  of  shop-prentise  boyes  :    but  never 
amongst  us  ?     If  they  part  or  give  one  another  over,  it  is 
with  incivilitie  :  and  so  doe  we.     But  their  wrangling,  their 
brawling  and  impatience,  cannot  make  them  to  forgoe  or 
forget  their  theame. 

Their  discourse  holds  on  his  course.  If  they  prevent  one 
another,  if  they  stay  not  for,  at  least  they  understand  one 
another.  A  man  doth  ever  answere  sufficiently  well  for  me, 
if  he  answere  what  I  say.  But  when  the  disputation  is 
confounded  and  orderlesse,  I  quit  the  matter,  and  betake 
me  to  the  forme,  with  spight  and  indiscretion  :  and  embrace 
a  kinde  of  debating,  teasty,  headlong,  malicious  and  imperi 
ous,  whereat  I  afterward  blush.  It  is  impossible  to  treate 
quietly  and  dispute  orderly  with  a  foole.  My  judgement  is 
not  onely  corrupted  under  the  hand  of  so  imperious  a  maister, 
but  my  conscience  also.  Our  disputations  ought  to  be  for 
bidden  and  punished,  as  other  verball  crimes.  What  vice 
raise  they  not,  and  heape  up  together,  being  ever  swayed 
and  commanded  by  choller  ?  First  we  enter  into  enmity  with 
the  reasons,  and  then  with  the  men.  We  learne  not  to  dis 
pute,  except  it  be  to  contradict :  and  every  man  contradict 
ing  and  being  contradicted,  it  commonly  followeth,  that  the 
fruit  of  disputing,  is  to  loose  and  to  disanull  the  trueth.  So 
Plato  in  his  common  wealth,  forbiddeth  foolish,  unapt  and 
base-minded  spirits,  to  undertake  that  exercise.  To  what 
purpose  goe  you  about  to  quest  or  enquire  that  which  is  with 
him,  who  hath  neither  good  pace  nor  proceeding  of  woorth  ? 
No  man  wrongs  the  subject,  when  he  quits  the  same,  for 
want  of  meanes  to  treat  or  mannage  it.  I  meane  not  a 
scholasticall  and  artist  meane,  but  intend  a  naturall  meane, 
and  of  a  sound  understanding.  What  will  the  end  be  ?  one 
goeth  Eastward,  and  another  Westward :  They  loose  the 
principall,  and  stray  it  in  the  throng  of  incidents.  At  the 
end  of  an  houres  wrangling,  they  wot  not  what  they  seeke 
for  :  one  is  high,  another  low,  and  another  wide.  Some  take 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  hold  of  a  word,  some  of  a  similitude.     Some  forget  what  was 
VIII         objected   against  them,  so  much  are  they  engaged  in   the 

Of  the  Art  of  pursuite   and    thinke  to  follow  themselves,   and   not  you  : 
Some  finding  themselves  weake-backt,  feare  all,  refuse  all, 
and  at  the  very  entrance  mingle  the  subject  and  confound 
the  purpose :   or  in  the  heate  of  the  disputation,  mutine  to 
hold  their  peace  altogether  :  through  a  spightfull  ignorance, 
affecting  a  proud  kinde  of  contempt,  or  a  foolish   modesty 
avoyding  of  contention.     Provided  that  one  strike  and  hit, 
he  careth  not   how   open    he    lye.     Another   compteth    his 
words,  and  wayeth  them  for  reasons ;  Another  employeth 
nothing  but  the  advantage  of  his  voyce  and  winde.     Here 
one  concludeth  against  himselfe  ;  here  another  wearyeth  you 
with  idle  prefaces,  and  frivolous  digressions.     Another  armeth 
himselfe  afore  hand  with  injuries,  and  seekes  after  a  Dutch 
quarrell,  to  rid  himselfe  of  the  society,  and  shake  off'  the  con 
ference  of  a  spirit,  that  presseth  and  overbeareth  his.     This 
last  hath  no  insight  at  all  in  reason,  but  still  beleagreth  you 
with  the  dialecticall  or  logicall  close  of  his  clause,  and  ties 
you  to  the  rule  of  his  arte  or  forme  of  his  skill.     Now  who 
doth  not  enter  into  distrust  of  sciences,  and  is  not  in  doubt, 
whether  in  any  necessity  of  life  he  may  reape  solid  fruit  of 
them  ;  if  he  consider  the  use  we  have  of  them  ?    Nihil  scnian- 
tibus  literis.      '  Since  learning  doth   not  cure/     Who  hath 
learnt  any  wit  or  understanding  in  Logique  ?     Where  are 
her  faire  promises  ?    Nee  ad  melms  vivendum,  nee  ad  com- 
modius  dixserenduni.     '  Nether  to  live  better  or  to  dispute 
'  fitter/     Shall  a  man  heare  more  brabling  or  confusion  in 
the  tittle  tattle  of  fish  wives  or  scoulding  sluts,  then  in  the 
publike  disputations  of  men  of  this  profession  ?    I  had  rather 
my  child  should  learne  to  speake  in  a  Taverne,  then  in  the 
schooles  of  well-speaking  Art.     Take  you  a  maister  of  arts, 
and  conferre  with  him,  why  doth  hee  not  make  us  perceive 
his  artificiall  excellency,  and  by  the  admiration  of  his  reasons- 
constancy,  or  with  the  beauty  of  his  quaint  order,  and  grace 
of  his  method,  ravish  silly  women,  and  bleare  ignorant  men 
as  we  are  ?    Why  doth  he  not  sway,  winde  and  perswade  us 
as  hee  list  ?    Why  should  one  so  advantageous  in  matter  and 
conduct,  entermixe  injuries,  indiscretion  and  chollericke  rage 
with  his  fence  ?     Let  him   pull  of  his  twofaced  hoode,  his 
164 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

gowne  and  his  latine,  let  him  not  fill  our  eares  with  meerely  CHAPTER 
beleeved  Aristotle,  you  will  discover  and  take  him  for  one  of  VIII 
us,  and  worse  if  may  be.  Me  thinks  this  implication  and  en-  ^  tlle  A.rt  of 
tangling  of  speech,  wherewith  they  doe  so  much  importune 
us,  may  fitly  be  compared  unto  j  uglers  play  of  fast  and  loose  : 
their  nimblenesse  combats  and  forceth  our  sences,  but  it 
nothing  shaketh  our  beliefe  :  Take  away  their  j  ugling,  what 
they  doe  is  but  base,  common  and  slight.  Though  they  be 
more  witty  and  nimble  spirited,  they  are  not  the  lesse  foolish, 
simple  and  unapt.  I  love  wit,  and  honour  wisedome,  as 
much  as  them  that  have  it.  And  beeing  rightly  used,  it  is 
the  noblest,  the  most  forcible,  yea  and  richest  purchase  men 
can  make.  But  in  such  (of  which  kinde  the  number  is 
infinit)  that  upon  it  establish  their  fundamentall  sufficiency 
and  worth  :  that  from  their  wit  refer  themselves  to  their 
memory,  sub  aliena  umbra  latentes :  6  reposing  them  under 
'  another  mans  protection  ** ;  and  can  do  nothing  but  by  the 
booke  (if  I  may  be  bold  to  say  so)  I  hate  the  same,  a  little 
more  then  sottishnes.  In  my  country,  and  in  my  dayes, 
learning  and  bookishnes,  doth  much  mend  purses,  but  minds 
nothing  at  all.  If  it  chance  to  finde  them  empty,  light  and 
dry,  it  filleth,  it  over-burthens  and  swelleth  them  :  a  raw  and 
indigested  masse  :  if  thinne,  it  doth  easily  purifie,  clarih'e, 
extenuate  and  subtilize  them  even  unto  exinanition  or  evacua 
tion.  It  is  a  thing  of  a  quality  very  neare  indifferent :  a 
most  profitable  accessory  or  ornament  unto  a  wel  borne 
mind,  but  pernicious  and  hurtfully  domageable  unto  any 
other.  Or  rather  a  thing  of  most  precious  use,  that  will  not 
basely  be  gotten,  nor  vily  possessed.  In  some  hands  a  royall 
scepter,  in  other  some  a  rude  mattocke.  But  let  us  proceed. 
What  greater  or  more  glorious  victory  can  you  expect,  then 
teach  your  enemy,  that  hee  cannot  withstand  you  ?  When 
you  gaine  the  advantage  of  your  proposition,  it  is  Truth 
that  winneth  :  when  you  get  the  advantage  of  the  order  and 
conduct,  it  is  you  that  winne.  I  am  of  opinion,  that  both 
in  Plato  and  in  Xenophon,  Socrates  disputeth  more  in 
favour  of  the  disputers,  then  in  grace  of  the  disputation  : 
and  more  to  instruct  Euthydemus  and  Protagoras  with 
the  knowledge  of  their  impertinency  of  their  art.  He  takes 
hold  of  the  first  matter,  as  he  who  hath  a  more  profitable 

165 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  end,  then  to  cleare  it ;  that  is,  to  cleare  the  spirits  he  under- 

^HI         taketh  to  manage  and  to  exercise.     Agitation,  stirring  and 

the  Art  of  n^-       j    proper}y  belonging  to  our  subject  or  drift;  wee 

conferring  ,&        r    iS     /  i      ,  *?i  -n         i  •  *.•        ^i 

are  not  excusable  to  conduct  the  same  ill  and  impertinently, 

but  to  misse  the  game,  and  faile  in  taking,  that  "s  another 
matter.  For  wee  are  borne  to  quest  and  seeke  after  trueth  ; 
to  possesse  it  belongs  to  a  greater  power.  It  is  not  (as 
Democritus  said)  hidden  in  the  deepes  of  abisse  :  but  rather 
elevated  in  infinite  height  of  divine  knowledge.  The  world 
is  but  a  Schoole  of  inquisition.  The  matter  is  not  who  shall 
put  in,  but  who  shall  runne  the  fairest  courses.  As  well  may 
hee  play  the  foole  that  speaketh  truely,  as  hee  that  speaketh 
falsely  :  for  wee  are  upon  the  manner,  and  not  upon  the 
matter  of  speaking.  My  humour  is,  to  have  as  great  a 
regard  to  the  forme,  as  to  the  substance  ;  as  much  respect 
to  the  Advocat,  as  to  the  cause  ;  as  Alcibiades  appointed 
we  should  doe.  And  I  dayly  ammuse  my  selfe  to  read  in 
authors,  without  care  of  their  learning  :  therein  seeking  their 
manner,  not  their  subject.  Even  as  I  pursue  the  communi 
cation  of  some  famous  wit,  not  that  he  should  teach  me,  but 
that  I  may  know  him  ;  and  knowing  him  (if  he  deserve  it)  I 
may  imitate  him.  Every  one  may  speake  truely,  but  to 
speake  orderly,  methodically,  wisely  and  sufficiently,  few  can 
doe  it.  So  falsehood  proceeding  of  ignorance  doth  not  offend 
mee  ;  ineptnesse  and  trifling  doth.  I  have  broken  off  divers 
bargaines,  that  would  have  beene  very  commodious  unto  me, 
by  the  impertinency  of  their  contestation,  with  whom  I  did 
bargaine.  I  am  not  mooved  once  a  yeare,  with  the  faults  or 
oversights  of  those,  over  whom  I  have  power  :  but  touching 
the  point  of  the  sottishnesse  and  foolishnes  of  their  allega 
tions,  excuses,  and  defences,  rude  and  brutish,  we  are  every 
day  ready  to  goe  by  the  eares.  They  neither  understand 
what  is  said  nor  wherefore,  and  even  so  they  answer  ;  a  thing 
able  to  make  one  despaire.  I  feele  not  my  head  to  shocke 
hard  but  by  being  hit  with  another.  And  I  rather  enter 
into  composition  with  my  peoples  vices,  then  with  their  rash- 
nesse,  importunity  and  foolishnesse.  Let  them  doe  lesse, 
provided  they  be  capable  to  doe.  You  live  in  hope  to  en- 
flame  their  will :  But  of  a  blocke  there  is  nothing  to  be 
hoped  for,  nor  any  thing  of  worth  to  bee  enjoyed.  Now. 
166 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

what  if  I  take  things  otherwise  then  they  are?     So  it  may  CHAPTER 

bee  :    And  therefore  I  accuse  my  impatience.       And  first  I         VIII 

hould,  that  it  is  equally  vicious  in  him,  who  is  in  the  right,     conferring0 

as  in  him,  that  is  in  the  wrong  :  For,  it  is  ever  a  kinde  of 

tyrannicall  sharpenesse,  not  to  be  able  to  endure  a  forme 

different  from  his  :  and  verily,  since  there  is  not  a  greater 

fondnesse,  a  more  constant  gullishnesse,  or  more  heteroclite 

insipidity  then  for  one  to  move  or  vex  himselfe  at  the  fond 

nesse,  at  the  gullishnesse,  or  insipidity  of  the  world  :  For  it 

principally  formalizeth  and  moveth  us  against  our  selves  : 

and   that  Philosopher    of   former  ages   should  never   have 

wanted  occasion  to  weepe,  so  long  as  he  had  considered  him 

selfe.     Miso,  one  of  the  seaven  sages  (a  man  of  a  Timonian 

disposition    and    Democraticall    humour)   being   demanded, 

where-at  he  laughed  alone  ;  he  answered,  Because  I  laugh 

alone  ;  How  many  follies  doe  I  speake  and  answer  every  day, 

according  to  my  selfe  ;  and  then  how  much  more  frequent 

according  to  others  ?    And  if  I  bite  mine  owne  lips  at  them, 

what  ought  others  to  doe  ?    In  fine,  wee  must  live  with  the 

quicke,  and  let  the  water  runne  under  the  bridge,  without 

any  care,  or  at  least  without  alteration   to   us.     In  good 

sooth,  why  meet  we  sometimes  with  crooked,  deformed,  and 

in  body  mishapen  men,  without  falling  into  rage  and  discon 

tent,  and  cannot  endure  to  light-upon  a  fro  ward,  skittish, 

and  ill-ranged  spirit,  without  falling  into  anger  and  vexa 

tion  ?    This  vicious  austerity  is  rather  in  the  ludge,  then  in 

the  fault.     Let  us   ever  have  that  saying  of  Plato  in  our 

mouthes  :  '  What  I  finde  unwholsome,  is  it  not  to  be  un- 

'  healthy  my  selfe  ?    Am  not  I  in  fault  my  selfe  ?    May  not    ^ 

4  mine  owne  advertisement  be  retorted  against  my  selfe  ?'    Oh 

wise  and  divine  restraint,  that  curbeth  the  most  universall 

and  common  error  of  men  :  Not  onely  the  reproches,  wee  doe 

one  to  another,  but  our  reasons,  our  arguments  and  matter 

controversed,  are   ordinarily  retortable    unto  us  :    and  wee 

pinch  our  selves  up  in  our  owne  armes.     Whereof  antiquity 

hath   left  me  divers  grave   examples.      It   was  ingeniously 

spoken  and  fit  to  the  purpose,  by  him  that  first  devised  the 

same. 


Stercus  cuique  suum  bene  olet.  ?.RAS- 

m.  cent.  iv. 
Ev'ry  mans  ordure  well,  To  his  owne  sense  doth  smell.  ad.  2. 

167 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Our  eyes  see  nothing  backward.  A  hundred  times  a  day  we 
VIII  mocke  our  selves,  upon  our  neighbours  subject,  and  detest 
conferrin'  some  defects  in  others,  that  are  much  more  apparant  in 
us  ;  yea  and  admire  them  with  a  strange  impudency  and 
unheedinesse.  Even  yesterday,  I  chanced  to  see  a  man 
of  reasonable  understanding,  who  no  lesse  pleasantly  then 
justly  flouted  at  anothers  fond  fashion,  and  yet  upon  every 
silly  occasion  doth  nothing  but  molest  all  men  with  the  im 
pertinent  bedrowle  and  register  of  his  pedigrees,  genealogies 
and  alliances,  more  then  halfe  false  and  wrested  in ;  (for  it 
is  the  manner  of  such  people,  commonly  to  undertake  such 
foolish  discourses,  whose  qualities  are  more  doubtfull  and 
lesse  sure)  who  if  he  had  impartially  considered  and  looked 
upon  himselfe,  should  doubtlesse  have  found  himselfe  no 
lesse  intemperate,  indiscreet,  and  tedious,  in  publishing  and 
extolling  the  prerogative  of  his  wives  pedigree  and  descent. 
Oh  importunate  presumption,  wherewith  the  wife  seeth  her 
selfe  armed  by  the  hands  of  her  own  husband.  If  he  under 
stand  Latin,  a  man  should  say  to  him, 

TER.  And.  act.  Age,  si  heec  non  insanit  satis  sua  sponte,  instiga. 

Goe  too,  if  of  her  owne  accord  before, 

She  were  not  mad  enough,  provoke  her  more. 

I  say  not,  that  none  should  accuse,  except  hee  bee  spotlesse 
in  himselfe :  For  then  none  might  accuse  :  no,  not  spotlesse 
in  the  same  kinde  of  fault.  But  my  meaning  is,  that  our 
judgement  charging  and  blaming  another,  of  whom  there  is 
then  question,  spareth  us  nothing,  of  an  inward  and  severe 
jurisdiction.  It  is  an  office  of  charity,  that  he  who  cannot 
remove  a  vice  from  himselfe,  should  neverthelesse  endevour 
to  remove  it  from  others,  where  it  may  have  a  lesse  hurtfull 
and  fro  ward  seed.  Nor  doe  I  deeme  it  a  fit  answer,  for  him 
that  warneth  me  of  my  fault,  to  say,  the  same  is  likewise  in 
him.  But  what  of  that  ?  Well  meaning  warning  is  alwayes 
true  and  profitable.  Had  we  a  good  and  sound  nose,  our 
owne  ordure  should  be  more  unsavory  unto  our  selves,  foras 
much  as  it  is  our  owne.  And  Socrates  is  of  opinion,  that 
he,  who  should  find  himselfe,  and  his  son,  and  a  stranger 
guilty  of  any  violence  or  injury,  ought  first  begin  by  him 
selfe,  and  present  himselfe  to  the  sentence  and  condemna- 
168 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

tion  of  the  law,  and  for  his  owne  discharge  and  acquital  CHAPTER 
implore  the  assistance  of  the  executioners  hand  :  secondly  VIII 
for  his  son,  and  lastly  for  the  stranger :  If  this  precept  take  °^rf£  of 
his  tune  somewhat  too  high  :  it  should  at  lest  be  first  pre 
sented  to  the  punishment  of  ones  owne  conscience.  Our 
senses  are  our  proper  and  first  judges,  who  distinguish  not 
things,  but  by  externall  accidents ;  and  no  marvell,  if  in  all 
parts  of  the  service  belonging  to  our  society,  there  is  so  per- 
petuall  and  universall  commixture  of  ceremonies  and  super- 
ficiall  apparances :  so  that  the  best  and  most  effectual  part 
of  policies,  consists  in  that.  It  is  man  with  whom  we  have 
alwayes  to  doe,  whose  condition  is  marvellously  corporall. 
Let  those,  who  in  these  latter  dayes  have  so  earnestly 
laboured,  to  frame  and  establish  unto  us,  an  exercise  of 
Religion  and  Service  of  God,  so  contemplative  and  im- 
materiall,  wonder  nothing  at  all,  if  some  be  found,  who 
thinke,  it  would  have  escaped  and  moultred  away  betweene 
their  fingers,  if  it  had  not  held  and  continued  amongst  us, 
as  a  marke,  a  title  and  instrument  of  division  and  faction, 
more  then  by  it  selfe.  As  in  conference :  The  gravity,  the 
gowne  and  the  fortune  of  him  that  speaketh,  doth  often 
adde  and  winne  credit  unto  vaine,  trifling  and  absurd  dis 
courses.  It  is  not  to  bee  presumed,  that  one  of  these  gowne- 
Clarkes  or  quoifed  Serjants,  so  followed,  and  so  redoubted, 
have  not  some  sufficiency  within  him,  more  then  popular  :  and 
that  a  man  so  sullen  so  grim  and  so  disdainfull,  to  whom  so 
many  commissions,  charges  and  authorities  are  given,  be  not 
more  sufficient  and  worthy,  then  another,  who  saluteth  and 
vaileth  to  him  so  farre-ofF,  and  whom  no  man  employeth. 
Not  onely  the  words,  but  the  powtings  of  such  people,  are 
considered  and  registred,  every  one  applying  himselfe  to 
give  them  some  notable  and  solide  interpretation.  If  they 
stoope  to  common  conference,  and  that  a  man  afFoord  or 
shew  them  other  then  reverence  and  approbation,  they  over 
throw  you  with  the  autority  of  their  experience :  they  have 
read,  they  have  heard,  scene  and  done  goodly  things,  you 
are  cleane  overwhelmed  with  examples.  I  would  faine  tell 
them,  that  the  fruit  of  a  Chirurgions  experience,  is  not  the 
story  of  his  practises,  or  the  remembrance  that  hee  hath 
cured  foure  who  had  the  Plague,  and  healed  as  many  that 
Y  '169 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 


CHAPTER  had  the  Goute,  except  hee  know  and  have  the  wit,  from  his 
VIII  use  and  experience,  to  draw  a  methode  how  to  frame  his 
the  Art  of  juc}gements  and  by  his  skill  and  practise  make  us  perceave, 
mg  hee  is  become  wiser  in  his  art.  As  in  a  consort  of  instru 
ments,  one  heares  not  severally  a  Lute,  a  Vyol,  a  Flute, 
or  a  paire  of  Virginalles,  but  a  perfect-full  harmony  :  the 
assembly  and  fruit  of  all  those  instruments  in  one.  If  their 
travels  and  charges  have  amended  them,  it  is  in  the  produc 
tion  of  their  understanding  to  make  it  appeare.  It  sufficeth 
not  to  number  the  experiments  ;  they  ought  to  bee  well 
poised  and  orderly  sorted  :  and  to  extract  the  reasons  and 
conclusions  they  containe,  they  should  be  well  digested 
and  thorowly  distilled.  There  were  never  so  many  His 
torians.  It  is  ever  good  and  profitable  to  heare  them  :  for 
out  of  the  magazin  of  their  memory,  they  store  us  with 
divers  good  instructions  and  commendable  documents. 
Verily  a  chiefe  part,  for  the  assistance  of  our  life.  But  now 
a  dayes  wee  seeke  not  after  that,  but  rather  whether  the 
Collectors  and  reporters  of  them  be  praise  worthy  and 
directing  themselves.  I  hate  al  manner  of  tyranny,  both 
verball  and  effectuall.  I  willingly  band  and  oppose  my  selfe 
against  these  vaine  and  frivolous  circumstances,  which  by 
the  sences  delude  our  judgement  ;  and  holding  my  selfe 
aloofe  of  from  these  extraordinary  greatnesses,  have  found, 
that  for  the  most  part,  they  are  but  men  as  others  be  : 

IUVEN.  Sat.  Rarus  enimferme  sensus  communis  in  ilia 

vi".  73-  Fortuna. 

For  common  sense  is  seldome  found 
In  fortunes  that  so  much  abound. 

They  are  perad  venture  esteemed  and  discerned  lesse  then 
they  bee,  forsomuch  as  they  undertake  more,  and  so  shew 
themselves  ;  they  answer  not  the  charge  they  have  taken. 
There  must  necessarily  be  more  vigour  and  strength  in  the 
bearer,  then  in  the  burden  :  He  who  is  not  growne  to  his 
full  strength,  leaves  you  to  ghesse,  whether  he  have  any  left 
him  beyond  that,  or  have  beene  tried  to  the  utmost  of  his 
power.  He  who  fainteth  under  his  burden,  bewrayeth  his 
measure  and  the  weaknesse  of  his  shoulders.  Thats  the 
reason,  why  amongst  the  wiser  sort,  there  are  so  many 
foolish  and  unapt  minds  seene,  and  more  then  of  others. 
170 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

They   might  happily   have  beene  made  good  husbandmen,  CHAPTER 
thriving  merchants,  and  plodding  artificers.     Their  natural!         VIII 

vigour  was  cut  out  to  this  proportion.    Learning:  is  a  matter       *  ?  Art 

P  ,  i     L  (.  V  i       -.        m  ,    n          i      conferring 

oi  great  consequence:  they  faint  under  it.      lo  enstall  and 

distribute,  so  rich  and  so  powerfull  a  matter,  and  availefully 
to  employ  the  same,  their  wit  hath  neither  sufficient  vigour, 
nor  conduct  enough  to  manage  it.  It  hath  no  prevailing 
vertue  but  in  a  strong  nature  ;  and  they  are  very  rare  :  and 
such  as  are  but  weake  (saith  Socrates)  corrupt  and  spoil- 
ingly  deface  the  dignity  of  Philosophy,  in  handling  the  same. 
She  seemeth  faulty  and  unprofitable,  being  ill  placed  and 
unorderly  disposed.  Loe  how  they  spoyle  and  entangle 
themselves. 

Humani  qualis  simulator  simius  oris,  CLAUD. 

Quern  puer  arridens,  pretioso  stamine  serum  Eutrop.  i.  303. 

Velauit,  nudasquc  nates  ac  terga  reliquit, 

Ludibrium  mensis. 

Such  counterfets  as  Apes  are  of  mans  face, 

Whom  children  sporting  at,  featly  incase 

In  coastly  coates,  but  leave  his  backeside  bare 

For  men  to  laugh  at,  when  they  feasting  are. 

To  those  likewise,  who  sway  and  command  us,  and  have  the 
world  in  their  owne  hands,  "'tis  not  sufficient  to  have  a  common 
understanding,  and  to  be  able  to  doe,  what  we  can  effect. 
They  are  farre  beneath  us,  if  they  be  not  much  above  us.     As 
they  promise  more,  so  owe  they  more.     And  therefore  silence 
is  in  them,  not  onely  a  countenance  of  respect  and  gravitie, 
but  often  of  thrift  and  profit :    Megabysus  going  to  visite 
Apelles  in  his  worke-house,  stood  still  a  good  while  with 
out  speaking  one  word,  and  then  began  to  discourse  of  his 
workes.     Of  whom  he  received  this  rude  and  nipping  cheke  : 
So  long  as  thou  heldest  thy  peace,  by  reason  of  thy  garish 
clothes,  goodly  chaines  and  stately  pompe,  thou  seemedst  to 
be  some  worthy  gallant :  but  now  thou  hast  spoken,  there 
is  not  the  simplest  boy  of  my  shop,  but  scorneth  and  con 
temns  thee.1     That  great  state  of  his,  those  rich  habilli- 
ments,  and  goodly  traine,  did  not  permit  him  to  be  ignorant 
with  a  popular  ignorance,  and  to  speake  impertinently  of 
painting.      He  should  have  kept  mute,  and  concealed  his 
externall  and  presuming  sufficiency.     Unto  how  many  fond 
and  shallow  minds,  hath  in  my  daves,  a  sullen,  cold  and  silent 

171 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  countenance,  served  as  a  title  of  wisedome  and  capacity  ? 
VIII  Dignities,  charges  and  places,  are  necessarily  given,  more  by 
the  Art  of  fortune  then  by  merit :  and  they  are  often  to  blame,  that 
lllg  for  it  lay  the  blame  on  Kings.  Contrariwise  it  is  a  wonder, 
that  being  so  untoward,  they  should  therein  have  so  good 
lucke :  Principis  est  virtus  maxima,  nosse  suos.  '  Chiefe 
'  vertue  it  is  knowne,  In  Kings  to  know  their  owne.1  For 
Nature  hath  not  given  them  so  perfect  a  sight,  that  it  might 
extend  it  selfe  and  overlooke  so  many  people,  to  discerne 
their  pre-excellency  ;  and  enter  their  breasts,  where  lodgeth 
the  knowledge  of  our  will  and  better  worth.  It  is  by 
conjectures,  and  as  it  were  groping  they  must  try  us :  by 
our  race,  alliances,  dependences,  riches,  learning,  and  the 
peoples  voice  :  all  over-weake  arguments.  He  that  could 
devise  a  meane,  how  men  might  be  judged  by  law,  chosen 
by  reason,  and  advanced  by  desert,  should  establish  a  per 
fect  forme  of  a  commonwealth.  Yea  but  hee  hath  brought 
that  great  businesse  unto  a  good  passe.  It  is  to  say  some 
thing  :  but  not  to  say  sufficiently.  For,  this  sentence  is 
justly  received,  that  counsels  ought  not  to  be  judged  by 
the  events.  The  Carthaginians  were  wont  to  punish  the  ill 
counsels  of  their  Captaines,  although  corrected  by  some  for 
tunate  successe.  And  the  Roman  people  hath  often  refused 
triumphes  to  famous,  succesfull,  and  most  profitable  victories, 
forsomuch  as  the  Generals  conduct,  answeared  not  his  good 
fortune.  It  is  commonly  perceived  by  the  worlds  actions, 
that  fortune,  to  teach  us,  how  farre  hir  power  extendeth  unto 
all  things  ;  and  who  taketh  pleasure  to  abate  our  presump 
tion,  having  not  bin  able  to  make  silly  men  wise,  she  hath 
made  them  fortunate,  in  envy  of  vertue  :  And  commonly 
gives  hir  selfe  to  favour  executions,  when  as  their  complot 
and  devise  is  meerly  hirs.  Whence  we  dayly  see,  that  the 
simplest  amongst  us,  compasse  divers  great  and  important 
affaires,  both  publike  and  private.  And  as  Sirannez  the 
Persian  Prince,  answered  those,  who  seemed  to  wonder  how 
his  negotiations  succeeded  so  ill,  his  discourses  being  so 
wise :  that  he  was  onely  maister  of  his  discourses,  but  for 
tune  mistris  of  his  affaires  successe.  These  may  answer  the 
like  ;  but  with  a  contrary  bias.  Most  things  of  the  world 
are  made  by  themselves., 
172 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

VIRG.  sEn.          Fata  viam  inveniunt.  CHAPTER 

iii.  356.  Fates  finde  and  know,  which  way  to  goe.  Q-,    ,      |        ,. 

The  issue  doth  often  aucthorize  a  simple  conduct.  Our  conferring 
interposition  is  in  a  manner  nothing  els  but  an  experience, 
and  more  commonly  a  consideration  of  use  and  example  then 
of  reason.  And  as  one  amazed  at  the  greatnesse  of  some 
businesse,  I  have  sometimes  understood  by  those  who  had 
atchieved  them,  both  their  motives  and  addresses  :  wherein 
I  have  found  but  vulgar  advises  :  and  the  most  vulgar  and 
used,  are  peradventure  the  surest  and  most  commodious  for 
the  practise,  if  not  for  the  shew.  And  what  if  the  plainest 
reasons  are  the  best  seated  :  the  meanest,  basest  and  most 
beaten,  are  best  applied  unto  affaires  ?  To  maintaine  the 
authority  of  our  Kings  counsell,  it  is  not  requisite,  that  pro- 
phane  persons  should  be  partakers  of  it,  and  looke  further 
into  it,  then  from  the  first  barre.  To  uphold  it's  reputation, 
it  should  be  reverenced  upon  credit,  and  at  full.  My  con 
sultation  doth  somewhat  roughly  hew  the  matter,  and  by  it's 
first  shew,  lightly  consider  the  same  :  the  maine  and  chiefe 
point  of  the  worke,  I  am  wont  to  resigne  to  heaven. 

Permitte  divis  ccetera.  HOR.  i.  Od.  ix. 

How  all  the  rew  shall  goe,  9< 

Give  leave  to  Gods  to  know. 

Good  and  bad  fortune,  are  in  my  conceit  two  soveraigne 
powers.  "Tis  folly  to  thinke,  that  humane  wisedome  may  act 
the  full  part  of  fortune.  And  vaine  is  his  enterprise,  that 
presumeth  to  embrace  both  causes  and  consequences,  and 
lead  the  progresse  of  his  fact  by  the  hand.  And  above  all, 
vainest  in  military  deliberations.  There  was  never  more 
circumspection  and  military  wisedome,  then  is  sometimes 
scene  amongst  us  :  May  it  be  that  man  feareth  to  lose  him- 
selfe  by  the  way,  reserving  himselfe  to  the  catastrophe  of 
that  play  ?  I  say  moreover,  that  even  our  wisedome  and  con 
sultation  for  the  most  part  followeth  the  conduct  of  hazard. 
My  will  and  my  discourse,  is  sometimes  mooved  by  one  ayre, 
and  sometimes  by  another  :  and  there  be  many  of  these 
motions,  that  are  governed  without  me.  My  reason  hath 
dayly  impulsions  and  casuall  agitations : 

173 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Vertuntur  species  animorum,  et  pectora  motus  VIRG.  Geo. 

Vin  Nunc  alios,  alios  dum  nubila  ventus  agebat,  iv-  20. 

Of  the  Art  of  Concipiunt. 

conferring  q^e  showes  of  mindes  are  chang'd,  and  brests  conceave 

At  one  time  motions,  which  anon  they  leave, 
And  others  take  againe,  As  winds  drive  clouds  amaiiie. 

Let  but  a  man  looke  who  are  the  mightiest  in  Cities  and 
who  thrive  best  in  their  businesse  :  he  shall  commonly  find, 
they  are  the  siliest  and  poorest  in  wit.  It  hath  hapned  to 
simple  women,  to  weake  children,  and  to  mad  men,  to  com 
mand  great  states,  as  well  as  the  most  sufficient  Princes. 
And  the  gullish  or  shallow-pated  (saith  Thucidides)  doe 
more  ordinarily  come  unto  them,  then  the  wisest  and  sub- 
tilest.  We  ascribe  their  good  fortunes  effects,  unto  their 
prudence. 

PLAU.  Pse.  act.  — ut  quisque  for  tuna  utitur, 

v>  sc.  4.  Lta  prcecellit :  atque  exinde  sapere  ilium  omnes  dicimus. 

As  men  their  fortune  use,  so  they  excell, 
And  so  we  say,  they  are  wise  and  doe  well. 

Wherefore  I  say  well,  that  howsoever,  events  are  but  weake 
testimonies  of  our  worth  and  capacity.  I  was  now  upon  this 
point,  that  we  need  but  looke  upon  a  man  advanced  to 
dignity  ;  had  we  but  three  daies  before  knowne  him  to  bee 
of  little  or  no  worth  at  all :  an  image  of  greatnesse,  and  an 
Idea  of  sufficiency,  doth  insensibly  glide  and  creepe  into  our 
opinions  ;  and  we  perswade  our  selves,  that  increasing  in 
state,  and  credit,  and  followers,  hee  is  also  increased  in 
merit.  We  judge  of  him,  not  according  to  his  worth ;  but 
after  the  maner  of  casting-counters,  according  to  the  pre 
rogative  of  his  ranke.  But  let  fortune  turne  her  wheele,  let 
him  againe  decline  and  come  down  amongst  the  vulgar  multi 
tude  ;  every  one  with  admiration  enquireth  of  the  cause,  and 
how  he  was  raised  so  high.  Good  Lord  is  that  he?  will 
some  say.  What  ?  knew  he  no  more  ?  had  he  no  other  skill 
when  he  was  so  aloft  ?  Are  Princes  pleased  with  so  little  ? 
Now  in  good  sooth  we  were  in  very  good  hands,  will  others 
say.  It  is  a  thing  my  selfe  have  often  scene  in  my  dayes. 
Yea  the  very  maske  of  greatnesse,  or  habit  of  Majesty, 
represented  in  Tragedies,  doth  in  some  sort  touch  and  be- 
174 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

guile  us.  The  thing  I  adore  in  Kings,  is  the  throng  of  their  CHAPTER 
adorators.  All  inclination  and  submission  is  due  unto  them,  VIII 
except  the  mindes.  My  reason  is  not  framed  to  bend  or  °*  th(P  ^F*  o 
stoope  :  my  knees  are.  Melanthius  being  demanded,  what 
he  thought  of  Dionysius  his  tragedy,  answered  I  have  not 
seene  it,  so  much  was  it  over-clouded  with  language.  So 
should  those  say,  that  judge  of  great  mens  discourses  :  I  have 
not  understood  his  discourse,  so  was  it  overdarkned  with 
gravity,  with  greatnes  and  with  Majesty.  Antisthenes  one 
day  perswaded  the  Athenians,  to  command  that  their  asses 
should  as  well  be  employed  about  the  manuring  of  grounds, 
as  were  their  horses :  who  answered  him  that  the  asse  was 
not  borne  for  such  service  :  That 's  all  one  (quoth  he)  there 
needs  but  your  allowance  for  it :  for  the  most  ignorant  and 
incapable  men  you  imploy  about  the  directing  of  your  warres, 
leave  not  to  become  out  of  hand  most  worthy,  onely  because 
you  employ  them.  Whereupon  depends  the  custome  of  so 
many  men,  who  canonize  the  King,  whom  they  have  made 
amongst  them,  and  are  not  contented  to  honor  him,  unlesse 
they  also  adore  him.  Those  of  Mexico,  after  the  ceremonies 
of  his  consecration  are  finished,  dare  no  more  looke  him  in 
the  face  :  but  as  if  by  his  Royalty,  they  had  deified  him, 
they  afterward  deeme  him  to  bee  a  God  :  amongst  the 
oathes,  they  make  him  sweare  to  maintaine  their  Religion, 
to  keepe  their  Lawes,  to  defend  their  liberties,  to  be  valiant, 
just  and  debonaire ;  he  is  also  sworne  to  make  the  Sun 
march  in  his  accustomed  light :  in  time  of  need  to  cause  the 
clouds  showre  downe  their  waters  ;  to  enforce  rivers  to  runne 
in  their  right  wonted  chanels  ;  and  compell  the  earth  to 
produce  all  necessary  things  for  his  people.  I  differ  from  this 
common  fashion,  and  more  distrust  sufficiency,  when  I  see  it 
accompanied  with  the  greatnes  of  fortune,  and  applauded 
by  popular  commendation.  Wee  should  needfully  marke, 
of  what  consequence  it  is,  for  a  man  to  speake  in  due  time, 
to  choose  fit  opportunity,  to  breake  or  change  his  discourse 
with  a  magistrale  authority  :  to  defend  himselfe  from  others 
oppositions,  by  a  nod  or  moving  of  the  head,  by  a  smile, 
a  shrug  or  a  silence,  before  an  assembly,  trembling  with 
reverence  and  respect.  A  man  of  monstrous  fortune,  chanc 
ing  to  shoote  his  boult,  and  give  his  opinion  upon  a  frivolous 

175 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  subject,  which  but  jestingly  was  tossed  too  and  fro  at  his 
^  1U  table,  began  ever  thus  ;  He  cannot  choose  but  be  a  Iyer,  or 

°conferrhi  °f  an  ignorant  asse>  that  will  say  otherwise  then,  etc.  Follow 
this  Philosophicall  point,  out  commeth  a  dagger,  and  there 
is  some  mischiefe.  Loe  here  another  advertisment ;  from 
whence  I  reape  good  use :  Which  is,  that  in  disputations  and 
conferences,  all  good  seeming  words,  ought  not  presently  to 
be  allowed  and  accepted.  Most  men  are  rich  of  a  strange 
sufficiency.  Some  may  chance  to  speake  a  notable  saying,  to 
give  a  good  answere,  to  use  a  witty  sentence,  and  to  propound 
it,  without  knowing  the  force  of  it.  That  a  man  holdeth 
not  all  he  borroweth,  may  perad venture  be  verified  in  my 
selfe.  A  man  should  not  alwayes  yeeld,  what  truth  or 
goodnes  soever  it  seemeth  to  containe.  A  man  must  either 
combat  the  same  in  good  earnest,  or  draw  back,  under  colour 
of  not  understanding  the  matter  :  to  try  on  all  parts,  how  it 
is  placed  in  it's  author.  It  may  fortune,  that  we  shut  our 
selves  up  and  further  the  stroake,  beyond  its  bearing.  I  have 
sometimes  in  necessity  and  throng  of  the  combat,  employed 
some  reviradoes  or  turnings,  which  beyond  my  intent,  have 
prooved  false  offers.  I  but  gave  them  by  tale,  and  they 
were  received  by  waight.  Even  as  when  1  contend  with  a 
vigourous  man  ;  I  please  my  selfe  to  anticipate  his  con 
clusions  :  I  ease  him  the  labour  to  interpret  himselfe,  I 
endevour  to  prevent  his  imperfect  and  yet  budding  imagina 
tion  :  the  order  and  pertinency  of  his  understanding  for- 
warneth  and  menaceth  a  farre  off:  of  these  others  I  do 
cleane  contrary ;  a  man  must  understand  or  presuppose  no 
thing  but  by  them.  '  If  they  judge  in  generall  termes  :  This 
'  is  good,  that's  naught':  and  that  they  jump  right;  see 
whether  it  be  fortune,  that  jumpeth  for  them.  Let  them  a 
little  circumscribe  and  restraine  their  sentence  wherefore  it 
is,  and  which  way  it  is.  These  universall  judgements,  I  see 
so  ordinarily  say  nothing  at  all.  They  are  men,  that  salute 
a  whole  multitude,  in  throng  and  troupe.  Such  as  have 
true  knowledge  of  the  same,  salute  and  marke  it  by 
name  and  particularly.  But  it  is  a  hazardous  enterprise. 
Whence  I  have  oftner  and  daily  seene  to  happen,  that 
wits  weakly  grounded,  intending  to  shew  themselves  in 
genious,  by  observing  in  the  reading  of  some  work,  the 
170 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

point  of  beauty  :  stay  their  admiration  with  so  bad  a  choise,  CHAPTER 
that  in  lieu  of  teaching  us  the  authors  excellency,  they  shew  VIII 
us  their  owne  ignorance.  This  maner  of  exclamation  is  Of  the  Art  of 
safe :  '  Loe  this  is  very  excellent ' :  '  Surely  this  is  very 
'  good,1  having  heard  a  whole  page  of  Virgil.  And  that's 
the  shift  whereby  the  subtill  save  themselves.  But  to  under 
take  to  follow  him  by  shrugs  and  crinches,  and  with  an  ex- 
presse  selected  judgement  to  goe  about  to  marke  which  way 
a  good  author  surmounteth  himselfe  :  pondring  his  words, 
his  phrases,  his  inventions,  and  his  severall  vertues  one  after 
another  :  Away,  goe  by  :  It  is  not  for  you.  Videndum  est 
non  modOy  quid  quisque,  loquatur,  sed  etiam  quid  quisque 
sentiaty  atque  etiam  qua  de  causa  quisque  sentiat.  '  Man  must 
6  take  heed  not  onely  what  he  speakes,  but  what  he  thinkes, 
4  and  also  why  he  thinkes."  I  dayly  heare  fooles  utter  un- 
foolish  words.  Speake  they  any  good  thing  :  let  us  under 
stand  whence  they  know  it,  how  farre  they  understand  and 
whereby  they  hold  it.  Wee  helpe  them  to  employ  this  fine 
word  and  this  goodly  reason,  which  they  posse^e  not,  and 
have  but  in  keeping  :  they  have  happily  produced  the  same 
by  chance  and  at  random,  our  selves  bring  it  in  credit  and 
esteeme  with  them.  You  lend  them  your  hand  :  what  to 
doe  ?  to  konne  you  no  thankes,  and  thereby  become  more 
simple,  and  more  foolish.  Doe  not  second  them  :  let  them 
goe-on  :  they  will  handle  this  matter  as  men  affraid  to  bewray 
themselves,  they  dare  neither  change  her  seate  or  light,  nor 
enter  into  it.  Shake  it  never  so  little,  it  escapeth  them  ; 
quit  the  same  how  strong  and  goodly  soever  it  be.  They  are 
handsome  weapons,  but  ill  hafted.  How  often  have  I  scene 
the  experience  of  it  ?  Now  if  you  come  to  expound  and  con- 
firme  them,  they  take  hold  of  you,  and  presently  steale  the 
advantage  of  your  interpretation  from  you.  '  It  was  that 
'  which  I  was  about  to  say ' :  '  It  was  just  my  conceit ' :  '  If  I 
4  have  not  so  exprest  it,  it  is  but  for  want  of  speech/  Handy- 
dandy,  what  is  this  ?  Malice  it  selfe  must  be  employed  to 
correct  this  fierce  rudenesse.  Hegesias  his  position,  that  a 
man  must  neither  hate  nor  accuse,  but  instruct,  hath  some 
reason  else  where.  But  here,  it  is  injustice  to  assist,  and  in 
humanity  to  raise  him  up  againe,  that  hath  nothing  to  doe 
with  it,  and  is  thereby  of  lesser  worth.  I  love  to  have  them 
Z  177 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  entangle  and  bemire  themselves  more  then  they  are,  and  if 
VIII  it  be  possible,  to  wade  so  deepe  into  the  gulphe  of  error,  that 
the  Art  of  jn  fae  en(|  they  may  recall  and  advise  themselves.  Sottish- 
®  nesse  and  distraction  of  the  senses,  is  no  disease  curable  by  a 
tricke  of  advertisment.  And  we  may  fitly  say  of  this  repara 
tion,  as  Cyrus  answered  one,  who  urged  him  to  exhort  his 
army  in  the  nicke  when  the  battell  should  begin  :  That  men 
are  not  made  warlike  and  couragious  in  the  field,  by  an 
excellent  oration  ;  no  more  then  one  becommeth  a  ready 
cunning  Musition,  by  hearing  a  good  song.  They  are 
prentisages  that  must  be  learned  aforehand,  by  long  and 
constant  institution.  This  care  we  owe  to  ours,  and  this 
assiduity  of  correction  and  instruction  :  but  to  preach  to  him 
that  first  passeth  by,  or  sway  the  ignorance  or  fondnesse  of 
him  we  meete  next,  is  a  custome  I  cannot  well  away  with.  I 
seldome  use  it,  even  in  such  discourses  as  are  made  to  me  ; 
and  I  rather  quit  all,  then  come  to  these  far-fetcht  and 
magistrale  instructions.  My  humour  is  no  more  proper  to 
speake,  then  to  write,  namely  for  beginners.  But  in  things 
commonly  spoken,  or  amongst  others,  how  false  and  absurd 
soever  I  judge  them,  I  never  crosse  or  gibe  them,  neither  by 
word  nor  signe.  Further,  nothing  doth  more  spight  me  in 
sottishnesse  then  that  it  pleaseth  it  selfe  more,  then  any 
reason  may  justly  bee  satisfied.  It  is  ill  lucke  that  wisedome 
forbids  you  to  please  and  trust  your  selfe,  and  sends  you 
alwayes  away  discontented  and  fearefull :  whereas  wilfulnesse 
and  rashnesse,  fill  their  guests  with  gratulation  and  assurance. 
It  is  for  the  simplest  and  least  able,  to  looke  at  other  men 
over  their  shoulders,  ever  returning  from  the  combat  full  of 
glory  and  gladnesse.  And  most  often  also,  this  outrecui- 
dance  of  speech  and  cheerefulnesse  of  countenance,  giveth 
them  the  victory  over  the  by-standers,  who  are  commonly 
weake,  and  incapable  to  judge  a  right  and  discerne  true 
advantage.  Obstinacy  and  earnestnesse  in  opinion,  is  the 
surest  try  all  of  folly  and  selfe  conceit.  Is  there  any  thing 
so  assured,  so  resolute,  so  disdainfull,  so  contemplative,  so 
serious  and  so  grave,  as  the  Asse  :  May  we  not  commixe  with 
the  title  of  conference  and  communication,  the  sharpe  and 
interrupted  discourses,  which  mirth  and  familiarity  iritro- 
duceth  amongst  friends,  pleasantly  dallying  and  wittily  jest- 
1  /o 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

ing  one  with  another  ?    An  exercise,  to  which  my  naturall  CHAPTER 


blithnesse  makes  me  very  apt.  And  if  it  be  not  so  wire- 
drawne  and  serious,  as  this  other  exercise  I  now  speake  of,  fe  . 
yet  is  it  no  lesse  sharpe  or  ingenious,  no  lesse  profitable,  as  it 
seemed  to  Lycurgus.  For  my  regard  I  bring  more  liberty 
then  wit  unto  it,  and  have  therin  more  lucke  then  invention  : 
but  I  am  perfect  in  sufferance  ;  for  I  endure  the  revenge,  not 
onely  sharpe  but  also  indiscreete,  without  any  alteration. 
And  to  any  assault  given  me,  if  I  have  not  presently  or 
stoutly  wherewith  to  worke  mine  owne  amends,  I  ammuse 
not  my  selfe  to  follow  that  ward  or  point,  with  a  tedious  and 
selfe-wiPd  contestation,  enclining  to  pertinacy  :  I  let  it  passe, 
and  hanging  downe  mine  eares,  remit  my  selfe  to  a  better 
houre  to  right  my  selfe.  He  is  not  a  marchant  that  ever 
gaineth.  Most  men  change  both  voice  and  countenance, 
where  might  faileth  them  :  And  by  an  importunate  rage, 
instead  of  avenging  themselves,  they  accuse  their  weaknesse 
and  therewith  bewray  their  impacience.  In  this  jollity  we 
now  and  then  harpe  upon  some  secret  strings  of  our  imper 
fections  ;  which  setled  or  considerate  we  cannot  touch  with 
out  offence,  and  we  profitably  enter-advertize  our  selves  of 
our  defects.  There  are  other  handy-sports  indiscreete,  fond 
and  sharpe,  just  after  the  French  maner  ;  which  I  hate 
mortally  :  I  have  a  tender  and  sensible  skinne  :  I  have  in  my 
daies  scene  two  Princes  of  our  Royall  blood  brought  to  their 
graves  for  it.  It  is  an  ill  seeming  thing  for  men,  in  jest  to 
hitte,  or  in  sport  to  strike  one  another.  In  other  matters, 
when  I  shall  judge  of  any  body,  I  demaund  of  him,  how 
farre  or  how  much  he  is  contented  with  himselfe  :  how  farre 
his  speach  or  his  worke  pleaseth  him.  I  will  avoyd  these 
goodly  excuses,  '  I  did  it  but  in  jest  ^  : 

Ablatum  medijs  opus  est  incudibus  istud.  OVID.  Trist. 

This  worke  away  was  brought, 
Halfe  hammered,  halfe  wrought  : 

4  1  was  not  an  houre  there  ':  '  I  have  not  scene  him  since."  Now 
I  say,  let  us  then  leave  these  partes,  give  me  one  that  may 
represent  you  whole  and  entire,  by  which  it  may  please  you 
to  be  measured  by  another.  And  then  ;  what  finde  you 
fairest  in  your  owne  worke  ?  is  it  that  or  this  part  ?  the 

179 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  grace  or  the  matter,  the  invention,  the  judgement,  or  the 
VIII  learning  ?  For  I  ordinarily  perceive,  that  a  man  misseth  as 
Of  the  Art  of  mucn  m  judging  of  his  owne  worke,  as  of  anothers.  Not 
m^  onely  by  the  affection,  he  therein  imployeth ;  but  because 
he  hath  not  sufficiencie  to  know,  nor  skill  to  distinguish  it. 
The  worke  of  it's  owne  power  and  fortune,  may  second  the 
worke-man,  and  transport  him  beyond  his  invention  and 
knowledge.  As  for  me,  I  judge  not  the  worth  of  anothers 
s/  worke  more  obscurely  then  of  mine  owne :  and  place  my 
Essayes  sometime  lowe,  sometimes  high,  very  unconstantly 
and  doubtfully.  There  are  divers  bookes  profitable  by 
reason  of  their  subjects  of  which  the  author  reapeth  no  com 
mendations  at  all :  And  good  bookes,  as  also  good  workes, 
which  make  the  workeman  ashamed.  I  shall  write  the  man 
ner  of  our  bankets,  and  the  fashion  of  our  garments,  and  I 
shall  write  it  with  an  ill  grace :  I  shall  publish  the  Edicts  of 
my  time,  and  the  letters  of  Princes  that  publikely  passe  from 
hand  to  hand  :  I  shall  make  an  abridgement  of  a  good  booke 
(and  every  abridgement  of  a  good  booke,  is  a  foole  abridged) 
which  booke  shall  come  to  be  lost,  and  such  like  things. 
Posterity  shall  reape  singular  profit  by  such  compositions : 
but  I,  what  honour  except  by  my  good  fortune?  Many 
famous  bookes  are  of  this  condition. 

When  I  read  Philip  de  Commines,  (now  divers  yeares  since) 

a  right  excellent  author,  I  noted  this  speech  in  him,  as  a 

saying  not  vulgar  :  'That  a  man  should  carefully  take  heed, 

'  how  he  do  his  master  so  great  or  much  service,  that  he  there- 

'  by  be  hindred  from  finding  his  due  recompence  for  it/     I 

should  have  commended  the  invention,  but  not  him.     After 

that  I  found  it  in  Tacitus  :  Beneficia  eo  usque  lota  sunt,  dum 

CORN.  TACIT,  videntur    exolvi    posse,   ubi   multum    antevenere  pro  gratia 

Annal.  iv.         odium   redditur.     '  Benefits  are  so    long   wel-come,   as    wee 

'  thinke  they  may  be  requited,  but  when  they  much  exceede 

'  all    power   of  recompence,    hate    is    returned    for    thankes 

'  and  good  will.1     And  Seneca  very  stoutly  :    Nam  qui  putat 

SEN.  Epist.       esse  turpe  non  reddere,  non  vult  esse  cui  reddat.     '  For  he 

Ixxxi.  f.  <  that  thinkes   it   a   shame    not  to  requite,  could  wish,  he 

4  were  not  whom  he    should    requite/      Q.    Cicero  with    a 

looser  by  as  :    Qui  se  non  putat  satisfacere,  amicus  esse  nullo 

modo  potest.     '  He  that  thinkes  he  doth  not  satisfie,  can  by 

180 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

6  no  meanes  be  a  friend."  The  subject  according  as  it  is,  may  CHAPTER 
make  a  man  be  judged  learned,  wise  and  memorious  :  but  to  VIII 
judge  in  him  the  parts  most  his  owne  and  best  worthy,  to-  ^  ^e  Art  °^ 
gether  with  the  force  and  beautie  of  his  minde ;  tis  very 
requisite  we  know  first  what  is  his  owne,  and  what  not :  and 
in  what  is  not  his  owne,  what  we  are  beholding  to  him  for,  in 
consideration  of  his  choise,  disposition,  ornament,  and  lan 
guage  he  hath  thereunto  furnished.  What  if  he  have  bor 
rowed  the  matter  and  empaired  the  forme  ?  as  many  times 
it  commeth  to  passe.  Wee  others  that  have  little  practise 
with  bookes,  are  troubled  with  this,  that  when  wee  meet 
with  any  rare  or  quaint  invention  in  a  new  Poet,  or  forcible 
argument  in  a  Preacher,  we  dare  not  yet  commend  them, 
untill  we  have  taken  instruction  of  some  wise  man,  whether 
that  part  be  their  owne  or  another  bodies.  And  untill  then  I 
ever  stand  upon  mine  owne  guard.  I  come  lately  from  read 
ing  over,  (and  that  without  any  intermission)  the  story  of 
Tacitus  (a  matter  not  usuall  with  me  ;  it  is  now  twenty 
yeares,  I  never  spent  one  whole  houre  together  upon  a 
booke)  and  I  have  now  done  it,  at  the  instant  request  of  a 
gentleman,  whom  France  holdeth  in  high  esteeme  ;  as  well 
for  his  owne  worth  and  valour  as  for  a  constant  forme  of 
sufficiencie  and  goodnes,  apparantly  scene  in  divers  brethren 
of  his.  I  know  no  author,  that  in  a  publike  register  enter- 
mixeth  so  many  considerations  of  manners,  and  particular 
inclinations.  And  I  deeme  cleane  contrary,  to  what  hee 
thinketh  :  who  being  especially  to  follow  the  lives  of  the 
Emperours  of  his  time,  so  divers  and  extreme  in  all  manner 
of  forme,  so  many  notable  and  great  actions,  which,  namely 
their  cruelty  produced  in  their  subjects,  he  had  a  more 
powerfull  and  attractive  matter,  to  discourse  and  relate,  then 
if  hee  had  beene  to  speake  or  treat  of  battels  and  universall 
agitations.  So  that  I  often  find  him  barren,  sleightlie  run 
ning-over  those  glorious  deaths,  as  if  he  feared  to  attediate 
and  molest  us  with  their  multitude  and  continuance.  This 
forme  of  historic  is  much  more  profitable  :  Publike  innova 
tions,  depend  more  on  the  conduct  of  fortune  :  private  on 
ours.  It  is  rather  a  judgement,  then  a  deduction  of  an 
history  :  therein  are  more  precepts,  then  narrations :  It  is 
not  a  booke  to  reade,  but  a  volume  to  studv  and  to  learne : 

181 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  It  is  so  fraught  with  sentences,  that  right  or  wrong  they  are 
VIIJ  hudled  up  :  It  is  a  seminary  of  morall,  and  a  magazine  of 
Of  the  Art  of  pOHitique  discourses,  for  the  provision  and  ornament  of  those, 
m^  that  possesse  some  place  in  the  managing  of  the  world.  He 
ever  pleadeth  with  solid  and  forcible  reasons ;  after  a  sharpe 
and  witty  fashion :  following  affected  and  laboured  stile  of 
his  age :  They  so  much  loved  to  raise  and  puffe  themselves 
up,  that  where  they  found  neither  sharpenesse  nor  subtility 
in  things,  they  would  borrow  it  of  wordes.  He  draweth 
somewhat  neare  to  Senecas  writing.  I  deeme  Tacitus,  more 
sinnowy,  Seneca  more  sharpe.  His  service  is  more  proper  to 
a  crazed  troubled  state,  as  is  ours  at  this  present :  you  would 
often  say,  he  pourtrayeth  and  toucheth  us  to  the  quicke. 
Such  as  doubt  of  his  faith,  doe  manyfestly  accuse  themselves 
to  hate  him  for  somewhat  else.  His  opinions  be  sound, 
and  enclining  to  the  better  side  of  the  Romane  affaires. 
I  am  neverthelesse  something  greeved,  that  he  hath  more 
bitterly  judged  of  Pompey,  then  honest  mens  opinions,  who 
lived  and  conversed  with  him,  doe  well  allow  of:  to  have 
esteemed  him  altogether  equall  to  Marius  and  Silla,  saving 
that  he  was  more  close  and  secret.  His  intention  and  can- 
vasing  for  the  government  of  affaires,  hath  not  beene  exempted 
from  ambition,  nor  cleared  from  revenge  :  and  his  owne 
friends  have  feared,  that  had  he  gotten  the  victory,  it  would 
have  transported  him  beyond  the  limits  of  reason  ;  but  not 
unto  an  unbridled  and  raging  measure.  There  is  nothing  in 
his  life  that  hath  threatned  us  with  so  manyfest  a  cruelty, 
and  expresse  tyranny.  Yet  must  not  the  suspition  be  coun 
terpoised  to  the  evidence :  So  doe  not  I  beleeve  him. 

That  his  narrations  are  naturall  and  right,  might  happily 
be  argued  by  this :  That  they  doe  not  alwaies  exactly  apply 
themselves  to  the  conclusions  of  his  judgement;  which  hee 
pursueth  according  to  the  course  he  hath  taken,  often  be 
yond  the  matter  he  sheweth  us  ;  which  he  hath  dained  to 
stoope  unto  with  one  onely  glance.  He  needeth  no  excuse 
to  have  approoved  the  religion  of  his  times,  according  to  the 
lawes  which  commanded  him,  and  beene  ignorant  of  the  true 
and  perfect  worship  of  God.  That's  his  ill  fortune,  not  his 
defect.  I  have  principally  considered  his  judgement,  where 
of  I  am  not  every  where  throughly  resolved.  As  namely  these 

182 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

words  contayned  in  the  letter,  which  Tiberius  being  sicke  CHAPTER 
and  aged,  sent  to  the  Senate.  '  What  shall  I  write  to  you  my  VIII 
'  masters,  or  how  shall  I  write  to  you,  or  what  shall  I  not  ^f  th®  A.rt  of 
'  write  to  you  in  these  times  ?  May  the  gods  and  goddesses 
c  loose  me  worse,  then  I  dayly  feele  my  selfe  to  perish,  if  I  can 
4  tell.1  I  cannot  perceive  why  he  should  so  certainly  apply 
them  unto  a  stinging  remorse,  tormenting  the  conscience  of 
Tiberius  :  At  least  when  my  selfe  was  in  the  same  plight,  I 
saw  it  not.  That  hath  likewise  seemed  somwhat  demisse 
and  base  unto  me,  that  having  said,  how  he  had  exercised  a 
certaine  honourable  magistracy  in  Rome,  he  goeth  about  to 
excuse  himselfe,  that  it  is  not  for  ostentation,  he  spake  it : 
This  one  tricke,  namely  in  a  minde  of  his  quality,  seemeth 
but  base  and  course  unto  me :  For,  not  to  dare  speake 
roundly  of  himselfe,  accuseth  some  want  of  courage :  A 
constant,  resolute  and  high  judgement,  and  which  judgeth 
soundly  and  surely,  every  hand  while  useth  his  owne  examples, 
as  well  as  of  any  strange  thing  ;  and  witnesseth  as  freely  of 
himselfe  as  of  a  third  person  :  A  man  must  overgoe  these 
populare  reasons  of  civility,  in  favour  of  truth  and  liberty. 
I  dare  not  onely  speake  of  my  selfe :  but  speake  alone  of  my 
selfe.  I  stragle  when  I  write  of  any  other  matter,  and 
digresse  from  my  subject.  I  doe  not  so  discreetly  love  my 
selfe,  and  am  so  tied  and  commixt  to  my  selfe,  as  that  I  can 
not  distinguish  and  consider  my  selfe  a  part :  as  a  neighbour, 
as  a  tree ;  it  is  an  equall  error,  either  not  to  see  how  farre  a 
mans  worth  stretcheth,  or  to  say  more  of  it  then  one  seeth 
good  cause.  We  owe  more  love  to  God,  then  to  our  selves, 
and  know  him  lesse,  and  yet  we  talke  our  fill  of  him.  If  his 
writings  relate  any  thing  of  his  conditions  he  was  a  notable 
man,  upright  and  couragious,  not  with  a  superstitious  ver- 
tue,  but  Philosophicall  and  generous  :  He  may  be  found 
over-hardy  in  his  testimonies.  As  where  he  holdeth,  that  a 
souldier  carrying  a  burden  of  wood,  his  hands  were  so  stifly  be- 
nummed  with  cold  that  they  stucke  to  his  wood,  and  remained 
so  fast  unto  it,  that  as  dead  flesh  they  were  divided  from  his 
armes.  In  such  cases  I  am  wont  to  yeeld  unto  the  authority 
of  so  great  testimonies.  Where  he  also  saith,  that  Vespasian 
by  the  favour  of  the  God  Serapis,  healed  in  the  citie  of 
Alexandria  a  blinde  woman,  with  the  rubbing  and  anoint- 

183 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ing  her  eyes  with  fasting  spettle,  and  some  other  miracles, 
Of  iT^A  f  W  k  ^  remem^er  n°t  weM  now5  ne  doth  *t  by  the  example 
conferrifl  n^  devoire  °f  a^  g°°d  historians.  They  keepe  a  register 
of  important  events  :  among  publike  accidents,  are  allso 
popular  reports  and  vulgar  opinions.  It  is  their  part  to 
relate  common  conceits,  but  not  to  sway  them.  This  part 
belongeth  to  Divines  and  Philosophers,  directors  of  con 
sciences.  Therefore  that  companion  of  his,  and  as  great  a 
man  as  hee,  said  most  wisely :  Equidem  plura  transcribo 
quam  credo :  Nam  nee  affirmare  sustineo,  de  quibus  dubito,  nee 
sub  ducere  qucic  accepi :  '  I  write  out  more  then  I  beleeve  :  for 
'  neither  can  I  bide  to  affirm  what  I  doubt  of,  nor  to  with- 
'  drawe  what  I  have  heard "* :  And  that  other :  Hcee  neque 
affirmare  neque  refellere  operas  predum  est :  famce  rerum 
standum  est.  '  It  is  not  worth  the  talke,  or  to  avouch,  or 
4  to  refuse  these  things  wee  must  stand  to  report.1  And 
writing  in  an  age,  wherein  the  beliefe  of  prodigies  began  to 
decline,  he  saith,  he  would  notwithstanding  not  omit  to 
insert  in  his  Annals,  and  give  footing  to  a  thing  received 
and  allowed  of  so  many  honest  men,  and  with  so  great 
reverence  by  antiquity.  It  is  very  well  said :  That  they 
yeelde  us  the  history,  more  according  as  they  receave,  then 
according  as  they  esteeme  it.  I  who  am  king  of  the  matter 
I  treat  of,  and  am  not  to  give  accompt  of  it  to  any  creature 
living,  doe  neverthelesse  not  altogether  beleeve  my  selfe  for 
it.  I  often  hazard  upon  certaine  outslips  of  my  minde,  for 
which  I  distrust  my  selfe  ;  and  certaine  verball  wilie-beguilies, 
whereat  I  shake  mine  eares :  but  I  let  them  runne  at  hab  or 
nab  ;  I  see  some  honour  them  selves  with  such  like  things : 
"Tis  not  for  me  alone  to  judge  of  them.  I  present  my  selfe 
standing  and  lying,  before  and  behinde,  on  the  right  and  left 
side,  and  in  all  by  naturall  motions.  Spirits  alike  in  force, 
are  not  ever  alike  in  application  and  taste.  Loe  here  what 
my  memory  doth  in  grose,  and  yet  very  uncertainely 
present  unto  me  of  it.  In  breefe,  all  judgements 
are  weake,  demisse  and  imperfect. 


184 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

THE   NINTH   CHAPTER 

Of  Vanitie. 


HERE  is  peradventure  no  vanity  more 
manyfest,  then  so  vainely  to  write  of  it. 
What  Divinity  hath  so  divinely  expressed 
thereof  unto  us,  ought  of  all  men  of 
understanding  to  be  diligently  and  con 
tinually  meditated  upon.  Who  seeth  not, 
that  I  have  entred  so  large  a  field,  and 
undertaken  so  high  a  pitch,  wherein  so 
long  as  there  is  either  Inke  or  Paper  in  the  world,  I  may 
imcessantly  wander  and  fly  without  encombrance  ?  I  can 
keepe  no  register  of  my  life  by  my  actions :  fortune  placeth 
them  to  lowe :  I  hould  them  of  my  fantasies.  Yet  have  I 
seen  a  gentleman,  who  never  communicated  his  life,  but  by 
the  operations  of  his  belly  :  you  might  have  scene  in  his  house, 
set  out  for  a  show,  a  row  of  basins  for  seaven  or  eight  dayes. 
It  was  all  his  study,  it  was  all  his  talke :  All  other  discourses 
were  unsavory  to  him.  These  are  somewhat  more  civile, 
the  excrements  of  an  ould  spirit,  sometimes  hard,  sometimes 
laxative ;  but  ever  indigested.  And  when  shall  I  come  unto 
an  end  of  representing  a  continuall  agitation  or  uncessant 
alteration  of  my  thoughts,  what  subject  soever  they  happen 
upon  ;  since  Diornedes  filled  six  thousand  bookes  only  with 
the  subject  of  Grammar  ?  What  is  idle  babling  like  to  pro 
duce,  since  the  faltring  and  liberty  of  the  tongue  hath  stuft 
the  world  with  so  horrible  a  multitude  of  volumes  ?  So 
many  words  onely  for  words.  Oh  Pythagoras,  why  didst 
not  thou  conjure  this  tempest  ?  One  Galba  of  former  ages, 
being  accused  for  living  id  lie  ;  answered,  that  all  men  ought 
to  give  an  account  of  their  actions,  but  not  of  their  abiding. 
He  was  deceived:  for  justice  hath  also  knowledge  and 
animadversion  over  such  as  gather  stubble  (as  the  common 
saying  is)  or  looke  about  for  gape-seed.  But  there  should 
be  some  correction  appointed  by  the  lawes,  against  foolish 
and  unprofitable  writers,  as  there  is  against  vagabonds  and 
loiterers :  so  should  both  my  selfe  and  a  hundred  others  of 
2  A  185 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  our  people  be  banished.  It  is  no  mockerie :  Scribling 
IX  seemeth  to  be  a  Symthome  or  passion  of  an  irregular  and 
Of  Vanitie  iicentjOus  age.  When  writ  we  ever  so  much  as  we  have 
done  since  our  intestine  troubles  ?  or  when  filled  the 
Romans  so  many  volumes,  as  in  the  times  of  their  ruine  ? 
Besides  that,  the  refining  of  wits  in  a  common  wealth,  doth 
seldome  make  them  the  wiser :  this  idle  working  proceedeth 
of  this  that  all  men  doe  over  slowly  give  themselves  to  the 
office  of  their  function,  and  are  easily  withdrawne  from  it. 
The  corruption  of  the  times  we  live  in,  is  wrought  by  the 
particular  contribution  of  every  one  of  us :  some  conferre 
treason  unto  it,  some  injustice,  other  some  irreligion, 
tyranny,  avarice  and  cruelty  ;  according  as  they  are  more  or 
lesse  powerfull :  the  weaker  sort,  whereof  I  am  one,  imparte 
foolishnesse,  vanity  and  idlenesse  unto  it.  It  seemeth  to  bee 
the  season  of  vaine  things ;  when  the  domageable  presse  us. 
In  a  time,  where  to  doe  evill  is  common  :  to  doe  nothing 
profitable,  is  in  a  manner  commendable.  One  thing  comforts 
me,  that  I  shall  be  of  the  last,  that  shall  be  attached  :  whilst 
they  shall  provide  for  the  worser  sort  and  the  most  hurtfull, 
I  shall  have  leasure  to  amend  my  selfe :  For,  mee  thinkes  it 
would  bee  against  reason  busily  to  insist  and  pursue  petty 
inconveniences,  when  great  ones  infect  us.  And  the  Physi- 
tion  Philotimus,  to  one  that  offred  his  finger  to  dresse,  by 
whose  face,  looke  and  breath  he  apparantly  perceaved,  that 
he  had  an  impostume  in  his  loonges  ;  '  My  friend1  (quoth  he) 
'  It  is  now  no  fit  time  to  busie  your  selfe  about  your  navies.1 
Yet  concerning  this  purpose,  I  saw  not  many  yeares  since 
a  friend  of  mine,  whose  name  and  memory  (for  divers  re 
spects),  I  hould  in  singular  account,  who  in  the  midst  of 
our  troublous  mischiefes  :  when,  no  more  then  at  this  time, 
neither  lawe,  nor  justice,  nor  magistrate  was  executed  or  did 
his  office,  published  certaine  silly  reformations,  concerning 
the  excesse  of  apparell,  gluttony  and  dyet,  and  abuses  com 
mitted  among  petty-fogging  lawiers.  They  be  ammusings 
wherewith  a  people  in  a  desperate  taking  is  fed,  that  so  men 
may  say  they  are  not  cleane  forgotten.  Even  so  doe  these 
others,  who  mainely  apply  them  selves  to  forbid  certaine 
manners  of  speach,  dances  and  vaine  sports,  unto  a  people 
wholy  given  over  to  all  licenciousnesse  and  execrable  vices. 
186 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

i  / 

It  is  then  no  convenient  time  for  a  man  to  wash  and  netifie  CHAPTER 
himselfe  when  he  is  assailed  by  a  violent  fever.  It  onely  IX  t 
belongs  to  Spartans,  to  tricke,  to  combe  and  wash  themselves 
at  what  time  they  are  ready  to  cast  them  selves  into  some 
extreame  hazard  of  life.  As  for  me,  I  am  subject  to  this 
ill  custome,  that  if  but  a  pump  sit  not  handsomly  upon  my 
foot,  I  shall  also  neglect  my  shirt  and  my  cloake :  for  I  dis 
ci  aine  to  correct  my  selfe  by  halfes  :  when  I  am  in  bad  estate, 
I  flesh  my  selfe  on  evill  and  abandon  my  selfe  through 
despaire,  and  run  to  downefall,  and  (as  the  saying  is)  cast 
rthe  haft  after  the  hatchet.  I  grow  obstinate  in  empairing  ; 
and  esteeme  my  selfe  no  more  worthy  of  my  care,  eyther  all 
well  or  all  evill.  It  is  a  favour  to  me,  that  the  desolation 
of  our  state  doth  sutably  meet  with  the  desolation  of  my 
age :  I  rather  endure  that  my  evills  should  thereby  be  sur 
charged,  then  if  my  goods  had  thereby  beene  troubled.  The 
words  I  utter  against  misfortune,  are  words  of  spite.  My 
courage  insteed  of  yeelding,  doth  grow  more  obstinate ;  and 
contrary  to  others,  I  finde  my  selfe  more  given  to  devotion, 
in  prosperous  then  adverse  fortune  :  according  to  Xenophons 
rule,  if  not  according  to  his  reason.  And  I  rather  looke  on 
heaven  with  a  chearefull  eye,  to  thanke  it,  then  to  begge 
any  thing.  I  am  more  carefull  to  encrease  my  health  when 
it  smiles  upon  me,  then  to  recover  it  when  I  have  lost  it. 
Prosperities  are  to  me  as  discipline  and  instruction,  as  adver 
sities  and  crosses  are  to  others.  As  if  good  fortune  were 
incompatible  with  a  good  conscience,  men  never  become 
honest  but  by  adverse  and  crosse  chances.  Good  fortune 
is  to  me  a  singular  motive  unto  moderation,  and  forcible 
spurre  unto  modesty.  Prayers  winne  me,  menaces  reject 
me,  favours  relent  me,  feare  imperverseth  me.  Amongst  | 
humane  conditions,  this  one  is  very  common,  that  we  are' 
rather  pleased  with  strange  things  then  with  our  owne  : 
we  love  changes,  affect  alterations,  and  like  innovations. 

Ipsa  dies  ideo  nos  grato  perluit  haustu, 
Quod  permutatis  hora  recurrit  equis. 

Times  therefore  us  refresh  with  welcome  ayre, 
Because  their  houres  on  chang'd  horse  doe  repayre  : 

And    mv    share    is   therein.     Such    as    follow    the    other 

187 


Of  Vanitie 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  extremity,  onely  to  bee  well  pleased  with  and  in  themselves; 
and  selfe-conceitedly  to  over-esteeme  what  they  possesse 
above  others:  and  acknowledge  no  forme  fayrer,  then  that 
they  see :  if  they  bee  not  more  advised  then  we,  they  arej 
indeed  more  happy.  I  envie  not  their  wisedome,  but  grudge 
their  good  fortune  :  This  greedy  humour  of  new  and  un 
quenchable  desire  of  unknowne  things  dooth  much  increase 
and  nourish  in  me  a  desire  to  travel! :  but  divers  other  cir 
cumstances  conferre  unto  it.  I  am  well  pleased  to  neglect 
and  shake  of  the  government  of  mine  owne  household.  It 
is  some  pleasure  to  command,  were  it  but  a  mole-hill,  and  a 
delight  to  be  obaied.  But  it  is  a  pleasure  over-uniforme  and 
languishing.  Besides  that  it  is  ever  necessarily  intermixed 
with  troublous  cares,  and  hart-wearing  thoughts.  Some 
times  the  indigence  and  oppression  of  your  owne  people ; 
sometimes  the  contentions  and  quarels  of  your  neighbours, 
and  othertimes  their  insulting  and  usurpation  over  you,  doth 
vexe,  doth  trouble  and  afflict  you. 

HOR.  Car.  iii.  Aut  verberatce  grandine  vinece, 

Od,  i.  29.  Fundusque  mendax,  arbore  nunc  aquas 

Culpante,  nunc  torrentia  agros 

Sydera,  nunc  hyemev  iniquas. 

Or  Vineyards  beate  and  wet  with  haile  and  raine, 
Or  grounds  defrauding  hope,  while  trees  complaine  ; 
Sometime  of  waters,  sometime  of  those  starres, 
That  scorch  the  fields,  sometime  of  winters  warres. 

And  that  God  will  hardly  once  in  halfe  a  yeare  send  you  a 
season,  that  shall  throughly  please  your  Bayly,  and  content 
your  Receaver :  and  that  if  it  be  good  for  your  vines,  it  be 
not  hurtfull  for  your  meddowes. 

LUCRET.  v.  Aut  nimijs  torret  feruoribus  cetherius  Sol, 

215.  Aut  subiti  perimunt  imbres,  gelidceque  pruince 

Flabraque  ventorum  violento  turbine  vexent. 

Or  with  excessive  heate  heavens  Sunne  doth  toast, 
Or  sodaine  stormes  do  kill,  and  chilling  frost, 
Or  violent  whirle-wind  blasts  doe  vexe  the  coast. 

As  that  new  and  well-shapen  shoe  of  that  man  of  former 
ages,  which  hurts  and  wrings  your  foote :  and  that  a 
stranger  knowes  not  what  it  costes  you,  and  what  you  con 
tribute  to  maintaine  the  show  of  that  order,  which  is  scene 

188 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

in  jour  housholde :  and  which  peradventure  you  purchase  CHAPTER 
at  too  high  a  rate.  It  was  very  late  before  I  betooke  my  IX 
selfe  to  husbandrie.  Those  whom  nature  caused  to  be  borne 
before  mee,  have  long  time  ridde  mee  of  that  carefull 
burthen  :  I  had  already  taken  another  habite  more  sutable 
to  my  complexion.  Neverthelesse  by  that  I  have  observed 
therein,  I  finde  it  to  be  rather  a  troublesome,  then  a  hard 
occupation.  Whosoever  is  capable  of  any  other  thing,  may 
easily  discharge  that.  If  I  would  seeke  to  grow  rich  ;  that 
way  would  seeme  over-long  and  tedious  to  mee  :  I  would 
then  have  served  our  kings,  a  trade  more  beneficiall  then  all 
others ;  since  I  pretend  but  to  get  the  reputation,  that  as 
I  have  gotten  nothing,  so  have  I  not  wasted  any  thing ; 
sutable  to  the  rest  of  my  life  ;  as  unfit  to  affect  any  good, 
as  improper  to  worke  any  evill  of  consequence ;  and  that  I 
onely  seeke  to  weare  out  my  life,  I  may  (God  bee  thanked) 
doe  it  without  any  great  attention  :  if  the  worst  come  to 
passe,  before  poverty  assaile  you,  seeke  by  prevention  to  cut 
of  your  charges,  and  by  husbanding  your  expences  keepe 
aforehand  with  it ;  that  is  it  I  trust  unto,  and  hope  to 
reforme  my  selfe  before  it  come  neare  or  enforce  me  to  it. 
As  for  other  matters,  I  have  forestalled  many  degrees  and 
established  sundry  wayes  in  my  minde,  to  live  and  rubbe 
out  with  lesse  then  I  have.  I  say  to  live  with  contentment. 
Non  estimatione  census ',  verum  victu  atque  cultu,  terminatur  Cic.  Farad, 
pecunice  modus.  '  The  measure  of  money  is  lymited  not  by 
6  the  estimate  of  wealth  or  place,  but  by  the  manner  of 
'  living  and  other  furniture."  My  very  neede  doth  not  so 
precisely  possesse  my  whole  estate,  but  that  without  touch 
ing  to  the  quick  or  empairing  the  maine,  fortune  shall  finde 
something  to  play  upon,  or  take  hold  of.  My  very  presence 
as  ignorant  and  grim  as  it  is,  affordeth  much  helpe  to  my 
houshould  affaires  :  I  apply  my  selfe  thereunto  but  somewhat 
dispightfully :  considering  the  manner  of  my  house,  which 
is,  that  severally  to  burne  my  candle  at  one  end,  the  other 
is  thereby  nothing  spared.  Travels  do  not  much  hurt  me, 
were  it  not  for  the  charges,  which  are  exceeding  great  and 
beyond  my  ability  :  having  ever  beene  accustomed  to  jour 
ney  not  only  with  necessary,  but  also  decent  equipage :  and 
that's  the  reason  I  make  but  short  journeis  and  travel 

189 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  not  to  often:  wherein  I  imploy  but  the  scumme  and  what 
IX  I  Can  well  spare,  temporising  and  differing,  according  as  it 
vanitie  COmmeth  more  or  lesse.  I  will  not  have  the  pleasure  of  my 
wandring  to  corrupt,  the  delight  of  my  retiring.  Contrary- 
wise  my  intent  is,  that  they  nourish  and  favor  one  another. 
Fortune  hath  steaded  me  in  this,  that  since  my  chiefest  pro 
fession  in  this  life,  was  to  live  delicately  and  quietly,  and 
rather  negligently  then  seriously,  it  hath  deprived  me  of 
need  to  hoard  up  riches,  to  provide  for  the  multitude  of  my 
heires.  For  one,  if  that  be  not  sufficient  for  him,  wherewith 
I  have  lived  so  plentiously,  at  his  owne  perill  be  it.  His 
indiscretion  shall  not  deserve,  that  I  wish  him  more.  And 
every  man  (according  to  the  example  of  Phocion)  provideth 
sufficiently  for  his  children,  that  provideth  they  be  not  unlike 
to  him.  I  should  by  no  meanes  be  of  Crates  his  mind,  or 
commend  his  proceeding.  He  left  his  mony  with  a  banquier 
upon  this  condition  :  That  if  his  children  were  fooles  he 
should  deliver  it  them :  but  prooving  wise  and  able  to  shift 
for  themselves,  he  should  distribute  the  same  amongst  the 
greatest  fooles.  As  if  fooles  being  least  capable  to  make 
shift  without  it,  were  more  capable  to  use  riches.  So  it  is, 
that  the  hurt  proceeding  from  my  absence,  doth  not  (in 
mine  opinion)  deserve,  so  long  as  I  shall  have  meanes  to 
beare  it,  I  should  refuse  to  accept  the  occasions  that  offer 
themselves,  to  distract  mee  from  this  toylesome  assistance. 
There  is  ever  some  peece  out  of  square.  Sometimes  the 
businesse  of  one  house,  and  other  times  the  affaires  of  an 
other,  doe  hurry  you.  You  pry  too  neare  into  all  things : 
herein,  as  well  as  elsewhere,  your  perspicuity  doth  harme 
you.  I  steale  from  such  occasions  as  may  move  me  to 
anger :  and  remoove  from  the  knowledge  of  things,  that 
thrive  not :  yet  can  I  not  so  use  the  matter,  but  still  I 
stumble  (being  at  home)  upon  some  inconvenience,  which 
displeaseth  me.  And  slight  knaveries,  that  are  most  hidden 
from  mee  are  those  I  am  best  acquainted  with.  Some  there 
are,  which  to  avoyd  a  further  mischiefe,  a  man  must  helpe 
to  conceale  himselfe  :  vaine  prickings  (vaine  sometimes)  but 
yet  ever  prickings.  The  least  and  sleightest  hindrances,  are 
the  sharpest.  And  as  the  smallest  letters  hurt  our  '  eyes 
most,  so  the  least  affaires  grieve  us  most  :  A  multitude  of 
190 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

slender  evils  offendeth  more,  then  the  violence  of  one  alone,  CHAPTER 
how  great  soever.      Even  as  ordinary  thornes  being  small          Jx  >  . 
and  sharpe  pricke  us  more  sharpely  and  sans  threatning,  if 
on  a  sudden  we  hit  upon  them.     I  am  no  Philosopher:  Evils 
oppresse  me  according  as  they  waigh  ;  and  waigh  according 
to  their  forme,  as  wel  as  according  to  the  matter,  and  often 
more.     I  have  more  insight  in  them,  then  the  vulgar  sort ; 
and  so  have  I  more  patience.     To  conclude,  if  they  hurt  me 
not,  they  lie  heavie  upon  me.     Life  is  a  tender  thing,  and 
easie  to  be  distempered.     Since   I  began  to  grow  towards 
peevish  age,  and  by  consequence  toward  frowardnes,  nemo  SEN.  Ep.  i. 
enim  resistit  sibi  cum  ceperit  impelli ;  'For  no  man   stayes  J3  *• 
4  himself  when  he  is  set  on  going."     What  ever  fond  cause 
hath  brought  me  to  it ;  I  provoke  the  humour  that  way  : 
which   afterward  by  his  owne   motion  is  fostred  and  exas 
perated,  attracting  and  heaping  up  one  matter  upon  another, 
to  feede  it  selfe  withall. 

Stillicidij  casus  lapidem  cauat. 

By  often  falling  on, 

Even  water  breakes  a  stone. 

These  ordinary  distilling  drops  consume  and  ulcerate  me. 
Ordinary  inconveniences  are  never  light.  They  are  con- 
tinuall  and  irreparable,  if  they  continually  and  inseperatly 
aryse  from  the  members  of  husbandry.  When  I  consider 
my  affaires  a  farre  off,  and  in  grosse,  I  finde,  be  it  because  I 
have  no  exact  memory  of  them,  that  hitherto  they  have 
thrived  beyond  my  reasons  and  expectation.  Me  thinks  I 
draw  more  from  them,  then  there  is  in  them  :  their  good 
successe  betraieth  me.  But  am  I  waded  into  the  businesse  ? 
See  I  all  these  parcels  march  ? 

Turn  vero  in  curas  animum  deducimus  omnes.  VIRG.  /En.  \. 

Then  we  our  minde  divide,  ^2°' 

To  cares  on  every  side. 

A  thousand  things  therein  give  me  cause  to  desire  and  feare. 
Wholy  to  forsake  them  is  very  easie  unto  me ;  without  toyl- 
ing  and  vexation  altogether  to  apply  my  selfe  unto  them,  is 
most  hard.  It  is  a  pittyfull  thing,  to  be  in  a  place,  where 
whatsoever  you  see  doeth  set  you  a  worke  and  concerne 

191 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  you.  And  me  thinkes,  I  enjoy  more  blithly  and  taste  more 
1^.  choisely  the  pleasures  of  a  stranger  house,  then  of  mine 
mtie  owne  :  and  both  my  minde  and  taste  runne  more  freely 
and  purely  on  them.  Diogenes  answered  according  to  my 
humor,  when  being  demanded  what  kinde  of  Wine  he  liked 
best :  'Another  mans,"  said  he.  My  father  delighted  to  build 
at  Montaigne  where  he  was  borne :  and  in  al  this  policy  of 
domestick  affaires,  I  love  to  make  use  of  his  examples  and 
rules,  unto  which  I  will  as  much  as  possibly  I  can  tie  my 
successors.  Could  I  doe  better  for  him,  I  would  performe  it. 
I  glory  his  will  is  at  this  day  practised  by  mee,  and  doth  yet 
worke  in  me.  God  forbid  I  should  ever  suffer  any  image  of 
life  to  perish  under  my  hands,  that  I  may  yeeld  unto  so 
good  and  so  kinde  a  father.  If  I  have  undertaken  to  finish 
any  old  peece  of  wall,  or  repare  any  building  either  imperfect 
or  decaied  :  it  hath  certainly  beene,  because  I  had  rather  a 
respect  to  his  intention,  then  a  regard  to  my  contentment. 
And  I  blame  my  negligence  or  lithernesse,  that  I  have  not 
continued  to  perfect  the  foundations  he  had  laid,  or  begin 
nings  he  had  left  in  his  house :  by  so  much  the  more  because 
I  am  in  great  likelihood  to  be  the  last  possessor  of  it, 
namely  of  my  race,  and  set  the  last  hand  unto  it.  For, 
concerning  my  particular  application,  neither  the  pleasure 
of  building,  which  is  said  to  be  so  bewitching,  nor  hunting, 
nor  hawking,  nor  gardens,  nor  such  other  delights  of  a  re 
tired  life,  can  much  embusie  or  greatly  ammuse  me.  It  is  a 
thing  for  which  I  hate  my  selfe,  as  of  all  other  opinions, 
that  are  incommodious  to  me.  I  care  not  so  much  to  have 
them  vigorous  and  learned,  as  I  labour  to  have  them  easie 
and  commodious  unto  life.  They  are  indeed  sufficiently  true 
and  sound,  if  they  be  profitable  and  pleasing.  Those,  who 
hearing  mee  relate  mine  owne  insufficiencie  in  matters  per 
taining  to  husbandry  or  thrift,  are  still  whispering  in  mine 
eares,  that  it  is  but  a  kinde  of  disdaine,  and  that  I  neglect 
to  know  the  implements  or  tooles  belonging  to  husbandry  or 
tillage,  their  seasons  and  orders,  how  my  wines  are  made, 
how  they  graft,  and  understand  or  know  the  names  and 
formes  of  hearbes,  of  simples,  of  fruits,  and  what  belongs  to 
the  dressing  of  meats  wherewith  I  live  and  whereon  I  feede  ; 
the  names  and  prices  of  such  stuffes  I  cloath  my  selfe  withall, 
192 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

onely  because  I  doe  more  seriously  take  to  heart  some  higher  CHAPTER 
knowledge  ;  bring  me  in  a  manner  to  deaths  doore.     That  is          IX 
meere  sottishnesse ;    and  rather  brutishnesse  then  glory :   I 
would  rather  be  a  cunning  horseman,  then  a  good  Logician. 

Quin  tu  aliquid  saltern  potius  quorum  indiget  mus,  Vu&G.Buc.  Eel. 

Viminibus  mollique  paras  detexere  iunco  ?  ii-  71- 

Why  rather  with  soft  wings  make  you  not  speed,, 
To  worke-up  something,  whereof  there  is  need  ? 

Wee  hinder  our  thoughts  from  the  generall  and  maine 
point,  and  from  the  causes  and  universall  conducts  :  which 
are  very  well  directed  without  us,  and  omit  our  owne  busi- 
nesse  :  and  Michael,  who  concernes  us  neerer  then  man. 
Now  I  most  commonly  stay  at  home,  but  I  would  please  my 
selfe  better  there,  then  any  where  else. 

Sit  mea  sedes  utinam  senectee,  HOR.  Car.  ii. 

Sit  modus  lasso  maris,  et  viarum,  Od.  vi.  6. 

— Militiceque. 

Some  repaire  and  rest  to  mine  old  age  I  crave, 
lournying,  failing,  with  a  weary  warring, 
O  let  an  end  have. 

I  wot  not  whether  I  shall  come  to  an  end  of  it.  I  would 
that  in  lieu  of  some  other  part  of  his  succession,  my  father 
had  resigned  that  passionate  love  and  deare  affection,  which 
in  his  aged  yeeres  he  bare  unto  his  houshold  husbandry. 
He  was  very  fortunate,  in  conforming  his  desires  unto  his 
fortune,  and  knew  how  to  be  pleased  with  what  he  had. 
Politike  Philosophy  may  how  it  list  accuse  the  basenesse 
and  blame  the  sterilitie  of  my  occupation,  if  as  he  did,  I 
may  but  once  finde  the  taste  of  it.  I  am  of  this  opinion, 
that  the  honorablest  vacation,  is  to  serve  the  Common 
wealth,  and  be  profitable  to  many.  Fructus  enim  ingenij  et  CICER.  Amic. 
virtutis,  omnisque  prcestantiae,  turn  maximus  accipitur,  quum  in 
proximum  quemque,  confertur.  '  For  then  is  most  fruit  reaped, 
'  both  of  our  wit  and  vertue,  and  all  other  excellencie,  when 
4  it  is  bestowed  upon  our  neighbours.1  As  for  me,  I  depart 
from  it :  partly  for  conscience  sake :  (for  whence  I  discern 
the  waight,  concerning  such  vacations,  I  also  discover  the 
slender  meanes  I  have  to  supply  them  withall :  And  Plato  a 
master  workeman  in  all  politike  government,  omitted  not 
2B  193 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  to  abstaine  from  them)  partly  for  lithernesse.  I  am  well 
pleased  to  enjoy  the  world,  without  troubling  or  pressing 
Vamtie  my  sejfe  wjth  it :  to  live  a  life,  onely  excusable :  and  which 
may  neither  bee  burthensome  to  mee,  nor  to  any  other. 
Never  did  man  goe  more  plainly  and  carelesly  to  worke  in 
the  care  and  government  of  a  third  man,  then  I  would, 
had  I  a  ground  to  worke  upon.  One  of  my  wishes  at  this 
instant,  should  be  to  finde  a  sonne  in  Jaw,  that  could  hand 
somely  allure  and  discreetly  beguile  my  old  yeeres,  and  lull 
them  asleepe :  into  whose  hands  I  might  despose,  and  in  all 
soveraignty  resigne  the  conduct  and  managing  of  my  goods : 
that  he  might  dispose  of  them  as  I  doe,  and  gaine  upon 
them  what  I  gaine  :  alwaies  provided  he  would  but  carry  a 
truly-thankfull  and  friendly  minde.  But  what  ?  we  live  in 
a  world,  where  the  loyalty  of  our  owne  children  is  not 
knowen.  Whosoever  hath  the  charge  of  my  purse  when  I 
travell,  hath  it  freely  and  without  controll :  as  well  might 
he  decive  me  in  keeping  of  reckonings.  And  if  he  be  not  a 
Divell,  I  bind  him  to  deale  well  and  honestly,  by  my  care- 
lesse  confidence.  Multifallere  docuerunt,  dum  timentfalli,  et 
alijs  ius  peccatidi  mspwando  fecerunt.  '  Many  have  taught 
4  others  to  deceive,  while  themselves  feare  to  be  deceived, 
'  and  have  given  them  just  cause  to  offend,  by  suspecting 
'  them  unjustly.1  The  most  ordinary  assurance  I  take  of 
my  people,  is  a  kinde  of  disacknowledge  or  neglect :  I  never 
presume  vices,  but  after  I  have  seene  them  :  and  trust  more 
yoong  men,  such  as  I  imagine  to  be  least  debaushed  and 
corrupted  by  ill  examples.  I  had  rather  heare  at  two 
months  end,  that  I  have  spent  foure  hundred  crownes,  then 
every  night  when  I  should  goe  to  my  quiet  bed,  have  mine 
eares  tired  and  my  minde  vexed  with  three,  five,  or  seven. 
Yet  in  this  kinde  of  stealing,  have  I  had  as  little  stolne 
from  mee  as  any  other :  True  it  is,  I  lend  a  helping  hand  to 
ignorance.  I  wittingly  entertaine  a  kinde  of  troubled  and 
uncertaine  knowledge  of  my  money  :  untill  it  come  to  a  cer- 
taine  measure  I  am  content  to  doubt  of  it.  It  is  not  amisse 
if  you  allow  your  boy  or  servant  some  small  scope  for  his 
disloyalty  and  indiscretion.  If  in  grosse  we  have  sufficiently 
left  to  bring  our  matters  to  passe,  this  excesse  of  fortunes- 
liberalitie,  let  us  somewhat  more  suffer  it  to  stand  to  her 
194- 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

mercie;  It  is  the  gleaners  fee.     After  all,  I  esteeme  not  so  CHAPTER 

much  my  peoples  fidelity,  as  I  disesteeme  their  injurie.     Oh       .   IX. 

base  and  absurd  study,  for  a  man  to  study  his  money,  and    ()f  Vamtie 

please  himselfe  with  handling  and  counting  the  same  :  for 

that 's  the  way  whereby  covetousnesse  maketh  her  approches. 

Since  eighteene  yeeres,  that  I  have  had  the  full  disposing  of 

my  goods  in  mine  owne  hands,  I  could  never  yet  be  brought 

to  overlooke,  neither  titles  nor  bookes,  no  not  so  much  as 

the  principall  affaires,  that  should  necessarily  passe  thorow 

my  knowledge  and  care. 

It  is  no  Philosophicall  contempt,  to  neglect  worldly  and 
transitorie  things :  my  taste  is  not  so  exquisitely  nice ;  for  I 
value  them  according  to  their  worth  at  least :  but  trulv  it  is 
an  inexcusable  slothfulnesse  and  childish  negligence.  What 
would  I  not  rather  doe,  then  reade  a  contract  ?  And  more 
willingly,  as  a  slave  to  my  businesse,  with  carke  to  over 
looke,  and  care  to  survay  a  company  of  old-dusty  bookes, 
and  plod  upon  musty  writings  ?  and  which  is  worse,  other 
mens,  as  so  many  doe  daily  for  money  ?  I  have  nothing  so 
deare  as  care  and  paine :  and  I  onely  endeavour  to  become 
carelesse  and  retchlesse.  I  had,  in  mine  opinion,  been  fitter 
(if  it  might  be)  to  live  by  others  fortune,  without  bound  en 
duty  or  bondage.  And  yet  I  wot  not  (the  matter  being 
thorowly  sifted)  whether  according  to  my  humour  and  for 
tune,  what  I  must  endure  with  my  affaires,  and  pocket  up  at 
my  servants  and  familiars  hands,  hath  not  more  abjection, 
importunitie  and  sharpenesse,  then  the  following  of  another 
man  should  have,  better  borne  then  my  selfe,  and  who 
should  give  me  somewhat  at  mine  ease.  Servitus  obedientia  Cic.  Farad,  v. 
estjracti  animi  et  abjecti,  arbitrio  carentis  suo :  '  Service  is  an 
'  obedience  of  an  abject  broken  heart,  that  cannot  dispose 
'  of  it  selfe."  Crates  did  worse,  who  voluntarily  cast  himselfe 
into  liberties  of  povertie,  only  to  ridd  himselfe  of  the  incon 
veniences,  indignities  and  cares  of  his  house.  Which  I  would 
not  doe,  I  hate  povertie  as  much  as  griefe  ;  yet  could  I  finde 
in  my  heart  to  change  this  manner  of  life  with  another  lesse 
glorious  and  not  so  troublesome.  Being  absent,  I  discharge 
my  selfe  of  all  such  carefull  thoughts,  and  should  lesse  feele 
the  ruinous  downe-fall  of  a  Towne,  then  being  present,  the 
fall  of  a  Tile.  Alone  my  minde  is  easily  freed,  but  in  com- 

195 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  pany  it  indureth  as  much  as  a  Plough-mans.     My  horse 

IX          uncurbM,  his  reines  misplaced,  or  a  stirrup  or  a  strap  hitting 

Of  Vamtie    agamst  my  legge,  will  keepe  me  in  a  checke  a  whole   day 

long.    I  rouze  my  courage  sufficiently  against  inconvenience; 

mine  eies  I  cannot. 

Sensus  6  superi  sensus  I 

At  home  I  am  ever  answerable  for  whatsoever  is  amisse. 
Few  masters  (I  speake  of  meane  condition,  as  mine  is  ; 
whereof  if  any  be,  they  are  the  more  happie)  can  so  fully 
rely  upon  a  second,  but  still  a  good  part  of  the  burden  shall 
lie  upon  them.  That  doth  perad venture  take  something  from 
my  fashion,  in  entertaining  of  guests  or  new  commers ;  and 
happily  I  have  beene  able  to  stay  some,  more  by  my  kitchin, 
then  by  my^  behaviour  or  grace :  as  doe  the  peevish  and 
fantasticall :  and  I  greatly  diminish  the  pleasure  I  should 
take  in  my  house,  by  the  visitations  and  meetings  of  my 
friends.  No  countenance  is  so  foolish,  or  so  ill  beseeming 
a  gentleman  in  his  owne  house,  as  to  see  him  vexed  or 
troubled  about  his  houshold  or  domesticke  affaires  :  to  see 
him  whisper  one  of  his  servants  in  the  eare,  and  threaten 
another  with  his  looke.  It  should  insensibly  glide-on,  and 
represent  an  ordinary  course.  And  I  utterly  dislike,  that  a 
man  should  entertaine  his  guest  with  either  excusing,  or 
boasting  of  the  entertainment  he  affoordeth  them.  I  love 
order  and  cleanlinesse, 

HOR.  i.  Epist.  — et  cantharus  et  laux, 

v.  23.  Ostendunt  mihi  me. 

My  dish,,  my  drinking  kanne, 
Shew  me  what  kinde  of  man, 

well  nigh  as  much  as  plentie  :  In  mine  owne  house  I  exactly 
looke  unto  necessitie,  little  unto  state,  and  lesse  unto  orna 
ment.  If  your  neighbours  servant  be  fighting  with  his  com 
panion,  if  a  dish  be  overthrowen,  you  but  laugh  at  it,  you 
sleepe  quietly  whilst  Sir  such  a  one  is  busie  casting  up  of 
accounts,  and  over-seeing  his  stocke  with  his  steward,  and 
all  about  your  provision  for  to-morrow.  I  speake  according 
to  mine  opinion  :  omitting  not  in  generall  to  thinke,  how 
pleasing  an  ammusement  it  is  to  certaine  natures,  to  see  a 
196 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

quiet  and  prosperous  houshold,  directed  by  a  formall  and  CHAPTER 
guided  by  a  regular  order.  But  not  intending  to  fasten  ^ 
mine  owne  errours  and  inconveniences  to  the  matter :  Nor  to 
gaine-say  Plato,  who  deemeth  that  the  happiest  occupation 
any  man  can  follow,  is,  to  apply  himselfe  to  his  owne  pri 
vate  businesse,  without  injustice.  When  I  journey,  I  have 
nothing  to  care  for  but  my  selfe,  and  how  my  money  is  laid 
out,  which  is  disposed  with  one  onely  precept.  Over-many 
parts  are  required  in  hoarding  and  gathering  of  goods  :  I 
have  no  skill  in  it.  In  spending,  I  have  some  knowledge, 
and  how  to  give  my  expences  day  :  which  indeed  is  it 's 
principall  use.  But  I  attend  it  over  ambitiously,  which 
makes  it  both  unequall  and  deformed :  and  besides  thafe  im 
moderate  in  one  and  other  usage.  If  it  appeare  and  make 
a  good  shew,  if  it  serve  the  turne,  I  indiscreetly  goe  after 
it :  and  as  indiscreetly  restraine  my  selfe,  if  it  shine  or  smile 
not  upon  mee.  Whatsoever  it  bee,  either  Art  or  nature, 
that  imprints  this  condition  of  life  into  us,  by  relation  to 
others,  it  doth  us  much  more  hurt  then  good.  In  going 
about  to  frame  apparances  according  to  the  common  opinion, 
wee  defraud  our  selves  of  our  owne  profits.  Wee  care  not  so 
much,  what  our  state,  or  how  our  being  is  in  us,  and  in 
effect,  as  wee  doe  how  and  what  it  is,  in  the  publike  know 
ledge  of  others.  Even  the  goods  of  the  minde,  and  wisedome 
it  selfe,  seeme  fruitlesse  unto  us,  if  onely  enjoyed  by  us :  ex 
cept  it  be  set  forth  to  the  open  view  and  approbation  of 
strangers.  There  are  some,  whose  gold  runnes  by  streames 
in  places  under  ground,  and  that  imperceptible  :  others  ex 
tend  the  same  in  plates  and  leaves  :  So  that  to  some,  pence 
are  worth  crownes,  to  others  the  contrary  :  the  world  judging 
the  employment  and  value,  according  to  the  outward  shew. 
All  over-nice  care  and  curious  heed  about  riches,  hath  a  touch 
or  a  taste  of  avarice.  Even  their  dispending  and  over 
regular  and  artificiall  liberalities  are  not  worth  a  warie  heed 
taking,  and  countervaile  not  a  painefull  diligence.  Who  so 
will  make  his  expence  even  and  just,  makes  it  strict  and 
forced :  either  close-keeping  or  employing  of  money,  are  in 
themselves  things  indifferent,  and  admit  no  colour  of  good 
or  evill,  but  according  to  the  application  of  our  will.  The 
other  cause  that  drawes  me  to  these  lourneyes  or  Vagaries,  is 

'  197 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  dissent  or  disparitie  in  the  present  manners  of  our  state. 
IX          I  could  easily  comfort  my  selfe  with  this  corruption,  in  regard 
Of  Vanitie    of  the  pMfre  interest ; 

IUVEN.  Sat.  — pejoraque  seculaferri, 

xiii.  28.  Temporibus,  quorum  sceleri  non  invenit  ipsa 

Nomen,  et  a  nullo  posuit  natura  metallo. 
Times  worse  then  times  of  Iron,  for  whose  bad  frame 
And  wickednesse  even  nature  findes  no  name, 
Nor  hath  from  any  metall  set  the  same  ; 

but  not  for  mine  owne :  I  am  in  particular  over-pressed 
by  it.  For  round  about  where  I  dwell  we  are,  by  the  over- 
long  licentiousnesse  of  our  intestine  civill  warres,  almost 
growen  old,  in  so  licentious  and  riotous  a  forme  of  state, 

VIRG.  Georg.  Quippe  ubifas  versum  atque  nefas. 

lm  5°5-  As  where  of  good  and  bad, 

There  is  no  difference  had, 

that  in  good  truth,  it  were  a  wonder,  if  it  should  continue 
and  maintaine  it  selfe. 

VIRG.  sEn.  ix.  Armati  terram  exercent,  semperque  recentes 

612.  Convectare  iuvat  pradas,  et  vivere  rapto. 

They  armed  plow  the  land,  and  joy  to  drive, 
And  draw  new  booties,  and  on  rapine  live. 

To  conclude,  I  see  by  our  example,  that  the  societie  of 
men  doth  hold  and  is  sewed  together,  at  what  rate  soever  it 
be :  where  ever  they  be  placed,  in  mooving  and  closing,  they 
are  ranged  and  stowed  together ;  as  uneven  and  rugged 
bodies,  that  orderlesse  are  hudled  in  some  close  place,  of 
themselves  finde  the  way  to  be  united  and  joyned  together 
one  with  another :  and  many  times  better,  then  Art  could 
have  disposed  them.  King  Philip  assembled  a  rabble  of  the 
most  leaud,  reprobate  and  incorrigible  men  he  could  finde 
out,  all  which  he  placed  in  a  Citie,  which  of  purpose  he  had 
caused  to  be  built  for  them,  of  whom  it  bare  the  name.  I 
imagine,  that  even  of  their  vices,  they  erected  a  politike  con 
texture  amongst  themselves,  and  a  commodious  and  just 
societie.  I  see  not  one  action,  or  three,  or  a  hundred,  but 
even  divers  manners,  admitted  and  commonly  used  :  so  ex 
travagant  (namely  in  disloyalty)  and  so  barbarous  in  in- 
humanitie,  which  in  my  conceit,  are  the  worst  and  most 
198 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

execrable  kinde  of  vices,  that  I  have  not  the  heart  so  much  CHAPTER 
as  to  conceive  them  without  horrour :  All  which  I  in  a  IX 
manner  admire  as  much  as  I  detest.  The  exercise  of 
these  egregious  villanies,  beareth  a  brand  of  vigour  and 
hardinesse  of  minde,  as  much  as  of  error  and  irregular 
confusion.  Necessitie  composeth,  and  assembleth  men  to 
gether.  This  casuall  combining  is  afterward  framed  into 
lawes.  For,  there  have  beene  some  as  barbarously-savage 
as  humane  opinion  could  possible  produce,  which  not 
withstanding  have  kept  their  bodies  in  as  good  health  and 
state,  in  long  life,  as  those  of  Plato  or  Aristotle  could  doe. 
And  to  say  true,  all  these  descriptions  of  policie,  fained  by 
Art  and  supposition,  are  found  ridiculous  and  foolish,  to  bee 
put  in  practise.  These  great  and  long  continuing  alterca 
tions,  about  the  best  forme  of  societie,  and  most  commodious 
rules  to  unite  us  together,  are  altercations  onely  proper  for 
the  exercise  of  our  wit :  As  in  arts,  divers  subjects  are  found, 
that  have  no  essence  but  in  agitation  and  disputing,  without 
which  they  have  no  life  at  all.  Such  an  Idea  of  policie,  or 
picture  of  government,  were  to  be  established  in  a  new 
world  ;  but  we  take  a  world  already  made  and  formed  to 
certaine  customes :  wee  engender  not  the  same  as  Pyrrha, 
nor  beget  it  as  Cadmus.  By  what  meanes  soever  we  have  the 
privilege  to  re-erect  and  range  the  same  anew,  we  can  very 
hardly  wrest  it  from  the  accustomed  habit  and  fold  it  hath 
taken,  except  we  breake  all.  Solon  being  demanded,  whether 
hee  had  established  the  best  lawes  he  could  for  the  Athenians  : 
answered,  Yea  of  those  they  would  have  received  :  with  such 
a  shift  doth  Varro  excuse  himselfe  ;  saying,  that  if  he  were 
newly  to  beginne  to  write  of  religion,  he  would  plainly  tell 
what  his  beleefe  were  of  it :  But  being  alreadie  received,  he 
will  speake  more  of  it  according  to  custome,  then  to  nature. 
Not  to  speake  by  opinion,  but  consonant  to  truth,  the  most 
excellent  and  best  policie,  for  any  nation  to  observe,  is  that 
under  which  it  hath  maintained  it  selfe.  It  "s  forme  and 
essentiall  commoditie  doth  much  depend  of  custome.  We 
are  easily  displeased  with  the  present  condition  :  yet  doe  I 
hold  that  to  wish  the  government  of  few,  in  a  popular  estate  : 
or  in  a  Monarchic,  another  kinde  of  policie,  it  is  a  manifest 
vice  and  meere  follic. 

199 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Ayme  I'estat  tel  que  tu  le  wis  estre,  PIBRAC. 

IX  S'il  est  royally  ay  me  la  royaute, 

Of  Vanitie  &M  esi  de  pen,  ou  bien  communaute, 

Ayme  I'aussi,  car  Dieu  t'y  afaict  naistre. 
Love  thou  the  state,  as  thou  seest  it  to  be, 
If  it  be  Regall,  love  the  royall  race, 
If  of  a  few,  or  Common-weale,  embrace 
It  as  it  is,  borne  there  God  pointed  thee. 

So  was  the  good  Lord  of  Pibrac  wont  to  speake  of  it,  whom 
we  have  lately  lost,  a  man  of  so  quaint  and  rare  wit,  of  so 
sound  judgement,  and  of  so  milde  and  affable  behaviour.  The 
untimely  losse  of  whom,  with  that  of  the  Lord  of  Foix,  both 
fatally  happning  to  us  at  one  time,  are  surely  losses  of  great 
consequence  unto  our  crowne.  I  wot  not  well,  whether 
France,  amongst  all  the  men  it  hath  left,  is  able  to  affoord  us 
two  such  other  Gentlemen,  as  may  either  in  sincerity  and 
woorth,  or  in  sufficiencie  and  judgement,  for  the  counsell  of 
our  Kings  match  these  two  Gascoynes.  They  were  two 
mindes  diversly  faire,  and  verily,  if  we  respect  the  corrupted 
age  wherein  we  live,  both  rare  and  gloriously-shining,  every 
one  in  her  forme.  But  alas,  what  destiny  had  placed  them 
on  the  Theater  of  this  age,  so  dissonant  and  different  in  pro 
portion  from  our  deplorable  corruption,  and  so  farre  from 
agreeing  with  our  tumultuous  stormes  ?  Nothing  doth  so 
neerely  touch  and  so  much  overlay  an  estate,  as  innovation : 
Onely  change  doth  give  forme  to  injustice,  and  scope  to 
tyranny.  If  some  one  peece  be  out  of  square,  it  may  be 
underpropt :  one  may  oppose  himselfe  against  that,  which 
the  alteration  incident,  and  corruption  naturall  to  all  things, 
doth  not  too  much  elonge  and  draw  us  from  our  beginnings 
and  grounded  principles  :  But  to  undertake  to  re-erect  and 
found  againe  so  huge  a  masse,  and  change  or  remoove  the 
foundations  of  so  vast  a  frame,  belongeth  onely  to  them, 
who  instead  of  purging,  deface  and  in  liew  of  cleansing, 
scrape  out :  that  will  amend  particular  faults  by  an  uni- 
versall  confusion,  and  cure  diseases  by  death :  Non  tarn  com- 
mutandarum  quam  evertendarum  rerum  cupidi.  '  Not  so 
4  desirous  to  have  things  altered,  as  overthrowen.''  The 
world  is  fondly  unapt  to  cure  it  selfe  :  So  impatient  with  that 
which  vexeth  or  grieveth  it,  that  it  only  aimeth  to  ridd  it 
selfe  of  it,  never  regarding  at  what  rate.  Wee  see  by  a 
200 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

thousand  examples,  that  it  doth  ordinarily  cure  it  selfe  at  CHAPTER 
it's  owne  charges  :  To  be  freed  from  a  present  evill,  is  no  IX 
perfect  cure,  except  there  be  a  generall  amendment  of  condi-  Vamtie 
tion.  The  end  of  a  skilfull  Chirurgion,  is  not  to  mortifie  the 
bad  flesh,  it  is  but  the  beginning  and  addressing  of  his  cure  : 
he  aimeth  further,  that  is,  to  make  the  naturall  to  grow 
againe,  and  reduce  the  partie  to  his  due  being  and  quality. 
Who  ever  proposeth  onely  to  remoove  what  gnaweth  him 
shall  be  to  seeke  :  for  good  dooth  not  necessarily  succeed 
evill :  another,  yea  a  worse  evill  may  succeed  it.  As  it 
hapned  unto  Cesars  murderers,  who  brought  the  common 
wealth  to  so  distresfull  a  plunge,  that  they  repented  them 
selves  they  ever  medled  with  the  same.  The  like  hath  since 
fortuned  to  divers,  yea  in  our  daies.  The  French  that  live 
in  my  times,  know  very  well  what  to  speake  of  such  matters. 
All  violent  changes  and  great  alterations,  disorder,  distemper 
and  shake  a  state  very  much.  He  that  should  rightly  respect 
a  sound  recovery  or  absolute  cure,  and  before  all  other 
things  thorowly  consult  about  it,  might  happily  grow  slacke 
in  the  businesse  and  beware  how  he  set  his  hand  unto  it. 
Pacuvius  Calavius  corrected  the  vice  of  this  manner  of  pro 
ceeding  by  a  notable  example.  His  fellow  Citizens  had 
mutined  against  their  magistrates.  He  being  a  man  of 
eminent  authority  in  the  cittie  of  Capua,  found  one  day 
the  meanes  to  shut  up  the  Senate  in  the  Guildhall  or  Palace, 
then  calling  the  people  together  in  the  market  place,  told 
them,  that  the  day  was  now  come,  wherein  with  full  and 
unresisted  liberty,  they  might  take  vengeance  of  the  tyrants, 
that  had  so  long  and  so  many  wayes  oppressed  them,  all 
which  he  had  now  at  his  mercy,  alone  and  unarmed.  His 
opinion  was,  that  orderly  by  lots,  they  should  be  drawne  out 
one  after  another :  which  done  they  might  particularly  dis 
pose  of  every  one :  and  whatsoever  should  be  decreed  of 
them,  should  immediately  be  executed  upon  the  place  ;  pro 
vided  they  should  therewithall  presently  advise  and  resolve 
to  nominate  and  establish  some  honest  and  undetected  man, 
to  supply  the  roome  of  the  condemned,  lest  their  cittie 
should  remaine  void  of  due  officers.  To  which  they  granted, 
and  heard  no  sooner  the  name  of  a  Senatour  read,  but  a  loud 
exclamation  of  a  generall  discontent  was  raised  against  him  : 
2  C  201 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which  Pacuvius  perceiving,  he  requested  silence, and  thus  be- 
IX  spake  them.  My  country-men,  I  see  very  well,  that  man 
Of  Vamtie  mus^  ^e  cu^  off^  nee  is  a  pernicious  and  wicked  member ; 
but  let  us  have  another  sound  good  man  in  his  place  ;  and 
whom  would  you  name  for  that  purpose  ?  This  unexpected 
speech  bred  a  distracted  silence  ;  each  one  finding  himselfe 
to  seeke  and  much  confounded  in  the  choise.  Yet  one,  who 
was  the  boldest  impudent  amongst  them,  nominated  one 
whom  he  thought  fittest ;  who  was  no  sooner  heard,  but  a 
generall  consent  of  voices,  louder  then  the  first,  followed,  all 
refusing  him :  as  one  taxed  with  a  hundred  imperfections, 
lawfull  causes  and  just  objections,  utterly  to  reject  him. 
These  contradicting  humours  growing  more  violent  and 
hot,  every  one  following  his  private  grudge  or  affection, 
there  ensued  a  farre  greater  confusion  and  hurly-burly  in 
drawing  of  the  second  and  third  Senatour,  and  in  naming  and 
choosing  their  successours,  about  which  they  could  never 
agree.  As  much  disorder  and  more  confusion  about  the 
election,  as  mutuall  consent  and  agreement  about  the  demis 
sion  and  displacing.  About  which  tumultuous  trouble,  when 
they  had  long  and  to  no  end  laboured  and  wearied  them 
selves,  they  began  some  here,  some  there,  to  scatter  and 
steale  away  from  the  assemblie :  every  one  with  this  resolu 
tion  in  his  minde,  that  the  oldest  and  best  knowen  evill,  is 
ever  more  tolerable,  then  a  fresh  and  unexperienced  mischiefe. 
By  seeing  our  selves  piteously  tossed  in  continuall  agitation  : 
for  what  have  we  not  done  ? 

HOR.  Car.  i.  Eheu  cicatricum  et  sceleris  pudet, 

Od.  xcv.  33.  Fratrumque :  quid  nos  dura  refugimus 

dStas  ?  quid  intactum  nefasti 

Liquimus  ?  unde  manus  iuventus 

Metu  Deorum  continuit  ?  quibus 

Pepercit  aris  ? 

Alas  for  shame  of  wickednesse,  and  scarres 

Of  brother-country-men  in  civill  warres. 

We  of  this  hardned  world,  what  doe  we  shunne  ? 

What  have  we  execrable  left  undone  ? 

To  set  their  hand  whereto  hath  youth  not  dared 

For  feare  of  Gods  ?  what  altars  hath  it  spared  ? 

I  am  not  very  sudden  in  resolving  or  concluding. 
202 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

TER.  Adel  —ipsa  si  velit  salus,  CHAPTER 

act.  iv.  sc.7.          Servare  prorsus  non  potest  hancfamiliam :  jx 

This  familie  if  safetie  would  Of  Vanitie 

Keepe  safe,  I  doe  not  thmke  it  could. 

Yet  are  we  not  peradventure  come  unto  our  last  period. 
The  preservation  of  states,  is  a  thing  in  all  likelihood  ex 
ceeding  our  understanding.  A  civill  policie  (as  Plato  saith) 
is  a  mighty  and  puisant  matter,  and  of  very  hard  and  diffi 
cult  dissolution ;  it  often  endureth  against  mortall  and  in 
testine  diseases:  yea  against  the  injury  of  unjust  lawes, 
against  tyrannie,  against  the  ignorance  and  debordement  of 
Magistrates,  and  against  the  licentiousnesse  and  sedition  of 
the  people.  In  all  our  fortunes,  we  compare  our  selves  to 
that  which  is  above  us,  and  looke  toward  those  that  are 
better.  Let  us  measure  our  selves  by  that  which  is  beneath 
us,  there  is  no  creature  so  miserably  wretched,  but  findes  a 
thousand  examples  to  comfort  himselfe  withall.  It  is  our 
fault,  that  we  more  unwillingly  behold  what  is  above  us,  then 
willingly  what  is  beneath  us.  And  Solon  said,  that  should 
a  man  heape  up  in  one  masse  all  evils,  together,  there  is 
none,  that  would  not  rather  chuse  to  carry  back  with  him 
such  evils  as  he  alreadie  hath,  then  come  to  a  lawfull  division 
with  other  men  of  that  chaos  of  evils  and  take  his  allotted 
share  of  them.  Our  Common-wealth  is  much  crazed,  and 
out  of  tune.  Yet  have  divers  others  beene  more  dangerously 
sicke,  and  have  not  died.  The  gods  play  at  hand-ball  with 
us,  and  tosse  us  up  and  downe  on  all  hands.  Enim  uero  dij  PLAUT.  Capt. 
nos  homines  quasi  pilas  habent.  '  The  gods  perdie  doe  reckon  Pro1- 
'  and  racket  us  men  as  their  tennis-balles/  The  destinies 
have  fatally  ordained  the  state  of  Rome,  for  an  exemplar 
patterne  of  what  they  can  doe  in  this  kinde.  It  containeth 
in  it  selfe  all  formes  and  fortunes  that  concerne  a  state : 
whatsoever  order  trouble,  good  or  bad  fortune  mav  in  any 
sort  effect  in  it.  What  man  may  justly  despaire  of  *  his  con 
dition,  seeing  the  agitations,  troubles,  alterations,  turmoiles 
and  motions,  wherewith  it  was  tossed  to  and  fro,  and  which 
it  endured  ?  If  the  extention  of  rule,  and  far-spreading 
domination,  be  the  perfect  health  of  a  state,  of  which  opinion 
I  am  not  in  any  wise  (and  Isocrates  doth  greatly  please  me, 
who  instructeth  Nicocles,  not  to  envie  those  Princes,  who 

203 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  have  large  dominations,  but  such  as  can  well  maintaine  and 
IX  orderly  preserve  those  that  have  beene  hereditarily  escheated 
f  Vamtie  un^o  them)  that  of  Rome  was  never  so  sound,  as  when  it  was 
most  sicke  and  distempered.  The  worst  of  it's  forme,  was  to 
it  the  most  fortunate.  A  man  can  hardly  distinguish  or 
know  the  image  of  any  policie  under  the  first  Emperors  :  it 
was  the  most  horrible  and  turbulent  confusion  that  could  be 
conceaved,  which  notwithstanding  it  endured  and  therein  con 
tinued,  preserving,  riot  a  Monarchic  bounded  in  her  limits, 
but  so  many  nations,  so  different,  so  distant,  so  evill  affected, 
so  confusedly  commanded,  and  so  unjustly  conquered. 

LucRET.i.  82.  — nee  gentibus  ullis 

Commodat  in  populum  terrce  pelagique  potentem, 
Invidiam  fortuna  mam. 

Fortune  doth  to  no  other  nation  lend 
Envie,,  against  that  people  force  to  bend, 
Which  both  by  land  and  sea  their  force  extend. 

All  that  shaketh  doth  not  fall :  The  contexture  of  so  vast  a 
frame  holds  by  more  then  one  naile.  It  holds  by  it's  anti 
quity  :  as  olde  buildings,  which  age  hath  robbed  of  founda 
tion,  without  loame  or  morter,  and  neverthelesse  live  and 
subsist  by  their  owne  waight. 

Ibid.  138.  — nee  iam  validis  radicibus  hcerens 

Pondere  tuta  ,mo  est. 

Though  now  to  no  strong  roote  it  sticke  so  fast, 
Yet  is  it  safe  by  selfe-waight,  and  will  last. 

Moreover  he  goes  not  cunningly  to  worke,  that  onely  sur- 
vayes  the  flankes  and  dykes  :  to  judge  well  of  the  strength  of 
a  place  ;  he  must  heedily  marke  how,  and  view  which  way  it 
may  be  approached,  and  in  what  state  the  assailant  stand. 
Few  vessels  sinke  with  their  owne  waight,  and  without  some 
extraordinary  violence.  Cast  we  our  eyes  about  us,  and  in  a 
generall  survay  consider  all  the  world  ;  all  is  tottring,  all  is 
out  of  frame.  Take  a  perfect  view  of  all  great  states  in 
Christendome  and  where  ever  else  we  have  knowledge-of, 
and  in  all  places  you  shall  finde  a  most  evident  threatning 
of  change  and  ruine  : 

Et  sua  sunt  illis  incommoda,  parque  per  omnes 
Tempestas. 
204 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Their  discommodities  they  know  :  CHAPTER 

One  storme  alike  ore  all  doth  grow.  IX 

Of  Vanitie 

Astrologers  may  sport  themselves,  with  warning  us,  as  they 
doe  of  imminent  alterations  and  succeeding  revolutions  :  their 
divinations  are  present  and  palpable,  wee  need  not  prie  into 
the  heavens  to  finde  them  out.  Wee  are  not  only  to  draw 
comfort  from  this  universall  aggregation  of  evill  and  threats ; 
but  also  some  hope  for  the  continuance  of  our  state  :  for- 
somuch  as  naturally  nothing  falleth,  where  all  things  fall : 
a  generall  disease  is  a  particular  health  :  Conformitie  is  a 
qualitie  enemie  to  dissolution.  As  for  me,  I  nothing  despaire 
of  it,  and  me  thinks  I  already  perceive  some  starting  holes 
to  save  us  by  : 

Deus  hcBcfortasse  benigna  HOR-  EP°d- 

Reducet  in  sedem  vice.  xm-  IO- 

It  may  be,  God  with  gracious  entercourse 
Will  re-establish  these  things  in  their  course. 

Who  knowes,  whether  God  hath  determined  it  shall  happen 
of  them,  as  of  bodies  that  are  purged,  and  by  long  grievous 
sicknesses  brought  to  a  beter  and  sounder  state ;  which 
thorowly  purged  diseases  do  afterward  yeeld  them  a  more 
entire  and  purely-perfect  health,  then  that  they  tooke  from 
them  ?  That  which  grieveth  me  most,  is,  that  counting  the 
symptomes  or  affects  of  our  evill,  I  see  as  many  meerely  pro 
ceeding  of  nature,  and  such  as  the  heavens  send  us,  and  which 
may  properly  be  termed  theirs,  as  of  those  that  our  owne 
surfet,  or  excesse,  or  misse-diet,  or  humane  indiscretion  con 
fer  upon  us.  The  very  Planets  seeme  orderly  to  declare  unto 
us,  that  we  have  continued  long  enough,  yea  and  beyond  our 
ordinary  limits.  This  also  grieves  me,  that  the  neerest  evill 
threatning  us,  is  not  a  distemper  or  alteration  in  the  whole 
and  solide  masse,  but  a  dissipation  and  divulsion  of  it :  the 
extreamest  of  our  feares.  And  even  in  these  fantasticall 
humors  or  dotings  of  mine,  I  feare  the  treason  of  my  memory, 
least  unwarily  it  have  made  me  to  register  somethings  twise. 
I  hate  to  correct  and  agnize  my  selfe,  and  can  never  endure 
but  grudgingly  to  review  and  repolish  what  once  hath 
escaped  my  pen.  I  heere  set  downe  nothing  that  is  new  or 
lately  found  out.  They  are  vulgar  imaginations  ;  and  which 

205 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  peradventure  having  beene  conceived  a  hundred  times,  I 
IX  feare  to  have  already  enrolled  them.  Repetition  is  ever 
Of  Vanitie  ^e Jjous?  Were  it  in  Homer :  But  irkesome  in  things,  that 
have  but  one  superficiall  and  transitorie  shew.  I  am  nothing 
pleased  with  inculcation  or  wresting-in  of  matters,  be  it  in 
profitable  things,  as  in  Seneca.  And  the  maner  of  his  Stoike 
schoole  displeaseth  me,  which  is,  about  every  matter,  to 
repeat  at  large,  and  from  the  beginning  to  the  end,  such 
principles  and  presuppositions,  as  serve  in  generall :  and 
every  hand-while  to  re-allege  anew  the  common  arguments, 
and  universall  reasons.  My  memorie  doth  daily  grow  worse 
and  worse,  and  is  of  late  much  empaired : 

HOR.  Epod.  Pocula  lethceos  ut  si  ducentia  somnos, 

xiv-  3-  — Arentefauce  traxerim. 

As  though  with  drie  lips  I  had  drunke  that  up, 
Which  drawes  oblivious  sleepe  in  drowsie  cup. 

I  shall  henceforward  be  faine  (for  hitherto  thankes  be  to  God, 
no  capitall  fault  hath  hapned)  whereas  others  seeke  time  and 
occasion,  to  premeditate  what  they  have  to  say,  that  I  avoid 
to  prepare  my  selfe,  for  feare  I  should  tie  my  selfe  to  some 
strict  bond,  on  which  I  must  depend.  To  be  bound  and  tied 
doth  somewhat  distract  me  :  namely  when  I  am  wholly  to 
rely  and  depend  on  so  weake  an  instrument,  as  is  my  memory. 
I  never  read  this  story,  but  I  feele  a  certaine  proper  and 
naturall  offence.  Lyncestes  being  accused  of  a  conspiracie 
against  Alexander,  the  very  same  day,  that  according  to 
custome,  he  was  led  forth  in  presence  of  all  the  armie,  to  be 
heard  in  his  ovvne  defence,  had  in  his  minde  a  premeditated 
oration,  which  he  had  studiously  learn't  by  rote,  whereof, 
stammering  and  faltring,  having  uttered  some  words  :  And 
wrestling  with  his  memory,  and  striving  to  run-it  over  againe, 
he  was  sodainly  charged  by  the  souldiers  that  were  about 
him  and  slaine  with  pikes  ;  as  they  who  held  him  to  be  con 
victed.  His  amazement  and  silence,  served  them  as  a  con 
fession.  For  they  supposed  that  having  had  so  long  leasure 
in  prison  to  prepare  himselfe,  it  was  not  (as  they  thought)  his 
memory  failed  him,  but  his  guilty  conscience  bridled  so  his 
tongue  and  deprived  him  of  his  wonted  faculties.  It  was 
truly  wel  spoken.  The  very  place,  the  company  and  expecta- 
206 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

tion  astonieth  a  man,  when  he  most  aimeth  at  an  ambition  CHAPTER 
of  well-speaking.  What  can  a  man  doe,  when  a  meere  IX 
oration  shall  bring  his  life  into  consequence  ?  As  for  mee, 
if  I  bee  tide  unto  a  prescript  kinde  of  speaking,  what  bindes 
me  to  it,  dooth  also  loose  me  from  it,  when  I  have  committed 
and  wholly  assigned  my  selfe  unto  my  memory  :  I  so  strongly 
depend  on  the  same,  that  I  overwhelme  it :  she  faints  under 
her  owne  burthen.  So  much  as  I  refer  my  selfe  unto  her,  so 
much  am  I  divided  from  my  selfe  :  untill  I  make  try  all  of 
my  countenance.  And  I  have  sometimes  beene  in  paine,  in 
concealing  the  bondage  whereunto  I  was  engaged  :  whereas 
my  dessigne,  in  speaking,  to  represent  a  maine  carelesnesse 
of  accent  and  countenance,  suddaine  and  unpremeditated,  or 
casuall  motions  as  rising  of  present  occasions  ;  rather  loving 
to  say  nothing  of  any  worth,  then  make  shew  I  came  pro 
vided  to  speake  well :  a  thing  above  all  unseemely,  to  men 
of  my  profession,  and  of  over  strict  an  obligation,  to  one 
that  cannot  hold  much  :  Preparation  gives  more  to  hope 
then  it  brings  with  it.  A  man  doth  often  strip  himselfe 
into  his  doblet,  to  leape  shorter  then  he  did  in  his  gowne. 
Nihil  est  his,  qui  placere  volunt,  tarn  adversarium,  quam  ex- 
pectatio.  '  There  is  none  so  great  an  enemy,  to  them  that 
'  would  please,  as  expectation.1  It  is  written  of  Curio  the 
Orator,  that  when  he  proposed  the  distribution  of  the  parts 
of  his  oration,  into  three  or  foure,  or  the  number  of  his 
arguments  and  reasons,  it  was  his  ordinary  custome,  either 
to  forget  some  one,  or  adde  one  or  two  more  unto  it.  I  have 
ever  shunned  to  fall  into  such  an  inconvenience  :  as  one 
hating  these  selfe-promises  and  prescriptions  :  Not  onely  for 
the  distrust  of  my  memory,  but  also  because  this  forme 
drawes  over  neare  unto  an  artiste.  Simpliciora  militares 
decent.  'Plaine  wordes  and  manners  become  Martialists/ 
Sufficeth,  I  have  now  made  a  vow  unto  my  selfe,  no  more  to 
undertake  the  charge,  to  speake  in  any  place  of  respect :  For 
to  speake  in  reading  what  one  hath  written  :  besides  that  it 
is  most  foolish  and  absurde,  it  is  a  matter  of  great  disadvan 
tage  to  such  as  by  nature  were  interressed  or  might  do  any 
thing  in  the  action.  And  wholy  to  rely  or  cast  my  selfe  to 
the  mercy  of  my  present  invention,  much  lesse  :  I  have  it 
by  nature  so  dull  and  troubled,  that  it  cannot  in  any  wise 

207 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  supply  me  in  sudaine,  and  stead  me  in  important  necessities. 
IX .  .  May  it  please  the  gentle  reader,  to  suffer  this  one  part  of 
Of  Vanitie  j]ssay  £o  run  on?  an(j  this  third  straine  or  addition  of  the 
rest  of  my  pictures  peeces.  I  adde,  but  I  correct  not :  First, 
because  he  who  hath  hypothekised  or  engaged  his  labour  to 
the  world,  I  finde  apparance,  that  he  hath  no  longer  right  in 
the  same  :  let  him,  if  hee  be  able,  speake  better  els  where, 
and  not  corrupt  the  worke  he  hath  already  made  sale  off ; 
Of  such  people,  a  man  should  buy  nothing,  but  after  they 
are  dead :  let  them  throughly  thinke  on  it,  before  they  pro 
duce  the  same.  Who  hastens  them  ?  My  booke  is  alwaies 
one  :  except  that  according  as  the  Printer  goes  about  to 
renew  it,  that  the  buyers  depart  not  altogether  empty- 
handed  ;  I  give  my  selfe  law  to  adde  thereto  (as  it  is  but 
uncoherent  cheeky,  or  ill  joined  in  laid  worke)  some  super- 
numerall  embleme.  They  are  but  over-waights,  which  dis 
grace  not  the  first  forme,  but  give  some  particular  price  unto 
every  one  of  the  succeeding,  by  an  ambitious  pety  subtility. 
Whence  notwithstanding,  it  may  easily  happen,  that  some 
transposition  of  chronology  is  thereto  commixt :  my  reports 
taking  place  according  to  their  opportunity,  and  not  ever  ac 
cording  to  their  age.  Secondly,  forsomuch  as  in  regard  of  my 
selfe,  I  feare  to  loose  by  the  exchange :  My  understanding  doth 
not  alwaies  goe  forward,  it  sometimes  goes  also  backeward  : 
I  in  a  manner  distrust  mine  owne  fantasies  as  much,  though 
second  or  third,  as  I  doe  when  they  are  the  first,  or  present, 
as  past.  We  many  times  correct  our  selves  as  foolishly,  as 
we  taxe  others  unadvisedly.  I  am  growne  aged  by  a  number 
of  yeares  since  my  first  publications,  which  were  in  a  thousand 
five  hundred  and  foure  score.  But  I  doubt  whether  I  be 
encreased  one  inch  in  wisedome.  My  selfe  now,  and  my  selfe 
anon,  are  indeede  two  ;  but  when  better,  in  good  sooth  I 
cannot  tell.  It  were  a  goodly  thing  to  bee  old,  if  wee  did 
onely  march  towards  amendment.  It  is  the  motion  of  a 
drunkard,  stumbling,  reeling,  giddie-brain'd,  formeles,  or  of 
reedes,  which  the  ayre  dooth  causually  wave  to  and  fro,  what 
way  it  bloweth.  Antiochus  in  his  youth,  had  stoutly  and 
vehemently  written  in  favor  of  the  Academy,  but  being  olde 
he  changed  copy,  and  writ  as  violently  against  it :  which  of 
the  two  I  should  follow,  should  I  not  ever  follow  Antiochus? 
208 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Having  once  established  a  doubt,  to  attempt  to  confirme  the  CHAPTER 
certainty  of  humane  opinions,  were  it  not  an  establishing  of  IX 
a  doubt,  and  not  of  the  certainty  ?  and  promise,  that  had  he 
had  another  age  given  him  with  assurance  to  live,  he  should 
ever  have  beene  in  termes  of  new  agitations  ;  not  so  much 
better,  as  other  and  different  ?  Publike  favor  hath  given  me 
some  more  boldnes,  then  I  hoped  for  :  but  the  thing  I  feare 
most,  is  to  breed  a  glutting  saciety :  I  would  rather  spur, 
then  bee  weary.  As  a  wiseman  of  my  time  hath  done. 
Commendation  is  ever  pleasing,  from  whom,  from  whence,  or 
wherefore  soever  it  come  :  yet  ought  a  man  to  be  informed 
of  the  cause,  if  he  will  justly  please  and  applaud  himselfe 
therewith.  Imperfections  themselves  have  their  meanes  to 
be  recommended.  Vulgar  and  common  estimation,  is  little 
happy  if  it  come  to  encounter  :  And  I  am  deceived,  if  in  my 
dayes,  the  worst  compositions  and  absurdest  bookes  have 
not  geined  the  credit  of  popular  breath.  Verily  I  am  much 
beholding  to  divers  honest  men,  and  I  thanke  them,  that 
vouchsafe  to  take  my  endeavours  in  good  parte.  There  is  no 
place  where  the  defects  of  the  fashion  doe  so  much  appeare, 
as  in  a  matter,  that  in  it  selfe  hath  nothing  to  recommend 
it.  Good  reader  blame  not  me,  for  those  that  passe  here, 
either  by  the  fantazie  or  unwarinesse  of  others  :  for  every 
hand,  each  workeman,  brings  his  owne  unto  them.  I  neither 
meddle  with  orthography  (and  would  onely  have  them  follow 
the  ancient)  nor  with  curious  pointing  :  I  have  small  experi 
ence  in  either.  Where  they  altogether  breake  the  sence,  I 
little  trouble  my  selfe  therewith  ;  for  at  least  they  discharge 
me.  But  where  they  will  wrest-in  and  substitute  a  false 
sence  (as  often  they  doe)  and  wyre-draw  me  to  their  conceits, 
then  they  spoyle  me.  Neverthelesse,  when  the  sentence  is 
not  strong  or  sinnowy  according  to  my  meaning,  an  honest 
man  may  reject  it  to  be  mine.  He  that  shall  know  how 
little  laborious  I  am  and  how  framed  after  mine  owne  fashion, 
will  easily  beleeve,  I  would  rather  endite  anew,  as  many  more 
other  Essayes,  then  subject  my  selfe  to  trace  these  over 
againe,  for  this  childish  correction.  I  was  saying  erewhile 
that  being  plunged  in  the  deepest  mine  of  this  new  kinde  of 
rnettall,  I  am  not  onely  deprived  of  great  familiarity  with 
men  of  different  custome  from  mine  ;  and  other  opinions,  by 
2  D  209  " 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  which  they  holde  together  by  a  knot,  commanding  all  other 
IX  knots  :  but  am  not  also  without  some  hazard,  amongst  those, 
Of  Vamtie  w--j.j1  wnom  au  things  are  equally  lawfull  :  most  of  which 
cannot  now  adayes  empaire  their  market  towarde  our  justice  : 
whence  the  extreme  degree  of  licenciousnesse  proceedeth. 
Casting  over  all  the  particular  circumstances  that  concerne 
mee,  I  finde  no  one  man  of  ours,  to  whome  the  inhibition  of 
our  lawes  costeth  any  thing,  eyther  in  gaine  ceasing,  or  in 
losse  appearing  (as  Lawyers  say)  more  then  unto  my  selfe. 
And  some  there  be,  that  in  chollericke  heate  and  humorous 
fury  will  cracke  and  vaunt  much,  that  will  performe  a  great 
deale  lesse  then  my  selfe,  if  once  wee  come  to  an  equall 
ballance.  As  a  house  at  all  times  freely  open,  much 
frequented,  of  great  haunt  and  officious  in  entertaining  all 
sorts  of  people  (for  I  could  never  bee  induced,  to  make  an 
implement  of  warre  thereof:  which  I  perceive  much  more 
willingly  to  bee  sought-out  and  flocked  unto,  where  it  is 
furthest  from  my  neighbours)  my  house  hath  merited  much 
popular  affection  :  And  it  were  a  hard  matter  to  gourmandize 
my  selfe  upon  mine  owne  dung-hill :  And  I  repute  it  a  won- 
derfull  and  exemplar  strangenesse,  that  having  undergone  so 
many  stormy-wrackes,  so  divers  changes  and  tumultuous- 
neighbour  agitations,  it  doth  yet  this  day  continue  free,  and 
(as  I  may  say)  an  undefiled  virgin  from  shedding  of  blood, 
spoile  or  sacking.  For,  to  say  true,  it  was  possible  for  a  man 
of  my  disposition  to  escape  from  a  constant  and  continuall 
forme,  whatsoever  it  was.  But  the  contrary  invasions,  hostile 
incursions,  alterations  and  vicissitudes  of  fortune,  round 
about  me,  have  hitherto  more  exasperated,  then  mollified 
the  humour  of  the  country  :  and  recharge  mee  with  dangers 
and  invincible  difficulties.  I  have  escaped.  But  it  grieveth 
me  that  it  is  rather  by  fortune,  yea  and  by  my  discretion, 
then  by  justice  :  And  it  vexeth  me,  to  bee  without  the  pro 
tection  of  the  lawes  and  under  any  other  safegard,  then 
theirs.  As  things  now  stand,  I  live  more  then  halfe  by  the 
favour  of  others  ;  which  is  a  severe  obligation.  I  would  not 
be  endebted  for  my  safety,  neither  to  the  goodnesse,  nor  to 
the  good  will  of  our  great  men,  which  applaude  themselves 
with  my  liberty  and  legalitie,  nor  to  the  facilitie  of  my  pre- 
decessours,  or  mine  owne  manners  :  for,  what  if  I  were  other 
210 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

then  I  am  ?  If  my  demeanour,  the  libertie  of  my  conver-  CHAPTER 
sation,  or  happilie  alliance,  binde  my  neighbours  ;  It  is  a  IX 
cruelty  that  they  should  acquit  themselves  of  it,  in  suffering  Of  Vanitie 
me  to  live,  and  that  they  may  say ;  Wee  give  him  a  free  and 
an  undisturbed  continuation  of  divine  service,  in  the  chaple 
of  his  house,  whilst  all  other  Churches  round  about  are  by 
us  prophaned  and  deserted  :  and  we  freely  allow  and  pardon 
him  the  fruition  of  his  goods,  and  use  of  his  life,  as  hee  main- 
taineth  our  wives,  and  in  time  of  need  keepeth  our  cattle. 
It  is  long  since  that  in  my  house,  we  have  a  share  in 
Lycurgus  the  Athenians  praise,  who  was  the  generall  storier, 
depositary  and  guardian  of  his  fellow-citizens  goods  and 
purses.  I  am  now  of  opinion,  that  a  man  must  live  by  law 
and  authoritie,  and  not  by  recompence  or  grace.  How  many 
gallant  men  have  rather  made  choise  to  lose  their  life,  then 
be  indebted  for  the  same  ?  I  shunne  to  submit  my  selfe  to  airy 
manner  of  obligation  :  But  above  all,  to  which  bindes  me  by 
duty  of  bonds  of  honour.  I  finde  nothing  so  deare,  as  what 
is  given  mee  :  and  that  because  my  will  remaines  engaged  by 
a  title  of  ingratitude  :  And  I  more  willingly  receive  such 
offices,  as  are  to  be  sold.  A  thing  easie  to  bee  beleeved  ;  for 
these  I  give  nothing  but  money ;  but  for  those,  I  give  my 
selfe.  The  bond  that  holdes  me  by  the  law  of  honestie, 
seemeth  to  me  much  more  urgent  and  forcible,  then  that  of 
civill  compulsion.  I  am  more  gently  tyed  by  a  Notarie,  then 
by  my  selfe.  Is  it  not  reason,  that  my  conscience  bee  much 
more  engaged  to  that,  wherein  she  hath  simply  and  onely 
beene  trusted  ?  Els,  my  faith  oweth  nothing  ;  for  she  hath 
nothing  lent  her.  Let  one  helpe  himselfe  with  the  con 
fidence  or  assurance  he  hath  taken  from  me.  I  would  much 
rather  breake  the  prison  of  a  wall  or  of  the  lawes,  then  the 
bond  of  my  word.  I  am  nicely  scrupulous  in  keeping  of  my 
promises,  nay  almost  superstitious  ;  and  in  all  subjects  I 
commonly  passe  them  uncertaine  and  conditionall.  To  such 
as  are  of  no  weighty  consequence,  I  adde  force  with  the 
jealousie  of  my  rule  :  shee  rackes  and  chargeth  me  with  her 
owne  interest.  Yea,  in  such  enterprises  as  are  altogether 
mine  owne  and  free,  if  I  speake  the  word,  or  name  the  point, 
mee  thinkes  I  prescribe  the  same  unto  me  :  and  that  to  give 
it  to  anothers  knowledge,  it  is  to  preordaine  it  unto  himselfe. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Me  seemes  I  absolutely  promise,  when  I  speake.     Thus  I 

IX          make  but  small  bragge  of  my  propositions.     The  condemna- 

amtie    tion  I  make  of  my   selfe,  is  more   mooving,  forcible  and 

severe,  then  that  of  the  judges,  who  onely  take  me  by  the 

countenance  of  common  obligation  :    the  constraint  of  my 

conscience   is    more  rigorous   and    more    strictly   severe :    I 

faintly  follow  those  duties,  to  which  I  should  bee  haled,  if 

Cic.  Off.  i.  I  did  not  goe  to  them.  Hoc  ipsum  ita  justum  est  quod  recte 
fit,  si  voluntarium.  'This  is  so  just,  as  it  is  well  done,  if  it 
'  be  voluntary.'  If  the  action  have  no  glimps  of  libertie,  it 
hath  neither  grace  nor  honour. 


TER.  Ad.  act. 
iii.  sc.  4. 


Quid  me  ius  cogit,  vix  voluntate  impetrent. 

What  law  enforceth  me  to  doe, 

By  will  they  can  scarse  winne  me  to. 


Where  necessitie  drawes  me,  I  love  to  relent  my  will.  Qua 
quicquid  imperio  cogitur,  exigenti  magis^  quam  prcestanti 
acceptum  refertur.  '  For  whatsoever  is  enforced  by  com- 
'  mand,  is  more  imputed  to  him  that  exacteth  then  in  him 
'  that  performeth.'  I  know  some,  that  follow  this  aire  even 
unto  injustice  :  They  will  rather  give,  then  restore  ;  sooner 
lend,  then  pay ;  and  more  sparingly  doe  good  to  him,  to 
whom  they  are  bound  to  doe  it.  I  bend  not  that  way,  but 
am  mainely  against  it.  I  love  so  much  to  disoblige  and 
discharge  my  selfe,  that  I  have  sometimes  esteemed  as  profit, 
the  ingratitudes,  the  offences,  and  indignities  I  had  received 
of  those,  to  whom  either  by  nature  or  accidents,  I  was  by 
way  of  friendship  somewhat  beholding  :  taking  the  occasion 
of  their  fault  for  a  quittance  and  discharge  of  my  debt. 
Although  I  continue  to  pay  them  the  apparent  offices  with 
common  reason ;  I  notwithstanding  finde  some  sparing  in 
doing  that  by  j  ustice,  which  I  did  by  affection ;  and  some 
what  to  ease  my  self  with  the  attention  and  diligence  of  my 
Cic.  De  Amic.  inward  will.  Est  prudentis  sustinere  ut  cursum,  sic  impetum 
benevolentice.  '  It  is  a  wisemans  part  to  keepe  a  hand  as  on  the 
course,  so  on  the  career  of  his  goodwill':  Which  where  ever 
I  apply  my  selfe,  is  in  me  too  urgent  and  over  pressing :  at 
least  for  a  man  that  by  no  meanes  would  be  en  thronged. 
Which  husbandrie  stands  mee  in  stead  of  some  comfort,  about 
the  imperfections  of  those  that  touch  me.  Indeed  I  am  much 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

displeased,  they  should  thereby  be  of  lesse  worth :  but  so  it  CHAPTER 
is  that  I  also  save  something  of  my  engagement  and  applica-  *x .  . 

tion  towards  them.  I  allow  of  him  that  loves  his  childe  so 
much  the  lesse,  by  how  much  more  he  is  either  deformedly 
crooked,  or  scald-headed  :  And  not  onely  when  he  is  knavish 
or  shrewd,  but  also  being  unluckie  or  ill  borne  (for  God 
himselfe  hath  in  that  abated  of  his  worth  and  naturall 
estimation)  alwaies  provided,  that  in  such  a  cold  and  sleight 
affection,  hee  beare  himselfe  with  moderation  and  exact  jus 
tice.  In  mee,  proximitie  of  blood  doth  nothing  diminish, 
but  rather  aggravate  defects.  After  all,  according  to  the 
skill  I  have  in  the  knowledge  of  benefits  and  thankfulnesse, 
which  is  a  knowledge  very  subtill  and  of  great  use,  I  see  no 
man  more  free  and  lesse  indebted,  then  hitherto  I  am  my 
selfe.  What  ever  I  owe,  the  same  I  owe  simply  to  common 
and  naturall  obligations.  There  is  no  man  more  absolutely 
quit  and  cleare  else  whence. 

— nee  sunt  mihi  nota  potentum 
Munera. 

With  gifts  I  am  not  much  acquainted, 
Of  mighty  men,  and  much  lesse  tainted. 

Princes  give  mee  sufficiently,  if  they  take  nothing  from  me, 
and  doe  me  much  good,  if  they  doe  me  no  hurt :  it  is  all  I 
require  of  them.  Oh  how  much  am  I  beholding  to  God, 
forsomuch  as  it  hath  pleased  him,  that  whatsoever  I  enjoy, 
I  have  immediately  received  the  same  from  his  grace :  that 
he  hath  particularly  reserved  all  my  debt  unto  himselfe.  I 
most  instantly  beseech  his  sacred  mercy,  that  I  may  never 
owe  any  man  so  much  as  one  essential!  God  amercie.  Oh 
thrise  fortunate  libertie,  that  hath  brought  me  so  farr. 
May  it  end  successefully.  I  endevour  to  have  no  manner 
of  need  of  any  man.  In  me  omnis  spes  est  mihi.  '  All  my 
4  hope  for  all  my  helpes  is  my  selfe/  It  is  a  thing  that  every 
man  may  effect  in  himselfe  :  but  they  more  easily,  whom 
God  hath  protected  and  sheltred  from  naturall  and  urgent 
necessities.  Indeed  it  is  both  lamentable  and  dangerous,  to 
depend  of  others.  Our  selves,  which  is  the  safest  and  most 
lawfull  refuge,  are  not  very  sure  under  our  selves.  I  have 
nothing  that  is  mine  owne,  but  my  selfe  :  yet  is  the  posses- 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  sion  thereof  partly  defective  and  borrowed.  I  manure  my 
J^  selfe,  both  in  courage  (which  is  the  stronger)  and  also  in 
Of  Vanitie  fortune5  that  if  all  things  else  should  forsake  me,  I  might 
finde  something,  wherewith  to  please  and  satisfie  my  selfe. 
Eleus  Hippias  did  not  onely  store  himselfe  with  learning 
that  in  time  of  need  hee  might  joyfully  withdraw  himselfe 
amongst  the  Muses,  and  be  sequestred  from  all  other  com 
pany  :  nor  onely  with  the  knowledge  of  Philosophic,  to 
teach  his  minde  to  be  contented  with  her,  and  when  his 
chance  should  so  dispose  of  him,  manfully  to  passe  over  such 
incommodities,  as  exteriorlie  might  come  unto  him.  But 
moreover  he  was  so  curious  in  learning  to  dresse  his  meat, 
to  notte  his  haire,  to  make  his  cloathes,  breeches  and  shoes, 
that  as  much  as  could  possibly  be,  he  might  wholly  relie  and 
trust  to  himself,  and  be  freed  from  all  forraine  helpe.  A 
man  doth  more  freely  and  more  blithely  enjoy  borrowed 
goods :  when  it  is  not  a  bounden  jovissance  and  constrained 
through  neede :  and  that  a  man  hath  in  his  will  the  power, 
and  in  his  fortune  the  meanes  to  live  without  them.  I 
know  my  selfe  well.  But  it  is  very  hard  for  me  to  imagine 
any  liberalitie  of  another  body  so  pure  towards  me,  or  sup 
pose  any  hospitalitie  so  free,  so  hartie  and  genuine,  as  would 
not  seeme  affected,  tyrannicall,  disgraced  and  attended -on 
by  reproach,  if  so  were  that  necessitie  had  forced  and  tied 
me  unto  it.  As  to  give  is  an  ambitious  qualitie,  and  of  pre 
rogative,  so  is  taking  a  qualitie  of  submission.  Witnes  the 
injurious  and  pick-thanke  refusall,  that  Bajazeth  made  of 
the  presents  which  Themir  had  sent  him.  And  those  which 
in  the  behalfe  of  Soliman  the  Emperour  were  sent  to  the 
Emperour  of  Calicut,  did  so  vex  him  at  the  heart,  that  he 
did  not  only  utterly  reject  and  scornfully  refuse  them  ;  say 
ing,  that  neither  himselfe  nor  his  predecessors  before  him, 
were  accustomed  to  take  any  thing,  and  that  their  office  was 
rather  to  give,  but  besides  he  caused  the  Ambassadors,  to 
that  end  sent  unto  him,  to  be  cast  into  a  deepe  dungeon. 
When  Thetis  (saith  Aristotle)  flattereth  lupiter :  when  the 
Lacedemonians  flatter  the  Athenians,  they  doe  not  thereby 
intend  to  put  them  in  minde  of  the  good  they  have  done 
them,  which  is  ever  hatefull,  but  of  the  benefits  they  have 
received  of  them.  Those  I  see  familiarly  to  employ  and 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

make  use  of  all  men,  to  begge  and  borrow  of  all  men,...alid  CHAPTER 
engage  themselves  to  all  men,  would  doubtlesse  never  doe  it,  IX 

knew  they  as  I  doe,  or  tasted  they  as  I  have  done,  the  sweet 
content  of  a  pure  and  undepending  libertie :  and  if  there- 
withall  (as  a  wiseman  ought)  they  did  duly  ponder  what  it 
is  for  a  man  to  engage  himselfe  into  such  an  obligation,  or 
libertie  depriving  bond.  It  may  happily  be  paid  sometimes, 
but  it  can  never  be  utterly  dissolved.  It  is  a  cruell  bond 
age,  to  him  that  loveth,  throughly  and  by  all  meanes  to 
have  the  free  scope  of  his  libertie.  Such  as  are  best  and 
most  acquainted  with  me,  know,  whether  ever  they  saw  any 
man  living,  lesse  soliciting,  lesse  craving,  lesse  importuning 
or  lesse  begging,  then  I  am,  or  that  lesse  employeth  or 
chargeth  others,  which  if  I  be,  and  that  beyond  all  moderne 
example,  it  is  no  great  wonder,  sithence  so  many  parts  of 
my  humours  or  manners  contribute  thereunto.  As  a  natu- 
rall  kind  of  stubbornnesse,  an  impatience  to  be  denied,  a  con 
traction  of  my  desires  and  desseignes ;  and  an  insufficiencie 
or  untowardlinesse  in  all  manner  of  affaires  ;  but  above  all, 
my  most  favoured  qualities,  lethall  sloathfulnesse,  and  a 
genuine  liberty.  By  all  which  meanes,  I  have  framed  an 
habite  mortally  to  hate,  to  be  beholding  to  any  creature  els, 
or  to  depend  of  other,  then  unto  and  of  my  selfe.  True  it  is, 
that  before  I  employ  the  beneficence  or  liberality  of  an 
other,  in  any  light  or  waighty  occasion,  small  or  urgent 
neede  soever:  I  doe  to  the  utmost  power  employ  all  that 
ever  I  am  able,  to  avoid  and  forbeare  it.  My  friends  doe 
strangelie  importune  and  molest  me,  when  they  solicitie  and 
urge  me  to  entreate  a  third  man.  And  I  deeme  it  a  matter 
of  no  lesse  charge  and  imputation,  to  disingage  him  that  is 
endebted  unto  me,  by  making  use  of  him,  then  to  engage 
my  selfe  unto  him  that  oweth  me  nothing.  Both  which 
conditions  being  removed,  let  them  not  looke  for  any 
combersome,  negotious  and  carefull  matter  at  my  hands  (for 
I  have  denounced  open  warre  unto  all  manner  of  carke  and 
care)  I  am  commodiously  easie  and  ready  in  times  of  any 
bodies  riecessitie.  And  I  have  also  more  avoyded  to  receive, 
then  sought  to  give :  which  (as  Aristotle  saith)  is  also  more 
facile.  My  fortune  hath  afforded  me  small  meanes  to  benefit 
others,  and  that  little  she  hath  bestowed  on  me,  the  same 

215 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  hath  she  also  meanely  and  indifferently  placed.  Had  shee 
*x .  .  made  mee  to  be  so  borne  that  I  might  have  kept  some  ranke 
mtie  amongst  men,  I  would  then  have  beene  ambitious  in  procur 
ing  to  be  beloved,  but  never  to  be  feared  or  admired.  Shall 
I  expresse  it  more  insolentlie  ?  I  would  have  had  as  much 
regard  unto  pleasing,  as  unto  profiting.  Cyrus  doth  most 
wiselie,  and  by  the  mouth  of  an  excellent  Captaine  and  also 
a  better  Philosopher,  esteeme  his  bountie  and  praise  his 
good  deedes,  farre  beyond  his  valour  and  above  his  warlike 
conquests.  And  Scipio  the  elder  wheresoever  hee  seeketh  to 
prevaile  and  set  forth  himselfe,  rateth  his  debonairitie  and 
valueth  his  humanitie  above  his  courage  and  beyond  his 
victories :  and  hath  ever  this  glorious  saying  in  his  mouth  : 
6  That  hee  hath  left  his  enemies  as  much  cause  to  love  him,  as 
6  his  friends.'  I  will  therefore  say,  that  if  a  man  must  thus 
owe  any  thing,  it  ought  to  be  under  a  more  lawfull  title, 
then  that  whereof  I  speake,  to  which  the  law  of  this  miser 
able  warre  doth  engage  me,  and  not  of  so  great  a  debt,  as 
that  of  my  totall  preservation  and  whole  estate  :  which  doth 
unreparablie  over-whelme  mee.  I  have  a  thousand  times  gone 
to  bed  in  mine  house,  imagining  I  should  the  very  same 
night,  either  have  beene  betrayed  or  slaine  in  my  bed :  com 
pounding  and  conditioning  with  fortune,  that  it  might  be 
without  apprehension  of  feareful  astonishment  and  languish- 
ment.  And  after  my  praiers,  have  cried  out, 

VIRG.  Eclo.  i.  Impius  hcec  tarn  culta  novalia  miles  habebit? 

Shall  these  our  grounds  so  deckt  i 
By  godlesse  souldiers  be  possest  ? 

What  remedie  ?  It  is  the  place  where  my  selfe  and  most 
of  my  ancestors  were  borne  :  therein  have  they  placed  their 
affection  and  their  name.  Wee  harden  our  selves  unto 
whatsoever  wee  accustome  our  selves.  And  to  a  wretched 
condition,  as  ours  is,  custome  hath  beene  a  most  favourable 
present,  given  us  by  nature,  which  en  lire  th  and  lulleth  our 
sense  asleepe,  to  the  suffring  of  divers  evils.  Civill  warres 
have  this  one  thing  worse  then  other  warres,  to  cause  every 
one  of  us  to  make  a  watch-tower  of  his  owne  house. 

OVID.  Trist.  Quam  miserum,  porta  vitam  muroque  tueri, 

iv.  El.  i.  69.  Vixque  suce  tutum  viribits  esse  domus  ! 

216 


Shall  these  our  grounds  so  deckt  and  drest, 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

How  hard  with  gate  and  wall  our  life  to  gard,  CHAPTER 

And  scarce  be  safe  in  our  owne  houses  bard  !  JX 

It  is  an  irkesome  extremitie,  for  one  to  be  troubled  and 
pressed  even  in  his  owne  houshold  and  domesticall  rest.  The 
place  wherein  I  dwell,  is  ever  both  the  first  and  last  to  the 
batterie  of  our  troubles  :  and  where  peace  is  ever  absolutely 
discerned. 

Turn  quoque  cum  pax  est,  trepidant  formidine  belli.  LUCAN.  i.  256. 

Ev'n  when  in  peace  they  are, 
They  quake  for  feare  of  warre. 

— quoties  pacemfortuna  lacessit, 
Hac  iter  est  bellis,  melius  fortuna  dedisses 
Orbe  sub  Eoo  sedem,  gelidaque  sub  Arcto, 
Errantesque  domos. 

As  oft  as  fortune  troubleth  peace,  their  race, 
Warres  makes  this  way  :  fortune  with  better  grace, 
In  th'  Easterne  world  thou  shouldst  have  giv'n  them 

place, 
Or  wandring  tents  for  warre,  under  the  cold  North- 

starre. 

I  sometimes  draw  the  meanes  to  strengthen  my  selfe 
against  these  considerations,  from  carelesnesse  and  idlenesse : 
which  also  in  some  sort  bring  us  unto  resolution.  It  often 
befalleth  me,  with  some  pleasure,  to  imagine  what  mortall 
dangers  are,  and  to  expect  them.  I  do  even  hood-winkt, 
with  my  head  in  my  bosome  and  with  stupiditie,  plunge  my 
selfe  into  death,  without  considering  or  knowing  it,  as  into 
a  deepe,  hollow  and  bottomlesse  abysse,  which  at  one  leape 
doth  swallow  me  up,  and  at  an  instant  doth  cast  me  into  an 
eternall  slumber,  full  of  insipiditie  and  indolencie.  And  in 
these  short,  sudden  or  violent  deaths,  the  consequence  I  fore 
see  of  them,  affords  me  more  comfort  then  the  effect  of  feare. 
They  say,  that  even  as  life  is  not  the  best,  because  it  is  long, 
so  death  is  the  best,  because  it  is  short.  I  estrange  not  my 
selfe  so  much  by  being  dead,  as  I  enter  into  confidence  with 
dying.  I  enwrap  and  shrowd  my  selfe  in  that  storme,  which 
shall  blinde  and  furiously  wrap  me,  with  a  ready  and  in 
sensible  charge.  Yet  if  it  hapned  (as  some  gardners  say) 
that  those  Roses  and  Violets  are  ever  the  sweeter  and  more 
odoriferous,  that  grow  neere  unto  Garlike  and  Onions,  forso- 
2E  217 


Of  Vanitie 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  much  as  they  sucke  and  draw  all  the  ill  savours  of  the  ground 
unto  them :  so  that  these  depraved  natures  would  draw  and 
sucke  all  the  venome  of  mine  aire,  and  infection  of  my 
climate  ;  and  by  their  neerenesse  unto  me  make  me  so  much 
the  better  and  purer,  that  I  might  not  lose  all.  That  is  not, 
but  of  this,  something  may  be,  forsomuch  as  goodnesse  is  the 
fairer  and  more  attracting  when  it  is  rare,  and  that  con- 
trarietie  stifneth,  and  diversitie  encloseth  well  doing  in  it 
selfe,  and  by  the  jealousie  of  opposition  and  glory,  it  doth 
enflame  it.  Theeves  and  stealers  (godamercie  their  kindnesse) 
have  in  particular  nothing  to  say  to  me :  no  more  have  I  to 
them.  I  should  then  have  to  do  with  over-many  sorts  of 
men.  Alike  consciences  lurke  under  divers  kinds  of  gar 
ments,  alike  crueltie,  disloialtie  and  stealing.  And  so  much 
the  worse,  by  how  much  it  is  more  base,  more  safe  and  more 
secret  under  the  colour  of  lawes.  I  hate  lesse  an  open- 
professed  injurie,  then  a  deceiving  traiterous  wrong,  an 
hostile  and  war-like,  then  a  peacefull  and  lawfull.  Our 
feaver  hath  seased  upon  a  body,  which  it  hath  not  much  em- 
paired.  The  fire  was  in  it,  but  now  the  flame  hath  taken 
hold  of  it.  The  report  is  greater,  the  hurt  but  little.  I 
ordinarily  answere  such  as  demand  reasons  for  my  voiages  : 
That  I  know  what  I  shunne,  but  wot  not  what  I  seeke.  If 
one  tell  mee,  there  may  be  as  little  sound  health  amongst 
strangers,  and  that  their  manners  are  neither  better  nor 
purer,  then  ours :  I  answere  first,  that  it  is  very  hard  : 


VIRG.  Georg. 
i.  506. 


Tarn  multce  scelerum  fades. 

The  formes  so  manifold 
Of  wickednesse  we  hold. 

Secondly,  that  it  is  ever  againe,  to  change  a  bad  estate  for 
an  uncertaine.  And  that  others  evils  should  not  touch  us 
so  neare  as  ours.  I  will  not  forget  this,  that  I  can  never 
mutinie  so  much  against  France,  but  I  must  needes  looke  on 
Paris  with  a  favourable  eye  :  It  hath  my  hart  from  my  in 
fancy,  whereof  it  hath  befalne  me  as  of  excellent  things  :  the 
more  other  faire  and  stately  cities  I  have  scene  since,  the  more 
hir  beauty  hath  power  and  doth  still  usurpingly  gaine  upon 
my  affection.  I  love  that  Citie  for  her  owne  sake,  and  more 
in  her  onely  subsisting  and  owne  being,  then  when  it  is  full 

218 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

fraught  and  embellished  with  forraine  pompe  and  borrowed  CHAPTER 
garish  ornaments  :  I  love  her  so  tenderly,  that  even  hir  spotts,          *x  .  . 
her  blemishes  and  hir  warts  are  deare  unto  me.     I  am  no 
perfect  French-man,  but  by  this  great- matchlesse  Citie,  great 
in  people,  great  in  regard  of  the  felicitie  of  her  situation  ; 
but  above  al,  great  and  incomparable  in  varietie  and  diver- 
sitie  of  commodities  :  The  glory  of  France,  and  one  of  the 
noblest    and   chiefe  ornaments   of  the   world.     God  of  his 
mercy  free  hir,  and  chase  away  all  our  divisions  from  hir : 
Being  entirely  united  to  hir  selfe,  I  finde  hir  defended  from 
all  other  violence.     I  forewarne  hir,  that  of  all  factions,  that 
shall  be  the  worst,  which  shall  breed  discord  and  sedition  in 
hir.     And  for  hir  sake,  I  onely  feare  hir  selfe.     And  surely, 
I  am  in  as  great  feare  for  hir,  as  for  any  other  part  of  our 
state.     So  long  as  she  shall  continue,  so  long  shall  I  never 
want  a  home  or  retreat,  to  retire  and  shrowd  my  selfe  at  all 
times  :  a  thing  able  to  make  me  forget  the  regret  of  all  other 
retreates.     Not  because  Socrates  hath  said   it,  but  because 
such  is  in  truth  my  humour,  and  peradventure  not  without 
some  excuse,  to  esteem e  all  men  as  my  country-men  ;  and  as 
I  kindly  embrace  a  Polonian  as  a  Frenchman  ;  postposing 
this  naturall  bond,  to  universall  and  common.     I  am  not 
greatly    strucken   with    the   pleasantnesse    of  naturall  aire. 
Acquaintances  altogether  new  and  wholly  mine,  doe  in  my 
conceit  countervaile  the  worth  of  all  other  vulgar  and  casuall 
acquaintances  of  our  neighbours.     Friendships  meerely  ac 
quired  by  our  selves,  doe  ordinarily  exceed  those,  to  which  wee 
are  joyned,  either  by  communication  of  climate,  or  affinity  of 
blood.     Nature  hath  placet  us  in  the  world  free  and  unbound, 
wee  emprison  our  selves  into  certaine  streights  :  As  the  Kings 
of  Persia,  who  bound  themselves  never  to  drinke  other  water, 
then  of  the  river  Choaspez ;  foolishly  renouncing  all  lawful! 
right  of  use  in  all  other  waters :  and  for  their  regard  dried 
up  all  the  rest  of  the  world.     What  Socrates  did  in  his  latter 
dayes,  to  deeme  a  sentence  of  banishment  worse,  then  a  doome 
of  death  against  himselfe,  being  of  the  mind  I  am  now,  I 
shall  never  be  neither  so  base  minded,  nor  so  strictly  habitu 
ated  in  my  country,  that  I  would  follow  him.     The  celesticall 
lives,  have  divers  images,  which  I  embrace  more  by  estima 
tion,  then  bv  affection.     And  some  too  extraordinary,  and 

219 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  so  highly  elevated,  which  because  I  am  not  able  to  con- 
IX  ceive,  I  cannot  embrace  by  estimation.  This  humor  was  very 
f  Vamtie  tenderly  apprehended  by  him,  who  deemed  all  the  world  to 
be  his  City.  True  it  is,  he  disdained  peregrinations,  and  had 
not  much  set  his  foote  beyond  the  territory  of  Athens. 
What,  if  he  bewailed  the  mony  his  friend  offred  to  lay  out, 
to  disingage  his  life,  and  refused  to  come  out  of  prison,  by 
the  intercession  of  others,  because  he  would  not  disobey  the 
lawes,  in  a  time  wherein  they  were  otherwise  so  corrupted  ? 
These  examples  are  of  the  first  kind  for  me.  Of  the  second 
there  are  others,  which  I  could  find  in  the  very  same  man. 
Many  of  these  rare  examples  exceed  the  power  of  my  action  ; 
but  some  exceed  also  the  force  of  my  judgement.  Besides 
these  reasons,  I  deem  travell  to  be  a  profitable  exercise.  The 
minde  hath  therein  a  continuall  excitation,  to  marke  things 
unknowne,  and  note  new  objects.  And  as  I  have  often  said, 
I  know  no  better  schoole,  to  fashion  a  mans  life,  then  un- 
cessantly  to  propose  unto  him  the  diversitie  of  so  many 
other  mens  lives,  customes,  humors  and  fantasies  ;  and  make 
him  taste  or  apprehend  one  so  perpetuall  variety  of  our 
natures,  shapes  or  formes.  Therein  the  body  is  neither 
absolutely  idle  nor  wholly  troubled,  and,  that  moderate 
agitation  doth  put  him  into  breath.  My  selfe,  as  crazed 
with  the  collicke  as  I  am,  can  sit  eight,  yea  sometimes  ten 
houres  on  horse-backe  ;  without  wearinesse  or  tyring. 

VIRG.  ALH.  vi.  Vires  ultra  sortemque  senecttp. 

Beyond  strength  ordinary, 
Which  old  yeeres  use  to  cary. 

No  weather  is  to  me  so  contrary,  as  the  scorching  heat  of  the 
parching  Sunne.  For,  these  timbrels  or  riding  canapies, 
which  since  the  ancient  Romans,  the  Italians  use,  doe  more 
weary  the  armes,  then  ease  the  head.  I  would  faine-faine 
know  what  industry  it  was  in  the  Persians,  so  anciently,  and 
even  in  the  infancy  of  luxuriousnesse  (as  Xenophon  re- 
porteth)  to  fanne  themselves,  and  at  their  pleasures  to  make 
cold  shades.  I  love  rainy  and  durty  weather,  as  duckes  doe. 
The  change  either  of  aire  or  climate  doth  nothing  distemper 
mee.  All  heavens  are  alike  to  me,  I  am  never  vexed  or 
beaten,  but  with  internall  alterations,  such  as  I  produce  mv 
220 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

selfe,  which  surprise  and  possesse  me  least  in  times  of  Way-  CHAPTER 
fairing.  It  is  a  hard  matter  to  make  me  resolve  of  any  IX 
journey:  but  if  I  be  once  on  the  way,  I  hold  out  as  long 
and  as  farre,  as  another.  I  strive  as  much  in  small,  as  I 
labour  in  great  enterprises :  and  to  prepare  my  selfe  for  a 
short  journey  or  to  visite  a  friend,  as  to  undertake  a  farre 
set  voiage.  I  have  learnt  to  frame  my  journeyes  after  the 
Spanish  fashion,  all  at  once  and  out-right,  great  and  reason 
able.  And  in  extreme  heats,  I  travell  by  night,  from  Sunne- 
set  to  Sunne  rising.  The  other  fashion,  confusedly  and  in 
haste  to  bait  by  the  way  and  dine,  especially  in  Winter, 
when  the  daies  are  so  short,  is  both  troublesome  for  man, 
and  incommodious  for  horse.  My  lades  are  the  better,  and 
hold  out  longer.  No  horse  did  ever  faile  me,  that  held 
out  the  first  daies  journey  with  me.  I  water  them  in  all 
waters,  and  only  take  care  of  their  last  watering,  that  before 
I  come  to  mine  Inne  they  have  way  enough  to  heat  their 
water.  My  slothfulnesse  to  rise  in  the  morning,  alloweth 
such  as  follow  mee  sufficient  leasure  to  dine,  before  wee 
take  horse.  As  for  me,  I  never  feed  over-late  :  I  commonly 
get  an  appetite  in  eating,  and  no  otherwise  :  I  am  never 
hungry  but  at  the  table.  Some  complaine,  that  being 
maried,  and  well  strucken  in  yeeres,  I  have  enured  my  selfe, 
and  beene  pleased  to  continue  this  exercise.  They  doe  me 
wrong:  The  best  time  for  a  man  to  leave  his  house,  is 
when  he  hath  so  ordered  and  settled  the  same,  that  it  may 
continue  without  him :  and  when  he  hath  so  disposed  his 
affaires,  that  they  may  answere  the  ancient  course  and 
wonted  forme.  It  is  much  more  indiscretion,  and  an  argu 
ment  of  want  of  judgement,  to  goe  from  home,  and  leave  no 
trusty  guard  in  his  house,  and  which  for  lacke  of  care  may 
be  slow  or  forgetfull  in  providing  for  such  necessities,  as  in 
your  absence  it  may  stand  in  need  of.  The  most  profitable 
knowledge,  and  honourablest  occupation  for  a  matron  or 
mother  of  a  familie,  is  the  occupation  and  knowledge  of 
huswiferie.  I  see  divers  covetous,  but  few  huswifes.  It  is 
the  mistresse-qualitie  that  all  men  should  seeke  after,  and 
above  all  other  endeavour  to  finde,  as  the  onely  dowry, 
that  serveth,  either  to  ruine  and  overthrow,  or  to  save  and 
enrich  our  houses.  Let  no  man  speake  to  me  of  it ;  accord- 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ing  as  experience  hath  taught  me,  I  require  in  a  maried 
Of  yX-  .  woman  the  Oeconomicall  vertue  above  all  others.  Wherein 
I  would  have  her  absolutely  skilfull,  since  by  my  absence 
I  commit  the  whole  charge,  and  bequeath  the  full  govern 
ment  of  my  houshold  to  her. 

I  see  (and  that  to  my  griefe)  in  divers  houses  the  master 
or  good  man  come  home  at  noone  all  weary,  durty  and  dusty, 
with  drudging  and  toiling  about  his  businesse ;  when  the 
mistresse  or  good-wife  is  either  scarce  up,  or  if  shee  bee,  she 
is  yet  in  her  closet,  dressing,  decking,  smugging,  or  trimming 
of  her  selfe.  It  is  a  thing  onely  fitting  Queenes  or  Princes  ; 
whereof  some  doubt  might  be  made.  It  is  ridiculous  that 
the  idlenesse,  and  unjust  that  the  lithernesse  of  our  wives 
should  be  fostered  with  our  sweat,  and  maintained  by  our 
travell :  No  man  (as  neere  as  I  can)  shall  fortune  to  have 
a  more  free  and  more  absolute  use,  or  a  more  quiet  and 
more  liquid  fruition  of  his  goods,  then  I  have.  If  the 
husband  bring  matter ;  nature  her  selfe  would  have  women 
to  bring  forme.  Concerning  duties  of  wedlocke-friendship, 
which  some  happily  imagine  to  be  interessed  or  prejudiced 
by  the  husbands  absence,  I  beleeve  it  not.  Contrariwise,  it 
is  a  kinde  of  intelligence,  that  easily  growes  cold  by  an  over- 
continuall  assistance,  and  decaieth  by  assiduitie ;  for,  to 
stand  still  at  racke  and  manger  breedeth  a  satietie.  Every 
strange  woman  seemeth  to  us  an  honest  woman  :  And  all 
feele  by  experience,  that  a  continuall  seeing  one  another, 
cannot  possibly  represent  the  pleasure,  men  take  by  parting 
and  meeting  againe.  These  interruptions  fill  mee  with  a  new 
kinde  of  affection,  toward  mine  owne  people  ;  and  yeeld  me 
the  use  of  my  house  more  pleasing  :  vicissitude  doth  now  and 
then  en-earnest  my  minde  toward  one,  and  then  toward 
another.  I  am  not  ignorant  how  true  amitie  hath  armes 
long  enough,  to  embrace,  to  claspe  and  holde  from  one 
corner  of  the  world  unto  another :  namely  in  this,  where  is 
a  continuall  communication  of  offices,  that  cause  the  obliga 
tion,  and  revive  the  remembrance  thereof.  The  stoickes 
say,  that  there  is  so  great  an  affinitie  and  mutual  relation, 
betweene  wise  men,  that  he  who  dineth  in  France,  feedeth 
his  companion  in  ./Egypt ;  and  if  one  of  them  doe  but  hould 
up  his  finger,  where  ever  it  bee,  all  the  wise  men  disperced 

222 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

upon  the  habitable  land,  feele  a  kinde  of  aid  thereby.  CHAPTER 
lovissance  and  possession,  appertaine  chiefly  unto  imagina-  IX  t 
tion.  It  embraceth  more  earnestly  and  uncessantly  what 
she  goeth  to  fetch,  then  what  wee  touch.  Summon  and 
count  all  your  daily  ammusements  ;  and  you  shall  finde,  you 
are  then  furthest  and  most  absent  from  your  friend,  when 
he  is  present  with  you.  His  assistance  releaseth  your  atten 
tion,  and  giveth  your  thoughts  libertie,  at  all  times  and 
upon  every  occasion,  to  absent  themselves.  If  I  be  at  Rome, 
or  any  where  else,  I  hold,  I  survay,  and  governe  my  house 
and  the  commodities,  which  I  have  left  about  and  in  it.  I 
even  see  my  walles,  my  trees,  my  grasse  and  my  rents,  to 
stand,  to  grow,  to  decay  and  to  diminish,  within  an  inch  or 
two  of  that  I  should  doe  when  I  am  at  home. 

Ante  oculos  err  at  domus,  errat  forma  locorum. 

My  house  is  still  before  mine  eies, 
There  still  the  forme  of  places  lies. 

If  we  but  onely  enjoy  what  we  touch,  farewell  our  crownes 
when  they  are  in  our  coafers,  and  adiew  to  our  children, 
when  they  are  abroad  or  a  hunting ;  we  would  have  them 
neerer.  In  the  garden  is  it  farre  off  ?  within  halfe  a  daies 
journey  ?  What,  within  ten  leagues,  is  it  farre  or  neere  ?  If 
it  be  neere :  what  is  eleven,  twelve,  or  thirteene  ?  and  so 
step  by  step.  Verely  that  woman  who  can  prescribe  unto 
her  husband,  how  many  steps  end  that  which  is  neere,  and 
which  step  in  number  begins  the  distance  she  counts  farre,  I 
am  of  opinion,  that  she  stay  him  betweene  both. 

— excludat  iurgia  finis.  HOR.  ii.  Epist. 

Let  the  conclusion,  Exclude  confusion. 

Vtor  permisso,  caudceque  pilos  ut  equince.  Ibid.  45. 

Paulatim  vello :  et  demo  unum,  demo  etiam  unum 
Dum  cadat  elusus  ratione  mentis  acervi. 

I  use  the  grant,  and  plucke  by  one  and  one 
The  horse-taile  haires,  till  when  the  bush  is  gone 
I  leave  the  lade  a  curtail  taile  or  none. 

And  let  them  boldly  call  for  Philosophy  to  helpe  them.  To 
whom  some  might  reproach,  since  she  neither  discerneth  the 
one  nor  other  end  of  the  joynt,  betweene  the  overmuch  and 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  the  little;  the  long  and  the  short,  the  light  and  the  heavie, 
IX  the  neare  and  the  farre,  since  she  neither  knowes  the  begin- 
OfVamtie  nmg  nor  endjng  thereof,  that  she  doth  very  uncertainly 
judge  of  the  middle.  Rerum  natura  nullam  nobis  dedit 
cognitionemjinium:  'Nature  hath  affoorded  us  no  knowledge 
'  of  her  endes."  Are  they  not  yet  wives  and  friendes  of  the 
deceased,  that  are  not  at  the  end  of  this,  but  in  the  other 
world  ?  wee  embrace  both  those  that  have  beene,  and  those 
which  are  not  yet,  not  onely  the  absent.  We  did  not  con 
dition,  when  we  were  maried,  continually  to  keepe  our 
selves  close  hugging  one  another,  as  some,  I  wot  not  what 
little  creatures  doe,  we  see  daily  ;  or  as  those  bewitched 
people  of  Karenti,  in  a  kinde  of  dogged  manner.  And  a 
woman  should  not  have  hir  eyes  so  greedily  or  so  dotingly 
fixed  on  hir  husbands  fore-part,  that  if  neede  shall  require, 
she  may  not  view  his  hinder-partes.  But  might  not  the 
saying  of  that  cunning  Painter,  who  could  so  excellently  set 
foorth  their  humours  and  pourtray  their  conditions,  fitly 
bee  placed  heere,  lively  to  represent  the  cause  of  their 
complaints  ? 

TER.  Adelph.  Vxor,  si  cesses,  aut  te  amare  cogitat, 

act.  i.  sc.  i.  Aut  tete  amari,  aut  potare,  aut  animo  obsequi, 

Et  tibi  bene  esse  soli,  cum  sibi  sit  male. 

If  you  be  slow,,  your  wife  thinkes  that  in  love  you  are, 
Or  are  belov'd,  or  drinke,  or  all  for  pleasure  care, 
And  that  you  onely  fare-well,  when  she  ill  doth  fare. 

Or  might  it  be,  that  opposition  and  contradiction  doe 
naturally  entertaine,  and  of  themselves  nourish  them :  and 
that  they  are  sufficiently  accommodated,  provided  they  dis- 
turbe  and  incommode  you  ?  In  truly-perfect  friendship, 
wherein  I  presume  to  have  some  skill  and  well-grounded 
experience ;  I  give  my  selfe  more  unto  my  friend,  than  I 
draw  him  unto  me.  I  doe  not  onely  rather  love  to  do  him 
good,  then  he  should  doe  any  to  me  :  but  also,  that  he 
should  rather  doe  good  unto  himselfe,  then  unto  me :  For 
then  doth  he  me  most  good,  when  he  doth  it  to  himselfe. 
And  if  absence  be  either  pleasing  or  beneficiall  unto  him,  it 
is  to  me  much  more  pleasing,  then  his  presence  :  and  that 
may  not  properly  be  termed  absence,  where  meanes  and 
waies  may  be  found  to  enter-advertise  one  another.  I  have 

224 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

heeretofore  made  good  use,  and  reaped  commoditie  by  our  CHAPTER 
absence  and  distance.     Wee  better  replenished  the  benefit,  IX 

and  extended  further  the  possession  of  life,  by  being  divided 
and  farre-asunder :  He  lived,  he  rejoiced,  and  he  saw  for  me, 
and  I  for  him,  as  fully  as  if  he  had  beene  present :  Being 
together,  one  partie  was  idle :  We  confounded  one  another. 
The  separation  of  the  place,  made  the  conjunction  of  our 
mindes  and  wills,  the  richer.  This  insatiate  and  greedy 
desire  of  corporall  presence  doth  somewhat  accuse  the  weake- 
nesse  in  the  jovissance  of  soules.  Concerning  age,  which  some 
allege  against  me,  it  is  cleane  contrary.  It  is  for  youth,  to 
subject  and  bondage  it  selfe  to  common  opinions,  and  by 
force  to  constraine  it  selfe  for  others.  It  may  fit  the  turne 
of  both,  the  people  and  it  selfe :  We  have  but  overmuch  to 
doe  with  our  selves  alone.  According  as  naturall  commodi 
ties  faile  us,  let  us  sustaine  our  selves  by  artificiall  meanes. 
It  is  injustice,  to  excuse  youth  in  following  her  pleasures, 
and  forbid  age  to  devise  and  seeke  them.  When  I  was 
yong,  I  concealed  my  wanton  and  covered  my  youthfull 
passions,  with  wit :  and  now  being  aged,  I  endevour  to  passe 
the  sadde  and  incident  to  yeeres,  with  sport  and  debauches. 
Yet  doe  Platoes  lawes  forbid  men  to  travell  abroad,  before 
they  are  forty  or  fifty  yeares  of  age,  that  so  their  travell 
may  sort  more  profitable,  and  proove  more  instructive.  I 
should  more  willingly  consent  to  this  other  second  article  of 
the  said  lawes,  which  forbiddeth  men  to  wander  abroad, 
after  they  are  once  threescore.  Of  which  age,  few  that 
travell  farre  journies  returne  home  againe.  What  care  I  for 
that  ?  I  undertake  it  not,  either  to  returne  or  to  perfect  the 
same.  I  onely  undertake  it  to  be  in  motion  :  So  long  as 
the  motion  pleaseth  me,  and  I  walke  that  I  may  walke. 
Those  runne  not,  that  runne  after  a  Benefice  or  after  a 
Hare :  But  they  runne,  that  runne  at  barriers  and  to  exer 
cise  their  running.  My  desseigne  is  every  where  divisible,  it 
is  not  grounded  on  great  hopes :  each  day  makes  an  end  of 
it.  Even  so  is  my  lifes  voiage  directed.  Yet  have  I  seene 
divers  farre  countries,  where  I  would  have  beene  glad  to 
have  beene  staied.  Why  not  ?  If  Chrysippus,  Diogenes, 
Cleanthes,  Antipater  and  Zeno,  with  so  many  other  wise 
men  of  that  roughly-severe,  and  severely -strict  Sect,  forsooke 
2  F  225 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  their  Countries  (without  just  cause  to  be  offended  with 
*x  .  them)  onely  to  enjoy  another  aire  ?  Truly  the  greatest 
Of  Vanitie  grjefe  of  my  peregrinations,  is,  that  I  cannot  have  a  firme 
resolution,  to  establish  my  abiding  where  I  would.  And 
that  I  must  ever  resolve  with  my  selfe  to  returne,  for  to 
accommodate  my  selfe  unto  common  humors.  If  I  should 
feare  to  die  in  any  other  place,  then  where  I  was  borne  ;  if  I 
thought  I  should  die  lesse  at  my  ease,  farre  from  mine  owne 
people :  I  would  hardly  goe  out  of  France,  nay  I  should 
scarcely  goe  out  of  mine  owne  parish,  without  feeling  some 
dismay.  I  feele  death  ever  pinching  me  by  the  throat,  or 
pulling  me  by  the  backe :  But  I  am  of  another  mould  :  to 
me  it  is  ever  one,  and  at  all  times  the  same.  Nevertheles  if 
I  were  to  chuse,  I  thinke  it  should  rather  be  on  horsebacke, 
than  in  a  bed :  from  my  home,  and  farre  from  my  friends. 
There  is  more  harts-sorrow,  than  comfort,  in  taking  ones 
last  farewell  of  his  friends.  I  doe  easily  forget  or  neglect 
these  duties  or  complements  of  our  common  or  civill 
courtesie.  For,  of  Offices  appertaining  to  unaffected  amitie, 
the  same  is  the  most  displeasing  and  offensive :  And  I 
should  as  willingly  forget  to  give  a  body  that  great  adiew, 
or  eternall  farewell.  If  a  body  reape  any  commoditie  by 
this  assistance,  he  also  findes  infinite  inconveniences  in  it. 
I  have  scene  divers  die  most  piteously,  compassed  and  beset 
round  with  their  friends  and  servants :  Such  multitudes, 
and  thronging  of  people  doth  stifle  them.  It  is  against 
reason,  and  a  testimony  of  smal  affection,  and  little  care 
they  have  that  you  should  die  at  rest.  One  offendeth  your 
eies,  another  molesteth  your  eares,  the  third  vexeth  your 
mouth  :  You  have  neither  sense  nor  limme,  or  parte  of  your 
body,  but  is  tormented  and  grieved.  Your  hart  is  ready  to 
burst  for  pittie  to  heare  your  friends  moanes  and  com 
plaints  ;  and  to  rive  asunder  with  spite  to  heare  peradven- 
ture  some  of  their  wailings  and  moanes,  that  are  but  fained 
and  counterfet.  If  a  man  have  ever  had  a  milde  or  tender 
nature,  being  weake  and  readie  to  die,  he  must  then  neces 
sarily  have  it  more  tender  and  relenting.  It  is  most  requi 
site,  that  in  so  urgent  a  necessitie,  one  have  a  gentle  hand 
and  fitly  applied  to  his  senses,  to  scratch  him  where  he 
itcheth  ;  or  else  he  ought  not  be  clawed  at  all.  If  wee  must 
226 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

needs  have  the  helpe  of  a  Midwife,  to  bring  us  into  this  CHAPTER 
world,  there  is  reason  we  should  also  have  the  aiding-hand  IX.  a 

of  a  wise  man,  to  deliver  us  out  of  the  same.  Such  a  one,  Of  Vanitie 
and  therewithall  a  true  friend,  should  a  man  before-hand 
purchase  very  deare,  only  for  the  service  of  such  an  occasion. 
I  am  not  yet  come  to  that  disdainfull  vigor,  which  so  forti- 
fieth  it  selfe,  that  at  such  times  nothing  aideth,  nor  nothing 
troubleth :  I  flie  a  lower  pitch.  I  seeke  to  squat  my  selfe, 
and  steale  from  that  passage :  not  by  feare,  but  by  Art. 
My  intent  is  not  in  such  an  action,  to  make  either  triall  or 
shew  of  my  constancy.  Wherefore  ?  Because,  then  shall  the 
right  and  interest  I  have  in  reputation  cease.  I  am  content 
with  a  death  united  in  it  selfe,  quiet  and  solitarie,  wholly 
mine,  convenient  to  my  retired  and  private  life.  Cleane 
contrary  to  the  Roman  superstition,  where  he  was  judged 
unhappy,  that  died  without  speaking,  and  had  not  his 
neerest  friends  to  close  his  eies.  I  have  much  adoe  to  com 
fort  my  selfe,  without  being  troubled  to  comfort  others  : 
cares  and  vexations  enow  in  my  minde,  without  needing  cir 
cumstances  to  bring  me  new ;  and  sufficient  matter  to  enter- 
taine  my  selfe,  without  borrowing  any.  This  share  belongs 
not  to  the  part  of  societie:  It  is  the  act  of  one  man  alone. 
Let  us  live,  laugh  and  be  merry  amongst  our  friends,  but 
die  and  yeeld  up  the  ghost  amongst  strangers,  and  such  as 
we  know  not.  Hee  who  hath  money  in  his  purse,  shall  ever 
finde  some  ready  to  turne  his  head,  make  his  bedde,  rubbe 
his  feet,  attend  him,  and  that  will  trouble  and  importune 
him  no  longer  than  hee  list  :  and  will  ever  shew  him  an 
indifferent  and  well-composed  countenance  ;  and  without 
grumbling  or  grudging  give  a  man  leave  to  doe  what  he 
please,  and  complaine  as  he  list.  I  dayly  endevour  by  dis 
course  to  shake  off  this  childish  humour  and  inhumane  con 
ceit,  which  causeth,  that  by  our  griefes  and  paines  we  ever 
desire  to  moove  our  friends  to  compassion  and  sorrow  for  us, 
and  with  a  kinde  of  sympathy  to  condole  our  miseries  and 
passions.  We  endeare  our  inconveniences  beyond  measure, 
to  exact  teares  from  them  :  And  the  constancy  we  so  much 
commend  in  all  others,  undauntedly  to  endure  all  evill 
fortune,  we  accuse  and  upbraid  to  our  neerest  allies,  when 
they  molest  us  :  we  are  not  contented  they  should  have  a 


MONTAIGNES    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  sensible  feeling  of  our  calamities,  if  they  doe  not  also  afflict 
IX  themselves  for  them.  A  man  should  as  much  as  he  can  set 
Of  Vamtie  foorth  anc|  extend  his  joy  ;  but  to  the  utmost  of  his  power, 
suppresse  and  abridge  his  sorrow.  He  that  will  causelesly 
be  moaned,  and  sans  reason,  deserveth  not  to  be  pitied  when 
he  shall  have  cause  and  reason  for  it.  To  be  ever  complain 
ing  and  alwaies  moaning,  is  the  way  never  to  be  moaned 
and  seldome  to  be  pitied :  and  so  often  to  seeme  over  pas 
sionately  pitifull,  is  the  meane  to  make  no  man  feelingly 
ruthfull  towards  others.  He  that  makes  himselfe  dead  being 
alive,  is  subject  to  be  accounted  alive  when  he  is  dying.  I 
have  scene  some  take  pepper  in  the  nose,  forsomuch  as  they 
were  told  that  they  had  a  cheerefull  countenance ;  that  they 
looked  well ;  that  they  had  a  temperate  pulse  :  to  force 
laughter,  because  some  betraied  their  recovery  :  and  hate 
their  health,  because  it  was  not  regreetable.  And  which  is 
more,  they  were  no  women.  I  for  the  most,  represent  my 
infirmities  such  as  they  are :  And  shunne  such  words  as  are 
of  evill  presage ;  and  avoid  composed  exclamations.  If  not 
glee  and  mirth,  at  least  an  orderly-setled  countenance  of  the 
by-standers  and  assistants,  is  sufficiently-convenient  to  a 
wise  and  discreet  sicke-man,  who  though  he  see  himselfe 
in  a  contrary  state,  he  will  not  picke  a  quarell  with  health. 
He  is  pleased  to  behold  the  same,  sound  and  strong  in 
others,  and  at  least  for  company-sake  to  enjoy  his  part  of 
it.  Though  he  feele  and  finde  himselfe  to  faint  and  sinke 
downe,  he  doth  not  altogether  reject  the  conceits  and  imagi 
nations  of  life,  nor  doth  he  avoid  common  entertainments. 
I  will  studie  sicknesse  when  I  am  in  health,  when  it  comes, 
it  will  really  enough  make  her  impression,  without  the  helpe 
of  my  imagination.  We  deliberately  prepare  our  selves 
before-hand  for  any  voiage  we  undertake,  and  therein  are 
resolved  :  the  houre  is  set  when  he  wil  take  horse,  and  we 
give  it  to  our  company,  in  whose  favour  we  extend  it.  I 
finde  this  unexpected  profit  by  the  publication  of  my 
maners,  that  in  some  sort  it  serveth  me  for  a  rule.  I  am 
sometimes  surprised  with  this  consideration,  not  to  betray 
the  history  of  my  life.  This  publike  declaration,  bindes  me 
to  keepe  my  selfe  within  my  course,  and  not  to  contradict 
the  image  of  my  conditions  :  commonly  lesse  disfigured  and 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

gaine-said,  then  the  malignitie  and  infirmitie  of  moderne  CHAPTER 
judgements  doth  beare.  The  uniformitie  and  singlenesse  of  IX 
my  manners,  produceth  a  visage  of  easie  interpretation  ;  but  lf  Vamtie 
because  the  fashion  of  them  is  somewhat  new  and  strange, 
and  out  of  use,  it  giveth  detraction  to  faire  play.  Yet  is  it 
true,  that  to  him,  who  will  goe  about  loyally  to  injure  me, 
me  thinkes  I  doe  sufficiently  affoord  him  matter,  whereby  he 
may  detract  and  snarle  at  my  avowed  and  knowen  imperfec 
tions,  and  wherewith  hee  may  bee  satisfied,  without  vaine 
contending  and  idle  skirmishing.  If  my  selfe  by  preoccupat- 
ing  his  discovery  and  accusation,  hee  thinkes  I  barre  him  of 
his  snarling,  it  is  good  reason  hee  take  his  right,  towards 
amplification  and  extension :  Offence  hath  her  rights  beyond 
justice :  And  that  the  vices,  whereof  I  shew  him  the  rootes 
in  mee,  hee  should  amplifie  them  to  trees.  Let  him  not 
only  employ  thereunto  those  that  possesse  me,  but  those 
which  but  threaten  me.  Injurious  vices,  both  in  qualitie 
and  in  number.  Let  him  beate  me  that  way.  I  should 
willingly  embrace  the  example  of  Dion  the  Philosopher. 
Antigonus  going  about  to  scoffe  and  quip  at  him  touching 
his  birth  and  off-spring,  he  interrupted  him  and  tooke  the 
word  out  of  his  mouth :  I  am  (said  hee)  the  sonne  of  a  bond 
slave,  a  butcher,  branded  for  a  rogue,  and  of  a  whoore, 
whom  my  father  by  reason  of  his  base  fortune,  tooke  to 
wife :  Both  were  punished  for  some  misdeede.  Being  a 
child,  an  orator  bought  me  as  a  slave,  liking  me  for  my 
beautie  and  comelinesse ;  and  dying,  left  mee  all  his  goods ; 
which  having  transported  into  this  citie  of  Athens,  I  have 
applied  my  selfe  unto  Philosophy.  Let  not  Historians 
busie  themselves  in  seeking  newes  of  mee,  I  will  at  large 
blazon  my  selfe,  and  plainely  tell  them  the  whole  discourse. 
A  generous  and  free-minded  confession  doth  disable  a  re- 
proch  and  disarme  an  injurie.  So  it  is,  that  when  all  cards 
be  told :  me  seemes,  that  I  am  as  oft  commended  as  dis 
praised  beyond  reason.  As  also  me  thinks,  that  even  from 
my  infancie,  both  in  ranke  and  degree  of  honour,  I  have 
had  place  given  me,  rather  above  and  more,  than  lesse  and 
beneath  that  which  appertained  to  me.  I  should  better  like 
to  be  in  a  countrie,  where  these  orders  might  either  be  re 
formed  or  contemned.  Among  men,  after  that  striving  or 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  altercation  for  the  prerogative  or  upper  hand  in  going  or 
IX.  .  sitting,  exceedeth  three  replies,  it  becommeth  incivill.  I 
mtie  neither  feare  to  yeeld  and  give  place,  nor  to  follow  and  pro 
ceed  unjustly,  so  I  may  avoid  such  irkesome  and  importunate 
contestations.  And  never  did  man  desire  precedencie  or 
place  before  me,  but  I  quitted  the  same  without  grudging. 
Besides  the  profit  I  reape  by  writing  of  my  selfe,  I  have 
hoped  for  this  other,  that  if  ever  it  might  happen  my 
humours  should  please  or  sympathize  with  some  honest  man, 
he  would  before  my  death  seeke  to  be  acquainted  with  me, 
or  to  overtake  mee.  I  have  given  him  much  ground  :  For, 
whatsoever  a  long  acquaintance  or  continual!  familiarity 
might  have  gained  him  in  many  wearisome  yeares,  the  same 
hath  hee  in  three  daves  fully  seene  in  this  Register,  and 
that  more  safely  and  more  exactly.  A  pleasant  fantazie  is 
this  of  mine ;  many  things  I  would  be  loath  to  tell  a  par 
ticular  man,  I  utter  to  the  whole  world.  And  concerning 
my  most  secret  thoughts  and  inward  knowledge,  I  send  my 
dearest  friends  to  a  Stationers  shop. 

PERS.  Sat.  v.  Eoccutienda  damns  preecordia. 

Our  very  entrailes  wee 
Lay  forth  for  you  to  see. 

If  by  so  good  markes  and  tokens,  I  had  ever  knowen  or 
heard  of  any  one  man,  that  in  this  humour  had  beene 
answerable  to  me,  I  would  assuredly  have  wandred  very  farre 
to  h'nde  him  out :  For,  the  exceeding  joy  of  a  sortable  and 
in  one  consent  agreeing  company,  cannot  (in  mine  opinion) 
be  sufficiently  endeared  or  purchased  at  too  high  a  rate. 
Oh  God  !  who  can  expresse  the  value  or  conceive  the  true 
worth  of  a  friend  ?  How  true  is  that  ancient  golden  saying, 
that  '  the  use  of  a  friend  is  more  necessary  and  pleasing,  then 
4  of  the  elements,  water  and  fire/  But  to  returne  to  my 
former  discourse  :  There  is  then  no  great  inconvenience  in 
dying  farre  from  home  and  abroad.  Wee  esteeme  it  a  part 
of  duty  and  decencie  to  withdraw  our  selves  for  naturall 
actions,  lesse  hideous  and  lesse  disgracefull  then  this.  But 
also  those  that  come  unto  that,  in  languishing  manner  to 
draw  a  long  space  of  life,  should  not  happily  wish  with  their 
miserie  to  trouble  a  whole  familie.  Therefore  did  the 

230 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Indians  of  a  certaine  countrie  deeme  it  just  and  lawfull,  to  CHAPTER 
kill  him  that  should  fall  into  such  necessitie.  And  in  another  IX 
of  their  Provinces  they  thought  it  meet  to  forsake  him,  and 
as  well  as  hee  could  leave  him  alone  to  seeke  to  save  him- 
selfe.  To  whom  at  last,  proove  they  not  themselves  tedious 
and  intolerable  ?  Common  offices  proceed  not  so  farre.  Per 
force  you  teach  cruelty  unto  your  best  friends ;  obdurating 
by  long  use,  both  wife  and  children,  not  to  feele,  nor  to  con 
ceive,  nor  to  moane  your  evils  any  longer.  The  groanes  and 
out-cries  of  my  chollicke,  cause  no  more  ruth  and  wailing  in 
any  body.  And  should  we  conceive  pleasure  by  their  con 
versation  (which  seldome  hapneth,  by  reason  of  the  disparitie 
of  conditions,  which  easily  produceth  either  contempt  or 
envy  towards  what  man  soever)  is  it  not  too-too  much, 
therwith  to  abuse  a  whole  age  ?  The  more  I  should  see 
them  with  a  good  heart  to  straine  themselves  for  me,  the 
more  should  I  bewaile  their  paine.  The  law  of  curtesie 
alloweth  us  to  leane  upon  others,  but  not  so  unmanerly  to 
lie  upon  them  and  underpropt  our  selves  in  their  ruine.  As 
he  who  caused  little  infants  to  be  slaine,  that  with  their 
innocent  blood  he  might  be  cured  of  a  malady  he  had.  Or 
another  who  was  continually  stored  with  young  tendrels  or 
lasses,  to  keepe  his  old  frozen  limbs  warme  a  nights,  and  en- 
termix  the  sweetnesse  of  their  breath  with  his  old -stinking 
and  offensive  vapours.  Decrepitude  is  a  solitary  quality. 
I  am  sociable  even  unto  excesse,  yet  doe  I  thinke  it  reason 
able,  at  last  to  substract  my  opportunity  from  the  sight  of 
the  world,  and  hatch  it  in  my  selfe.  Let  me  shrowd  and 
shrugge  my  selfe  into  my  shell,  as  a  tortoise  :  and  learne  to 
see  men,  without  taking  hold  of  them.  I  should  outrage 
them  in  so  steepe  a  passage.  It  is  now  high  time  to  turne 
from  the  company.  But  here  will  some  say,  that  in  these 
farre  journies  you  may  peradventure  fall  into  some  miserable 
dog-hole  or  poore  cottage,  where  you  shall  want  all  need  full 
things.  To  whom  I  answere,  that  for  things  most  necessary 
in  such  cases,  I  ever  carry  most  of  them  with  me :  And  that, 
where-ever  wee  are,  wee  cannot  possibly  avoid  fortune,  if 
she  once  take  upon  her  to  persecute  us.  When  I  am  sicke, 
I  want  nothing  that  is  extraordinary :  what  nature  cannot 
worke  in  me,  I  will  not  have  a  Bolus,  or  a  glister  to  effect. 

231 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  At  the  very  beginning  of  my  agues  or  sicknesses  that  cast 
IX  me  downe,  whilst  I  am  yet  whole  in  my  senses  and  neere  unto 

f  Vanitie  hodl^  I  reconcile  my  self  to  God  by  the  last  duties  of  a 
Christian ;  whereby  I  finde  my  selfe  free  and  discharged  ; 
and  thinke  I  have  so  much  more  reason  and  authority  over 
my  sicknesse.  I  finde  lesse  want  of  notaries  and  counsell,  then 
of  Physitions.  What  I  have  not  disposed  of  my  affaires  or 
setled  of  my  state  when  I  was  in  perfect  health,  let  none  ex 
pect  I  should  doe  it  being  sicke.  Whatever  I  will  doe  for 
the  service  of  death,  is  alwayes  ready  done.  I  dare  not  delay 
it  one  onely  day.  And  if  nothing  be  done,  it  is  as  much  to 
say,  that  either  some  doubt  hath  delaide  the  choise :  For, 
sometimes  it  is  a  good  choice,  not  to  chuse  at  all :  Or  that 
absolutely  I  never  intended  to  doe  any  thing.  I  write  my 
booke  to  few  men,  and  to  few  yeares.  Had  it  beene  a  matter 
of  lasting  continuance,  it  should  have  beene  compiled  in  a 
better  and  more  polished  language  :  According  to  the  con- 
tinuall  variation,  that  hitherto  hath  followed  our  French 
tongue,  who  may  hope,  that  ifs  present  forme  shall  be  in 
use  fifty  yeares  hence  ?  It  dayly  changeth  and  slips  our 
hands :  and  since  I  could  speake  the  same,  it  is  much  altred 
and  wellnigh  halfe  varied.  We  say  it  is  now  come  to  a  full 
perfection.  There  is  no  age  but  saith  as  much  of  hirs.  It 
lies  not  in  my  power,  so  long  as  it  glideth  and  differeth 
and  altereth  as  it  doth,  to  keepe  it  at  a  stay.  It  is  for 
excellent  and  profitable  compositions  to  fasten  it  unto  them, 
whose  credit  shall  either  diminish  or  encrease  according  to 
the  fortune  of  our  state.  For  all  that,  I  feare  not  to  insert 
therein  divers  private  articles,  whose  use  is  consumed  amongst 
men  living  now  adayes :  and  which  concerne  the  particular 
knowledge  of  some,  that  shall  further  see  into  it,  then  with 
a  common  understanding.  When  al  is  done,  I  would  not 
(as  I  often  see  the  memory  of  the  deceased  tossed  too  and 
fro)  that  men  should  descant  and  argue,  '  Thus  and  thus  he 
'  judged,  thus  he  lived,  thus  he  ment :  had  he  spoken  when  his 
4  life  left  him,  he  would  have  given  I  wot  what :  There  is  no 
6  man  knew  him  better  then  my  selfe/  Now,  as  much  as 
modestie  and  decorum  doth  permit  me,  I  here  give  a  taste  of 
my  inclinations  and  an  essay  of  my  affection  :  which  I  doe 
more  freely  and  more  willingly  by  word  of  mouth,  to  any  that 
232 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

shall  desire  to  be  throughly  informed  of  them.     But  so  it  is,  CHAPTER 
that  if  any  man  shall  looke  into  these  memorialls,  he  shall          IX 
finde  that  either  I  have  said  all,  or  desseigned  all.     What 
I  cannot  expresse,  the  same  I  point  at  with  my  finger. 

Verum  ammo  satis  hcec  vestigia  parva  sagaci  LUCR.  i.  419. 

Sunt,  per  qua  possis  cognoscere  ccetera  tute. 

But  this  small  footing  to  a  quicke-sent  minde 
May  serve,  whereby  safely  the  rest  to  finde. 

I  leave  nothing  to  bee  desired  or  divined  of  mee.  If 
one  must  entertaine  himselfe  with  them,  I  would  have  it  to 
be  truly  and  justly.  I  would  willingly  come  from  the  other 
world,  to  give  him  the  lie,  that  should  frame  me  other  then 
I  had  beene  :  were  it  he  meant  to  honour  mee.  I  see  that  of 
the  living,  men  never  speake  according  to  truth,  and  they  are 
ever  made  to  be  what  they  are  not.  And  if  with  might  and 
maine  I  had  not  upheld  a  friend  of  mine  whom  I  have  lately 
lost,  he  had  surely  beene  mangled  and  torne  in  a  thousand 
contrary  shapes.  But  to  make  an  end  of  my  weake  humours  : 
I  confesse,  that  in  travelling  I  seldome  alight  in  any  place  or 
come  to  any  Inne,  but  first  of  all  I  cast  in  my  minde  whether 
I  may  conveniently  lie  there,  if  I  should  chaunce  to  fall  sicke, 
or  dying,  die  at  my  ease  and  take  my  death  quietly.  I  will, 
as  nere  as  I  can  be  lodged  in  some  convenient  part  of  the 
house,  and  in  particular  from  all  noise  or  stinking  savours ; 
in  no  close,  filthy  or  smoaky  chamber.  I  seeke  to  flatter 
death  by  these  frivolous  circumstances  :  Or  as  I  may  rather 
say,  to  discharge  my  selfe  from  all  other  trouble  or  encom- 
brance  ;  that  so  I  may  wholly  apply  and  attend  her,  who 
without  that  shall  happily  lie  very  heavy  upon  me.  I  will 
have  her  take  a  full  share  of  my  lives  eases  and  commodi 
ties  ;  it  is  a  great  part  of  it  and  of  much  consequence,  and 
I  hope  it  shall  not  belie  what  is  past.  Death  hath  some 
formes  more  easie  then  others,  and  assumeth  divers  qualities  ; 
according  to  all  mens  fantazies.  Among  the  naturall  ones, 
that  proceeding  of  weakenesse  and  heavy  dulnesse,  to  me 
seemeth  gentle  and  pleasant.  Among  the  violent  I  imagine 
a  precipice  more  hardly  then  a  ruine  that  overwhelmes 
me :  and  a  cutting  blow  with  a  sword,  then  a  shot  of  an 
harquebuse  :  and  I  would  rather  have  chosen  to  drinke  the 

2  G  253 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  potion  of  Socrates,  then  wound  my  selfe  as  Cato  did.  And 
IX  though  it  be  all  one  yet  doth  my  imagination  perceive  a 
>f  Vamtie  difference,  as  much  as  is  betweene  death  and  life,  to  cast  my 
selfe  into  a  burning  fornace,  or  in  the  channell  of  a  shallow 
river.  So  foolishly  doth  our  feare  respect  more  the  meane, 
then  the  effect.  It  is  but  one  instant ;  but  of  such  moment, 
that  to  passe  the  same  according  to  my  desire,  I  would  will 
ingly  renounce  many  of  my  lives  dayes.  Since  all  mens 
fantazies,  finde  either  excesse  or  diminution  in  her  sharp- 
nesse  ;  since  every  man  hath  some  choise  betweene  the  formes 
of  dying,  let  us  trie  a  little  further,  whether  we  can  finde 
out  some  one,  free  from  all  sorrow  and  griefe.  Might  not 
one  also  make  it  seeme  voluptuous,  as  did  those  who  died 
with  Anthonie,  and  Cleopatra?  I  omit  to  speake  of  the 
sharpe  and  exemplar  efforts,  that  Philosophy  and  religion 
produce.  But  amongst  men  of  no  great  fame,  some  have 
beene  found  (as  one  Petronius,  and  one  Tigillinus  at  Rome) 
engaged  to  make  themselves  away,  who  by  the  tendernesse  of 
their  preparations  have  in  a  manner  lulled  the  same  asleepe. 
They  have  made  it  passe  and  glide  away,  even  in  the  midst 
of  the  security  of  their  accustomed  pastimes  and  wanton 
recreations  :  Amongst  harlots  and  good  felowes ;  no  speech 
of  comfort,  no  mention  of  will  or  testament,  no  ambitious 
affectation  of  constancie,  no  discourse  of  their  future  condi 
tion,  no  compunction  of  sinnes  committed,  no  apprehension 
of  their  soules-health,  ever  troubling  them ;  amid  sports, 
playes,  banketting,  surfetting,  chambering,  jesting,  musicke 
and  singing  of  amorous  verses  :  and  all  such  popular  and 
common  entertainements.  Might  not  wee  imitate  this 
manner  of  resolution  in  more  honest  affaires  and  more 
commendable  attempts  ?  And  since  there  are  deaths  good 
unto  wise  men  and  good  unto  fooles,  let  us  find  some  one  that 
may  be  good  unto  such  as  are  betweene  both.  My  imagina 
tion  presents  me  some  easie  and  milde  countenance  thereof, 
and  (since  we  must  all  die)  to  bee  desired.  The  tyrants  of 
Rome  have  thought,  they  gave  that  criminall  offender  his  life, 
to  whom  they  gave  the  free  choise  of  death.  But  Theo- 
phrastus  a  Philosopher  so  delicate,  so  modest  and  so  wise, 
was  he  not  forced  by  reason,  to  dare  to  utter  this  verse, 
latinized  by  Cicero  : 
234 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  Vitam  regitfortuna  non  sapientia.  CHAPTER 

v.     Theoph.  Fortune  our  life  doth  rule,  IX 

Not  wisdome  of  the  schoole.  Of  Variitie 

Fortune  giveth  the  facilitie  of  my  lives-condition  some 
aide  ;  having  placed  it  in  such  a  time,  wherein  it  is  neither 
needfull  nor  combersome  unto  my  people.  It  is  a  condition 
I  would  have  accepted  in  all  the  seasons  of  my  age  :  but  in 
this  occasion  to  trusse  up  bag  and  baggage,  and  take  up  my 
bed  and  walke  :  I  am  particularly  pleased,  that  when  I  shall 
die,  I  shall  neither  breede  pleasure  nor  cause  sorrow  in  them. 
Shee  hath  caused  (which  is  the  recompence  of  an  artist)  that 
such  as  by  my  death  may  pretend  any  materiall  benefit, 
receive  thereby  elswhere,  jointly  a  materiall  losse  and  hinder- 
ance.  Death  lies  sometimes  heavie  upon  us,  in  that  it  is 
burthensome  to  others:  and  interesseth  us  with  their  in 
terest,  almost  as  much  as  with  ours  :  and  sometimes  more  ; 
yea  altogether  !  In  this  inconveniency  of  lodging  that  I 
seeke,  I  neither  entermix  pompe  nor  amplitude ;  For  I 
rather  hate  it.  But  a  certaine  simple  and  humble  pro- 
prietie,  which  is  commonly  found  in  places  where  lesse  Arte 
is  and  that  nature  honoureth  with  some  grace  peculiar  unto 
her  selfe.  Non  ampliter,  sed  munditer  convivium.  Plus  sails  PLAUTIN. 
quam  sumptus.  '  Not  a  great,  but  a  neat  feast.  More  con- 
'  ceit  then  cost.1 

And  then  it  is  for  those,  who  by  their  urgent  affaires  are 
compelled  to  travell  in  the  midst  of  deepe  Winter,  and 
amongst  the  Grisons,  to  be  surprized  by  such  extreamities 
in  their  journies.  But  I,  who  for  the  most  part  never  travell, 
but  for  pleasure,  will  neither  bee  so  ill  advised  nor  so  simply 
guided.  If  the  way  be  foule  on  my  right  hand,  I  take  the 
left :  If  I  find  my  selfe  ill  at  ease  or  unfit  to  ride,  I  stay  at 
home.  Which  doing,  and  observing  this  course,  in  very 
truth  I  see  no  place,  and  come  no  where,  that  is  not  as 
pleasant,  as  convenient,  and  as  commodious  as  mine  owne 
house.  True  it  is,  that  I  ever  find  superfluitie  superfluous  : 
and  observe  a  kind  of  troublesomenesse  in  delicatenesse  and 
plenty.  Have  I  omitted  or  left  any  thing  behind  me  that 
was  worth  the  seeing  ?  I  returne  backe  ;  It  is  ever  my  way, 
I  am  never  out  of  it.  I  trace  no  certaine  line,  neither  right 
nor  crooked.  Coniming  to  any  strange  place,  finde  I  not 

235 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  what  was  told  mee  ?  As  it  often  fortuneth,  that  others 
IX  .  judgements  agree  not  with  mine,  and  have  most  times  found 
Of  Vamtie  them  false,  I  grieve  not  at  my  labour :  I  have  learned  that 
what  was  reported  to  bee  there,  is  not.  I  have  my  bodies 
complexion  as  free,  and  my  taste  as  common,  as  any  man  in 
the  world.  The  diversity  of  fashions  betweene  one  and  other 
Nations,  concerneth  me  nothing,  but  by  the  varieties-pleasure. 
Each  custome  hath  his  reason.  Bee  the  trenchers  or  dishes 
of  wood,  of  pewter  or  of  earth  :  bee  my  meate  boy  led,  rosted 
or  baked  :  butter  or  oyle,  and  that  of  Olives  or  of  Wall- 
nuts  :  hot  or  colde  :  I  make  no  difference  :  all  is  one  to 
me  :  And  as  one,  that  is  growing  old  ;  I  accuse  the  generous 
facultie  ;  and  had  need  that  delicatenesse  and  choise,  should 
stay  the  indiscretion  of  my  appetite,  and  sometime  ease  and 
solace  my  stomacke.  When  I  have  beene  out  of  France,  and 
that  to  do  me  curtesie,  some  have  asked  me,  whether  I 
would  be  served  after  the  French  maner,  I  have  jested  at 
them,  and  have  ever  thrust-in  amongst  the  thickest  tables 
and  fullest  of  strangers.  I  am  ashamed  to  see  our  men  be 
sotted  with  this  foolish  humor,  to  fret  and  chafe,  when  they 
see  any  fashions  contrary  to  theirs.  They  thinke  themselves 
out  of  their  element,  when  they  are  out  of  their  Village  : 
Where  ever  they  come  they  keepe  their  owne  country 
fashions,  and  hate,  yea  and  abhorre  all  strange  manners  : 
Meet  they  a  countriman  of  theirs  in  Hungary,  they  feast 
that  good  fortune  :  And  what  doe  they  ?  Marry  close  and 
joyne  together,  to  blame,  to  condemne  and  to  scorne  so  many 
barbarous  fashions  as  they  see.  And  why  not  Barbarous, 
since  not  French  ?  Nay  happily  they  are  the  better  sort  of 
men,  that  have  noted  and  so  much  exclaimed  against  them. 
Most  take  going  out  but  for  comming  home.  They  travell 
close  and  covered,  with  a  silent  and  incommunicable  wit, 
defending  themselves  from  the  contagion  of  some  unknowne 
ayre.  What  I  speake  of  such,  puts  mee  in  minde  in  the  like 
matter,  of  that  I  have  heretofore  perceived  in  some  of  your 
young  Courtiers.  They  onely  converse  with  men  of  their 
coate  ;  and  with  disdaine  or  pitty  looke  upon  us,  as  if  we 
were  men  of  another  world.  Take  away  their  new  fangled, 
mysterious  and  affected  courtly  complements,  and  they  are 
out  of  their  byase.  As  farre  to  seeke  and  short  of  us,  as  we 
236 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

of  them.  That  saying  is  true  ;  that  'An  honest  man  is  a  CHAPTER 
'  man  compounded.1  Cleane  contrary,  I  travell  fully  glutted  IX 
with  our  fashions :  Not  to  seeke  Gaskoines  in  Sicilie  :  I  Of  Vamtie 
have  left  over  many  at  home.  I  rather  seeke  for  Graecians 
and  Persians  :  Those  I  accost,  them  I  consider,  and  with 
such  I  endevour  to  be  acquainted  :  to  that  I  prepare  and 
therein  I  employ  my  selfe.  And  which  is  more,  me  seemeth, 
I  have  not  met  with  many  maners,  that  are  not  worth  ours. 
Indeed  I  have  not  wandred  farre,  scarsly  have  I  lost  the  sight 
of  our  Chimnies.  Moreover,  most  of  the  casuall  companies 
you  meete  withall  by  the  way,  have  more  incommodity  than 
pleasure  :  a  matter  I  doe  not  greatly  take  hold  of,  and  lesse 
now  that  age  doth  particularize  and  in  some  sort  sequester 
me  from  common  formes.  You  suffer  for  other,  or  others 
endure  for  you.  The  one  inconvenience  is  yrkesome,  the 
other  troublesome  :  but  yet  the  last  is  (in  my  conceipt)  more 
rude.  It  is  a  rare  chaunce,  and  seld-seene  fortune,  but  of 
exceeding  solace  and  inestimable  worth,  to  have  an  honest 
man,  of  singular  experience,  of  a  sound  judgement,  of  a 
resolute  understanding  and  constant  resolution,  and  of 
manners  conformable  to  yours,  to  accompany  or  follow  you 
with  a  good  will.  I  have  found  great  want  of  such  a  one  in 
all  my  voyages.  Which  company  a  man  must  seeke  with 
discretion  and  with  great  heed  obtaine,  before  he  wander 
from  home.  With  me  no  pleasure  is  fully  delightsome  with 
out  communication  ;  and  no  delight  absolute,  except  im 
parted.  I  doe  not  so  much  as  apprehend  one  rare  conceipt, 
or  conceive  one  excellent  good  thought  in  my  minde,  but  me 
thinks  I  am  much  grieved  and  grievously  perplexed,  to  have 
produced  the  same  alone,  and  that  I  have  no  sympathizing 
companion  to  impart  it  unto.  Si  cum  hac  exceptwne  detur 
sapientia,  ut  illam  inclusam  teneam,  nee  enunciem,  reijciam. 
'If  wisdome  should  be  offered  with  this  exception,  that  I 
'  should  keepe  it  concealed,  and  not  utter  it,  I  would  refuse 
4  it."  The  other  strained  it  one  note  higher.  Si  contigerit  Cic.  Offic.  ii. 
ea  vita  sapienti,  ut  omnium  rerum  qffluentibus  copijs,  quamvis 
omnia,  quce  cognitione  digna  sunt,  summo  otio  secum  ipse  con- 
sideret  et  contempletur,  tamen  si  solitudo  tanta  sit,  ut  hominem 
videre  non  possit,  excedat  e  vita.  6  If  a  wiseman  might  lead 
4  such  a  life,  as  in  abundance  of  all  things  hee  may  in  full 

237 


CHAPTER 
IX 

Of  Vanitie 


VIRG. 
339- 


HOR.  Car.  iii. 
Od.  iii.  54. 


ENNI,  Cic. 

Senect.  p. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

quiet  contemplate  and  consider  all  things  worthy  of  know 
ledge,  yet  if  he  must  be  so  solitary  as  he  may  see  no  man, 
he  should  rather  leave  such  a  life.'  Architas  his  opinion  is 
sutable  to  mine,  which  was,  that  it  would  be  a  thing  un- 
pleasing  to  the  very  heavens,  and  distastefull  to  man,  to 
survay  and  walke  within  those  immense  and  divine  and 
coelestiall  bodies,  without  the  assistance  of  a  friend  or  com 
panion  :  Yet  is  it  better  to  be  alone,  than  in  tedious  and 
foolish  company.  Aristippus  loved  to  live  as  an  alien  or 
stranger  every  where  : 

Me  ^i  fata  meis  paterentur  ducere  vitam 

Auspicijs. 

If  fates  would  me  permit 

To  live  as  I  thinke  fit, 

I  should  chuse  to  weare  out  my  life  with  my  bum  in  the 
saddle,  ever  riding. 

— visere  gestiens, 

Qua  parte  debacchentur  ignes, 

Qua  nebula  pluvijque  rores. 

Delighting  much  to  goe  and  see 

Where  firy  heats  rage  furiously, 

Where  clouds  and  rainy  dews  most  be. 

Have  you  not  more  easie  pastimes  ?  What  is  it  you  want  ? 
Is  not  your  house  well  seated,  and  in  a  good  and  wholesome 
ayre  ?  Sufficiently  furnished,  and  more  then  sufficiently  cap 
able  ?  His  Roy  all  Majesty  hath  in  great  state  beene  in 
the  same,  and  more  then  once  taken  his  repast  there.  Doth 
not  your  family  in  rule  and  government  leave  many  more 
inferior  to  hir,  than  above  hir  eminency  ?  Is  there  any 
locall  thought  or  care,  that  as  extrordinary  doth  ulcerate, 
or  as  indigestible  doth  molest  you  ? 

QUCB  te  nunc  coquat  et  vexet  sub  pectore  fixa. 
Which  now  boyles  in  thy  brest, 
And  let's  thee  take  no  rest. 

Where  doe  you  imagine  you  may  bee  without  empeach- 
ment  or  disturbance  ?  Nunguam  simpliciter  fortuna  indulget. 
6  Fortune  never  favours  fully  without  exception. '  You  see 
then,  there  is  none  but  you  that  trouble  and  busie  your 
selfe :  and  every  where  you  shall  follow  your  self,  and  in  all 
places  you  shall  complaine.  For,  here  below  there  is  no 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

satisfaction  or  content,  except  for  brutall  or  divine  mindes.  CHAPTER 
He  who  in  so  j  ust  an  occasion  hath  no  content,  where  doth  IX  . 
he  imagine  to  finde  it  ?  Unto  how  many  thousands  of  men, 
doth  such  a  condition  as  yours,  bound  and  stay  the  limits 
of  their  wishes  ?  Reforme  but  your  selfe  ;  by  that  you  may 
doe  all :  Whereas  towards  fortune  you  have  no  right  or 
interest,  but  patience.  Nulla  placida  quies  est,  nisi  quam  SEN.  Ep.  Ivi. 
ratio  composuit.  '  There  is  no  pleasing  setled  rest,  but  such  m- 
4  as  reason  hath  made  up/  I  see  the  reason  of  this  adver 
tisement,  yea  I  perceive  it  wel.  But  one  shold  sooner  have 
done  and  more  pertinently,  in  one  bare  word  to  say  unto 
me  :  '  Be  wise.1  This  resolution  is  beyond  wisedome.  It 
is  hir  Worke  and  hir  production.  So  doth  the  Physition, 
that  is  ever  crying  to  a  languishing,  heart-broken  sicke-man, 
that  he  be  merry  and  pull  up  a  good  heart ;  he  should  lesse 
foolishly  perswade  him  if  he  did  but  bid  him,  to  be  healthy: 
as  for  me,  I  am  but  a  man  of  the  common  stamp.  It  is  a 
certaine,  sound  and  of  easie  understanding  precept :  Be  con 
tent  with  your  owne  ;  that  is  to  say,  with,  reason  :  the 
execution  wherof  notwithstanding  is  no  more  in  the  wiser 
sort  than  in  my  self:  It  is  a  popular  word,  but  it  hath 
a  terrible  far-reaching  extention.  What  comprehends  it 
not  ?  All  things  fall  within  the  compasse  of  discretion  and 
modification.  Wel  I  wot,  that  being  taken  according  to 
the  bare  letter,  the  pleasure  of  travell  brings  a  testimony 
of  unquietnesse  and  irresolution.  Which  to  say  truth,  are 
our  mistrisse  and  predominant  qualities.  Yea,  I  confesse  it : 
I  see  nothing,  bee  it  but  a  dreame  or  by  wishing,  whereon 
I  may  take  hold.  Onely  varietie  and  the  possession  of  diver- 
sitie  doth  satisfie  me  :  if  at  least  any  thing  satisfie  mee.  In 
travell  this  doth  nourish  mee,  that  without  interest  I  may 
stay  my  selfe ;  and  that  I  have  meanes  commodiously  to 
divert  my  selfe  from  it.  I  love  a  private  life,  because  it  is 
by  mine  owne  choice,  that  I  love  it,  not  by  a  diffidence  or 
disagreeing  from  a  publike  life ;  which  peradventure  is  as 
much  according  to  my  complexion.  I  thereby  serve  my 
Prince  more  joyfully  and  genuinely,  because  it  is  by  the  free 
election  of  my  judgement  and  by  my  reason,  without  any 
particular  obligation.  And  that  I  am  not  cast  or  forced 
thereunto,  because  I  am  unfit  to  be  received  of  any  other, 

*    239 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  or  am  not  beloved:  so  of  the  rest.     I  hate  those  morsels 
Of  yX-  .      that    necessitie    doth    carve    mee.      Every   commoditie,    of 
which  alone  I  were  to  depend,  should  ever  hold  me  by  the 
throat : 

PROPERT.  iii.  Alter  remus  aquas,  alter  mihi  radat  arenas. 

El-  "•  23-  Let  me  cut  waters  with  one  oare, 

With  th'  other  shave  the  sandie  shoare  : 

One  string  alone  can  never  sufficiently  hold  me.  You  will 
say,  there  is  vanitie  in  this  ammusement.  But  where  not  ? 
And  these  goodly  precepts  are  vanitie,  and  meere  vanitie  is 
Psal.  xciii.  11.  all  worldly  wisedome.  Dominus  novit  cogitationes  sapientum, 
quoniam  vance  sunt.  '  The  Lord  knowes  the  thoughts  of 
'  the  wise,  that  they  are  vaine.'  Such  exquisite  subtilities, 
are  onely  fit  for  sermons.  They  are  discourses,  that  will 
send  us  into  the  other  World  on  horsebacke.  Life  is  a 
materiall  and  corporall  motion,  an  action  imperfect  and  dis 
ordered  by  its  owne  essence :  I  employ  or  apply  my  selfe  to 
serve  it  according  to  it  selfe. 

Quisque  suos  patimur  manes. 
All  of  us  for  our  merit,, 
Have  some  attending  spirit. 

Sic  est  faciendum,  ne  contra  naturam  universam  nihil  con- 
tendamus,  ea  tamen  conservata,  propriam  sequamur.  '  We 
6  must  so  worke,  as  we  endevour  nothing  against  nature  in 
'  generall,  yet  so  observe  it,  as  we  follow  our  owne  in 
'  speciall.1  To  what  purpose  are  these  heaven-looking  and 
nice  points  of  Philosophic,  on  which  no  humane  being  can 
establish  and  ground  it  selfe  ?  And  to  what  end  serve  these 
rules,  that  exceed  our  use  and  excell  our  strength  ?  I  often 
see,  that  there  are  certaine  Ideaes  or  formes  of  life  proposed 
unto  us,  which  neither  the  proposer  nor  the  Auditors  have 
any  hope  at  all  to  follow ;  and  which  is  worse,  no  desire  to 
attaine.  Of  the  same  paper,  whereon  a  ludge  writ  but  even 
now  the  condemnation  against  an  adulterer,  hee  will  teare  a 
scantlin,  thereon  to  write  some  love-lines  to  his  fellow-judges 
wife.  The  same  woman  from  whom  you  came  lately,  and 
with  whom  you  have  committed  that  unlawfull-pleasing 
sport,  will  soone  after  even  in  your  presence,  raile  and  scold 
more  bitterly  against  the  same  fault  in  her  neighbour,  than 

240 


VIRG.  s& 
vi-  743- 

Cic.  Offic.  i. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

ever  Portia  or  Lucrece  could.      And  some  condemne  men  CHAPTER 
to  die  for  crimes,  that  themselves  esteeme   no   faults.       I  IX 

have  in  my  youth  seen  a  notable  man  with  one  hand  to 
present  the  people  most  excellent  and  well-written  verses, 
both  for  invention  and  extreme  licentiousnesse ;  and  with 
the  other  hand,  at  the  same  instant,  the  most  sharpe- 
railing  reformation,  according  to  Divinitie,  that  happily  the 
World  hath  scene  these  many-many  yeeres.  Thus  goes  the 
world,  and  so  goe  men.  We  let  the  lawes  and  precepts 
follow  their  way,  but  wee  keepe  another  course :  Not  onely 
by  disorder  of  manners,  but  often  by  opinion  and  contrary 
judgement.  Heare  but  a  discourse  of  Philosophy  read  ;  the 
invention,  the  eloquence  and  the  pertinencie,  doth  presently 
tickle  your  spirit  and  moove  you.  There  is  nothing  tickleth 
or  pricketh  your  conscience :  it  is  not  to  her  that  men 
speake.  Is  it  not  true  ?  Ariston  said,  that '  Neither  Bath  nor 
'  Lecture  are  of  any  worth,  except  the  one  wash  cleane,  and 
'  the  other  cleanse  al  filth  away.1  One  may  busie  himselfe 
about  the  barke,  when  once  the  pith  is  gotten  out :  As  when 
we  have  drunke  off  the  Wine,  we  consider  the  graving  and 
workmanship  of  the  cuppe.  In  all  the  parts  of  ancient 
Philosophic,  this  one  thing  may  be  noted,  that  one  same 
worke-man  publisheth  some  rules  of  temperance,  and  there- 
withall  some  compositions  of  love  and  licentiousnesse.  And 
Xenophon  in  Cliniaes  bosome,  writ  against  the  Aristippian 
vertue.  It  is  not  a  miraculous  conversion,  that  so  doth 
wave  and  hull  them  to  and  fro.  But  it  is,  that  Solon  doth 
sometimes  represent  himselfe  in  his  owne  colours,  and  some 
times  in  forme  of  a  Law-giver :  now  he  speaketh  for  the 
multitude,  and  now  for  himselfe.  And  takes  the  free  and 
naturall  rules  to  himselfe  ;  warranting  himselfe  with  a  con 
stant  and  perfect  soundnesse. 

Curentur  dubij  medicis  maioribus  cegri.  Juv.  Sat. 

Let  patients  in  great  doubt,  xiii-  I24- 

Seeke  great  Physitians  out. 

Antisthenes  alloweth  a  wise  man  to  love  and  doe  what  he 
list,  without  respect  of  lawes,  especially  in  things  he  deem- 
eth  needfull  and  n't :  Forasmuch  as  he  hath  a  better  under 
standing  than  they,  and  more  knowledge  of  vertue.  His 

2H  241 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Disciple  Diogenes  said,  'To  perturbations  we  should  oppose, 
IX  <  reason,  to  fortune,  confidence:  and  to  lawes,  nature:  To 
f  V  anitie  <  dainty  and  tender  stomacks,  constrained  and  artificiall 
6  ordinances/  Good  stomackes  are  simply  served  with  the 
prescriptions  of  their  naturall  appetite.  So  do  our  Phisi- 
tions,  who  whilst  they  tie  their  patients  to  a  strik^t  diet  of  a 
panada  or  a  sirope,  feed  themselves  upon  a  melone,  dainty 
fruits,  much  good  meat,  and  drinke  all  maner  of  good  Wine. 
I  wot  not  what  Bookes  are,  nor  what  they  meane  by  wise- 
dome  and  philosophy  (quoth  the  Curtizan  Lais)  but  sure  I 
am,  those  kinds  of  people  knocke  as  often  at  my  gates,  as 
any  other  men.  Because  our  licenciousnesse  transports  us 
commonly  beyond  what  is  lawfull  and  allowed,  our  lives- 
precepts  and  lawes  have  often  been  wrested  or  restrained 
beyond  universall  reason. 

luv.  Sat.  Nemo  satis  credit  tantum  delinquere,  quantum. 

xiv-  233-  Permittas. 

No  man  thinkes  it  enough  so  farre  t'offend 
As  you  give  lawfull  leave  (and  there  to  end). 

It  were  to  be  wished,  there  were  a  greater  proportion  be- 
tweene  commandement  and  obedience :  And  unjust  seemeth 
that  ayme  or  goale  whereto  one  cannot  possibly  attaine.  No 
man  is  so  exquisitely  honest  or  upright  in  living,  but  brings 
all  his  actions  and  thoughts  within  compasse  and  danger  of 
the  lawes,  and  that  ten  times  in  his  life  might  not  lawfully 
be  hanged.  Yea  happily  such  a  man,  as  it  were  pitty  and 
dangerously-hurtfull  to  loose,  and  most  unjust  to  punish  him. 

MART.  vii.  — Olle  quid  ad  te, 

Epig.  ix.  i.  De  cute  quidfaciat  ille  vel  ilia  sua  ? 

Foole,  what  hast  thou  to  doe,  what  he  or  she 
With  their  owne  skinnes  or  themselves  doing  bee  ? 

And  some  might  never  offend  the  lawes,  that  notwith 
standing  should  not  deserve  the  commendations  of  vertuous 
men:  and  whom  philosophy  might  meritoriously  and  justly 
cause  to  be  whipped.  So  troubled,  dimme-sighted  and  par- 
tiall  is  this  relation.  Wee  are  farre  enough  from  being 
honest  according  to  God  :  For,  wee  cannot  be  such  accord 
ing  to  our  selves.  Humane  wisedome  could  never  reach  the 
duties,  or  attaine  the  devoires  it  had  prescribed  unto  it  selfe. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

And  had  it  at  any  time  attained  them,  then  would  it  doubt-  CHAPTER 
lesse  prescribe  some  others  beyond  them,  to  which  it  might  IX 
ever  aspire  and  pretend.  So  great  an  enemy  is  our  condition  Of  Vanitie 
unto  consistence.  Man  doth  necessarily  ordaine  unto  him- 
selfe  to  bee  in  fault.  Hee  is  not  very  crafty,  to  measure 
his  duty  by  the  reason  of  another  being,  than  his  owne. 
To  whom  prescribes  he  that,  which  hee  expects  no  man  will 
performe  ?  Is  he  unjust  in  not  dooing  that,  which  he  cannot 
possibly  atchieve  ?  The  lawes  which  condemne  us,  not  to  be 
able  ;  condemne  us  for  that  we  cannot  performe.  If  the 
worst  happen,  this  deformed  libertie,  for  one  to  present 
himselfe  in  two  places,  and  the  actions  after  one  fashion, 
the  discourses  after  an  other  ;  is  lawfull  in  them,  which  re 
port  things  :  But  it  cannot  be  in  them,  that  acknowledge 
themselves  as  I  doe.  I  must  walke  with  my  penne,  as  I 
goe  with  my  feete.  The  common  high  way  must  have  con 
ference  with  other  wayes.  Catoes  vertue  was  vigorous,  be 
yond  the  reason  of  the  age  he  lived  in  :  and  for  a  man 
that  entermedled  with  governing  other  men,  destinated  for 
the  common  service ;  it  might  be  said  to  have  beene  a 
justice,  if  not  unjust,  at  least  vaine  and  out  of  season. 
Mine  owne  manners,  which  scarse  disagree  one  inch  from 
those  now  currant,  make  me  notwithstanding  in  some  sort, 
strange,  uncouth  and  unsociable  to  my  age.  I  wot  not, 
whether  it  be  without  reason,  I  am  so  distasted  and  out 
of  liking  with  the  world,  wherein  I  live  and  frequent :  but 
well  I  know,  I  should  have  small  reason  to  complaine,  the 
world  were  distasted  and  out  of  liking  with  me,  since  I  am 
so  with  it.  The  vertue  assigned  to  the  worlds  affaires,  it 
is  a  vertue  with  sundry  byases,  turnings,  bendings  and 
elbowes,  to  apply  and  joyne  it  selfe  to  humane  imbecilitie  : 
mixed  and  artificiall :  neither  right,  pure  or  constant,  nor 
meerely  innocent.  Our  Annales  even  to  this  day,  blame 
some  one  of  our  Kings,  to  have  over-simply  suffered  himself 
to  be  led  or  misled  by  the  conscientious  perswasions  of  his 
Confessor.  Matters  of  state  have  more  bold  precepts. 

—•exeat  aula,  LUCAN.  Bell. 

Qui  vult  esse  plus.  Civ.  i.  493. 

He  that  will  godly  bee,, 
From  Court  let  him  be  free. 

243 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  I  have  heretofore  assayed  to  employ  my  opinions  and  rules 
IX  of  life,  as  new,  as  rude,  as  impolished  or  as  unpolluted,  as 
Vamtie  they  were  naturally  borne  with  me,  or  as  I  have  attained 
them  by  my  institution  ;  and  wherewith,  if  not  so  commodi- 
ously,  at  least  safely  in  particular,  I  serve  mine  owne  turne, 
unto  the  service  of  publike  affaires  and  benefit  of  my  Com 
mon-wealth.  A  scholasticall  and  novice  vertue ;  but  I  have 
found  them  very  unapt  and  dangerous  for  that  purpose. 
He  that  goeth  in  a  presse  or  throng  of  people,  must  some 
times  step  aside,  hold  in  his  elbowes,  crosse  the  way,  advance 
himselfe,  start  backe,  and  forsake  the  right  way,  according 
as  it  falls  out :  Live  he  not  so  much  as  he  would  himselfe, 
but  as  others  will,  not  according  to  that  he  proposeth  to 
himselfe,  but  to  that  which  is  proposed  to  him  :  according  to 
times,  to  men  and  to  affaires,  and  as  the  skilfull  Mariner, 
saile  with  the  winde.  Plato  saith,  that  who  escapes  un 
tainted  and  cleane-handed  from  the  managing  of  the  world  ; 
escapeth  by  some  wonder.  He  sayes  also,  that  when  he  in- 
stituteth  his  Philosopher  as  chiefe  over  a  Common-wealth, 
he  meanes  not  a  corrupted  or  law  broken  commonwealth,  as 
that  of  Athens ;  and  much  lesse,  as  ours,  with  which  wise- 
dome  herselfe  would  be  brought  to  a  non-plus  or  put  to  her 
shifts.  And  a  good  hearb,  transplanted  into  a  soile  very 
diverse  from  her  nature,  doth  much  sooner  conforme  it  selfe 
to  the  soile,  then  it  reformeth  the  same  to  it  selfe.  I  feel 
ingly  perceive  that  if  I  were  wholly  to  enure  my  selfe  to  such 
occupations,  I  should  require  much  change  and  great  repair 
ing.  Which  could  I  effect  in  me  (and  why  not  with  time 
and  diligence  ?)  I  would  not.  Of  that  little  which  in  this 
vocation  I  have  made  triall  of,  I  have  much  distasted  my 
selfe  :  I  sometimes  finde  certaine  temptations  arise  in  my 
minde,  towards  ambition  ;  but  I  start  aside,  bandie  and 
opinionate  my  selfe  to  the  contrarie  : 


CATUL.  Lyr. 
Epig.  viii.  19. 


At  tu  (Jatulle  obstinatus  obdura. 

Be  thou  at  any  rate, 
Obdurate,  obstinate. 


I  am  not  greatly  called,  and  I  invite  my  selfe  as  little  unto 
it.     Libertie  and  idlenesse,  my  chiefe  qualities,  are  qualities 
diameterly  contrarie  to  that  mysterie.     We  know  not  how 
244 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

to  distinguish  mens  faculties.  They  have  certaine  divisions  CHAPTER 
and  limits  uneasie  and  over  nice  to  be  chosen.  To  conclude  IX 
by  the  sufficiency  of  a  private  life,  any  sufficiency  for  pub- 
like  use,  it  is  ill  concluded  :  Some  one  directs  himselfe  well, 
that  cannot  so  well  direct  others  ;  and  composeth  Essayes, 
that  could  not  worke  effects.  Some  man  can  dispose  and 
order  a  siege,  that  could  but  ill  commaund  and  marshall  a 
battel :  and  discourseth  well  in  private,  that  to  a  multitude 
or  a  Prince  would  make  but  a  bad  Oration.  Yea  peradven- 
ture,  tis  rather  a  testimony  to  him  that  can  doe  one,  that  he 
cannot  doe  the  other,  but  otherwise.  I  finde  that  high  spirits 
are  not  much  lesse  apt  for  base  things,  then  base  spirits  are 
for  high  matters.  Could  it  be  imagined,  that  Socrates  would 
have  given  the  Athenians  cause  to  laugh  at  his  own  charges, 
because  he  could  never  j  ustly  compt  the  suffrages  of  his  tribe, 
and  make  report  thereof  unto  the  counsell  ?  Truely  the 
reverence  I  beare,  and  respect  I  owe  unto  that  mans  perfec 
tions,  deserveth  that  his  fortune  bring  to  the  excuse  of  my 
principal  imperfections,  one  so  notable  example.  Our  suffi- 
ciencie  is  retailed  into  small  parcells.  Mine  hath  no  latitude, 
and  is  in  number  very  miserable.  Saturninus  answered  those, 
who  had  conferred  all  authority  upon  him,  saying,  '  Oh  you 
'  my  fellow-souldiers,  you  have  lost  a  good  Captaine,  by 
4  creating  him  a  bad  Generall  of  an  Annie."1  Who  in  time 
of  infection  vanteth  himselfe,  for  the  worlds-service,  to 
employ  a  genuine  or  sincere  vertue,  either  knowes  it  not, 
(opinions  being  corrupted  with  maners ;  in  good  sooth, 
heare  but  them  paint  it  forth,  marke  how  most  of  them 
magnifie  themselves  for  their  demeanours,  and  how  they 
forme  their  rules  :  in  liew  of  pourtraying  vertue,  they  onely 
set  forth  meere  injustice  and  vice,  and  thus  false  and  adul 
terate  they  present  the  same  to  the  institution  of  Princes) 
or  if  he  know  it,  he  wrongfully  boasteth  himselfe  ;  and  what 
ever  he  saith,  he  doth  many  things  whereof  his  owne  con 
science  accuseth  him.  I  should  easily  believe  Seneca,  of  the 
experience  he  made  of  it  in  such  an  occasion,  upon  condi 
tion  he  would  freely  speake  his  minde  of  it  unto  me.  The 
honourablest  badge  of  goodnesse  in  such  a  necessitie,  is  in 
geniously  for  a  man  to  acknowledge  both  his  owne  and  others 
faults  ;  to  stay  and  with  his  might,  hinder  the  inclination 

245 


MONTA  KINKS    HSSAYI-'.S 

rilAPTICH  toward  I  evill  :  and  avie  to  follow  this  count*,  to   hope  nnd 

IX         wish  heller.     In  tlim*  diimembringi  or  havooki  of  t'Yance, 
fYAmtlt    amj  divisions  whtreinto   we  are  miserably   lalne,  I  perceive 

<  \.  i\     man    Irftvcll    and    l>ui<     HiRlftolfo    lo    defend    In      ownt* 
cause,  and  lln    better     "i  l   wild  much   dilflORlblinff  and  false 
hood.      ll<-c   i  lit  i    hhoidd    plainely  and  roundly  write  of  M 
Nhonld  write  rashly  and  viciously.*    Take  I  he  bent  and  juMtent 
part,  what  in  it  else  bid    the  member  of  cram'd,  wornif-eatt'n 
and  corrupted  body  '?     Itut  of  Mich  a  l)od\   tlic  mcinbcr  leant 
hicke,  IN  called    HOUIld  :    and    good    reason    why,   heeau.se  our 
Dualities  have  no  title  luil    in   comparison,      Civill  innoerliey 
in  measured  according   to   placets   and     .  .1  ..n-        I    would   be 
end 


••l.ul  to  see  M.  It  a  eominendat  ion  of  A^eNJlaitN  in  Xeno|>hon, 
who  being  entreated  <>l  a  neighbour  Prince,  with  whom  he 
had  Momel  lines  made  \  ui  l.«  Miller  him  lo  paHsc  through 
hlH  countrie,  waM  therewith  well  pleased:  ^lanlin^  him  free 
passage  through  IN'loponnese,  and  having  him  at  In  mercy, 
did  not  only  not  emprison  nor  empoison  him,  but  according 
lo  (he  lenoin  of  his  promise,  wil  hotil  shew,  or  oMence,  or  mi 
I.  in.  I.  n.  .  entertained  him  with  all  eourtesie  and  Immanitic. 
To  such  humoui'N,  it  were  a  mailer  of  no  moment  :  At  oilier 
limes  and  elsewhere,  the  liherlie  and  nia^iianimil  le  of  such 
an  action  shall  be  highly  esteemed.  Our  Bullish  (  ialx-nl  incs 
would  have  mockl  al  it.  So  little  allinity  is  I  here  helweene 
the  Spartan  and  the  1'Veneh  innocencie.  We  have  not  with 
standing  some  honesl  men  amongst  us;  but  it  is  alter  our 
fashion.  lie  wlmse  manners  are  in  regularity  established 
ahovelhe  a^e  he  livelh  in,  lei  him  eit  her  wreist  or  mntlle 
his  rules:  or  (which  I  would  rather  pcrswadc  him)  let  him 
withdraw  InniM-lle  apart  and  not  .medic  with  UN.  What  shall 
he  gaine  thereby  P 


IUVB.  Sat,  Kyrqjium  tnuwtuimjiif  vim  in  iti  Mrmt, 

x"i-  64-  Hoc  nuHustnim  put>rut  rl  mirunti  iam  «ut>  tti'<itn> 

/*i.v«'«7>i<A-  invfntii  et   \vtw  ownuro  inulw. 


SOO    I    tt    in   in    (if  II..IIIK-       ••    .mil    v  ,-|  I  11.        i.n  ,- 

To  i.n  tii-.  blmombrodj  nn.i.-i  ».'u.i,-i  inii  (Mow    i>  n. 

I    i    li    ton  i  ul     or    mo  1  1.-      with    I"!.'.   I  In       m.-n    l,-i     I    i  ,.ni|».in- 

One  nmy  bewaile  the  bi'tter  times,  1ml  not  avoide  the  pre 
sent:  one  may  tlesi  re  other  magistrates   hut  notuithstanuinu; 


TITK    THIRD     HOOKE 

he  must  obey  those  he  hath  :   And   happily  it  is  more  com-  (JHAI'TKR 

mendable  to  obey  the  wicked  than  the  good.     So  long  as  the          J  x 

image   of  the  received,   allowed   and  ancient   lawes  of  this 

Monarchic  shall  be  extant  and   shine  in  any  corner  thereof; 

there  will  I   be;  there  will   I  abide.      And   if  by  any  disaster 

they  shall  chaunce  to  have  contradiction  or  em  peach  m  en  t 

amongst   themselves,  and   produce  two   factions,   of   doubt 

full   or    hard  choise  :    my   election  shall  be  to    avoide,  and 

if    1    can  escape  this  storme.      In   the   meane    while,   either 

nature  or  the  ha/ard   of  warre,  shall  lend   me  that  helping 

hand.      I    should    freely    have   declared    my    selfe     betweene 

(  'a^sar    and    Pornpey.      Hut    betweene    those    three    theevea 

which  came   after,   where   either    one    must   have    hid   him 

selfe,  or   followed   the   winde  :    which   I  deeme   lawfull,  when 

reason  swayeth  no  longer. 


Quod  diutrsu*  abitt.  VlRG.  Ain.  v. 

Whether  have  you  recourse, 
fto  farre  out  of  your  course? 

This  mingle-mangle  is  somewhat  beside  my  text.  I  stragle 
out  of  the  path  ;  yet  it  is  rather  by  licence,  then  by  unad 
vised  nesse  :  my  fantasies  follow  one  another:  but  sometimes* 
a  farre  off,  and  looke  one  at  another;  but  with  an  oblique 
looke.  I  have  heretofore  cast  mine  eyes  upon  some  of 
Platues  Dialogue!*  :  bemolted  with  a  fantastical!  variety  : 
the  h'rst  part  treateth  of  love,  all  the  latter  of  Jlhetorick. 
They  feare  not  those  variances:  and  have  a  wonderful!  grace 
in  suffering  themselves  to  bee  transported  by  the  wind  ;  or  to 
seerne  so.  The  titles  of  my  chapters,  embrace  not  all  way  es 
the  matter  :  they  often  but  glance  at  it  by  some  marke  . 
as  these  others,  Andria,  Kunuchus:  or  these,  Sylla,  Cicero, 
Torquatus.  I  love  a  PoeticaJl  kinde  of  march,  by  friskes, 
skips,  and  jumps.  It  is  an  arte  (saith  Plato)  light,  nimble, 
fleeting  and  light  braind.  There  are  some  treatises  in 
Plutarke,  where  he  forgets  his  theame,  where  the  drift  of  his 
argument  is  not  found  but  by  incidencie  and  chaunce,  all 
stuffed  with  strange  matter.  Marke  but  the  vagaries  in  hib 
Daemon  of  Socrates.  Oh  God  !  what  grace  hath  the  varia 
tion,  and  what  beautie  these  start  ings  and  nimble  escapes  ; 
and  then  most,  when  they  seeme  to  employ  carelesnesse  and 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  casualtie:    It    is    the    unheedie  and   negligent    reader  that 
IX  .  .      loseth  my  subject,  and  not  my  life.     Some  word  or  other 
if  Vamtie    sj,a]j  ever  be  found  in  a  corner  that  hath  relation  to  it,  though 
closely  couched.     I  am  indiscreetly  and  tumultuously  at  a 
fault ;  my  stile  and  wit  are  still  gadding  alike.     A  little  folly 
is  tolerable  in  him  that  will  not  be  more  sottish  ;  say  our 
masters  precepts,  and  more  their  examples.      A  thousand 
Poets  labour  and  languish  after  the  prose-manner,  but  the 
best  antient  prose,   which  I   indifferently  scatter  here  and 
there  for  verse,  shineth  every  where,  with  a  poetticall  vigour 
and  boldnesse,  and  representeth  some  aire  or  touch  of  it's 
fury :  Verily  she  ought  to  have  the  maistry  and  prehemi- 
nence  given  her  in  matters  of  speech.     A  Poet  (saith  Plato) 
seated  on  the  Muses  footestoole,  doth  in  a  furie  powre  out 
whatsoever  commeth  in  his  mouth,  as  the  pipe  or  cocke  of  a 
fountaine,  without  considering  or  ruminating  the  same :  and 
many  things  escape  him,  diverse  in  colour,  contrary  in  sub 
stance,  and  broken  in  course.     Antient  Divinitie  is  altogether 
Poesie  (say  the  learned)  and  the  first  Philosophic.     It  is  the 
original  language  of  the  Gods.     I  understand  that  the  mat 
ter  distinguisheth   it  selfe.     It  sufficiently  declareth  where 
it  changeth,  where  it  concludeth,  where  it  beginneth,  and 
where  it  rejoyneth ;  without  enterlacings  of  words,  joyning 
ligaments  and  binding  seames  wrested-in  for  the  service  of 
weake  and   unattentive  eares  :  and  without  glossing  or  ex 
pounding  my  selfe.     What  is  he,  that  would  not  rather  not  be 
read  at  all,  then  read  in  drowsie  and  cursorie  manner :  Nihil 
est  tarn  utile,  quod  in  transitu  prosit.     '  There  is  nothing  so 
'  profitable,  that  being  lightly  past  over,  will  doe  good.'     If 
to  take  bookes  in  hand  were  to  learne  them :  and  if  to  see 
were  to  view  them  ;  and  if  to  runne  them  over  were  to  seize 
upon  them,  I  should  be  to  blame,  to  make  my  self  altogether 
so  ignorant  as  I  say.     Since  I  cannot  stay  the  readers  atten 
tion  by  the  weight :  Maneo  male,  if  I  happen  to  stay  him  by 
my  intricate  confusion :  yea  but  he  will  afterward  repent, 
that  ever  he  ammused  himselfe  about  it.     You  say  true,  but 
hee  shall  have  ammused  himselfe  upon  it.     And  there  be7 
humors,  to  whom  understanding  causeth  disdaine,  who  be 
cause  they  shall  not  know  what  I  meane  will  esteeme  mee  the 
better,  and  will  conclude  the  mystery  and  depth  of  my  sense 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

by  the  obscuritie :  Which,  to  speake  in  good  earnest,  I  hate  CHAPTER 
as  death,  and  would  shunne  it,  if  I  could  avoid  my  selfe.  *x  .  . 
Aristotle  vaunteth  in  some  place  to  affect  the  same.  A 
vicious  affectation,  forsomuch  as  the  often  breaking  of  my 
chapters,  I  so  much  used  in  the  beginning  of  my  booke, 
seemed  to  interrupt  attention  before  it  be  conceived :  Dis 
daining  for  so  little  a  while  to  collect  and  there  seat  it  selfe : 
I  have  betaken  my  selfe  to  frame  them  longer ;  as  requiring 
proposition  and  assigned  leasure.  In  such  an  occupation  he 
to  whom  you  will  not  grant  one  houre,  you  will  allow  him 
nothing.  And  you  doe  nought  for  him,  for  whom  you  doe, 
but  in  doing  some  other  thing.  Sithence  perad venture  I  am 
particularly  tied  and  precisely  vowed,  to  speake  by  halves,  to 
speake  confusedly,  to  speake  discrepantly.  I  therefore  hate 
this  trouble-feast  reason  :  And  these  extravigant  projects, 
which  so  much  molest  mans  life,  and  these  so  subtle  opinions, 
if  they  have  any  truth  ;  I  deeme  it  over-deare,  and  find  it 
too  incommodious.  On  the  other  side,  I  labour  to  set  forth 
vanitie  and  make  sottishnesse  to  prevaile  if  it  bring  me  any 
pleasure.  And  without  so  nicely  controlling  them,  I  follow 
mine  owne  naturall  inclinations.  I  have  elsewhere  seene 
some  houses  ruined,  statues  overthrowne,  both  of  heaven  and 
of  earth  :  But  men  be  alwaies  one.  All  that  is  true :  and 
yet  I  can  not  so  often  survay  the  vast  toombe  of  that  Citie 
so  great,  so  populous  and  so  puissant,  but  I  as  often  admire 
and  reverence  the  same.  The  care  and  remembrance  of 
evills  is  recommended  unto  us.  Now  have  I  from  my  in- 
fancie  beene  bred  and  brought  up  with  these :  I  have  had 
knowledge  of  the  affaires  of  Rome,  long  time  before  I  had 
notice  of  those  of  my  house.  I  knew  the  Capitoll,  and  its 
platforme,  before  I  knew  Louvre,  the  pallace  of  our  Kings  in 
Paris  ;  and  the  River  Tiber,  before  Seyne.  I  have  more  re- 
membred  and  thought  upon  the  fortunes  and  conditions  of 
Lucullus,  Metellus  and  Scipio,  then  of  any  of  our  country 
men.  They  are  deceased,  and  so  is  my  father,  as  fully  as 
they :  and  is  as  distant  from  me  and  life  in  eighteene  yeeres 
as  they  were  in  sixteene  hundred  :  Whose  memorie,  amitie, 
and  societie,  I,  notwithstanding  omit  not  to  continue,  to 
embrace  and  converse  withall :  with  a  perfect  and  most  lively 
union.  Yea  of  mine  owne  inclination,  I  am  more  officious 
21  249 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  toward  the  deceased.  They  can  no  longer  helpe  themselves  ; 
Of  VX  •  •  kut  (as  me  seemeth)  they  require  so  much  the  more  my  ayde  : 
Vamtie  ^nere  js  Gratitude,  and  there  appeareth  she  in  her  perfect 
lustre.  A  benefit  is  lesse  richly  assigned,  where  retrograda- 
tion  and  reflexion  is.  Arcesilaus  going  to  visit  Ctesibius 
that  was  sicke,  and  finding  him  in  very  poore  plight,  faire 
and  softly  thrust  some  money  under  his  boulster,  which  he 
gave  him  :  And  concealing  it  from  him,  left  and  gave  him 
also  a  quittance  for  ever  being  beholding  to  him.  Such  as 
have  at  any  time  deserved  friendship  or  love  or  thanks  at  my 
hands,  never  lost  in  the  same,  by  being  no  longer  with  me. 
I  have  better  paid  and  more  carefully  rewarded  them,  being 
absent  and  when  they  least  thought  of  it.  I  speake  more 
kindely  and  affectionately  of  my  friends,  when  there  is  least 
meanes,  that  ever  it  shall  come  to  their  eares.  I  have  hereto 
fore  undergone  a  hundred  quarrels  for  the  defence  of  Pompey 
and  Brutus  his  cause.  This  acquaintance  continueth  to  this 
day  betweene  us.  Even  of  present  things,  wee  have  no 
other  holde,  but  by  our  fantazie.  Perceiving  my  selfe  unfit 
and  unprofitable  for  this  age,  I  cast  my  selfe  to  that  other  ; 
And  am  so  besotted  with  it  that  the  state  of  the  said 
j  ancient,  free,  just  and  florishing  Rome,  (for  I  neither  love  the 
birth  nor  like  the  old  age  of  the  same)  doth  interest,  con- 
cerne  and  passionate  me.  And  therefore  can  I  not  so  often 
looke  into  the  situation  of  their  streets  and  houses,  and  those 
wondrous-strange  ruines,  that  may  be  said  to  reach  down  to 
the  Antipodes,  but  so  often  must  I  ammuse  my  selfe  on  them. 
Is  it  nature  or  by  the  error  of  fantasie,  that  the  seeing  of 
places,  wee  know  to  have  beene  frequented  or  inhabited  by 
men,  whose  memory  is  esteemed  or  mentioned  in  stories,  doth 
in  some  sort  move  and  stirre  us  up  as  much  or  more,  than 
the  hearing  of  their  noble  deeds,  or  reading  of  their  composi- 

Cic.  s.  De  Fin.  tions  ?  Tanta  vis  admonitionis  inest  in  locis :  Et  id  quidem  in 
hac  urbe  infinitum ;  quacunque  enim  ing  redimur,  in  aliquam 
historiam  vestigium  ponivnus.  '  So  great  a  power  of  admoni- 
'  tion  is  in  the  very  place.  And  that  in  this  City  is  most 
'  infinite,  for  which  way  soever  we  walke,  we  set  our  foote 
4  upon  some  History."  I  am  much  delighted  with  the  con 
sideration  of  their  countenance,  port  and  abilliments.  I 
ruminate  those  glorious  names  betweene  my  teeth,  and  make 
250 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

mine  eares  to  ring  with    the   sound  of  them.      Ego   illos  CHAPTER 
veneror,  et  tantis  nominibus  semper  assurgo.     6 1  do  reverence  IX 

4  them,  and  at  their  names  I  do  rise  and  make  curtesie " :  Of  Of  Vanitie 
things  but  in  some  sort  great,  strange  and  admirable,  I 
admire  their  common  parts.  I  could  wish  to  see  them  walke 
and  suppe  together,  and  heare  their  discourses.  It  were  In 
gratitude  to  despise,  and  impietie  to  neglect  the  reliques  or 
images  of  so  many  excellent,  honest  good  men,  and  there- 
withall  so  valiant,  which  I  have  seene  live  and  die  :  And  who 
by  their  examples,  had  we  the  wit  or  grace  to  follow  them, 
affoord  us  so  many  notable  instructions.  And  Rome  as  it 
stands  now,  deserveth  to  be  loved  :  Confederated  so  long 
since,  and  sharing  titles  with  our  Crowne  of  France  :  Being 
the  only  common  and  universall  Citie :  The  Soveraigne 
Magistrate  therein  commanding,  is  likewise  knowne  abroad 
in  divers  other  places.  It  is  the  chiefe  Metropolitan  Citie  of 
all  Christian  nations :  Both  French  and  Spaniards  and  all 
men  else  are  there  at  home.  To  be  a  Prince  of  that  state,  a 
man  needs  but  be  of  Christendome,  where  ever  it  be  seated. 
There's  no  place  here  on  earth,  that  the  Heavens  have  em 
braced  with  such  influence  of  favors  and  grace,  and  with  such 
constancie :  Even  her  ruine  is  glorious  with  renowne,  and 
swolne  with  glorie. 

Laudandis  preciosior  minis. 

Ev'n  made  more  honourable, 
By  ruines  memorable. 

Low-levelled  as  she  lieth,  and  even  in  the  tombe  of  hir 
glory,  she  yet  reserveth  the  lively  image  and  regardfull 
markes  of  Empire.  Vt  palam  si  uno  in  loco  gaudeniis  opus 
esse  naturae.  '  So  as  it  is  cleare,  in  one  place  is  set-forth  the 
4  worke  of  nature  in  her  jollity."  Some  one  would  blame") 
himselfe,  yea  and  mutinie,  to  feele  himselfe  tickled  with  so  ' 
vaine  a  pleasure.  Our  humors  are  not  over-vaine,  that  be 
pleasant.  Whatsoever  they  be,  that  constantly  content  a 
man  capable  of  common  understanding,  I  could  not  finde 
in  my  heart  to  moane  or  pitty  him.  I  am  much  behold 
ing  to  fortune,  in  asmuch  as  untill  this  day,  she  hath 
committed  nothing  outragiously  against  me,  or  imposed 
any  thing  upon  me,  that  is  beyond  my  strength,  or  that 

251 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER   I    could  not  well  beare.     It  is  not  haply  her  custome,  to 
IX          suffer  such  as  are  not  importunate  or  over  busie  with  hir, 
OfVanitie    to  live  in  peace. 

HOR.  Car.  iii.  Quanto  quisque  sibi  plura  negaverit, 

Od.  xvi.  21,  A  Dijs  pluraferet,  nil  cupientium, 

42.  Nudus  castra  peto,  multa  petentibus, 

Desunt  multa. 

The  more  that  men  shall  to  themselves  denie, 
The  more  the  gods  will  give  them  :  threed-bare  I 
Follow  the  campe  of  them  that  nought  desire,, 
They  still  want  much,  that  still  doe  much  require. 

If  she  continue  so,   I  shall    depart  very  well  content  and 

satisfied. 

Ibid.  Car.  ii.  —nihil  supra, 

Od.  xviii.  ii.  Deox  lacesso. 

More  than  will  serve,,  to  have 
Of  Gods  I  doe  not  crave. 

But  beware  the  shocke :  Thousands  miscary  in  the  haven, 
and  are  cast  away  being  neerest  home.  I  am  easily  com 
forted  with  what  shall  happen  here  when  I  am  gone.  Things 
present  trouble  me  sufficiently,  and  set  me  thorovvly  a 
worke. 
OVID.  Metam.  Fortunes  ccatera  mando. 

"•  I4°*  The  rest  I  doe  commit 

To  Fortune  (as  is  fit). 

Besides,  I  am  not  tied  with  that  strong  bond,  which  some 
say,  bindes  men  to  future  times,  by  the  children  bearing 
their  names,  and  succeeding  them  in  honors :  And  being  so 
much  to  be  desired,  it  may  be  I  shall  wish  for  them  so  much 
the  lesse.  I  am  by  my  selfe  but  overmuch  tied  unto  the 
world,  and  fastned  unto  life :  I  am  pleased  to  be  in  Fortunes 
hold  by  the  circumstances  properly  necessary  to  my  state, 
without  enlarging  her  jurisdiction  upon  me  by  other  wayes  : 
And  I  never  thought,  that  to  be  without  children,  were  a 
defect,  able  to  make  mans  life  lesse  compleat  and  lesse  con 
tented.  A  barren  state  or  sterill  vacation,  have  also  their 
peculiar  commodities.  Children  are  in  the  number  of  things^ 
that  need  not  greatly  bee  desired ;  especially  in  these  cor- 

252 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

rupted  dales,  wherein  it  would  be  so  hard  a  matter  to  make  CHAPTER 
them  good.  Bonajam  nee  nasci  licet  ita  corrupta  sunt  semina.  n  ^  .  . 
'  We  cannot  now  have  good  things  so  much  as  grow,  the 
'  seeds  are  so  corrupt."  Yet  have  they  just  cause  to  moane 
them,  that  having  once  gotten,  lose  them  untimely.  He 
who  left  me  my  house  in  charge,  considering  my  humor,  which 
was  to  stay  at  home  so  little,  fore-saw  I  should  be  the  over 
throw  of  it.  He  was  deceived  :  I  am  now  as  I  came  unto 
it,  if  not  somewhat  better.  And  that,  without  any  Office 
or  Churchliving ;  which  are  no  small  helps.  As  for  other 
matters,  if  Fortune  have  offred  me  no  violent  or  extraordi 
nary  offence,  so  hath  she  not  shewed  me  any  great  favour  or 
extraordinary  grace.  Whatsoever  I  have  belonging  to  it, 
that  may  properly  be  termed  her  gifts,  was  there  before  I 
came  unto  it ;  yea  and  a  hundred  yeeres  before.  I  particu 
larly  enjoy  no  essentiall  good,  or  possesse  no  solid  benefit, 
that  I  owe  unto  her  liberalise :  Indeed  she  hath  bestowed 
some  wind-pufft  favours  upon  me,  which  may  rather  be 
termed  titular  and  honourable  in  shew,  then  in  substance, 
or  materiall ;  And  which,  in  good  truth,  she  hath  not 
granted,  but  offered  me,  God  he  knowes,  to  me,  who  am 
altogether  materiall ;  not  satisfied  but  with  realitie,  which 
must  also,  be  massie  and  substantiall :  And  who,  if  I  durst 
confesse  it,  would  not  thinke  avarice  much  lesse  excusable 
then  ambition :  nor  griefe  lesse  evitable,  then  shame  :  nor 
health  lesse  desirable,  then  learning  :  or  riches,  lesse  to  be 
wished,  then  nobilitie.  Amongst  her  vaine  favours,  I  have 
none  doth  so  much  please  my  fond  selfe  pleasing  conceit,  as 
an  authenticke  Bull,  charter  or  patent  of  denizonship  or 
borgeouship  of  Rome,  which  at  my  last  being  there,  was 
granted  me  by  the  whole  Senate  of  that  Citie :  garish  and 
trimly  adorned  with  goodly  Scales,  and  written  in  faire 
golden  letters ;  bestowed  upon  me  with  all  gracious  and  free 
liberalitie.  And  forsomuch  as  they  are  commonly  conferred 
in  divers  stiles,  more  or  lesse  favourable :  and  that  before  I 
had  ever  scene  any,  I  would  have  beene  glad  to  have  had 
but  a  paterne  or  formular  of  one,  I  will  for  the  satisfaction 
of  any,  if  he  fortune  to  be  possessed  with  such  a  curiositie  as 
mine,  here  set  down  the  true  copy  or  transcript  of  it :  and 
thus  it  is. 

253 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Quod  Horatius   Maximus,  Martins    Cecius,  Alexander 

IX  Mutus,  almce  urbis  conservatores  de  Illustrissimo  viro 

fVanitie  Michaele    Montana,    Equite    sancti    Michaelis    et    a 

Cubiculo  Regis  Christianissimi,  Romana  civitate  do- 

nando,  ad  Senatum  retukrunt,  S.P.Q.R.  de  ea  re  ita 

fieri  censuit. 

CVM  veteri  more  et  institute  cupide  illi  semper  studioseque 
suscepti  sint,  qui  virtute  ac  nobilitate  prcestantes,  magno 
Reipublicce  nostrce  usui  atque  ornamento  juissent,  vel  esse  ali- 
quando  possent  :  Nos  majorum  nostrorum  exemplo  atque 
auctoritate  permoti,  preclaram  ham  Consuetudijiem  nobis  imi- 
tandam  ac  servandam  fore  censemus.  Quamobrem  cum  Illus- 
trissimus  Michael  Montanus  Eques  sancti  Michaelis,  et  a 
cubiculo  Regis  Cliristianissirm ;  Romani  nominis  studiosissi- 
mus,  et  familice  laude  atque  splendore  et  proprijs  virtutum 
meritis  dignissimus  sit,  qui  summo  Senatus  Populique  Romani 
judicio  ac  studio  in  Romanam  Civitatem  adsciscatur,  placere 
Senatui  P.Q.R.  Illustrissimum  Michaelem  Montanum  rebus 
omnibus  ornatissimum,  atque  huic  inclyto  Populo  charissimum, 
ipsum  posterosque,  in  Rom.  civitatem  adscribi,  ornarique,  omni 
bus  et  premijs  et  honoribus,  quibus  illifruuntur,  qui  Gives 
patritijque  Romani  nati  aut  jure  optimo  facti  sunt.  In  quo 
censer e  Senatum  P.Q.R.  se  non  tarn  illi  lus  Civitatis  largiri 
quam  debitum  tribuere,  neque  magis  beneficium  dare  quam 
ab  ipso  accipere,  qui  hoc  Civitatis  munere  accipiendo,  singulari 
Civitatem  ipsam  ornamento  atque  honor  e  affecerit.  Quam 
quidem  S.C.  auctoritatem  ijdem  Conservatores  per  Senatus 
P.Q.R.  scribas  in  acta  referri  atque  in  Capitolij  curia  servari, 
privilegiumque  hujusmodi  fieri,  solitoque  urbis  sigillo  com- 
muniri,  curarunt.  Anno  ab  urbe  condito  CX^CCCXXXI. 
post  Christum  natum  M.D.  Lxxxl.  III.  Idus  Martijt 

Horatius  Fuscus  sacri  S.P.Q.R.  scriba. 

Vincent.  Martholus  sacri  S.P.Q.R.  scriba. 

AT  the  motion   of  Horatius  Maximus,  Martius  Cecius, 
Alexander    Mutus,    who    are    Conservators    of    this 
beautifull   Cittie   concerning   the    endenizing    and    making 
Cittizen  of  Rome  the  noble  Gentleman  Michael  de  Mon 
taigne,  Knight  of  the  Order  of  Saint  Michaell,  and  one  of  the 
254 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Chamber  of  the  most  Christian  King,  the  Senate  and  people  CHAPTER 
of  Rome  thought  good  thereof  thus  to  exact.  Whereas  by  the  IX  .  . 
antient  custome  and  good  order,  they  have  ever  and  with 
good  will  been  entertained,  who  excelling  in  vertue  and  nobili- 
tie  have  been,  or  at  any  time  might  be  of  any  great  use  or 
ornament  unto  our  common-weale  :  Wee,  mooved  by  example 
and  authoritie  of  our  Auncesters,  decree,  That  this  notable 
custome,  by  us  should  be  ensued  and  observed.  Wherefore, 
sithence  the  right  Noble  Michael  de  Montaigne,  Knight  of 
Saint  Michaels  Order,  and  one  of  the  chamber  of  the  most 
Christian  King,  both  is  most  affectionate  unto  the  Roman 
name,  and  by  the  commendations  and  splendor  of  his 
pedegree,  as  also  by  the  merits  of  his  proper  vertues,  most 
worthe  to  be  adopted  and  inserted  into  the  Romane  Cittie 
with  a  speciall  judgement  and  good  will  of  the  Senate  and 
people  of  Rome.  It  pleaseth  the  Senate  and  people  of  Rome 
that  the  right  noble  Michael  de  Montaigne,  adorned  in  all 
complements,  and  well-beloved  of  this  famous  Communaltie, 
both  himselfe  and  his  successours  should  be  ascribed  and 
enfranchized  into  this  Romane  Cittie,  and  be  graced  with  al 
rewards  and  honours,  which  they  enjoy,  who  either  have 
been  borne,  or  elected,  either  Citizen  or  Noble  men  of  Rome. 
Wherein  the  Senate  and  people  doe  decree.  That  they  doe 
not  so  much  vouchsafe  him  the  right  of  their  Citie,  as  give 
him  that  is  due  unto  him,  nor  doe  they  rather  give  him  a 
beneh'te,  then  receive  it  of  him,  who  by  accepting  this  gift 
of  the  Cittie,  doth  countenance  the  Cittie  with  a  singu 
lar  ornament  and  honour.  Which  Act  and  authoritie  of 
the  Senates  decree :  the  said  Conservators  caused  by  the 
Clearks  of  the  Senate  and  people  to  be  registred  and  laid-up 
in  the  Capitoll  Court,  and  this  Priviledge  to  be  made  and 
signed  with  the  Cities  usuall  Scale.  In  the  yeare  since  the 
building  of  the  Citie  CXoCCCXXXL  after  the  birth  of 
Christ  a  thousand  five  hundred  eighty  and  one :  the  Ides  of 
March. 

HORATIUS  Fuscus,  and  VINCENT  MARTHOLUS 
Clarks  of  the  sacred  Senate  and  people  of  Rome. 

Being  neither  Burgeois  nor  Denizon  of  any  Citie,  I  am 
well  pleased  to  bee  so,  of  the  noblest  and  greatest  that  ever 

255 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  was  heretofore,  or  ever  shall  be  hereafter.  If  others  did  so 
1^ .  .  attentively  consider  and  survay  themselves  as  I  doe,  they 
shall  as  I  doe,  finde  themselves  full  of  inanitie,  fondnesse  or 
^vanity.  I  can  not  be  rid  of  it,  except  I  rid  and  quit  my  selfe. 
Wee  are  all  possessed  and  overwhelmed  therewith,  as  well 
one  as  the  other.  But  such  as  have  a  feeling  of  it,  have 
somewhat  the  better  bargaine :  And  yet  I  am  not  sure  of  it. 
This  common  opinion  and  vulgar  custome,  to  looke  and 
marke  elsewhere  then  on  our  selves,  hath  well  provided  for 
our  affaires.  It  is  an  object  full-fraught  with  discontent, 
wherein  we  see  nothing  but  miserie  and  vanitie.  To  tlV  end 
we  should  not  wholly  be  discomforted,  Nature  hath  very 
fitly  cast  the  action  of  our  sight  outward  :  Wee  goe  forward 
according  to  the  streame,  but  to  turne  our  course  backe  to 
our  selves,  is  a  painefull  motion  :  the  sea  likewise  is  troubled, 
raging  and  disquieted,  when  'tis  turned  and  driven  into  it 
selfe.  Observe  (saith  every  one)  the  motions  and  bransles  of 
the  heavens  :  take  a  survay  of  all :  the  quarrell  of  this  man, 
the  pulse  of  that  man,  and  anothers  last  testament :  to  con 
clude,  behold  and  marke  ever,  high  or  low,  right  or  oblique, 
before  or  behind  you.  It  was  a  paradoxall  commandement, 
which  the  God  of  Delphos  laid  heeretofore  upon  us  ;  saying. 
'  View  your  selves  within  ;  know  your  selves ;  and  keepe  you 
'  to  your  selves  ' :  Your  minde  and  your  will,  which  elsewhere 
is  consumed,  bring  it  unto  it  selfe  againe,  you  scatter,  you 
stragle,  you  stray,  and  you  distract  yourselves :  call  your 
selves  home  againe ;  rowze  and  uphold  your  selves ;  you  are 
betrayed,  you  are  spoiled  and  dissipated  ;  your  selves  are 
stolen  and  taken  from  your  selves.  Seest  thou  not  how  all 
this  universe  holdeth  all  his  sights  compelled  inward,  and  his 
eyes  open  to  contemplate  it  selfe  ?  Both  inward  and  out 
ward  it  is  ever  vanitie  for  thee ;  but  so  much  lesse  vanitie, 
by  how  much  lesse  it  is  extended.  Except  thy  selfe,  Oh  man, 
(said  that  God)  every  thing  doth  first  seeke  and  study  it 
selfe,  and  according  to  it's  neede  hath  limits  to  her  travells, 
and  bounds  to  her  desires.  There 's  not  one  so  shallow,  so 
empty,  and  so  needy  as  thou  art  who  embracest  the 
whole  world  :  Thou  art  the  Scrutator  without  know- 
ledg,  the  magistrate  without  jurisdiction  :  and 

when  all  is  done,  the  vice  of  the  play. 
256 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 


THE     TENTH    CHAPTER 

How  one  ought  to  governe  his  will. 

N  regard  of  the  common  sort  of  men,  few 
things  touch  me,  or  (to  speake  properly) 
sway  me :  For  it  is  reason  they  touch,  so 
they  possesse-us  not.  I  have  great  neede, 
both  by  study  and  discourse,  to  en  crease 
this  priviledge  of  insensibilitie,  which  is 
naturally  crept  farre  into  me.  I  am  not 
wedded  unto  many  things,  and  by  con 
sequence,  not  passionate  of  them.  I  have  my  sight  cleare, 
but  tied  to  few  objects  :  My  senses  delicate  and  gentle  ;  but 
my  apprehension  and  application  hard  and  dull.  I  engage 
my  selfe  with  difficulty.  As  much  as  I  can,  I  employ  my 
selfe  wholly  to  my  selfe.  And  in  this  very  subject,  I 
would  willingly  bridle  and  uphold  my  affection,  lest  it  be 
too  farre  plunged  therein  ;  Seeing  it  is  a  Subject  I  possesse 
at  the  mercy  of  others,  and  over  which  fortune  hath  more 
interest  then  my  selfe.  So  as  even  in  my  health,  which  I  so 
much  esteeme,  it  were  requisite  not  to  desire,  nor  so  care 
fully  to  seeke  it,  as  thereby  I  might  light  upon  intolerable 
diseases.  We  must  moderate  our  selves,  betwixt  the  hate 
of  paine,  and  the  love  of  pleasure.  Plato  sets  downe  a 
meane  course  of  life  betweene  both.  But  to  affections  that 
distract  me  from  my  selfe,  and  divert  me  elsewhere ;  surely, 
to  such  I  oppose  my  selfe  with  all  my  force.  Mine  opinion 
is,  that  one  should  lend  himselfe  to  others,  and  not  give 
himselfe  but  to  himselfe.  Were  my  wil  easie  to  engage 
or  apply  it  selfe,  I  could  not  continue :  I  am  over  tender 
both  by  nature  and  custome, 

Fugax  rerum,  securaque  in  otia  natus. 

Avoiding  active  businesse, 
And  borne  to  secure  idlenesse. 

Contested  and  obstinate  debates,  which  in   the  end  would 

give  mine  adversarie  advantage,  the  issue  which  would  make 

my  earnest  pursuit  ashamed,  would  perchance  torment  mee 

2  K  257 


OVID.  Trist. 
iii.  El.  ii.  9. 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  cruelly.     If  I  vexed  as  other  men,  my  soule   should  never 

^  have  strength  to  beare  tir  alaroms  and  emotions,  that  follow 

Hhtt  °ne     suc^  as  em^race  mucn-    She  would  presently  be  displaced  by 

°Uerne  °hfs°V"  ^is  intestine  agitation.  If  at  any  time  I  have  beene  urged 
will  to  the  managing  of  strange  affaires,  I  have  promised  to 
undertake  them  with  my  hand,  but  not  with  my  lungs  and 
liver  ;  to  charge,  and  not  to  incorporate  them  into  me,  to 
have  a  care,  but  nothing  at  all  to  be  over  passionate  of  them : 
I  looke  to  them,  but  I  hatch  them  not.  I  worke  enough  to 
dispose  and  direct  the  domesticall  troubles  within  mine  owne 
entrailes  and  veines,  without  harbouring,  or  importune  my 
selfe  with  any  forraine  employments  :  And  am  sufficiently 
interessed  with  my  proper,  naturall  and  essentiall  affaires, 
without  seeking  others  businesses.  Such  as  know  how  much 
they  owe  to  themselves  ;  and  how  many  offices  of  their  owne 
they  are  bound  to  performe,  shall  finde  that  nature  hath 
given  them  this  commission  fully  ample  and  nothing  idle. 
Thou  hast  businesse  enough  within  thy  selfe,  therefore  stray 
not  abroad :  Men  give  themselves  to  hire.  Their  faculties 
are  not  their  own,  but  theirs  to  whom  they  subject  them 
selves  ;  their  inmates,  and  not  themselves,  are  within  them. 
This  common  humour  doth  not  please  me.  We  should 
thriftily  husband  our  mindes  liberty,  and  never  engage  it 
but  upon  just  occasions,  which  if  we  judge  impartially,  are 
very  few  in  number.  Looke  on  such  as  suffer  themselves  to 
be  transported  and  swayed,  they  doe  it  every  where.  In 
little  as  well  as  in  great  matters ;  to  that  which  concerneth, 
as  easie  as  to  that  which  toucheth  them  not.  They  thrust 
themselves  indifferently  into  all  actions,  and  are  without  life, 
if  without  tumultuary  agitation.  In  negotijs  sunt,  negotij 
causa.  '  They  are  busie  that  they  may  not  be  idle,  or  else 
'  in  action  for  actions  sake/  They  seeke  worke  but  to  be 
working.  It  is  not  so  much  because  they  will  goe,  as  for 
that  they  cannot  stand  still.  Much  like  to  a  rowlingstone, 
which  never  stayes  untill  it  come  to  a  lying  place.  To  some 
men,  employment  is  a  marke  of  sufficiencie  and  a  badge  of 
dignity.  Their  spirits  seeke  rest  in  action,  as  infants  repose 
in  the  cradle.  They  may  be  said,  to  be  as  serviceable  to 
their  friends,  as  importunate  to  themselves.  No  man  dis 
tributes  his  mony  to  others  but  every  one  his  life  and  time. 
258 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

We  are  not  so  prodigall  of  any  thing,  as  of  those  whereof  to  CHAPTER 
be  covetous  would  be  both  commendable  and  profitable  for  X 

us.     I  follow  a  cleane  contrary  course,  I  am  of  another  com-  ou  £t  t  °ne 
plexion  :  I  stay  at  home  and  looke  to  my  selfe.     What  I  °Uerne  °hfs°V 
wish-for,  I  commonly  desire  the  same  but  mildely,  and  desire          will 
but  little  :  so  likewise  I  seldome  employ  and  quietly  embusie 
my  selfe.     What  ever  they  intend  and  act,  they  do  it  with 
all  their  will  and  vehemency.     There  are  so  many  dangerous 
steps,  that  for  the  more  security,  wee  must  somewhat  slightly 
and  superficially  slide  through  the  world,  and  not  force  it. 
Pleasure  it  selfe  is  painefull  in  it's  height. 

— incedis  per  ignes,  HOR.  Car.  ii. 

Subpositos  cineri  doloso.  Od.  i.  7. 

You  passe  through  fire  (though  unafraid) 
Under  deceitfull  ashes  laid. 

The  towne  counsell  of  Bourdeaux  chose  me  Major  of  their 
City,  being  farre  from  France,  but  further  from  any  such 
thought.  I  excused  my  selfe  and  would  have  avoided  it. 
But  they  told  mee  I  was  to  blame  ;  the  more,  because  the 
Kings  commandement  was  also  employed  therein.  It  is  a 
charge,  should  seeme  so  much  the  more  goodly,  because  it 
hath  neither  fee  nor  reward,  other  then  the  honour  in  the 
execution.  It  lasteth  two  yeares,  but  may  continue  longer 
by  a  second  election,  which  seldome  hapneth.  To  me  it  was, 
and  never  had  been  but  twice  before  :  Some  yeares  past  the 
Lord  of  Lansac ;  and  lately  to  the  Lord  of  Biron,  Marshall 
of  France.  In  whose  place  I  succeeded  ;  and  left  mine  to  the 
Lord  of  Matigon,  likewise  Marshall  of  France.  Glorious  by 
so  noble  an  assistance. 

Vterque  bonus  pads  bellique  minister. 

Both,  both  in  peace  and  warre, 
Right  serviceable  are. 

Fortune  would  have  a  share  in  my  promotion  by  this  par 
ticular  circumstance,  which  shee  of  her  owne  added  there 
unto  ;  not  altogether  vaine.  For  Alexander  disdained  the 
Corinthian  Ambassadors,  who  offred  him  the  freedome  and 
Burgeoise  of  their  Citie,  but  when  they  told  him  that 

259 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Bacchus  and  Hercules  were  likewise  in  their  registers,  hee 

X  kindly  thanked  them  and  accepted  their  offer.     At  my  first 

How    one     arrivall,  I  faithfully  disciphered  and  conscientiously  displaied 

net0hfs°V"  my  sel^e'  suc^  as  *  am  inc^ee^e  :  without  memorie,  without 
will  diligence,  without  experience  and  without  sufficiencie,  so 
likewise  without  hatred,  without  ambition,  covetousnesse 
and  without  violence  :  that  so  they  might  be  duly  instructed 
what  service  they  might,  or  hope,  or  expect  at  my  hands. 
And  forsomuch  as  the  knowledge  they  had  of  my  deceased 
father,  and  the  honour  they  bare  unto  his  memory,  had 
mooved  them  to  chuse  me  to  that  dignitie,  I  told  them 
plainly,  I  should  be  verie  sorie,  that  any  man  should  worke 
such  an  opinion  in  my  will,  as  their  affaires  and  Citie  had 
done  in  my  fathers,  while  he  held  the  said  government, 
whereunto  they  had  called  me.  I  remembred  to  have  scene 
him,  being  an  infant,  and  he  an  old  man,  his  minde  cruelly 
turmoiled  with  the  publike  toile,  forgetting  the  sweet  aire 
of  his  owne  house,  whereunto  the  weakenes  of  his  age  had 
long  before  tied  him,  neglecting  the  care  of  his  health  and 
family,  in  a  maner  despising  his  life,  which  as  one  engaged 
for  them,  he  much  endangered,  riding  long  and  painefull 
journies  for  them.  Such  a  one  was  he :  which  humor  pro 
ceeded  from  the  bountie  and  goodnesse  of  his  nature.  Never 
was  minde  more  charitable  or  more  popular.  This  course, 
which  I  commend  in  others,  I  love  not  to  follow :  Neither 
am  I  without  excuse.  He  had  heard,  that  a  man  must 
forget  himselfe  for  his  neighbour :  that  in  respect  of  the 
generall,  the  particular  was  not  to  be  regarded.  Most  of  the 
worlds-rules  and  precepts  hold  this  traine,  to  drive  us  out 
of  our  selves  into  the  wide  world,  to  the  use  of  publike 
societie.  They  presumed  to  worke  a  goodly  effect  in  dis 
tracting  and  withdrawing  us  from  our  selves :  supposing 
wee  were  by  a  naturall  instinct,  too-too  much  tied  unto  it : 
and  to  this  end  have  not  spared  to  say  any  thing.  For  to 
the  wise  it  is  no  novelty,  to  preach  things  as  they  serve,  and 
not  as  they  are.  Truth  hath  her  lets,  discommodities  and 
incomparabilities  with  us.  Wee  must  not  often  deceive 
others,  lest  we  beguile  our  selves.  And  seele  our  eyes,  and 
dull  our  understanding,  thereby  to  repaire  and  amend  them. 
Imperiti  enimjudicant,  et  qui  frequenter  in  hoc  ipsum  fallendi 
260 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

sunt,  ne  errent.     'For  unskilfull  men  judge,  who  must  often  CHAPTER 
4  even  therefore  be  deceived,  lest  they  erre  and  bee  deceived.1  X 

When  they  prescribe  us,  to  love  three,  foure  yea  fifty  degrees  ^£7+  °ne 
of  things  before  our  selves,  they  present  us  with  the  Arte  of  |rne  ^ 
shooters,  who  to  come  neere  the  marke  take  their  aime  far  will 
above  the  same.  To  make  a  crooked  sticke  straight,  we 
bend  it  the  contrary  way.  I  suppose  that  in  the  times  of 
Pallas,  as  we  see  in  all  other  religions,  they  had  some 
apparant  mysteries,  of  which  they  made  shew  to  all  the 
people,  and  others  more  high  and  secret,  to  be  imparted 
onely  to  such  as  were  professed.  It  is  likely,  that  the  true 
point  of  friendship,  which  every  man  oweth  to  himselfe,  is 
to  be  found  in  these.  Not  a  false  amitie,  which  makes  us 
embrace  glory,  knowledge,  riches,  and  such  like,  with  a 
principall  and  immoderate  affection,  as  members  of  our 
being  ;  nor  an  effeminate  and  indiscreet  friendship;  Wherein 
hapneth  as  to  the  Ivie,  which  corrupts  and  ruines  the  wals 
it  claspeth  :  But  a  sound  and  regular  amity,  equally  profit 
able  and  pleasant.  Who  so  understandeth  all  her  duties 
and  exerciseth  them,  hee  is  rightly  endenized  in  the  Muses 
cabinet :  Hee  hath  attained  the  type  of  humane  Wisedome 
and  the  perfection  of  our  happinesse.  This  man  knowing 
exactly  what  hee  oweth  to  himselfe,  findeth,  that  he  ought 
to  employ  the  use  of  other  men  and  of  the  world  unto  him 
selfe  ;  which  to  performe,  he  must  contribute  the  duties  and 
offices  that  concerne  him  unto  publike  societie.  He  that 
lives  not  somewhat  to  others,  liveth  little  to  himselfe.  Qui  SEN.  Epist. 
sibi  amicus  est,  scito  himc  amicum  omnibus  esse ;  '  He  that  yi%  f' 
6  is  friend  to  himselfe,  know,  he  is  friend  to  all.'  The 
principall  charge  we  have,  is  every  man  his  particular  con 
duct.  And  for  this  onely  wee  live  here.  As  he  that  should 
forget  to  live  well  and  religiously,  and  by  instructing  and 
directing  others  should  thinke  himselfe  acquitted  of  his 
duty,  would  be  deemed  a  foole  :  Even  so,  who  forsaketh  to 
live  healthy  and  merrily  himself,  therwith  to  serve  another, 
in  mine  opinion  taketh  a  bad  and  unnaturall  course.  I 
will  not,  that  in  any  charge  one  shall  take  in  hand,  he 
refuse  or  thinke  much  of  his  attention,  of  his  labour,  of 
his  steps,  of  his  speech,  of  his  sweat,  and  if  need  be  of 
his  blood. 

261 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  -non  ipse  pro  charts  amids,  HOR .  Car.  i v. 

X  Aut  patria  timidus  perire.  Od.  ix.  51. 

How    one  Not  fearing  life  to  end 

ought  to  gov-  For  Country  or  deare  friend, 

erne   his 

will  But  it  is  onely  borowed  and  accidentally ;   The  minde 

remaining  ever  quiet  and  in  health,  not  without  action,  but 
without  vexation  or  passion.  Simply  to  moove  or  be  dooing, 
costs  it  so  little,  that  even  sleeping  it  is  mooving  and  dooing. 
But  it  must  have  it's  motion  with  discretion.  For  the  body 
receiveth  the  charges  imposed  him,  justly  as  they  are  :  But 
the  spirit  extendeth  them,  and  often  to  his  hinderance 
makes  them  heavy ;  giving  them  what  measure  it  pleaseth. 
Like  things  are  effected  by  divers  efforts  and  different  con 
tentions  of  will.  The  one  may  goe  without  the  other.  For, 
how  many  men  doe  dayly  hazard  themselves  in  warre  which 
they  regard  not,  and  presse  into  the  danger  of  the  battells, 
the  losse  wherof  shall  no  whit  breake  their  next  sleep  ? 
Whereas  some  man  in  his  own  house,  free  from  this  danger, 
which  he  durst  not  so  much  as  have  look't  towards  it,  is  for 
the  wars  issue  more  passionate,  and  therewith  hath  his  minde 
more  perplexed,  than  the  souldier,  that  therin  employeth 
both  his  blood  and  life.  I  know  how  to  deale  in  publike 
charges,  without  departing  from  my  selfe :  This  sharpnesse 
and  violence  of  desires  hindreth  more,  then  steade  the  con 
duct  of  what  we  undertake,  filling  us  with  impatience  to 
the  events,  either  contrary  or  slow :  and  with  bitternesse 
and  jealousie  toward  those  with  whom  we  negotiate.  Wee 
never  governe  that  thing  well,  wherewith  we  are  possessed 
and  directed. 

— Male  cuncta  ministrat 
Impetus. 

Fury  and  haste  doe  lay  all  waste, 
Misplacing  all,  disgracing  all. 

He  who  therein  employeth  but  his  judgement  and  direction, 
proceeds  more  cheerefully  :  he  faines,  he  yeelds,  he  deferres 
at  his  pleasure  according  to  the  occasions  of  necessity :  hee 
failes  of  his  attempt,  without  torment  or  affliction  :  ready 
and  prepared  for  a  new  enterprise.  He  marcheth  alwaies 
with  the  reines  in  his  hand.  He  that  is  besotted  with  this 
violent  and  tyrannicall  intention,  doth  necessarily  declare 
262 


one 
_ov- 
erne 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

much  indiscretion  and  injustice.     The  violence  of  his  desire  CHAPTER 

transports   him.      They   are   rash  motions,  and  if   fortune 

helpe  not  much,   of  little  fruit.       Philosophic  wills    us  to        ™.  on 

'*.    i         i      ii          •         .1  -i  e        m      r  ,1        OUght  tO  g 

banish  choller  in  the  punishment  or  onences ;  not  to  the  erne 
end  revenge  should  be  more  moderate,  but  contrary,  more  will 
weighty  and  surely  set  on  :  wherunto  this  violence  seemeth 
to  bee  a  let.  Choller  doth  not  onely  trouble,  but  wearieth 
the  executioners  armes.  This  passionate  heat  dulleth  and 
consumes  their  force.  As  in  too  much  speede,  festinatw 
tarda  est,  '  Hastinesse  is  slow/  Haste  makes  waste,  and 
hinders  and  stayes  it  selfe  :  Ipsa  se  velocitas  implicat ;  '  Swift- 
'  nesse  entangles  it  selfe.1  As  for  example,  according  as  by 
ordinary  custome  I  perceive,  covetousnesse  hath  no  greater 
let,  then  it  selfe.  The  more  violent  and  extended  it  is,  the 
lesse  effectuall  and  fruitfull.  Commonly  it  gathers  wealth 
more  speedily  being  masked  with  a  shew  of  liberality.  A 
very  honest  Gentleman  and  my  good  friend,  was  likely  to 
have  endangered  the  health  of  his  body,  by  an  over  pas 
sionate  attention  and  earnest  affection  to  the  affaires  of  a 
Prince,  who  was  his  Maister.  Which  Maister  hath  thus 
described  himselfe  unto  me  :  That  as  another,  he  discerneth 
and  hath  a  feeling  of  the  burthen  of  accidents  :  but  such 
as  have  no  remedie,  he  presently  resolveth  to  suffer  with 
patience :  For  the  rest,  after  he  hath  appointed  necessary 
provisions,  which  by  the  vivacitie  and  nimblenesse  of  his  wit 
hee  speedily  effects,  hee  then  attends  the  event  with  quiet- 
nesse.  Verily,  I  have  scene  in  him  at  one  instant  a  great 
carelesnesse  and  libertie,  both  in  his  actions  and  counte 
nance  :  Even  in  important  and  difficult  affaires.  I  finde  him 
more  magnanimous  and  capable,  in  bad  then  in  good  fortune. 
His  losses  are  to  him  more  glorious,  than  his  victories  ;  and 
his  mourning  than  his  triumphs.  Consider  how  in  meere 
vaine  and  frivolous  actions,  as  at  chesse,  tennis  and  such  like 
sports,  this  earnest  and  violent  engaging  with  an  ambitious 
desire  to  winne,  doth  presently  cast  both  minde  and  limmes 
into  disorder  and  indiscretion.  Wherein  a  man  doth  both 
dazle  his  sight  and  distemper  his  whole  body.  Hee  who 
demeaneth  himselfe  with  most  moderation  both  in  winning 
and  loosing,  is  ever  neerest  unto  himselfe,  and  hath  his  wits 
best  about  him.  The  lesse  hee  is  mooved  or  passionate  in 

263 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  play,  the  more  safely  doth  he  governe  the  same,  and  to  his 
X  greater  advantage.     We  hinder  the  minds  seazure  and  hold- 

How    one     £    ,    i      giving  her  so  many  things  to  seize  upon.     Some  wee 
ought  to  gov-   ,     ' ,  /  &  ,    &  ,   J ,         to, ,          -    ,  j 

erne  his      should  onely  present  unto  her,  others  fasten  upon  her,  and 

will  others  incorporate  into  her.  Shee  may  see  and  feele  all 
things,  but  must  onely  feede  on  hir  selfe  :  And  bee  in 
structed  in  that  which  properly  concerneth  her,  and  which 
meerely  belongeth  to  her  essence  and  substance.  The 
lawes  of  nature  teach  us  what  is  just  and  fit  for  us. 
After  the  wise-men  have  told  us,  that  according  to  nature 
no  man  is  indigent  or  wanteth,  and  that  each-one  is  poore 
but  in  his  owne  opinion,  they  also  distinguish  subtilly, 
the  desires  proceeding  from  nature,  from  such  as  grow 
from  the  disorders  of  our  fantasie.  Those  whose  end 
may  be  discerned  are  meerely  hirs ;  and  such  as  flie  before 
us  and  whose  end  we  cannot  attaine,  are  properly  ours. 
Want  of  goods  may  easily  be  cured,  but  the  poverty  of  the 
minde,  is  incurable. 

Nam  si,  quod  satis  est  homini,  id  satis  esse  potesset, 

Hoc  sat  erat,  nunc,  quum  hoc  non  est,  qui  credimus  porro 

Divitias  ullas  animum  mi  eocplere  potesse  ? 

If  it  might  be  enough,  that  is  enough  for  man,, 

This  were  enough,  since  it  is  not,  how  thinke  we  can 

Now  any  riches  fill 

My  minde  and  greedy  will  ? 

Socrates  seeing  great  store  of  riches,  Jewells  and  pretious 
stuffe  carried  in  pompe  through  the  City :  '  Oh  how  many 
'  things ?  (quoth  he)  '  doe  not  I  desire  ! '  Metrodorus  lived 
daily  with  the  weight  of  twelve  ounces  of  foode :  Epicurus 
with  lesse:  Metrocles  in  winter  lay  with  sheepe,  and  in 
SEN.  Epist.  xc.  summer  in  the  Cloisters  of  Churches.  Sufficit  ad  id  natura, 
quod  poscil.  'Nature  is  sufficient  for  that  which  it  requires/ 
Cleanthes  lived  by  his  hands,  and  boasted,  that  if  Cleanthes 
would,  he  could  nourish  another  Cleanthes.  If  that  which 
nature  doth  exactly  and  originally  require  at  our  handes, 
for  the  preservation  of  our  being,  is  over  little  (as  in  truth 
what  it  is,  and  how  good  cheape  our  life  may  be  maintained, 
cannot  better  be  known  or  expressed  than  by  consideration, 
that  it  is  so  little,  and  for  the  smalnesse  thereof,  it  is  out 
of  Fortunes  reach,  and  she  can  take  no  hold  of  it)  let  u* 

264 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

dispense  something  els  unto  our  selves,  and  call  the  custome  CHAPTER 
and  condition  of  every-one  of  us  by  the  name  of  Nature.  X 

Let  us  taxe  and  stint  and  feede  our  selves  according  to  that       ?T*.  one 

,   ,  j  i    .  i  j        i         ought  to  gov- 

measure ;  let  us  extend  both  our  appurtenances  and  reckon-      £rne   ^ 

ings  thereunto.  For  so  farre,  mee  seemes,  we  have  some  will 
excuse.  Custome  is  a  second  Nature,  and  no  lesse  powerfull. 
What  is  wanting  to  custome,  I  hold  it  a  defect :  And  I 
had  well  nigh  as  leefe  one  should  deprive  mee  of  my  life, 
as  refraine  or  much  abridge  me  of  my  state  wherein  I 
have  lived  so  long.  I  am  no  more  upon  termes  of  any 
great  alteration  nor  to  thrust  my  selfe  into  a  new  and 
un-usuall  course,  no  not  toward  augmentation :  it  is  no 
longer  time  to  become  other  or  be  transformed.  And  as 
I  should  complaine  if  any  great  adventure  should  now 
befall  me,  and  grieve  it  came  not  in  time  that  I  might 
have  enjoyed  the  same ; 

Quo  mihi  fortuna,  si  non  conceditur  uti '{  HOR.  i.  Epist. 

Whereto  should  I  have  much,  v<  I2< 

If  I  to  use  it  grutch  ? 

I  should  likewise  bee  grieved  at  any  inward  purchase:  I 
were  better  in  a  manner,  never,  than  so  late,  to  become  an 
honest  man  :  and  well  practised  to  live,  when  one  hath  no 
longer  life.  I  who  am  ready  to  depart  this  World,  could 
easily  be  induced,  to  resigne  the  share  of  wisedome  I  have 
learn't,  concerning  the  Worlds  commerce,  to  any  other  man 
new-come  into  the  world.  It  is  even  as  good  as  Mustard 
after  dinner.  What  neede  have  I  of  that  good,  which  I 
cannot  enjoy  ?  Whereto  serveth  knowledge,  if  one  have  no 
head  ?  It  is  an  injury  and  disgrace  of  Fortune,  to  offer  us 
those  presents,  which  forsomuch  as  they  faile  us  when  we 
should  most  neede  them,  fill  us  with  a  just  spite.  Guide  me 
no  more :  I  can  go  no  longer.  Of  so  many  dismembrings 
that  Sufficiency  hath,  patience  sufficeth  us.  Give  the  capa 
city  of  an  excellent  treble  to  a  Singer,  that  hath  his  lungs 
rotten  ;  and  of  eloquence  to  a  hermit  confined  into  the 
Deserts  of  Arabia.  There  needs  no  Arte  to  further  a  fall. 
The  end  findes  it  selfe  in  the  finishing  of  every  worke.  My 
world  is  at  an  end,  my  forme  is  expired.  I  am  wholly  of 
the  time  past.  And  am  bound  to  authorize  the  same,  and 
2L  265 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  thereto   conforme   my   issue.      I   will   say  this   by  way  of 

X  example ;  that  the  eclipsing  or  abridging  of  tenne  dayes, 

How    one     whjcn  the  Pope  hath  lately  caused,  hath  taken  me  so  low, 

°U erne°hfsOV"  tliat  I  can  narjlv  recover  my  selfe.  I  follow  the  yeares, 
will  wherein  we  were  wont  to  compt  otherwise.  So  long  and 
antient  a  custome  doth  challenge  and  recall  me  to  it  againe. 
I  am  thereby  enforced  to  be  somewhat  an  hereticke  :  In 
capable  of  innovation,  though  corrective.  My  imagination 
mauger  my  teeth  runnes  still  tenne  dayes  before,  or  tenne 
behinde,  and  whispers  in  mine  eares :  '  This  rule  toucheth 
'  those,  which  are  to  come/  If  health  it  selfe  so  sweetly- 
pleasing,  comes  to  me  but  by  fittes,  it  is  rather  to  give  me 
cause  of  griefe  then  possession  of  it  selfe.  I  have  no  where 
left  mee  to  retire  it.  Time  forsakes  me ;  without  which 
nothing  is  enjoyed.  How  small  accompt  should  I  make  of 
these  great  elective  dignities  I  see  in  the  world,  and  which 
are  onely  given  to  men,  ready  to  leave  the  world  ;  wherein 
they  regard  not  so  much  how  duely  they  shall  discharge 
them,  as  how  little  they  shall  exercise  them  :  from  the  be 
ginning  they  looke  to  the  end.  To  conclude,  I  am  ready  to 
finish  this  man,  not  to  make  another.  By  long  custome, 
this  forme  is  changed  into  substance,  and  Fortune  into 
Nature.  I  say  therefore,  that  amongst  us  feeble  creatures, 
each  one  is  excusable  to  compt  that  his  owne,  which  is  com 
prehended  under  measure.  And  yet  all  beyond  these  limits, 
is  nothing  but  confusion. 

It  is  the  largest  extension  we  can  grant  our  rights.  The 
more  we  amplifie  our  neede  and  possession,  the  more  we 
engage  our  selves  to  the  crosses  of  fortune  and  adversities. 
The  cariere  of  our  desires  must  be  circumscribed,  and  tied 
to  strict  bounds  of  neerest  and  contiguous  commodities. 
Moreover,  their  course  should  be  managed,  not  in  a  straight 
line,  having  another  end,  but  round,  whose  two  points  hold 
together,  and  end  in  our  selves  with  a  short  compasse.  The 
actions  governed  without  this  reflection,  I  meane  a  neere 
and  essentiall  reflection,  as  those  of  the  covetous,  of  the 
ambitious  and  so  many  others,  that  runne  directly  point- 
blancke,  the  course  of  which  carrieth  them  away  before 
them,  are  erronious  and  crazed  actions.  Most  of  our  vaca 
tions  are  like  playes.  Mundus  universus  exercet  histrioniam. 
266 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

'  All   the  world   doth  practise  stage-playing."      Wee    must  CHAPTER 
play  our  parts  duly,  but  as  the  part  of  a  borrowed  person-  X 

age.      Of  a  visard  and  apparance,  wee  should   not  make  a     "°w    one 
reall  essence,   nor  proper  of  that  which  is  another.     Wee  °U^rne°}1^OV 
cannot  distinguish  the  skinne  from  the  shirt.     It  is  sufficient          wni 
to  disguise  the  face,  without  deforming  the  breast.      I  see 
some  transforme  and    transubstantiate   themselves,   into  as 
many   new  formes  and  strange  beings,  as  they  undertake 
charges :    and  who  emprelate  themselves  even  to  the  heart 
and    entrailes ;    and   entraine   their  offices   even  sitting  on 
their  close  stoole.     I  cannot  teach  them  to  distinguish  the 
salutations  and  cappings  of  such  as  regard  them,  from  those 
that  respect  either  their  office,  their  traine  or  their  mule. 
Tantum  se  fortunes  permittunt,  etiam  ut  naturam  dediscant. 
6  They  give  themselves  so  much  over  to  Fortune,  as  they 
'  forget  Nature."*     They  swell  in  minde  and  puffe  up  their 
naturall  discourse,  according  to  the  dignity  of  their  office. 
The  Major  of  Bourdeaux,  and  Michael  Lord  of  Montaigne, 
have  ever  beene  two,  by  an  evident  separation.     To  be  an 
advocate  or  a  Treasurer,  one  should  not  be  ignorant  of  the 
craft  incident  to    such   callings.      An   honest    man    is    not 
comp table  for  the  vice  and  folly  of  his  trade,  and  therefore 
ought  not  to  refuse  the  exercise  of  it.     It  is  the  custome  of 
his  country ;  and  there  is  profit  in  it.     We  must  live  by  the 
World,  and  such  as  we  finde  it,  so  make  use  of  it.     But  the 
judgement  of  an  Emperour  should  be  above  his  Empire  ; 
and  to  see  and  consider  the  same  as  a  strange  accident.     He 
should  know  how  to  enjoy  himselfe  apart;  and  communicate 
himselfe  as  lames  and  Peter,  at  least  to  himselfe.     I  cannot 
so  absolutely  or  so  deepely  engage  my  selfe.     When  my  wil  • 
gives  me  to  any  party,  it  is  not  with  so  violent  a  bond,  that   • 
my  understanding  is  thereby  infected.     In  the  present  intes-    ! 
tine  trouble  of  our  State,  my  interest  hath  not  made  me    ! 
forget  neither  the  commendable  qualities  of  our  adversaries,    j 
nor  the  reproachfull  of  those  I  have  followed.     They  par 
tially  extoll  what  ever  is  on  their  side :  I  doe  not  so  much    \ 
as  excuse  the  greater  number  of  my  friends  actions.    A  good 
Oratour  loseth  not  his  grace  by  pleading  against  me.     The 
intricatenesse  of  our  debate  remooved,  I  have  maintained 
my  selfe  in  eo^animity  and  pure  indifferency.     Neque  extra 

267 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  necessitates  belli,  prcecipuum  odium  gero,  'Nor  beare  I  capi- 

X  '  tall  hatred,   when  I  am  out  of  the  necessitie  of  warre.1 

How   one     Wherein  I  glory,  for  that  commonly  I  see  men  erre  in  the 

°Uenie  ^fs^"  contrary.  Such  as  extend  their  choller  and  hatred,  beyond 
will  their  affaires  (as  most  men  doe)  shew  that  it  proceedes 
elsewhence,  and  from  some  private  cause  :  Even  as  one  being 
cured  of  an  ulcer,  and  his  fever  remaineth  still,  declareth  it 
had  another  more  hidden  beginning.  It  is  the  reason  they 
beare  none  unto  the  cause,  in  generall :  and  forsomuch  as  it 
concerneth  the  interest  of  all,  and  of  the  state :  But  they 
are  vexed  at  it,  onely  for  this;  that  it  toucheth  them  in 
private.  And  therefore  are  they  distempered  with  a  par 
ticular  passion,  both  beyond  justice  and  publike  reason. 
Non  tarn  omnia  universi,  quam  ea,  quce  ad  quemque  pertinent, 
singuli  carpebant.  '  All  did  not  so  much  finde  fault  with 
'  all,  as  every  one  with  those  that  appertained  to  every  one.1 
I  will  have  the  advantage  to  be  for  us,  which  though  it  be 
not,  I  enrage  not,  I  stand  firmely  to  the  sounder  parts.  But 
I  affect  not  to  be  noted  a  private  enemy  to  others,  and 
beyond  generall  reason.  I  greatly  accuse  this  vicious  forme 
of  obstinate  contesting :  He  is  of  the  League,  because  he 
admireth  the  grace  of  the  Duke  of  Guise :  or  he  is  a  Hugo- 
note,  forsomuch  as  the  King  of  Navarres  activitie  amazeth 
him :  He  finds  fault  in  the  Kings  behaviours,  therefore  he  is 
sedicious  in  his  heart.  I  would  not  give  the  magistrate  my 
voice,  that  he  had  reason  to  condemne  a  booke,  because  an 
hereticke  was  therein  named  and  extolled  to  be  one  of  the 
best  Poets  of  this  age.  Dare  wee  not  say  that  a  theefe  hath 
a  good  leg  ?  if  he  have  so  indeed  ?  If  she  be  a  strumpet, 
must  she  needs  have  a  stinking  breath  ?  In  wiser  ages, 
revoked  they  the  proud  title  of  Capitolinus,  they  had  for 
merly  given  to  Marcus  Manlius,  as  the  preserver  of  religion 
and  publike  libertie  ?  Suppressed  they  the  memory  of  his 
liberalise,  his  deeds  of  armes  and  military  rewards  granted 
to  his  vertues,  because  to  the  prejudice  of  his  countries 
lawes,  he  afterward  affected  a  Royalty  ?  If  they  once  con 
ceive  a  hatred  against  an  Orator  or  an  advocate,  the  next 
day  he  becommeth  barbarous  and  uneloquent.  I  have 
elswhere  discoursed  of  zeale,  which  hath  driven  good  men 
into  like  errours.  For  my  selfe,  I  can  say  :  that  he  doth 
268 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

wickedly,  and  this  vertuously.     Likewise,  in  prognostickes  CHAPTER 
or  sinister  events  of  affaires,  they  will  have  every  man  blinde  X 

or  dull  in  his  owne  cause :  and  that  our  perswasion  and  £7t  one 
judgement,  serve  not  the  truth  but  the  project  of  our  °u^rne  °hf  °v~ 
desires.  I  should  rather  erre  in  the  other  extremity  :  So  win 
much  I  feare  my  desire  might  corrupt  me.  Considering,  I 
somewhat  tenderly  distrust  my  selfe  in  things  I  most  desire. 
I  have  in  my  dayes  scene  wonders,  in  the  indiscreet  and  pro 
digious  facilitie  of  people,  suffering  their  hopes  and  beliefes, 
to  be  led  and  governed,  as  it  hath  pleased  and  best  fitted 
their  leaders  :  above  a  hundred  discontents,  one  in  the  necke 
of  another :  and  beyond  their  fantasies  and  dreames.  I 
wonder  no  more  at  those,  whom  the  apish  toyes  of  Apol- 
lonius  and  Mahomet  have  seduced  and  blinded  :  Their  sense 
and  understanding  is  wholly  smothered  in  their  passion. 
Their  discretion  hath  no  other  choise  but  what  pleaseth 
them  and  furthereth  their  cause.  Which  I  had  especially 
observed  in  the  beginning  of  our  distempered  factions  and 
factious  troubles.  This  other  which  is  growne  since,  by 
imitation  surmounteth  the  same.  Whereby  I  observe,  that 
it  is  an  inseparable  quality  of  popular  errours.  The  first 
beeing  gone,  opinions  entershocke  one  another,  following 
the  winde,  as  waves  doe.  They  are  no  members  of  the  body, 
if  they  may  renounce  it ;  if  they  folow  not  the  common 
course.  But  truely  they  wrong  the  just  parts,  when  they 
seeke  to  helpe  them  with  fraude  or  deceipts.  I  have  alwaies 
contracted  the  same.  This  meane  is  but  for  sicke  braines  ; 
The  healthy  have  surer  and  honester  wayes  to  maintaine 
their  resolutions  and  excuse  all  contrary  accidents.  The 
Heavens  never  saw  so  weighty  a  discord  and  so  harmefull  a 
hatred,  as  that  betweene  Csesar  and  Pompey,  nor  ever  shall 
hereafter :  Mee  seemeth  notwithstanding,  I  see  in  those 
noble  and  Heroicall  mindes,  an  exemplar  and  great  modera 
tion  of  the  one  toward  the  other.  It  was  a  jelousie  of  honour 
and  emulation  of  command,  which  transported  them,  not  to 
a  furious  and  indiscreete  hatred  ;  without  malice  or  detrac 
tion.  In  their  sharpest  exploites,  I  discover  some  reliques 
of  respect  and  cinders  of  well-meaning  affection.  And  I 
imagine,  that  had  it  beene  possible,  either  of  them  desired 
rather  to  effect  his  purpose  without  overthrowing  his  com- 

269 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  petitour,  than  by  working  his  utter  ruine.     Note  how  con- 

X  trary  the  proceeding  was  betweene  Sylla  and  Marius.     We 

How  one     mus£  not  runne  headlong  after  our  affections  and  private 

OUerne°hisOV  interests.  As  in  my  youth,  I  ever  opposed  my  selfe  to  the 
will  motions  of  love,  which  I  felt  to  usurpe  upon  me,  and 
laboured  to  dimmish  its  delights,  lest  in  the  end  it  might 
vanquish  and  captivate  me  to  his  mercy  :  So  do  I  now  in  all 
other  occasions,  which  my  will  apprehendeth  with  an  over 
great  appetite.  I  bend  to  the  contrary  of  my  disposition, 
as  I  see  the  same  plunged  and  drunke  with  it's  owne  Wine. 
I  shunne  so  farre  foorth  to  nourish  her  pleasure,  as  I  may 
not  revoke  it  without  a  bloody  losse.  Those  mindes  which 
through  stupidity  see  things  but  by  halves,  enjoy  this 
happinesse,  that  such  as  be  hurtfull,  offend  them  least :  It 
is  a  spirituall  leprosie,  that  hath  some  shew  of  health,  and 
such  a  health,  as  Philosophy  doth  not  altogether  contemne. 
But  yet  it  may  not  lawfully  be  termed  wisedome ;  as  we 
often  doe.  And  after  this  manner  did  in  former  times  some 
body  mocke  Diogenes,  who  in  the  dead  of  Winter,  went  all 
naked,  embracing  an  image  of  Snow,  to  try  his  patience  ; 
Who  meeting  him  in  this  order,  said  thus  unto  him ;  '  Art 
'  thou  now  very  colde  ?'  '  Nothing  at  all,'  answered  Diogenes. 
'What  thinkest  thou  to  doe  then,  that  is  either  hard  or 
'  exemplar  by  standing  in  the  colde  ? '  replied  the  other : 
To  measure  constancy,  we  must  necessarily  know  suffer 
ance.  But  such  minds  as  must  behold  crosse  events,  and 
fortunes  injuries  in  their  height  and  sharpnesse,  which  must 
weigh  and  taste  them  according  to  their  naturall  bitternesse 
and  charge,  let  them  employ  their  skil  and  keep  themselves 
from  embracing  the  causes,  and  divert  their  approaches. 
What  did  King  Cotys  ?  He  payed  liberally  for  that  goodly 
and  rich  Vessell,  which  one  had  presented  unto  him,  but 
forsomuch  as  it  was  exceeding  brittle,  he  presently  brake  it 
himselfe,  that  so  betimes  he  might  remoove  so  easie  an 
occasion  of  choller  against  his  servants.  I  have  in  like  sort 
shunned  confusion  in  my  affaires,  and  sought  not  to  have 
my  goods  contiguous  to  my  neighbours,  and  to  such  as  I  am 
to  be  linked  in  strict  friendshippe  :  Whence  commonly  ensue 
causes  of  alienation  and  unkindnesse.  I  have  heeretofore 
loved  the  hazardous  play  of  Gardes  and  Dice,  I  have  long 
270 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

since  left  it,  onely  for  this  that  notwithstanding  any  faire  CHAPTER 
semblance  I  made  in  my  losses,  I  was  inwardly  disquieted.  X 

Let  a  man  of  honour,  who  is  to  take  a  lie  or  endure  an  out-  ^.  one 
ragious  wrong,  and  cannot  admit  a  bad  excuse  for  paiment  °U|rne  °h?s°V 
or  satisfaction,  avoid  the  progresse  of  contentious  alterca-  win 
tions.  I  shunne  melancholike  complexions  and  froward 
men,  as  infected.  And  in  matters,  I  cannot  talke-of  without 
interest  and  emotion,  I  meddle  not  with  them,  except  duty 
constraine  mee  thereunto.  Melius  non  incipient  quam  desi- 
nent.  '  They  shall  better  not  beginne,  than  leave  off.1  The 
surest  way,  is  then  to  prepare  our  selves  before  occasion.  I 
know  that  some  wisemen  have  taken  another  course,  and 
have  not  feared  to  engage  and  vehemently  to  insinuate 
themselves  into  diverse  objects.  Those  assure  themselves 
of  their  own  strength,  under  which  they  shrowd  themselves 
against  all  manner  of  contrary  events,  making  mischiefes 
to  wrestle  one  against  another,  by  vigor  and  vertue  of 
patience  : 

Velut  rupes  vastum  qua  prodit  in  tequor,  VIRG. 

Obvia  ventorumfurijs  expostaque  ponto.  Xt  693- 

Vim  cunctam  atque  minas  perfert  calique  marisque, 
— ipsa  immota  manens. 

Much  like  a  rocke,  which  buts  into  the  Maine, 
Meeting  with  windes-rage,  to  the  Sea  laid  plaine, 
It  doth  the  force  of  skies  and  Seas  sustaine, 
Endure  their  threats,  yet  doth  unmoov'd  remaine. 

Let  us  not  imitate  these  examples,  we  shall  not  attaine 
them.  They  opinionate  themselves  resolutely  to  behold, 
and  without  perturbation  to  be  spectatours  oif  their  Coun 
tries  ruine,  which  wilome  possessed  and  commaunded  their 
full  will.  As  for  our  vulgar  mindes,  therein  is  too  much 
effort  and  roughnesse.  Cato  quit  thereby  the  noblest  life 
that  ever  was.  Wee  seely-ones  must  seeke  to  escape  the 
storme  further  off:  We  ought  to  provide  for  apprehension 
and  not  for  patience,  and  avoid  the  blowes  wee  cannot  with 
stand.  Zeno  seeing  Chremonides  a  young  man  whom  he 
loved,  approach  to  sit  neere  him  ;  rose  up  sodainly.  Clean- 
thes  asking  him  the  reason  :  I  understand  (saith  hee)  that 
Physitions  above  all  things  prescribe  rest,  and  forbid  emotion 
in  all  tumors.  Socrates  saith  not ;  Yeeld  not  to  the  allure- 


How 


erne 
will 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  merits  of  beauty  ;  maintaine  it,  enforce  our  selves  to  the 
contrary  ;  Shunne  her  (saith  hee)  runne  out  of  her  sight  and 

one     company  ;    as   from    a   violent   poison,    that   infecteth   and 
to  g-ov-      .    "  ,,J  '„  m        A     T  T  .  i    TA?    •   i      f  •    • 

e   his     stmgeth  farre-off.      And  his  good  Disciple,  faming  or  re- 

citing,  but  in  mine  opinion,  rather  reciting  then  faining, 
the  matchles  perfections  of  that  great  Cyrus,  describeth  him 
distrusting  his  forces  to  withstand  the  blandishments  or 
allurings  of  the  divine  beautie  of  that  famous  Panthea  his 
Captive,  committing  the  visitation  and  guarde  of  her  to  an 
other,  that  had  lesse  libertie  then  himselfe.  And  likewise 
Matth,  vi.  13.  the  Holy-  Ghost  saith,  ne  nos  inducas  in  tentationem,  '  and 
'  lead  us  not  into  temptation/  We  pray  not  that  our  reason 
be  not  encountred  and  vanquished  by  concupiscence  :  but 
that  it  be  not  so  much  as  assayed  therewith  :  That  we  bee 
not  reduced  to  an  estate,  where  we  should  but  suffer  the 
approaches,  sollicitations  and  temptations  of  sinne  :  and  we 
entreat  our  Lord,  to  keepe  our  conscience  quiet,  fully  per 
fectly  free  from  all  commerce  of  evill.  Such  as  say  they  have 
reason  for  their  revenging  passion,  or  any  other  minde- 
troubling  perturbation  :  say  often  truth,  as  things  are,  but 
not  as  they  were.  They  speake  to  us,  when  the  causes  of 
their  error  are  by  themselves  fostred  and  advanced.  But  re 
tire  further  backeward,  recall  their  causes  to  their  beginning  : 
there  you  surprise  and  put  them  to  a  non-plus.  Would  they 
have  their  fault  be  lesse,  because  it  is  more  ancient  ;  and 
that  of  an  unjust  beginning,  the  progresse  be  just  ?  He 
that  (as  I  doe)  shall  wish  his  countries  well-fare,  without 
fretting  or  pining  himselfe,  shall  be  grieved,  but  not  swoune, 
to  see  it  threatning,  either  his  owne  downefall,  or  a  con 
tinuance  no  lesse  ruinous.  Oh  seely-weake  barke,  whom 
both  waves,  windes  and  Pilot,  hull  and  tosse  to  so  con 
trary  desseignes  : 

—  in  tarn  diver  so,  }  magister, 
Ventus  et  unda  trahunt. 

Maister  the  wave  and  winde 
So  divers  wayes  doe  binde. 

Who  gapes  not  after  the  favour  of  Princes,  as  after  a  thing 
without  which  hee  cannot  live  ;  nor  is  much  disquieted  at 
the  coldnes  of  their  entertainment  or  frowning  countenance, 

272 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

nor  regardeth  the  inconstancy  of  their  will.     Who  hatcheth  CHAPTER 
not  his  children  or  huggeth  not  honours,  with  a  slavish  pro-  X 

pension,  nor  leaves  to  live  comm odiously  having  once  lost        °w    one 
them.      Who  doth  good,  namely  for  his  owne  satisfaction,  °Uerne  °hfs°V 
nor  is  much  vexed  to  see  men  censure  of  his  actions  against          will 
his  merit.     A  quarter  of  an  ownce  of  patience  provideth  for 
such  inconveniences.     I  finde  ease  in  this  receit :  redeeming 
my  selfe  in  the  beginning,  as  good   cheape  as   I  can  :   By 
which   meanes  I   perceive  my  selfe  to   have   escaped  much 
trouble  and  manifold  difficulties.     With  very  little  force,  I 
stay  these  first  motions  of  my  perturbations  :  And  I  abandon 
the  subject  which  beginnes  to  molest  me,  and  before  it  trans 
port  mee.     Hee  that  stops  not  the  loose,  shall  hardly  stay 
the  course.     He  that  cannot  shut  the  doore  against  them, 
shall  never  expell  them   being    entred.       He    that    cannot 
attaine  an  end  in  the  beginning,  shall  not  come  to  an  end  of 
the  conclusion.     Nor  shall  he  endure  the  fall,  that  could  not 
endure  the  starts  of  it.     Etenim  ipsce  se  impellunt,  ubi  semel  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
a  ratione  discessum  est,  ipsaque  sibi  imbecillitas  indulget,  in  iv- 
altumque  provehitur  imprudens :  nee  reperit  locum  consistendi. 
4  For  they  drive  themselves  headlong,  when  once  they  are 
4  parted  and  past  reason,  and  weaknesse  soothes  it  selfe,  and 
4  unawares  is  carried  into  the  deepe,  nor  can  it  finde  a  place 
4  to  tarry  in.'     I   feele  betimes,  the  low  windes,  which  are 
forerunners  of  the  storm e,  buzze  in  mine  eares  and  sound  and 
trie  me  within  : 

— ceuflamina  prima  VIRG.  sEn.  x. 

Cum  deprensa  fremunt  sylvis,  et  cceca  volutant  97- 

Murmura,  ventures  nautis  prodentia  ventos. 

As  first  blasts  in  the  woods  perceiv'd  to  goe, 
Whistle,,  and  darkely  speake  in  murmurs  low, 
Foretelling  Marriners  what  windes  will  grow. 

How  often  have  I  done  my  selfe  an  apparant  injustice,  to 
avoide  the  danger  I  should  fall  into,  by  receiving  the  same, 
happily  worse,  from  the  judges,  after  a  world  of  troubles, 
and  of  foule,  and  vile  practices,  more  enemies  to  my  naturall 
disposition,  then  fire  or  torment  ?  Convenit  a  litibus  quan-  Cic.  Off.  i. 
turn  licet,  et  nescio  an  paulo  plus  etiam  quam  licet,  abhorren- 
tem  esse ;  Est  enim  non  modo  liberate,  paululum  nonnunquam 
de  mo  jure  decedere,  sed  interdum  etiam  fructnosum.  '  As 

2  M '  273 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  much  as  wee  may,  and  it  may  be  more  then  we  may,  we 
x  '  should  abhorre  brabling  and  lawing  ;  for  it  is  not  onely  an 

How    one     t  ingenious  part,  but  sometimes  profitable  also  at  sometimes 
ouarht  to  erov-  ,  ,   °       ,  ,     v, .,'      f  .    ,  .  ,    rT,>  •      •     i      i 

erne   his        to  yeeld  a  little  of  our  right.      If  we  were  wise  mdeede,  we 

will  should  rejoyce  and  glory,  as  I  heard  once  a  yong-gen tie- 
man,  borne  of  a  very  great  house,  very  wittily  and  un- 
fainedly,  rejoyce  with  all  men  that  his  mother  had  lost  her 
sute  ;  as  if  it  had  beene  a  cough,  an  ague,  or  any  other 
yrksome  burthen.  The  favours,  which  fortune  might  have 
given  mee,  as  aliances  and  acquaintances  with  such  as  have 
Soveraigne  authority  in  those  things  ;  I  have,  in  my  conscience 
done  much  instantly  to  evoide  imploying  them  to  others  pre 
judice,  and  not  over- value  my  rights  above  their  worth.  To 
conclude,  I  have  so  much  prevailed  by  my  endeavours  (in  a 
good  houre  I  may  speake  it)  that  I  am  yet  a  virgine  for  any 
sutes  in  law,  which  have  notwithstanding  not  omitted  gently 
to  offer  me  their  service,  and  under  pretence  of  lawfull  titles 
insinuate  themselves  into  my  allowance,  would  I  but  have 
given  eare  unto  them.  And  as  a  pure  maiden  from  quarrels  ; 
I  have  without  important  offence,  either  passive  or  active, 
lingred  out  a  long  life,  and  never  heard  worse  than  mine 
owne  name.  A  rare  grace  of  heaven.  Our  greatest  agita 
tions,  have  strange  springs  and  ridiculous  causes.  What 
ruine  did  our  last  Duke  of  Burgundy  runne  into,  for  the 
quarrell  of  a  cart-load  of  sheepes-skinnes  ?  And  was  not  the 
graving  of  a  scale,  the  chief'e  cause  of  the  most  horrible 
breach  and  topsie-turvy,  that  ever  this  worlds-frame  en 
dured  ?  For  Pompey  and  Caesar  are  but  the  new  buddings 
and  continuation  of  two  others.  And  I  have  seene  in  my 
time,  the  wisest  heads  of  this  realme  assembled  with  great 
ceremony  and  publike  charge,  about  treaties  and  agreements, 
the  true  deciding  whereof  depended  in  the  meane  while 
absolutely  and  soveraignely  of  the  will  and  consultations  held 
in  some  Ladies  pate  or  cabinet ;  and  of  the  inclination  of 
some  silly  woman.  Poets  have  most  judiciously  look't  into 
this,  who  but  for  an  apple  have  set  all  Greece  and  Asia  on 
fire  and  sword.  See  why  that  man  doth  hazzard  both  his 
v  honour  and  life  on  the  fortune  of  his  rapier  and  dagger; 
let  him  tell  you  whence  the  cause  of  that  contention  ariseth  ; 
he  can  not  without  blushing :  so  vaine  and  so  frivolous  is  the 
274 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

occasion.     To  embarke  him,  there  needes  but  little  advise-  CHAPTER 
ment,  but  being  once-in,   all  parts  doe  worke ;    Then  are  x 

greater  provisions  required,   more  difficult  and  important.        ??.  one 

TT  f  '       '       -4-  4-          4-U  1.  £      il.   •>  OUght  tO    gOV- 

Hovv  tarre  more  easie  is  it  not  to  enter,  than  to  get  forth  ?  grne  ^ 
We  must  proceed  contrary  to  the  brier,  which  produceth  a  will 
long  and  straight  stalke  at  the  first  springing;  but  after, 
as  tired  and  out  of  breath,  it  makes  many  and  thicke 
knots,  as  if  they  were  pawses,  shewing  to  have  no  more  that 
vigor  and  constancy.  Wee  should  rather  begin  gently  and 
leasurely;  and  keepe  our  strength  and  breath  for  the  per 
fection  of  the  worke.  We  direct  affaires  in  the  beginning, 
and  hold  them  at  our  mercy,  but  being  once  undertaken,  they 
guide  and  transport  us,  and  we  must  follow  them.  Yet  may 
it  not  be  said,  that  this  counsell  hath  freed  me  from  all 
difficulties,  and  that  I  have  not  beene  often  troubled  to  con- 
trole  and  bridle  my  passions  :  which  are  not  alwayes  governed 
according  to  the  measure  of  occasions  :  whose  entrances  are 
often  sharpe  and  violent.  So  is  it,  that  thence  may  be  reaped 
good  fruit  and  profit.  Except  for  those,  who  in  well  doing 
are  not  satisfied  with  any  benefit,  if  their  reputation  be  in 
question.  For  in  truth,  such  an  effect  is  not  compted  of  but 
by  every  one  to  himselfe.  You  are  thereby  better  satisfied, 
but  not  more  esteemed,  having  reformed  your  selfe,  before 
you  come  into  action  or  the  matter  was  in  sight :  yet  not  in 
this  onely,  but  in  all  other  duties  of  life,  their  course  which 
aime  at  honour,  is  diverse  from  that,  which  they  propound 
unto  themselves,  that  follow  order  and  reason.  I  finde  some, 
that  inconsiderately  and  furiously  thrust  themselves  into  the 
lists,  and  grow  slacke  in  the  course.  As  Plutarke  saith,  that 
'  Such  as  by  the  vice  of  bashfulnesse  are  soft  and  tractable  to 
4  graunt  whatsoever  is  demanded,  are  afterward  as  prone  and 
4  facile  to  recant  and  breake  their  word ' :  In  like  manner,  he 
that  enters  lightly  into  a  quarrel,  is  subject  to  leave  it  as 
lightly.  The  same  difficulty  which  keepes  me  from  embrac 
ing  the  same,  should  encite  me,  being  once  mooved  and 
therein  engaged,  to  continue  resolute.  It  is  an  ill  custome. 
Being  once  embarked,  one  must  either  goe  on  or  sinke. 
'  Attempt  coldly '  (sayed  By  as)  '  but  pursue  hotly/  For 
want  of  judgement,  our  hearts  faile  us;  Which  is  also  lesse 
tolerable.  Most  agreements  of  our  moderne  quarrels,  are 

275 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  shamefull  and  false  :    We  onely  seeke  to  save  apparances, 

x  and  therewhilst  betray  and  disavow  our  true  intentions.     We 

Hht*t  °n8     sa^ve  the  deede :  We  know  how  wee  spake  it,  and  in  what 

°U(L-ne  °hfs°V  sence  the  by-standers  know  it :  yea  and  our  friends  to  whom 
will  we  would  have  our  advantages  knowne.  It  is  to  the  preju 
dice  of  our  liberty  and  interest  of  our  resolutions  honour, 
that  we  disavow  our  thoughts  and  seeke  for  starting  holes 
in  falshood,  to  make  our  agreements.  We  bely  our  selves, 
to  salve  a  lye  we  have  given  to  another.  We  must  not  looke 
whether  your  action  or  word  may  admit  another  interpreta 
tion,  but  it  is  your  owne  true  and  sincere  construction,  that 
you  must  now  maintaine,  whatsoever  it  cost  you.  It  is  to 
your  vertue  and  to  your  conscience  that  men  speake ;  parts 
that  ought  not  to  bee  disguised.  Leave  we  these  base 
courses,  wrangling  shifts  and  verbal  1  meanes,  to  petty-fog 
ging  Lawyers.  The  excuses  and  reparations,  or  satisfactions, 
which  dayly  I  see  made,  promised  and  given  to  purge  indis 
cretion,  seeme  to  me  more  foule  than  indiscretion  it  selfe. 
Better  were  it  for  one  to  offend  his  adversary  againe,  than  in 
giving  him  such  satisfaction,  to  wrong  himselfe  so  much. 
You  have  braved  him  mooved  by  choller,  and  now  you  seeke 
to  pacific  and  flatter  him  in  your  cold  and  better  sense  : 
Thus  you  abase  your  selfe,  more  than  you  were  before 
exalted.  I  find  no  speech  so  vicious  in  a  Gentleman,  as 
I  deeme  any  recantation  hee  shall  make,  dishonorable ; 
especially  if  it  be  wrested  from  him  by  authority  :  Forso- 
much  as  obstinacy  is  in  him  more  excusable,  than  cowardize. 
Passions  are  to  me  as  easie  to  be  avoyded,  as  they  are  diffi 
cult  to  be  moderated.  Excinduntur  fadlius  ammo,  quam 
temper antur.  '  They  are  more  easily  rooted  out  of  the  minde, 
'  than  brought  to  good  temper/  He  that  cannot  attaine  to 
this  noble  Stoicall  impassibility,  let  him  shrowd  himselfe  in 
the  bosome  of  this  my  popular  stupidity.  What  they  did 
by  vertue,  I  inure  my  selfe  to  doe  by  Nature.  The  middle 
region  harboureth  stormes ;  the  two  extreames  containe 
Philosophers  and  rurall  men,  they  concurre  in  tranquility 
and  good  hap. 

VIRG.  Georg.  Fcelix  qui  potuit  rerum  cognoscere  causas, 

ii.  49°-  Atque  metus  omnes  et  inexorabile  fatum 

Subjecit  pedibus,  strepitumque  Acherontis  avari. 

276 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Fortunatus  et  ille,  Deos  qui  novit  agrestes,  CHAPTER 

Pandque,  Silvanumque  senem,  Nymphasque  sorores.  X 

Happy  is  he  that  could  of  things  the  causes  finde,  oue-hTto°eov- 

And  subject  to  his  feete  all  fearefulnesse  of  minde,  ° me  hpg 

Inexorable  fate,  and  noyse  of  greedy  Hell.  w-jj 

And  happy  he,  with  Country  Gods  acquainted  well, 
Pan  and  old  Sylvan  knowes, 
And  all  the  sister  shrowes. 

The  beginnings  of  all  things  are  weake  and  tender.  We 
must  therefore  be  cleare-sighted  in  beginnings  :  For,  as  in 
their  budding  we  discerne  not  the  danger,  so  in  their  full 
growth  we  perceive  not  the  remedy.  I  should  have  en- 
countred  a  thousand  crosses,  daily  more  hard  to  be  digested 
in  the  course  of  ambition,  than  it  hath  bin  uneasie  for  me  to 
stay  the  naturall  inclination,  that  led  me  unto  them. 

—jure  perhorrui,  HOR.  Car,  Hi> 

Late  conspicuum  toilers  verticem.  rg    jg 

I  have  beene  much  afraid  for  causes  right, 
To  raise  my  foretop  far  abroad  to  sight. 

All  publike  actions  are  subject  to  uncertaine  and  divers  in 
terpretations  :  For,  too  many  heads  judge  of  them.  Some 
say  of  this  my  City-employment  (whereof  I  am  content  to 
speake  a  word  ;  not  that  it  deserves  it,  but  to  make  a  shew 
of  my  manners  in  such  things)  I  have  demeaned  my  selfe 
like  one  that  is  too  slowly  mooved  and  with  a  languishing 
affection  :  And  they  are  not  altogether  void  of  reason.  I 
strive  to  keepe  my  minde  and  thoughts  quiet.  Cum  semper 
Natura,  turn  etiam  estate  jam  quietus.  '  Both  ever  quiet  by 
'  Nature,  and  now  because  of  yeeres/  And  if  at  any  time 
they  are  debauched  to  some  rude  and  piercing  impression,  it 
is  in  truth  without  my  consent.  From  which  naturall  slack  - 
nesse,  one  must  not  therefore  inferre  any  proofe  of  disability: 
For,  want  of  care  and  lacke  of  judgement  are  two  things:  And 
lesse  unkindnesse  and  ingratitude  toward  those  Citizens,  who 
to  gratifie  me,  employed  the  utmost  of  all  the  meanes  they 
could  possibly ;  both  before  they  knew  me  and  since.  And 
who  did  much  more  for  me,  in  appointing  me  my  charge  the 
second  time,  then  in  choosing  me  the  first.  I  love  them  with 
all  my  heart,  and  wish  them  all  the  good  that  may  be.  And 

277 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  truly  if  occasion   had  beene  offered,  I   would  have  spared 
x  nothing  to  have  done  them  service.      I  have  stirred  and 

How  one     la}3OUrecl  for  them,  as  I  doe  for  my  selfe.     They  are  good 

oug-ht  to  ffov-  ,.,  J     11       ^    i     v  j 

erne    his      people,  warlike  and  generous  ;  yet  capable  or  obedience  and 

will  discipline,  and  fit  for  good  employment,  if  they  be  well 
guided.  They  say  likewise,  that  I  passed  over  this  charge  of 
mine  without  any  deede  of  note  or  great  shew.  It  is  true. 
Moreover,  they  accuse  my  cessation,  when  as  all  the  world 
was  convicted  of  too  much  doing  :  I  have  a  most  nimble 
motion,  where  my  will  doth  carry  me.  But  this  point  is  an 
enemy  unto  perseverance.  Whosoever  will  make  use  of  me, 
according  to  my  selfe,  let  him  employ  me  in  affaires,  that 
require  vigor  and  liberty  :  that  have  a  short,  a  straight,  and 
there  withall  a  hazardous  course  :  I  may  peradventure  some 
what  prevaile  therein.  Whereas  if  it  be  tedious,  crafty, 
laborious,  artificiall  and  intricate,  they  shall  doe  better  to 
addresse  themselves  to  some  other  man.  All  charges  of  im 
portance  are  not  difficult.  I  was  prepared  to  labour  some 
what  more  earnestly,  if  there  had  beene  great  neede.  For 
it  lyes  in  my  power,  to  doe  something  more  than  I  make 
shew-of,  and  than  I  love  to  doe.  To  my  knowledge,  I  have 
not  omitted  any  motion  that  duty  required  earnestly  at  my 
hands.  I  have  easily  forgotten  those,  which  ambition  blend- 
eth  with  duty  and  cloketh  with  her  title.  It  is  they,  which 
most  commonly  fill  the  eyes  and  eares,  and  satisfie  men. 
Not  the  thing  it  selfe,  but  the  apparance  payeth  them.  If 
they  heare  no  noise,  they  imagine  we  sleepe.  My  humours 
are  contrary  to  turbulent  humors.  I  could  pacifie  an  incon 
venience  or  trouble  without  troubling  my  selfe,  and  chastise 
a  disorder  without  alteration. 

Have  I  neede  of  choller  and  inflammation  ;  I  borrow  it, 
and  therewith  maske  my  selfe  :  My  maners  are  musty,  rather 
wallowish  then  sharpe.  I  accuse  not  a  Magistrate  that 
sleepeth,  so  they  that  are  under  it  sleepe  also.  So  sleepe  the 
lawes.  For  my  part,  I  commend  a  gliding,  an  obscure  and 
Cic.  Off.  i.  reposed  life  :  Neque  submissam  et  abiectam,  neque  se  efferentem. 
6  Neyther  too  abject  and  submisse,  nor  vaunting  it  selfe  too 
'  much."  But  my  fortune  will  have  it  so  ;  I  am  descended  of 
a  family  that  hath  lived  without  noise  and  tumult :  and  of 
long  continuance  particularly  ambitious  of  integrity.  Our 

278 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

men  are  so  framed  to  agitation  and  ostentations  that  good-  CHAPTER 
nesse,  moderation,  equity,  constancy,  and   such   quiet  and  X 

meane  qualities,  are  no  more  heard  of.  Rough  bodies  are  ou  h^to011ov- 
felt,  smooth  ones  are  handled  imperceptibly.  Sickenesse  is  erne  ^s 
felt,  health  little  or  not  at  all  :  nor  things  that  annoint  us,  will 
in  regard  of  such  as  sting  us.  It  is  an  action  for  ones  re 
putation  and  private  commodity,  and  not  for  the  common 
good,  to  refer  that  to  be  done  in  the  market  place,  which  a 
man  may  do  in  the  counsel-chamber  :  and  at  noone  day,  what 
might  have  beene  effected  the  night  before :  and  to  be 
jealous  to  doe  that  himselfe,  which  his  fellow  can  performe 
as  well.  So  did  some  Surgeons  of  Greece  shew  the  opera 
tions  of  their  skill,  upon  scaffolds,  in  view  of  all  passengers, 
thereby  to  get  more  practise  and  custome.  They  suppose, 
that  good  orders  cannot  be  understood,  but  by  the  sound  of 
a  trumpet.  Ambition  is  no  vice  for  petty  companions,  and 
for  such  endevours  as  ours.  One  said  to  Alexander  :  Your 
father  will  leave  you  a  great  commaund,  easie  and  peacefull  : 
the  boy  was  envious  of  his  fathers  victories,  and  of  the 
justice  of  his  government.  He  would  not  have  enjoyed  the 
worlds  Empire  securely  and  quietly.  Alcibiades  in  Plato, 
loveth  rather  to  die  yong,  faire,  rich,  noble,  learned,  and  all 
that  in  excellence,  then  to  stay  in  the  state  of  such  a  condition. 
This  infirmity  is  happily  excusable,  in  so  strong  and  full  a 
minde.  When  these  petty  wretched  soules,  are  therewith  en- 
veagled  ;  and  thinke  to  publish  their  fame,  because  they  have 
judged  a  cause  rightly,  or  continued  the  order  in  guarding  of 
a  Cities  gates ;  by  how  much  more  they  hoped  to  raise  their 
head,  so  much  more  doe  they  shew  their  simplicity.  This 
petty  well-doing,  hath  neither  body  nor  life.  It  vanisheth  in 
the  first  moneth  ;  and  walkes  but  from  one  corner  of  a  street 
to  another.  Entertaine  therewith  your  sonne  and  your  ser 
vant,  and  spare  not.  As  that  ancient  fellow,  who  having 
no  other  auditor  of  his  praises  and  applauding  of  his  suffi 
ciency,  boasted  with  his  chamber-maide,  exclaiming :  Oh 
Perette,  what  a  gallant  and  sufficient  man  thou  hast  to  thy 
maister  !  If  the  worst  happen,  entertaine  your  selves  in  your 
selves:  As  a  Councellour  of  my  acquaintance,  having  degorged 
a  rable  of  paragraphes,  with  an  extreame  contention  and  like 
foolishnesse  ;  going  out  of  the  counsell  chamber,  to  a  pissing 

279 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  place  neere  unto  it;  was  heard  very  conscienciously  to  utter 

X  these  words  to  himselfe  :  Non  nobis,  Domine,  non  nobis,  sed 

^ht    °ne     nom^  tuo  da  gloriam.     *  Not  unto  us,  O  Lord,  not  unto  us, 

°Uerne  °hfs°V  '  but  un^°  *%  name  give  the  glory."  He  that  cannot  other- 
will  wise,  let  him  pay  himselfe  out  of  his  owne  purse.  Fame  doth 

Psal.  cxv.  i.  not  so  basely  prostitute  it  selfe,  nor  so  cheape.  Rare  and 
exemplar  actions,  to  which  it  duly  belongeth,  could  not 
brooke  the  company  of  this  innumerable  multitude  of  vulgar 
petty  actions.  Well  may  a  piece  of  marble  raise  your  titles 
as  high  as  you  list,  because  you  have  repaired  a  piece  of  an 
olde  Wall,  or  cleansed  a  common  ditch,  but  men  of  judge 
ment  will  never  doe  it.  Report  followeth  not  all  goodnesse, 
except  difficulty  and  rarietie  be  joyned  thereunto.  Yea 
simple  estimation,  according  to  the  Stoikes,  is  not  due  to 
every  action  proceeding  from  vertue.  Neither  would  they 
have  him  commended,  who  through  temperance  abstaineth 
from  an  old  blear-ey'd  woman.  Such  as  have  knowen  the 
admirable  qualities  of  Scipio  the  Affrican,  renounce  the 
glory  which  Panaetius  ascribeth  unto  him,  to  have  abstained 
from  gifts,  as  a  glory,  riot  his,  alone,  but  peculiar  to  that 
age.  We  have  pleasures  sortable  to  our  fortune  ;  let  us  not 
usurpe  those  of  greatnesse.  Our  owne  are  more  naturall. 
They  are  the  more  solide  and  firme,  by  how  much  the 
meaner.  Since  it  is  not  for  conscience,  at  least  for  ambition 
let  us  refuse  ambition.  Let  us  disdaine  this  insatiate  thirst 
of  honour  and  renowne,  base  and  beggerly,  which  makes  us 

Cic.DeFin.  ii.  so  suppliantly  to  crave  it  of  all  sorts  of  people  :  Quce  est  ista 
laus  quce  possit  e  macello  peti  ?  '  What  praise  is  this,  which 
'  may  bee  fetcht  out  of  the  Shambles?"1  By  abject  meanes, 
and  at  what  vile  rate  soever.  To  be  thus  honoured,  is 
meerely  a  dishonour.  Learne  we  to  bee  no  more  greedy  of 
glory,  then  we  are  capable  of  it.  To  be  proud  of  every  pro 
fitable  and  innocent  action,  is  it  fit  for  men  to  whom  it  is 
extraordinary  and  rare.  They  will  value  it,  for  the  price  it 
cost  them.  According  as  a  good  effect  is  more  resounding  ; 
I  abate  of  it's  goodnesse :  the  jealousie  I  conceive,  it  is  pro 
duced  more  because  it  is  so  resounding,  than  because  it  is 
good.  What  is  set  out  to  shew,  is  halfe  solde.  Those 
actions  have  more  grace,  which  carelesly  and  under  silence, 
passe  from  the  handes  of  a  Workeman.  and  which  some 
280 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

honest  man  afterward   chuseth  and  redeemeth  from  darke-  CHAPTER 
nesse,  to  thrust  them  into  the  worlds  light  ;  Onely  for  their  X 

worth.    Mihi  ouidem  laudabiliora  videntur  omnia*  quce  sine  ven-       ,ow   one 

7.,       ..  /  7         ,  „  «:A11il'  •  Jl  OUffht  tO  fiTOV- 

ditatione,  et  sine  populo  teste  fiunt:  'All  things  in  sooth  seeme 


grne 


4  to  me  more  commendable  that  are  performed  with  no  will 
'  ostentation  ;  and  without  the  people  to  witnessed  Said  the  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
most  glorious  man  of  the  world,  I  had  no  care  but  to  preserve  "• 
and  continue,  which  are  deafe  and  insensible  effects.  Innova 
tion  is  of  great  lustre  :  But  interdicted  in  times,  when  we  are 
most  urged,  and  have  to  defend  our  selves  but  from  novelties  ; 
Abstinence  from  doing,  is  often  as  generous,  as  doing  :  but 
it  is  not  so  apparant.  My  small  worth  is  in  a  manner  all  of 
this  kinde.  To  be  short,  the  occasions  in  this  my  charge 
have  seconded  my  complexion  ;  for  which  I  conne  them 
harty  thanks.  Is  there  any  man  that  desireth  to  be  sicke, 
to  see  his  Physition  set  a  worke  ?  And  should  not  that 
Physition  be  well  whipped,  who  to  put  his  arte  in  practize, 
would  wish  the  plague  to  infect  us  ?  I  was  never  possessed 
with  this  impious  and  vulgar  passion,  to  wish  that  the 
troubled  and  distempered  state  of  this  City,  might  raise  and 
honour  my  government.  I  have  most  willingly  lent  them  my 
hand  to  further,  and  shoulders  to  aid  their  ease  and  tran- 
quility.  He  that  will  not  thanke  me  for  the  good  order  and 
for  the  sweet  and  undisturbed  rest,  which  hath  accompanied 
my  charge  ;  cannot  at  least  deprive  me  of  that  part,  which 
by  the  title  of  my  good  fortune  belongeth  unto  me.  This 
is  my  humour,  that  I  love  as  much  to  be  happy  as  wise  :  And 
attribute  my  successes  as  much  to  the  meere  grace  of  God, 
as  to  the  meane  furtherance  of  my  operation.  I  had  suffici 
ently  published  to  the  World  my  sufficiency  in  managing  of 
such  publike  affaires  :  Nay,  there  is  something  in  me,  worse 
than  insufficiency  :  Which  is,  that  I  am  not  much  displeased 
therewith  :  and  that  I  endevour  not  greatly  to  cure  it,  con 
sidering  the  course  of  life  I  have  determined  to  my  selfe. 
Nor  have  I  satisfied  my  selfe  in  this  employment.  But  have 
almost  attained  what  I  had  promised  unto  my  selfe  :  Yet 
have  I  much  exceeded,  what  I  had  promised  those,  with 
whom  I  was  to  negotiate  :  For  I  willingly  promise  somewhat 
lesse,  then  I  can  perform  e,  or  hope  to  accomplish.  Of  this 
I  am  assured,  I  have  never  left  offence  or  hatred  among  them  : 
2  N  281 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  To  have  left  either  regret  or  desire  of  me.     This  know  I 

X  certainly,  I  have  not  much  affected  it. 

How    one  -, 

— Mene  huic  confidere  monstro,  VIRG.  <dLn. 

Mene  salis  placidi  vultum,  fluctusque  quietos  v.  849. 

Ignorare  ? 

Should  I  this  monster  trust  ?    Should  I  not  know 

The  calme  Seas  counterfait  dissembling  show, 

How  quietly  sometimes  the  flouds  will  go  ? 


ought  to  gov 

erne  his 

will 


THE    ELEVENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  the  Lame  or  Crippel. 

WO  or  three  yeares  are  now  past,  since  the 
yeere  hath  beene  shortned  tenne  dayes 
in  France.  Oh  how  many  changes  are 
like  to  ensue  this  reformation  !  It  was  a 
right  remooving  of  Heaven  and  Earth 
together,  yet  nothing  remooveth  from 
it's  owne  place  :  My  Neighbours  finde  the 
season  of  their  seede  and  Harvest  time, 
the  opportunity  of  their  affaires,  their  lucky  and  unlucky 
dayes,  to  answer  just  those  seasons  to  which  they  had  from 
all  ages  assigned  them.  Neither  was  the  errour  hereto 
fore  perceived,  nor  is  the  reformation  now  discerned  in  our 
use.  So  much  uncertainty  is  there  in  all  things  :  So  grosse, 
so  obscure  and  so  dull  in  our  understanding.  Some  are  of 
opinion,  this  reformation  might  have  bin  redressed  after  a  lesse 
incommodious  maner;  substracting  according  to  the  example 
of  Augustus,  for  some  yeares,  the  bissextile  or  leape  day : 
Which  in  some  sort,  is  but  a  day  of  hinderance  and  trouble  : 
Untill  they  might  more  exactly  have  satisfied  the  debt : 
Which  by  this  late  reformation  is  not  done  :  -For  wee  are  yet 
some  dayes  in  arrerages :  And  if  by  such  a  meane,  we  might 
provide  for  times  to  come,  appoynting  that  after  the  revolu 
tion  of  such,  or  such  a  number  of  yeares,  that  extraordinary 
day  might  for  ever  be  eclipsed  :  so  that  our  misreckoning 
should  not  henceforward  exceede  foure  and  twenty  houres. 
Wee  have  no  other  computation  of  time,  but  yeares  :  The 
World  hath  used  them  so  many  ages :  And  yet  is  it  a 
282 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

measure,  we  have  not  untill  this  day  perfectly  established.  CHAPTER 
And  such,  as  wee  dayly  doubt,  what  forme  other  Nations  XI 
have  diversly  given  the  same;  and  which  was  the  true  use  Of  ^e  Lame 
of  it.  And  what  if  some  say,  that  the  Heavens  in  growing 
olde  compresse  themselves  towards  us,  and  cast  into  an  un 
certainty  of  houres  and  dayes  ?  And  as  Plutarke  saith  of 
moneths,  that  even  in  his  dayes,  Astrology  could  not  yet  limit 
the  motion  of  the  Moone  ?  Are  not  we  then  well  holp-up, 
to  keepe  a  register  of  things  past  ?  I  was  even  now  plodding 
(as  often  I  doe)  upon  this,  what  free  and  gadding  instrument 
humane  reason  is.  I  ordinarily  see,  that  men,  in  matters 
proposed  them,  doe  more  willingly  ammuze  and  busie  them 
selves  in  seeking  out  the  reasons,  than  in  searching  out  the 
trueth  of  them.  They  omit  presuppositions,  but  curiously 
examine  consequences.  They  leave  things,  and  runne  to 
causes.  Oh  conceited  discourses  !  The  knowledge  of  causes 
doth  onely  concerne  him,  who  hath  the  conduct  of  things : 
Not  us,  that  have  but  the  sufferance  of  them.  And  who 
according  to  our  neede,  without  entering  into  their  begin 
ning  and  essence,  have  perfectly  the  full  and  absolute  use 
of  them.  Nor  is  wine  more  pleasant  unto  him  that  knowes 
the  first  faculties  of  it.  Contrariwise,  both  the  body 
and  the  minde,  interrupt  and  alter  the  right,  which  they 
have  of  the  worlds  use  and  of  themselves,  commixing  there 
with  the  opinion  of  learning.  The  effects  concerne  us,  but 
the  meanes,  nothing  at  all.  To  determine  and  distribute, 
belongeth  to  superiority  and  regency :  as  accepting,  to 
subjection  and  apprentiseshippe.  Let  us  re-assume  our 
custome.  They  commonly  beginne  thus  :  '  How  is  such  a 
*  thing  done  ?'  Whereas  they  should  say  :  '  Is  such  a  thing 
'  done  ? '  Our  discourse  is  capable  to  frame  an  hundred  other 
Worlds,  and  finde  the  beginnings  and  contexture  of  them. 
It  needeth  neither  matter  nor  ground.  Let  it  but  runne 
on :  It  will  as  well  build  upon  emptinesse,  as  upon  ful- 
nesse,  and  with  inanity  as  with  matter. 

Dare  pondua  idoneafumo.  PERS.  Sat.  v. 

That  things  which  vanish  straight 
In  smoke,  should  yet  beare  weight. 

I  finde,  that  wee  should  say  most  times  :  '  There  is  no  such 

283 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  '  thing.'   And  I  would  often  employ  this  answer;  but  I  dare 
XI          not :  for  they  cry  :  It  is  a  defeature  produced  by  ignorance 
orCri     el*6  an^  wea^enesse  °f  spirit.     And  I  most  commonly  juggle  for 
company  sake,  to  treate  of  idle  subjects  and  frivolous  dis 
courses,  which  I  believe  nothing  at  all.     Since  truely,  it  is  a 
rude  and  quarellous  humour,  flatly  to  deny  a  proposition. 
And  few  misse  (especially  in  things  hard  to  be  perswaded)  to 
affirme,  that  they  have  scene  it ;  Or  to  alleadge  such  witnesses, 
as  their  authority  shall  stay  our  contradiction.     According 
to  which  use,   we  know  the  foundation  and  meanes  of  a 
thousand  things  that  never  were.      And  the  world  is  in  a 
thousand  questions  discanted  and  bandied  too  and  fro,  the 
Cic.  Acad.        pro  and  contra  of  which  is  meerely  false.  Ita  finitima  sunt  falsa 
Que.  iv.  veris,  ut  in  prcecipitem  locum  non  debeat  se  sapiens  committere. 

'  Falsehood  is  so  neere  Neighbour  to  trueth,  that  a  wiseman 
6  should  not  put  himselfe  upon  a  slipperie  downefall.'1  Truth 
and  falsehood  have  both  alike  countenances,  their  port,  their 
taste  and  their  proceedings  semblable.  Wee  behold  them 
with  one  same  eyes.  I  observe  that  we  are  not  onely  slow 
in  defending  our  selves  from  deceipt,  but  that  we  seeke  and 
sue  to  embrace  it.  Wee  love  to  meddle  and  entangle  our 
selves  with  vanity,  as  conformable  unto  our  being.  I  have 
seene  the  birth  of  divers  miracles  in  my  dayes.  Although 
they  be  smoothered  in  the  first  grouth,  wee  omit  not  to  fore 
see  the  course  they  would  have  taken,  had  they  lived  their 
full  age  The  matter  is  to  finde  the  end  of  the  clue ;  that 
found,  one  may  winde-ofF  what  he  list :  And  there  is  a 
further  distance  from  nothing  to  the  least  thing  in  the 
World,  than  betweene  that  and  the  greatest.  Now  the 
first  that  are  embrued  with  the  beginning  of  strangenesse, 
comming  to  publish  their  history,  finde  by  the  oppositions 
made  against  them,  where  the  difficulty  of  perswasion 
lodgeth  ;  and  goe  about  with  some  false  patch,  to  botch  up 
those  places.  Besides  that,  Insita  hominibus  libidine  alendi 
de  industria  rumores :  '  Men  having  a  natural!  desire  to 
'  nourish  reports.'  We  naturally  make  it  a  matter  of  con 
science,  to  restore  what  hath  been  lent  us,  without  some 
usury  and  accession  of  our  encrease.  A  particular  errour 
doth  first  breede  a  publike  errour :  And  when  his  turne 
commeth,  A  publike  errour  begetteth  a  particular  errour. 
284 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

So  goeth  all  this  vast  frame,  from  hand  to  hand,  confound-  CHAPTER 
ing  and  composing  it  selfe,  in  such  sort  that  the  furthest- 
abiding  testimonie,  is  better  instructed  of  it,  then  the 
nearest :  and  the  last  informed,  better  perswaded  then  the 
first.  It  is  naturall  progresse  :  For,  whosoever  beleeveth  any 
thing,  thinkes  it  a  deede  of  charity,  to  perswade  it  unto 
another  :  Which,  that  he  may  the  better  effect,  he  feareth 
not  to  adde  something  of  his  owne  invention  thereunto,  so 
far  as  hee  seeth  necessary  in  his  discourse,  to  supply  the 
resistance  and  defect,  he  imagineth  to  bee  in  anothers  con 
ception.  My  selfe  who  make  an  especiall  matter  of  conscience 
to  lie,  and  care  not  greatly  to  add  credit  or  authority  to 
what  I  say,  perceive  nevertheles,  by  the  discourses  I  have 
in  hand,  that  being  earnested,  either  by  the  resistance  of 
another,  or  by  the  earnestnesse  of  my  naration  ;  I  swell  and 
amplifie  my  subject  by  my  voice,  motions,  vigor  and  force  of 
wordes :  as  also  by  extension  and  amplification,  not  without 
some  prejudice  to  the  naked  truth.  But  yet  I  doe  it  upon 
condition,  that  to  the  first  that  brings  mee  home  againe, 
and  enquireth  for  the  bare  and  simple  truth  at  my  hands : 
I  sodainly  give  over  my  hold,  and  without  exaggeration, 
emphasis  or  amplification,  I  yeeld  both  my  selfe  and  it  unto 
him  :  A  lively,  earnest  and  ready  speech  as  mine,  is  easie 
transported  unto  hyperboles.  There  is  nothing  whereunto 
men  are  ordinarily  more  prone,  then  to  give  way  to  their 
opinions.  Where  ever  usuall  meanes  faile  us,  we  adde  com- 
mandement,  force,  fire  and  sword.  It  is  not  without  some 
ill  fortune  to  come  to  that  passe,  that  the  multitude  of 
believers,  in  a  throng  where  fooles  doe  in  number  so  far 
exceede  the  wise,  should  bee  the  best  touch-stone  of  truth. 
Quasi  vero  quidquam  sit  tarn  valde,  quam  nil  sapere  vulgare.  Cic. 
Sanitatis  patrocinium  est  insanientium  turba.  '  As  though  "• 
'  any  thing  were  so  common  as  to  have  no  wit.  The  multi- 
'  tude  of  them  that  are  mad,  is  a  defence  for  them  that  are 
4  in  their  wits/  It  is  a  hard  matter  for  a  man  to  resolve  his 
judgement  against  common  opinions.  The  first  perswasion 
taken  from  the  very  subject,  seizeth  on  the  simple :  whence 
under  thf  authority  of  the  number  and  antiquity  of  testi 
monies,  it  extends  it  selfe  on  the  wiser  sort.  As  for  me,  in 
a  matter,  which  I  could  not  believe  being  reported  by  one,  I 

285 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  should  never  credit  the  same,  though  affirmed  by  a  hundred. 
x*  And  I  j  udge  not  opinions,  by  yeares.  It  is  not  long  since 

orCrippeT  one  of  our  Princes>  in  whom  the  gowt  had  spoiled  a  gentle 
disposition  and  blith  composition,  suffered  himselfe  so  far  to 
bee  perswaded  or  mis-led,  by  the  report  made  unto  him  of  the 
wondrous  deedes  of  a  Priest,  who  by  way  of  charmes,  spells 
and  gestures  cured  all  diseases,  that  he  undertooke  a  long- 
tedious  journy  to  finde  him  out:  and  by  the  vertue  of  his 
apprehension  did  so  perswade,  and  for  certaine  houres  so  lull 
his  legs  asleepe,  that  for  a  while  hee  brought  them  to  doe 
him  that  service,  which  for  a  long  time  they  had  forgotten. 
Had  fortune  heaped  five  or  six  like  accidents  one  in  the 
necke  of  another,  they  had  doubtles  beene  able  to  bring  this 
miracle  into  nature.  Whereas  afterward  there  was  so  much 
simplicity  and  so  little  skill  found  in  the  architect  of  these 
works,  that  he  was  deemed  unworthy  of  any  punishment :  As 
likewise  should  be  done  with  most  such-like  things,  were 
they  throughly  knowen  in  their  nature.  Miramur  ex  inter- 
vallo  Jallentia :  '  Wee  wonder  at  those  things  that  deceive  us 
'  by  distance."  Our  sight  doth  in  such  sort,  often  represent 
us  a  farre-off  with  strange  images,  which  vanish  in  approach 
ing  neerer.  Nunquam  ad  liquidum  fama  perducitur.  '  Fame 
'  is  never  brought  to  be  cleared  It  is  a  wonder,  to  see  how 
from  many  vaine  beginnings  and  frivolous  causes,  so  famous 
impressions  doe  ordinarily  arise  and  ensue.  Even  that  hin- 
dereth  the  information  of  them  :  For,  while  a  man  endev- 
oureth  to  finde  out  causes,  forcible  and  weighty  ends,  and 
worthy  so  great  a  name,  hee  loseth  the  true  and  essentiall. 
They  are  so  little,  that  they  escape  our  sight.  And  verily  a 
right  wise,  heedy  and  subtile  inquisitor  is  required  in  such 
questings:  impartiall  and  not  preoccupated.  All  these  mir 
acles  and  strange  events,  are  untill  this  day  hidden  from  me: 
I  have  scene  no  such  monster,  or  more  expresse  wonder  in  this 
world,  then  my  selfe.  With  time  and  custome  a  man  doth 
acquaint  and  enure  himselfe  to  all  strangenesse :  But  the 
more  I  frequent  and  know  my  selfe  the  more  my  deformitie 
astonieth  me :  and  the  lesse  I  understand  my  selfe.  The 
chiefest  priviledge  to  produce  and  advance  such  accidents,  is 
reserved  unto  fortune.  Travelling  yesterday  through  a 
village,  within  two  leagues  of  my  house,  I  found  the  place 
286' 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

yet  warme  of  a  miracle  that  was  but  newly  failed  and  CHAPTER 
discovered,  wherewith  all  the  country  thereabout  had  for  XI 
many  months  beene  ammused  and  abused,  and  divers  border-  ™  the  Lame 
ing  Provinces  began  to  listen  unto  it,  and  severall  troupes 
of  all  qualities  ceased  not  thicke  and  threefold  to  flocke 
thither.  A  yong  man  of  that  towne,  undertooke  one  night 
in  his  owne  house  (never  dreaming  of  any  knavery)  to 
counterfeit  the  voice  of  a  spirit  or  ghost,  but  onely  for  sport, 
to  make  himselfe  merry  for  that  present,  which  succeeding 
better  then  he  had  imagined ;  to  make  the  jest  extend  fur 
ther,  and  himselfe  the  merrier,  he  made  a  country-maiden 
acquainted  with  his  devise  :  who  because  she  was  both  seely 
and  harmelesse,  consented  to  bee  secret  and  to  second  him:  In 
the  end  they  got  another,  and  were  now  three,  all  of  one  age 
and  like  sufficiency :  and  from  private  spirit-talking,  they 
beganne  with  hideous  voices  to  cry  and  roare  aloud,  and  in, 
and  about  churches  hiding  themselves  under  the  chiefe 
Altar,  speaking  but  by  night,  forbidding  any  light  to  be  set 
up :  From  speeches  tending  the  worlds  subversion,  and 
threatning  of  the  day  of  judgement  (which  are  the  subjects, 
by  whose  authority  and  abusive  reverence,  imposture  and 
illusion,  is  more  easily  lurked)  they  proceeded  to  certaine 
visions  and  strange  gestures,  so  foolish  and  ridiculous,  that 
there  is  scarce  any  thing  more  grosse  and  absurd  used  among 
Children,  in  their  childish  sports.  Suppose  I  pray  you, 
that  fortune  would  have  seconded  this  harmelesse  devise  or 
juglirig  tricke  ;  Who  knoweth  how  farre  it  would  have 
extended,  and  to  what  it  would  have  growen  ?  The  poore 
seely  three  Divels  are  now  in  prison,  and  may  happily  eVe 
long  pay  deere  for  their  common  sottishnesse,  and  I  wot  not 
whether  some  cheverell  judge  or  other,  will  be  avenged  of 
them  for  his.  It  is  manifestly  scene  in  this,  which  now  is 
discovered,  as  also  in  divers  other  things  of  like  quality, 
exceeding  our  knowledge  ;  I  am  of  opinion  that  we  uphold 
our  judgement,  as  wel  to  reject,  as  to  receive.  Many  abuses 
are  engendered  into  the  World  ;  or  to  speake  more  boldly, 
all  the  abuses  of  the  World  are  engendered  upon  this,  that 
wee  are  taught  to  feare  to  make  profession  of  our  ignor 
ance,  and  are  bound  to  accept  and  allow,  all  that  wee  cannot 
refute.  Wee  speake  of  all  things  by  precepts  and  resolution. 

28! 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  The  Stile  of  Rome  did  beare,  that  even  the  same,  that  a 
Of  }^\  witnes  deposed,  because  lie  had  seen  it  with  his  own  eyes, 
orCri  el6  anc^  ^at  wn^c^  a  ludge  ordained  of  his  most  assured  know 
ledge,  was  conceived  in  this  form  of  speech  :  '  It  seemeth  so 
'  unto  me/  I  am  drawen  to  hate  likely  things,  when  men 
goe  about  to  set  them  downe  as  infallible.  I  love  these 
words  or  phrases,  which  mollifie  and  moderate  the  temerity 
of  our  propositions  :  '  It  may  be ':  '  Perad venture  ':  '  In  some 
'sort1:  'Some':  'It  is  said':  '  I  thinke,1  and  such  like  :  And 
had  I  beene  to  instruct  children,  I  would  so  often  have  put 
this  manner  of  answering  in  their  mouth ;  enquiring,  and 
not  resolving  :  'What  meanes  it  ?'  'I  understand  it  not':  'It 
'  may  well  bee1:  'Is  it  true  ?'  that  they  should  rather  have 
kept  the  forme  of  learners,  untill  three  score  yeeres  of  age, 
than  present  themselves  Doctors  at  ten,  as  many  doe.  Whoso 
ever  will  be  cured  of  ignorance,  must  confesse  the  same.  Iris 
is  the  daughter  of  Thaumantis,  Admiration  is  the  ground  of 
all  Philosophy:  Inquisition  the  progresse:  Ignorance  the  end. 
Yea  but  there  is  some  kinde  of  ignorance  strong  and  gene 
rous,  that  for  honor  and  courage  is  nothing  beholding  to 
knowledge  :  An  ignorance,  which  to  conceive  rightly,  there 
is  required  no  lesse  learning,  than  to  conceive  true  learning. 
Being  yong,  I  saw  a  law-case,  which  Corras  a  Counsellor 
of  Thoulouse  caused  to  be  printed  of  a  strange  accident 
of  two  men,  who  presented  themselves  one  for  another.  I 
remember  (and  I  remember  nothing  else  so  well)  that  me 
thought,  he  proved  his  imposture,  whom  he  condemned  as 

fuilty,  so  wondrous  strange  and  so  far-exceeding  both  our 
nowledge  and  his  owne,  who  was  judge,  that  I  found  much 
boldnes  in  the  sentence  which  had  condemned  him  to  be 
hanged.  Let  us  receive  some  forme  of  sentence  that  may 
say  :  '  The  Court  understands  nothing  of  it ' ;  more  freely  and 
ingenuously,  than  did  the  Areopagites  ;  who  finding  them 
selves  urged  and  entangled  in  a  case  they  could  not  well 
cleare  or  determine,  appointed  the  parties  to  come  againe 
and  appeare  before  them  a  hundred  yeares  after.  The 
witches  about  my  country,  are  in  hazard  of  their  life,  upon 
the  opinion  of  every  new  authour,  that  may  come  to  give 
their  dreames  a  body.  To  apply  such  examples  as  the  holy 
Word  of  God  offreth  us  of  such  things  (assured  and  irrefrag- 
288 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

able  examples)  and  joyne  them  to  our  moderne  events,  since  CHAPTER 
we  neyther  see  the  causes  nor  meanes  of  them,  some  other  XI 
better  wit  then  ours  is  thereunto  required.  Peradventure  Of  the  Lame 
it  appertaineth  to  that  onely  most-mighty  testimony,  to  tell 
us  :  This  here,  and  that  there ;  and  not  this  other  are  of 
them.  God  must  be  beleeved ;  and  good  reason  he  should 
be  so.  Yet  is  there  not  one  amongst  us,  that  will  be  amazed 
at  his  owne  narration  (and  he  ought  necessarily  to  be 
astonished  at  it,  if  he  be  not  out  of  his  wits)  whether  he 
employ  it  about  others  matters  ;  or  against  himselfe.  I  am 
plaine  and  homely,  and  take  hold  on  the  maine  point,  and 
on  that  which  is  most  likely ;  avoiding  ancient  reproches. 
Majorem  fidem  homines  adhibent  Us  qua?  non  intelligent. 
Cupidine  hurnani  ingenii  libentius  obscura  creduntur.  '  Men 
'  give  more  credit  to  things  they  understand  not :  Things 
4  obscure  are  more  willingly  beleeved  through  a  strange  de- 
'  sire  of  mans  wit/  I  see  that  men  will  be  angry :  and  am 
forbid  to  doubt  of  it  upon  paine  of  execrable  injuries.  A 
new  manner  of  perswading.  Mercy  for  Gods  sake.  My  be- 
liefe  is  not  carried  away  with  blowes.  Let  them  tyrannize 
over  such  as  accuse  their  opinion  of  falsehood ;  I  onely 
accuse  mine  of  difficulty  and  boldnesse.  And  equally  to  them 
I  condemne  the  opposite  affirmation  :  if  not  so  imperiously. 
He  that  with  bravery  and  by  commandement  will  establish 
his  discourse,  declareth  his  reason  to  bee  weake  :  For  a  ver- 
ball  and  scholasticall  altercation,  that  they  have  as  much 
apparance  as  their  contradictors.  Videantur  sane,  non  affir- 
mentur  modb.  'Indeede  let  them  seeme,  so  they  bee  not 
'  avouched."1  But  in  effectuall  consequence  they  draw  from 
it,  these  have  great  ods.  To  kill  men ;  there  is  required  a 
bright-shining  and  cleare  light.  And  our  life  is  over-reall 
and  essentiall,  to  warrant  these  supernaturall  and  fantasticall 
accidents.  As  for  drugges  and  poisons,  they  are  out  of  my 
element :  they  are  homicides,  and  of  the  worst  kinde.  In 
which  neverthelesse,  it  is  said,  that  one  must  not  alwayes 
rely  upon  the  meere  confession  of  those  people  :  For,  they 
have  sometimes  beene  scene  to  accuse  themselves,  to  have 
made  away  men  which  were  both  sound  and  living.  In  these 
other  extravagant  accusations,  I  should  easily  say  that  it 
sufficeth  what  commendations  soever  he  hath,  a  man  be 
2O  289 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  believed  in  such  things  as  are  humane  :  but  of  such  as  are 
XI          beyond  his  conception  and  of  a  supernaturall  effect,  he  ought 

d™ 


orCri  d™  ^nen  on^  ^e  believed  when  a  supernatural  approbation  hath 
authorized  him.  That  priviledge  it  hath  pleased  God  to 
give  some  of  our  testimonies,  ought  not  to  bee  vilified,  or 
slightly  communicated.  Mine  eares  are  full  of  a  thousand 
such  tales.  Three  saw  him  such  a  day  in  the  East  ;  three 
saw  him  the  next  day  in  the  west,  at  such  an  houre,  in  such 
a  place,  and  thus  and  thus  attired,  verily  in  such  a  case  I 
could  not  beleeve  my  selfe.  How  much  more  naturall  and 
more  likely  doe  I  finde  it,  that  two  men  should  lie,  then  one 
in  twelve  houres,  passe  with  the  windes,  from  East  to  West  ? 
How  much  more  naturall,  that  our  understanding  may  by 
the  volubility  of  our  loose-capring  minde  be  transported  from 
his  place  ?  then  that  one  of  us  should  by  a  strange  spirit,  in 
flesh  and  bone,  be  carried  upon  abroome  through  the  tunnell 
of  a  chimny  ?  Let  us,  who  are  perpetually  tossed  too  and 
fro  with  domesticall  and  our  owne  illusions,  not  seeke  for 
forraine  and  unknowen  illusions.  I  deeme  it  a  matter  par 
donable,  not  to  beleeve  a  wonder,  so  far  foorth  at  least  as  one 
may  divert  and  exlude  the  verification  by  no  miraculous  way. 
And  I  follow  Saint  Augustines  opinion,  that  a  man  were 
better  bend  towards  doubt,  than  encline  towards  certaintie, 
in  matters  of  difficult  triall  and  dangerous  beliefe.  Some 
yeares  are  now  past,  that  I  travelled  through  the  country  of 
a  soveraigne  Prince  :  who  in  favour  of  mee,  and  to  abate  my 
incredulity,  did  mee  the  grace,  in  his  owne  presence,  and  in 
a  particular  place,  to  make  mee  see  tenne  or  twelve  prisoners 
of  that  kinde  ;  and  amongst  others  an  olde  beldam  witch,  a 
true  and  perfect  sorceresse,  both  by  her  ugliness  and  de 
formity  ;  and  such  a  one  as  long  before  was  most  famous  in 
that  profession.  I  sawe  both  proofes,  witnesses,  voluntary 
confessions,  and  some  other  insensible  markes  about  this 
miserable  olde  woman  ;  I  enquired  and  talked  with  her  a  long 
time,  with  the  greatest  heed  and  attention  I  could,  yet  am  I 
not  easily  carried  away  by  preoccupation.  In  the  end,  and 
in  my  conscience,  I  should  rather  have  appointed  them 
Helleborum,  than  Hemlocke.  Captisque  res  magis  menttbus, 
quam  consceleratis  similis  visa.  '  The  matter  seemed  liker  to 
4  mindes  captivate  than  guiltie.1  Law  hath  her  owne  correc- 
290 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

tions   for   such    diseases.       Touching    the    oppositions    and  CHAPTER 

arguments,  that  honest    men   have    made    unto  mee,  both 

there,  and  often  elsewhere,  I  have  found  none  that  tie  mee ; 

and  that  admit  not  alwaies  a  more  likely  solution,  than  their 

conclusions.     True  it  is,  that  proofes  and  reasons  grounded 

upon  the  fact  and  experience,  I  untie  not :  for  indeede  they 

have  no  end  ;  but  often  cut  them,  as  Alexander  did  his  knot. 

When  al  is  done,  it  is  an  over- valuing  of  ones  conjectures,  by 

them  to  cause  a  man  to  be  burned  alive.     It  is  reported  by 

divers  examples  (and  Prestantius  saith  of  his  father)  that 

being  in  a  slumber  much  more  deeply,  then  in  a  full-sound 

sleepe,  he  dreamed  and  verily  thought  himselfe  to  be  a  Mare, 

and  served  certaine  souldiers  for  a  sumpter-horse,  and  was 

indeede  what  he  imagined  to  bee.    If  sorcerers  dreame  thus 

materially  :  If  dreames  may  sometimes  be  thus  incorporated 

into  effects :  I  cannot  possibly  believe,  that  our  will  should 

therefore  be  bound  to  the  lawes  and  justice  :  which  I  say,  as 

one  who  am  neither  a  ludge,  nor  a  Counsellor  unto  kings, 

and  furthest  from  any  such  worthinesse :  but  rather  a  man 

of  the  common  stamp,  and  both  by  my  deedes  and  sayings, 

borne  and  vowed  to  the  obedience  of  publique  reason.     Hee 

that  should  register  my  humours,  to  the  prejudice  of  the 

simplest  law,  or  opinion,  or  custome  of  this  village,  should 

greatly   wrong  himselfe,  and  injure  me  as  much.     For  in' 

what  I  say,  I  gape  for  no  other  certainty,  but  that  such  was 

then  my  thought.    A  tumultuous  and  wavering  thought.     It 

is  by  way  of  discourse  that  I  speake  of  all ;  and  of  nothing 

by  way  of  advise.     Nee  me  pudet,  ut  istos,fateri  nescire,  quod 

nesciam.     '  Nor  am  I  ashamed,  as  they  are  to  confesse  I  know 

'  not  that  which  I  doe  not  know/ 

I  would  not  be  so  hardy  to  speake,  if  of  duty  I  ought  to 
bee  believed :  and  so  I  answered  a  great  man,  who  blamed 
the  sharpnesse  and  contention  of  my  exhortations.  When  I 
see  you  bent  and  prepared  on  one  side  ;  with  all  the  endevour 
I  can,  I  will  propose  the  contrary  unto  you,  to  resolve  and 
enlighten  your  judgement,  not  to  subdue  or  binde  the  same  : 
God  hath  your  hearts  in  his  hands,  and  hee  will  furnish  you 
with  choise.  I  am  not  so  malapert,  as  to  desire,  that  my 
opinions  alone,  should  give  sway  to  a  matter  of  such  import 
ance.  My  fortune  hath  not  raised  them  to  so  powerfull 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  deepe  conclusions.  Truely,  I  have  not  onely  a  great 
number  of  complexions,  but  an  infinite  many  of  opinions, 
from  whjcn?  na(j  j  a  sonne  of  mine  owne,  I  would  disswade 
him,  and  willingly  make  him  to  distaste  them.  What  ?  If 
the  truest  are  not  ever  the  most  commodious  for  man,  he 
being  of  so  strange  and  untamed  a  composition  :  Whether  it 
be  to  the  purpose,  or  from  the  purpose,  it  is  no  great  matter. 
It  is  a  common  Proverbe  in  Italic,  that  '  He  knowes  not  the 
4  perfect  pleasure  of  Venus,  that  hath  not  laine  with  a  limping 
'  Woman."  Either  fortune,  or  some  particular  accident  have 
long  since  brought  this  by-saying  in  the  peoples  mouth  :  and 
it  is  as  well  spoken  of  men  as  of  women  :  For  the  Queene  of 
the  Amazons  answered  the  Scithian,  that  wooed  her  to  loves- 
embracements,  apicrra  ^0X09  ot^et, '  The  crooked  man  doth  it 
'  best.1  In  that  feminine  common- wealth  of  theirs,  to  avoyde 
the  domination  of  men,  they  were  wont  in  their  infancy  to 
maime  them,  both  their  armes  and  legges  and  other  limmes, 
that  might  any  way  advantage  their  strength  over  them,  and 
make  onely  that  use  of  them,  that  we  in  our  World  make 
of  our  Women.  I  would  have  saide,  that  the  loose  or  dis- 
joynted  motion  of  a  limping  or  crooke-backt  Woman,  might 
adde  some  new  kinde  of  pleasure  unto  that  businesse  or  sweet 
sinne,  and  some  un-assaid  sensuall  sweetnesse,  to  such  as 
make  triall  of  it :  but  I  have  lately  learnt,  that  even  ancient 
Philosophy  hath  decided  the  matter :  Who  saith,  that  the 
legs  and  thighs  of  the  crooked-backt  or  halting-lame,  by 
reason  of  their  imperfection,  not  receiving  the  nourishment, 
due  unto  them,  it  followeth  that  the  Genitall  parts,  that  are 
above  them,  are  more  full,  better  nourished  and  more  vigor 
ous.  Or  else,  that  such  a  defect  hindring  other  exercise, 
such  as  are  therewith  possessed,  do  lesse  waste  their  strength 
and  consume  their  vertue,  and  so  much  the  stronger  and 
fuller,  they  come  to  Venus  sports.  Which  is  also  the  reason 
why  the  Graecians  described  their  Women- Weavers,  to  bee 
more  hotte  and  earnestly-luxurious,  than  other  Women  : 
Because  of  their  sitting-trade,  without  any  violent  exercise  of 
the  body.  What  cannot  we  dispute  of  according  to  that 
rate  ?  I  might  likewise  say  of  these,  that  the  same  stirring, 
which  their  labour,  so  sitting  doth  give  them,  doth  rouze  and 
sollicite  them,  as  the  jogging  and  shaking  of  their  Coaclic, 
292 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

doth  our  Ladies.  Doe  not  these  examples  fit  that  whereof  CHAPTER 
I  spake  in  the  beginning  ?  That  our  reasons  doe  often  an- 
ticipate  the  effect,  and  have  the  extension  of  their  jurisdic- 
tion  so  infinite,  that  they  judge  and  exercise  themselves  in 
inanity,  and  to  a  not  being  ?  Besides  the  flexibilitie  of  our 
invention,  to  frame  reasons  unto  all  manner  of  dreames ;  our 
imagination  is  likewise  found  easie  to  receive  impressions 
from  falsehood,  by  very  frivolous  apparances.  For,  by  the 
onely  authoritie  of  the  antient  and  publike  use  of  this  word 
or  phrase,  I  have  heretofore  perswaded  my  selfe,  to  have 
received  more  pleasure  of  a  Woman,  in  that  she  was  not 
straight,  and  have  accompted  hir  crookednesse  in  the  num 
ber  of  hir  graces.  Torquato  Tasso,  in  the  comparison  he 
makes  betweene  Italy  and  France,  reporteth  to  have  noted, 
that  we  commonly  have  more  slender  and  spiny  legges,  than 
the  Italian  Gentlemen ;  and  imputeth  the  cause  unto  our 
eontinuall  riding  and  sitting  on  horse-backe.  Which  is  the 
very  same,  from  which  Suetonius  draweth  another  cleane 
contrary  conclusion  :  For,  he  saith,  that  Germanicus  had  by 
the  frequent  use  of  this  exercise,  brought  his  to  be  very  big. 
There  is  nothing  so  supple  and  wandering,  as  our  under 
standing.  It  is  like  to  Theramenez  shooe,  fit  for  all  feet.  It 
is  double  and  diverse,  and  so  are  matters  diverse  and  double. 
Give  me  a  Dragme  of  Silver,  said  a  Cinicke  Philosopher  unto 
Antigonus  :  It  is  not  the  present  of  a  King,  answered  he  ; 
Give  then  a  talent :  It  is  no  gift  for  a  Cinicke,  quoth  he : 

Sen  plures  calor  Hie  vias,  et  caeca  relaxat  VIRG.  Georg.  i. 

Spiramenta,  novas  veniat  qua  succus  in  herbas :  ^9. 

Sen  durat  magis,  et  venas  astringit  Mantes, 
Ne  tenues  pluvifB,  rapidive  potentia  soils 
Acrior,  aut  Borece  penetrabile  frigus  adurat. 

Whether  the  heate  layes  open  holes  unseene, 

Whereby  the  sappe  may  passe  to  hearbs  fresh-greene  : 

Or  rather  hardens  and  bindes  gaping  vaines, 

Lest  sharpe  power  of  hot  sunne,  or  thinning  raines  : 

Of  piercing  North-cold  blaste, 

Should  scortch,  consume  and  waste. 

Ogni  medagalia  ha  il  suo  river scio  ;  '  Each  outside  hath  his 
'  inside,"  saith  the  Italian.  Lo  why  Clitomachus  was  wont  to 
say,  that  Carneades  had  surmounted  the  labours  of  Hercules; 

293 


Of  the  Lame 
or  Crippel 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  because  be  had  exacted  consent  from  men  ;  that  is  to  say, 
opinion  and  temerity  to  judge.  This  fantasie  of  Carneades, 
so  vigorous  (as  I  imagine)  proceeded  antiently,  from  the  im- 
pudency  of  those,  who  make  profession  to  know,  and  from 
their  excessive  selfe-overweening.  JEsope  was  set  to  sale, 
together  with  two  other  slaves  ;  a  Chapman  enquired  of  the 
first,  what  he  could  doe ;  he  to  endeare  himselfe,  answered, 
Mountaine  and  wonders,  and  what  not  ?  For  he  knew  and 
could  doe  all  things.  The  second  answered  even  so  for  him 
selfe,  and  more  too  :  But  when  he  came  to  ^Esope,  and 
demaunded  of  him  what  he  could  doe.  Nothing  (said  he) 
for  these  two  have  forestaled  all,  and  know  and  can  doe  all 
things,  and  have  left  nothing  for  mee.  So  hath  it  happened 
in  the  schoole  of  philosophy.  The  rashnes  of  those  who 
ascribed  the  capacity  of  all  things  to  mans  wit,  through  spight 
and  emulation  produced  this  opinion  in  others,  that  humane 
wit  was  not  capable  of  any  thing.  Some  holde  the  same 
extremity  in  ignorance,  that  others  hold  in  knowledge.  To 
the  end  none  may  deny,  that  man  is  not  immoderate  in 
all  and  every  where  :  and  hath  no  other  sentence 
or  arrest,  than  that  of  necessity,  and  impuissance 
to  proceede  further. 


THE   TWELFTH   CHAPTER 

Of  Phisiognomy. 

LMOST  all  the  opinions  we  have,  are  taken 
by  authority,  and  upon  credit :  There  is 
no  hurt.  We  cannot  chuse  worse  then 
by  our  selves,  in  so  weake  an  age.  This 
image  of  Socrates  his  discourse,  which  his 
friends  have  left  us,  we  onely  approve  it, 
by  the  reverence  of  publicke  approbation. 
It  is  not  of  our  owne  knowledge  :  they  are 
not  according  to  our  use.  Might  such  a  man  be  borne  now 
adayes,  there  are  but  few  would  now  esteeme  him.  Wee  dis- 
cerne  not  graces  inly  or  aright  ;  We  onely  perceive  them  by 
a  false  light  set  out  and  puft  up  with  arte :  Such  as  passe 
294 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

under  their  naturall  purity  and  simplicity,  doe  easily  escape  CHAPTER 
so  weake  and  dimme  a  sight  as  ours  is.  They  have  a  XI1. 
secret,  unperceived  and  delicate  beauty:  he  had  neede 
of  a  cleere,  farre-seeing  and  true-discerning  sight,  that 
should  rightly  discover  this  secret  light.  Is  not  ingen 
uity  (according  to  us)  cosin  germaine  unto  sottishnesse, 
and  a  quality  of  reproach  ?  Socrates  rnaketh  his  soule  to 
moove,  with  a  naturall  and  common  motion.  Thus  saith  a 
plaine  Country-man,  and  thus  a  seely  Woman  :  Hee  never 
hath  other  people  in  his  mouth,  than  Coach-makers,  loyners, 
Coblers,  and  Masons.  They  are  inductions  and  similitudes, 
drawen  from  the  most  vulgar  and  knowen  actions  of  men  : 
every  one  understands  him.  Under  so  base  a  forme,  wee 
should  never  have  chosen  the  noble  worthinesse  and  bright- 
nesse  of  his  admirable  conceptions  :  Wee  that  esteeme  all 
those  but  meane  and  vile,  that  learning  doth  not  raise  :  and 
who  have  no  perceiving  of  riches,  except  set  out  in  shew  and 
pompe.  Our  World  is  framed  but  unto  ostentation.  Men 
are  puffed  up  with  winde,  and  moved  or  handled  by  bounds, 
as  Baloones.  This  man  proposeth  no  vaine  fantasies  unto 
himselfe.  His  end  was,  to  store  us  with  things  and  furnish 
us  with  precepts,  which  really  more  substantially  and  joyntly 
serve  our  life  : 

— servare  modum,  finemgue  tenere,  LUCAN.  Bel. 

Naturdmque  sequi.  Civ.  ii.  380. 

To  keepe  a  meane,  to  hold  the  end, 
And  natures  conduct  to  attend. 

So  was  he  ever  all  one  a  like  :  And  raised  himselfe  to  the 
highest  pitch  of  vigor,  not  by  fits,  but  by  complexion.  Or 
to  say  better ;  he  raised  nothing,  but  rather  brought  downe 
and  reduced  all  difficulties,  or  sharpnesse  to  their  originall 
and  naturall  state,  and  thereunto  subdued  vigor.  For,  in 
Cato,  it  is  manifestly  scene,  to  be  an  out-right  proceeding, 
far-above  and  beyond  the  common :  By  the  brave  exploits  of 
his  life,  and  in  his  death,  hee  is  ever  perceived  to  be  mounted 
upon  his  great  horses.  Whereas  this  man  keepes  on  the 
ground,  and  with  a  gentle  and  ordinary  pace,  treateth  of  the 
most  profitable  discourses,  and  addresseth  himselfe  both  unto 
death  and  to  the  most  thorny  and  crabbed  crosses,  that  may 
happen  unto  the  course  of  humane  life.  It  hatli  indeede 

295 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  fortuned  ;  that  the  worthiest  man  to  be  knowne,  and  for  a 
X1*  .  patterne  to  be  presented  to  the  world,  he  is  the  man  of  whom 
Of  Phisio-  we  jiaye  mosj-  certain  knowledge.  Hee  hath  beene  declared 
and  enlightned  by  the  most  cleare-seeing  men,  that  ever 
were  ;  the  testimonies  wee  have  of  him,  are  in  faithfulnesse 
and  sufficiency  most  admirable.  It  is  a  great  matter,  that 
ever  he  was  able  to  give  such  order  unto  the  pure  imagina 
tions  of  a  childe,  that  without  altring  or  wresting  them,  he 
hath  thence  produced  the  fairest  effects  of  our  minde.  He 
neither  represents  it  rich  nor  high-raised  :  but  sound  and 
pure  :  and  ever  with  a  blithe  and  undefiled  health.  By  these 
vulgar  springs  and  naturall  wards  :  by  these  ordinary  and 
common  fantasies,  sans  mooving  or  without  urging  himselfe, 
hee  erected  not  onely  the  most  regular,  but  the  highest  and 
most  vigorous  opinions,  actions  and  customes,  that  ever  were. 
He  it  is,  that  brought  humane  wisedome  from  heaven  againe, 
where  for  a  long  time  it  had  beene  lost,  to  restore  it  unto 
man  :  where  her  most  just  and  laborious  worke  is.  See  or 
heare  him  pleade  before  his  judges  ;  marke  with  what  reasons 
he  rouzeth  his  courage  to  the  hazards  of  warre,  what  argu 
ments  fortifie  his  patience  against  detraction,  calumniation, 
tyrranny,  death,  and  against  his  wives  peevish  head  :  therein 
is  nothing  borrowed  from  art,  or  from  learning.  The 
simplest  may  there  know  their  meanes  and  might :  it  is 
impossible  to  goe  further  backe  or  lower.  He  hath  done 
humane  nature  a  great  kindnesse,  to  shew  what  and  how 
much  she  can  doe  of  her  selfe.  We  are  every  one  richer 
then  we  imagine,  but  we  are  taught  to  borrow,  and  in 
structed  to  shift ;  and  rather  to  make  use  of  others  goods 
and  meanes,  then  of  our  owne.  There  is  nothing  whereon 
man  can  stay  or  fix  himselfe  in  time  of  his  need.  Of  voluptu- 
ousnesse,  of  riches,  of  pleasure,  of  power,  he  ever  embraceth 
more  then  he  can  graspe  or  hold.  His  greedinesse  is  in 
capable  of  moderation.  The  very  same  I  finde  to  be  in  the 
curiosity  of  learning  and  knowledge  :  he  cuts  out  more  worke 
then  he  can  well  make  an  end  of :  and  much  more  then  he 
neede.  Extending  the  profit  of  learning,  as  farre  as  his 
SEN.  Epist,  cvi.  matter.  Vt  omnium  rerum,  sic  liter  arum  quoque  intemperantia 
*•  labor amus.  '  We  are  sicke  of  a  surfet,  as  of  all  things,  so 

'  of  learning  also."    And  Tacitus  hath  reason  to  commend 
296 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Agricolaes  mother,  to  have  brideled  in  her  sonne  an  over-  CHAPTER 
burning  and  earnest  desire  of  learning.  It  is  a  good,  being 
neerely  looked  unto,  that  containeth  as  other  humane  goods, 
much  peculiar  vanity  and  naturall  weaken esse  :  and  is  very 
chargeable.  The  acquisition  and  purchase  whereof  is  much 
more  hazardous,  then  of  all  other  viands  and  beverage.  For, 
whatsoever  else  we  have  bought ;  we  carry  home  in  some 
vessell  or  other,  where  we  have  law  to  examine  it's  worth  : 
how  much,  and  at  what  time  we  are  to  take-it.  But  Sciences, 
we  cannot  sodainly  put  them  into  any  other  vessell,  then 
our  minde  :  wee  swallow  them  in  buying  them,  and  goe  from 
the  market,  either  already  infected  or  amended.  There  are 
some,  which  insteade  of  nourishing,  doe  but  hinder  and  sur 
charge  us  ;  and  other  some,  which  under  colour  of  curing, 
empoison  us.  I  have  taken  pleasure  in  some  place,  to  see 
men,  who  for  devotions  sake  have  made  a  vow  of  ignorance, 
as  of  chastity,  poverty  and  penitence.  It  is  also  a  kind  of 
guelding  of  our  inordinate  appetites,  to  muzzle  this  greedi- 
nesse,  which  provoketh  us  to  the  study  of  bookes,  and 
depriveth  the  mind  of  that  voluptuous  delight,  which  by  the 
opinion  of  learning  doth  so  tickle  us.  And  it  is  richly  to 
accomplish  the  vow  of  poverty,  to  joyne  that  of  the  minde 
unto  it.  We  neede  not  much  learning  for  to  live  at  ease. 
And  Socrates  teacheth  us,  that  we  have  both  it,  and  the  way 
to  finde  and  make  use  of  it,  within  us.  All  our  sufficiency, 
that  is  beyond  the  naturall,  is  well  nigh  vaine  and  super 
fluous.  It  is  much,  if  it  charge  and  trouble  us  no  more, 
then  it  steads  us.  Faucis  opus  est  literis  ad  mentem  bonam.  SEN.  Epist.c\\. 
'  We  have  neede  of  little  learning  to  have  a  good  minde.' f- 
They  are  febricitant  excesses  of  our  spirit :  a  turbulent  and 
unquiet  instrument.  Rowze  up  your  selfe,  and  you  shall 
finde  forcible  arguments  against  death  to  be  in  your  selfe  ; 
most  true  and  very  proper  to  serve  and  steade  you  in  time 
of  necessity.  'Tis  they  which  induce  a  peasant  swaine,  yea 
and  whole  nations  to  die  as  constantly  as  any  Philosopher. 
Should  I  have  died  lesse  merily  before  I  read  the  Tusculanes? 
I  thinke  not.  And  when  I  finde  my  selfe  in  my  best  wits,  I 
perceive,  that  I  have  somewhat  enriched  my  tongue  ;  my 
courage  but  little.  It  is  even  as  nature  framed  the  same  at 
first.  And  against  any  conflict,  it  shields  it  selfe,  but  with 
2  P  297 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  a  naturall  and  common  march.     Bookes  have  not  so  much 
XI1          served  mee  for  instruction,  as  exercitation.     What  if  learn- 
Phisio-     jng^  assaying  to  arme  us  with  new  wards  and  fences,  ag%ainst 
naturall  inconveniences,  hath  more  imprinted  their  great- 
nesse  and  weight  in  our  fantasie,  then  her  reasons,  quiddities 
and  subtilities,  therewith  to  cover  us  ?     They  are  subtilities 
indeed  ;  by  which  she  often  awaketh  us  very  vainely.    Observe 
how  many  sleight  and  idle  arguments  the  wisest  and  closest 
authors  frame  and  scatter  about  one  good  sound  :  which  if 
you  consider  neerely,  are  but  vaine  and  incorporall.     They 
are  but  verball  wiles,  which  beguile  us.     But  forsomuch  as 
it  may  be  profitable  :    I   will  not   otherwise    blanch  them. 
Many  of  that  condition  are   scattered   here  and   there,  in 
divers  places  of  this  volume  ;  either  borrowed  or  imitated. 
Yet  should  a  man  somewhat  heed,  he  call  not  that  force, 
which  is  but  quaintnes :  or  terme  that  which  is  but  quip 
ping  sharpe,  solide  ;  or  name  that  good,  which  is  but  faire : 
Cic.  Tusc.  Qu.  quoe  magis  gustata  quarn  potato,  delectant, '  which  more  delight 
v-  '  us    being   but   tasted,  then   swild  and  swallowed   downe." 

All  that  which  pleaseth  feedeth  not ;  ubi  non  ingenii  sed 
animi  negocium  agitur.  4  Where  it  is  no  matter  of  wit,  but 
4  of  courage. "*  To  see  the  strugling  endevors  which  Seneca 
giveth  himselfe,  to  prepare  himselfe  against  death  ;  to  see 
him  sweate  with  panting  ;  to  see  him  bathe  so  long  upon 
this  pearch,  thereby  to  strengthen  and  assure  himselfe  :  I 
should  have  made  question  of  his  reputation,  had  he  not 
most  undantedly  maintained  the  same  in  his  death.  His  so 
violent  and  frequent  agitation,  sheweth  that  himselfe  was 
SEN.  Epist.  fervent  and  impetuous.  Magnus  animus  remissius  loquitur, 
cxv.  EL  i.  et  securius :  Non  est  alias  ingenio,  alius  animo  color.  'A  great 
4  courage  speakes  softly  but  securely.  Wit  hath  not  one 
4  colour  and  courage  another."  He  must  be  convicted  at  his 
owne  charges.  And  sheweth  in  some  sort,  that  he  was 
presed  by  his  adversary.  Plutarkes  maner  by  how  much 
more  disdainefull  and  farre-extending  it  is  (in  my  opinion) 
so  much  more  manlike  and  perswasive  is  it :  I  should  easily 
beleeve,  that  his  soule  had  her  motions  more  assured  and 
more  regular.  The  one  more  sharpe,  pricketh  and  sodainely 
starts  us  :  toucheth  the  spirit  more.  The  other  more  solide, 
doth  constantly  enforme,  establish  and  comfort  us  :  toucheth 
298 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

more  the  understanding.  That  ravisheth  our  judgement :  CHAPTER 
this  doth  gaine  it.  I  have  likewise  scene  other  compositions  XII 
and  more  reverenced,  which  in  purtraying  the  combate,  they 
endure  against  the  provocations  of  the  flesh,  represent  them 
so  violent,  so  powerfull  and  invincible,  that  our  selves,  who 
are  cast  in  the  common  mould  of  other  men,  have  as  much 
to  admire  the  unknowne  strangenesse  and  unfelt  vigor  of  their 
temptation,  as  their  constant  resistance.  To  what  purpose 
do  we  so  arme  and  steele  our  selves  with  these  labouring- 
efforts  of  learning  ?  Let  us  diligently  survay  the  surface  of 
the  earth,  and  there  consider  so  many  seely-poore  people  as 
we  see  toyling,  sweltring  and  drooping  about  their  businesse, 
which  never  heard  of  Aristotle,  nor  of  Plato,  nor  ever  knew 
what  exemples  or  precepts  are.  From  those  doth  nature 
dayly  draw  and  affoord  us  effects  of  constancy  and  patternes 
of  patience,  more  pure  and  forcible,  then  are  those,  we  so 
curiously  study-for  in  schooles.  How  many  do  I  ordinarily 
see,  that  misacknowledge  poverty  ;  how  many  that  wish  for 
death,  or  that  passe  it  without  any  alaram  or  affliction  ?  A 
fellow  that  dungeth  my  garden,  hath  happily  this  morning 
buried  his  father  or  his  childe.  The  very  names  whereby 
they  call  diseases,  doe  somewhat  mylden  and  diminish  the 
sharpnes  of  them.  With  them  a  Phthysique  or  consumption 
of  the  lungs,  is  but  an  ordinary  cough  :  A  dysentery  or 
bloody  flix,  but  a  distemper  of  the  stomacke  :  A  pleurisie 
but  a  colde  or  murre :  and  as  they  gently  name  them,  so 
they  easily  endure  them.  Grievous  are  they  indeed,  when 
they  hinder  their  ordinary  labour  or  break  their  usuall  rest : 
They  will  not  take  their  beds  but  when  they  shall  dy. 
Simplex  ilia  et  aperta  virtus  in  obftcuram  et  solertem  scientiam 
versa  est.  '  That  plain e  and  cleare  vertue  is  turned  into 
'  obscure  and  cunning  knowledge."  I  was  writing  this  about 
a  time  that  a  boistrous  storme  of  our  tumultuous  broiles  and 
bloody  troubles,  did  for  many  months  space,  with  all  it's 
might  and  horrour,  hang  full  over  my  head.  On  the  one 
side,  I  had  the  enemies  at  my  gates  ;  on  the  other,  the 
Picoreurs  or  free-booters,  farre  worse  foes.  Non  armis  sed 
vitiis  certatur.  'We  contend  not  with  armour,  but  with 
'  vices/  And  at  one  time  felt  and  endured  all  manner  of 
harme-bringing  military  injuries  ; 

299 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Hostis  adest  dextra  Icevaque  aparte  timendus,  OVID.  Pont. 

XII  Vicinoque  malo  terret  utrumque  latus.  i.  El.  iv.  55. 

Of  Phisio-  A  fearefull  foe  on  left  hand  and  on  right, 
gnomy  Doth  with  his  neighbour  harmes  both  sides  afright. 

Oh  monstrous  Warre  :  Others  worke  without ;  this  in 
wardly  and  against  hir  selfe  :  And  with  her  owne  venome 
gnaweth  and  consumes  her  selfe.  It  is  of  so  ruinous  and 
maligne  a  Nature  ;  that  together  with  all  things  els,  she 
ruineth  her  selfe  :  and  with  spitefull  rage,  doth  rent,  deface 
and  massacre  it  selfe.  We  doe  more  often  see  it,  by  and 
through  hir  selfe,  to  wast,  to  desolate  and  dissolve  hir  selfe, 
then  by  or  through  want  of  any  necessary  thing,  or  by 
enemies  force.  All  manner  of  discipline  doth  shunne  and 
flie  it.  She  commeth  to  cure  sedition,  and  hir  selfe  is 
throughly  therewith  infected  :  She  goeth  about  to  chastize 
disobedience,  and  sheweth  the  example  of  it :  and  being 
employed  for  the  defence  of  Lawes,  entreth  into  actuall 
rebellion  against  her  owne  ordinances.  Aye  me,  where  are 
we  ?  Our  Phisicke  bringeth  infection. 

Nostre  mal  s'empoisonne 

Du  secours  qu'on  luy  donne. 

Our  evill  is  empoysond  more 

By  plaister  they  would  lay  to  th'  sore. 

VIRG.  &n.  xii.  — exuperat  magis  cegrescitque  medendo. 

46.  It  rises  higher,  quicker, 

And  growes  by  curing  sicker. 

CATUL.  Argon.  Omnlafanda  nefanda  malo  permista  furore, 

v.  405.  lustificam  nobis  mentem  avertere  Deorum. 

Lawfull  unlawfull  deeds  with  fury  blended,, 

Have  turn'd  from  us  the  Gods  just  minde  offended. 

In  these  popular  diseases,  one  may  in  the  beginning  dis 
tinguish  the  sound  from  the  sicke :  but  if  they  chance  to 
continue  any  time,  as  ours  hath  done  and  doth  still,  all  the 
body,  yea  head  and  heeles  feele  themselves  the  worse :  no 
part  is  exempted  from  corruption.  For,  there  is  no  aire  a 
man  drawes  so  greedily,  or  sucks  so  gluttonously ;  and  that 
more  spreds  it  selfe,  or  penetrates  more  deepely,  then  doth 
licentiousnesse.  Our  Armies  have  no  other  bond  to  tie 
them,  or  other  cyment  to  fasten  them,  then  what  commeth 
from  strangers  :  It  is  now  a  hard  matter  to  frame  a  body  of 

300 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

a  compleate,  constant,  well-ordered  and  coherent  Army  of  CHAPTER 
Frenchmen  :  Oh  what  shame  is  it  ?  We  have  no  other  dis-  XII 
cipline,  then  what  borrowed  or  auxiliar  Souldiers  shew  us.  Phisio- 
As  for  us,  we  are  led-on  by  our  owne  discretion  and  not  by 
the  commanders ;  each  man  followeth  his  owne  humour : 
and  hath  more  to  doe  within,  then  without.  It  is  the  com- 
mandement  should  follow,  court  and  yeeld  unto :  hee  onely 
ought  to  obey :  all  the  rest  is  free  and  loose.  I  am  pleased 
to  see,  what  remisnesse  and  pusilanimity  is  in  ambition,  and 
by  what  steps  of  abjection  and  servitude,  it  must  arrive  unto 
it's  end.  But  I  am  displeased  to  see  some  debonaire  and 
well-meaning  minds,  yea  such  as  are  capable  of  justice, 
dayly  corrupted,  about  the  managing  and  commanding  of 
this  many-headed  confusion.  Long  sufferance  begets  cus 
toms  ;  custome,  consent  and  imitation.  We  had  too-too 
many  infected  and  ill-borne  minds,  without  corrupting  the 
good,  the  sound  and  the  generous.  So  that,  if  we  continue 
any  time,  it  will  prove  a  difficult  matter  to  finde  out  a  man 
unto  whose  skill  and  sufficiency,  the  health  or  recovery  of 
this  state  may  be  committed  in  trust,  if  fortune  shall 
happily  be  pleased  to  restore  it  us  againe. 

Hunc  saltern  everso  juvenem  succurrere  seclo, 
Ne  prohibete. 

Forbid  not  yet  this  youth  at  least,, 
To  aide  this  age  more  then  opprest. 

What  is  become  of  that  ancient  precept ;  that  '  Souldiers 
'  ought  more  to  feare  their  Generall  than  their  enemy  '  ?  And 
of  that  wonderfull  examplelesse  example  :  That  the  Romane 
army  having  upon  occasion  enclosed  within  her  trenches, 
and  round-beset  an  apple-orchard  ;  so  obedient  was  she  to 
her  Captaines,  that  the  next  morning,  it  rose  and  marched 
away  without  entring  the  same  or  touching  one  apple, 
although  they  were  full-ripe  and  very  delicious  :  So  that 
when  the  owner  came,  he  found  the  full  number  of  his 
apples  ?  I  should  be  glad,  that  our  Youths,  in  steade  of 
the  time  they  employ  about  lesse  profitable  peregrinations, 
and  lesse  honourable  apprentiships,  would  bestow  one  moity, 
in  seeing  and  observing  the  warres  that  happen  on  the 
sea,  under  some  good  Captaine  or  excellent  commander  of 

301 


gnomy 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Malta;  the  other  moity  in  learning  and  surveying  the  dis- 
XII  cipline  of  the  Turkish  armies.  For  it  hath  many  differences 
and  advantages  over  ours.  This  ensueth,  that  here  our 
Souldiers  become  more  licentious  in  expeditions,  there  they 
prove  more  circumspect  and  fearfully  wary.  For,  small 
offences  and  petty  larcenies,  which  in  times  of  peace,  are  in 
the  common  people  punished  with  whipping  and  bastona- 
does,  in  times  of  warre  are  capitall  crimes.  For  an  egge 
taken  by  a  Turke  without  paying,  he  is  by  their  law  to  have 
the  full  number  of  fifty  stripes  with  a  cudgell.  For  every 
other  thing,  how  sleight  soever,  not  necessary  for  mans  feed 
ing,  even  for  very  trifles,  they  are  either  thrust  through 
with  a  sharpe  stake,  which  they  call  Empaling,  or  presently 
beheaded.  I  have  beene  amazed,  reading  the  story  of  Selim, 
the  cruellest  Conqueror  that  ever  was,  to  see,  at  what  time 
lie  subdued  the  Country  of  ^Egypt,  the  beauteous  gardens 
round  about  Damasco,  all  open  and  in  a  conquered  country ; 
his  maine  army  lying  encamped  round  about,  those  gardens 
were  left  untouched  and  unspoyled  by  the  hands  of  his 
Souldiers,  onely  because  they  were  commanded  to  spoyle 
nothing,  and  had  not  the  watch -word  of  pillage.  But,  is 
there  any  malady  in  a  Common-weale,  that  deserveth  to  be 
combated  by  so  mortall  drugge  ?  No  saide  Favonius,  not 
so  much  as  the  usurpation  of  the  tyranicall  possession  of  a 
Common-wealth.  Plato  likewise  is  not  willing  one  should 
offer  violence  to  the  quiet  repose  of  his  Countrey,  no  not  to 
reforme  or  cure  the  same  ;  and  alloweth  not  that  reforma 
tion,  which  disturbeth  or  hazardeth  the  whole  estate  ;  and 
which  is  purchased  with  the  blood  and  ruine  of  the  Citi 
zens.  Establishing  the  office  of  an  honest  man,  in  these 
causes,  to  leave  all  there :  But  onely  to  pray  God,  to  lend 
his  extraordinary  assisting  hand  unto  it.  And  seemeth  to 
be  offended  with  Dyon  his  great  friend,  to  have  therein  pro 
ceeded  somewhat  otherwise.  I  was  a  Platonist  on  that  side 
before  ever  I  knew  there  had  beene  a  Plato  in  the  world. 
And  if  such  a  man  ought  absolutely  be  banished  our  com 
merce,  and  refused  our  society :  (he  who  for  the  sincerity  of 
his  conscience,  deserved  by  meane  of  divine  favour,  athwart 
the  publique  darknesse,  and  through  the  generall  ignorance 
of  the  world  wherein  he  lived,  so  farre  to  enter  and  so 
302 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

deepely  to  penetrate  into  Christian  light)  I  doe  not  thinke,  CHAPTER 

that  it  befitteth  us,  to  be  instructed  by  a  Pagan.     Oh  what          XI 

impiety  is  it,  to  expect  from  God  no  succour  simply  his,  and 

without  our  cooperation.     I  often  doubt,  whether  amongst 

so  many  men,  that  meddle   with  such  a  matter,  any  hath 

beene  found  of  so  weake  an  understanding,  that  hath  ear 

nestly  beene  perswaded,  he  proceeded  toward  reformation, 

by  the  utmost  of  deformations;   that  he  drew  toward  his 

salvation,  by  the  most  expresse  causes,  that  we  have  of  un 

doubted  damnation  :    that  overthrowing   policy,   disgracing 

magistrates,  abusing  lawes,  under  whose  tuition  God  hath 

placed  him  ;  filling  brotherly  minds  and  loving  hearts,  with 

malice,  hatred  and  murther  ;  calling  the  Divels  and  furies  to 

his  helpe  ;  he  may  bring  assistance  to  the  most  sacred  mild- 

nesse  and  justice  of  divine  Law.     Ambition,  avarice,  cruelty 

and  revenge  have  not  sufficient  proppes  and  naturall  im- 

petuousity  ;  let  us  allure  and  stirre  them  up  by  the  glorious 

title  of  justice  and  devotion.     There  can  no  worse  estate  of 

things  be  imagined,  than  where  wickednesse  commeth  to  be 

lawfull  :  And  with  the  Magistrates  leave,  to  take  the  cloake 

of  vertue  :  Nihil  in  speciem  fallacius,  quam  prava  religio,  ubi 

deorum  numen  prcetendltur  sceleribus.      '  There  is    nothing 

'  more  deceiptfull  to  shew,  than  corrupt  religion,  when  the 

4  power  of  Heaven  is  made  a  pretence  and  cloake  for  wicked- 

4  nesse."      The    extreame    kinde  of  injustice  (according    to 

Plato)  is,  that  that  which  is  unjust  should  be  held  for  just. 

The  common  people  suffered  therein  greatly  then  ;  not  onely 

present  losses, 

—  undique,  totis. 
Vsque  adeo  turbatur  agris. 

Such  revell  and  tumultuous  rout 
In  all  the  country  round  about, 

but  also  succeeding  dommages.  The  living  were  faine  to 
suffer,  so  did  such  as  then  were  scarse  borne.  They  were 
robbed  and  pilled,  and  by  consequence  so  was  I,  even  of 
hope  :  spoiling  and  depriving  them  of  all  they  had  to 
provide  their  living  for  many  yeares  to  come. 


nequeunt  secumferre  aut  abducere,  perdunt, 
Et  cremat  insontes  turba  scelesta  casas  : 
Muris  nulla  fides,  sqaallent  popalaribus  agri. 

303 


CHAPTER 
XII 

Of  Physio 
gnomy 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

They  wretch-lesse  spoyle  and  spill  what  draw  or  drive 
they  may  not, 

Guilty  rogues  to  set  fire  on  guilt-lesse  houses  stay  not. 
In  wals  no  trust,  the  field 

By  spoyle  growes  waste  and  wilde. 

Besides  these  mischiefes,  I  endured  some  others.  I  in 
curred  the  inconveniences  that  moderation  bringeth  in  such 
diseases.  I  was  shaven  on  all  hands  :  To  the  Ghibelin  I 
was  a  Guelf,  to  Guelf  a  Ghibelin.  Some  one  of  my  Poets 
expresseth  as  much,  but  I  wot  not  where  it  is.  The  situa 
tion  of  my  house,  and  the  acquaintance  of  such  as  dwelt 
round  about  me,  presented  me  with  one  visage ;  my  life  and 
actions  with  another.  No  formall  accusations  were  made  of 
it ;  for  there  was  nothing  to  take  hold  of.  I  never  opposed 
my  selfe  against  the  lawes  ;  and  who  had  called  me  in  ques 
tion,  should  have  lost  by  the  bargaine.  They  were  mute 
suspicions,  that  ranne  under  hand,  which  never  want  ap- 
parance  in  so  confused  a  hurly-burly,  no  more  than  lacke 
of  envious  or  foolish  wits.  I  commonly  affoord  ayde  unto 
injurious  presumption,  that  fortune  scattereth  against  me; 
by  a  fashion  I  never  had,  to  avoid  justifying,  excusing  or 
interpreting  my  selfe;  deeming  it  to  be  a  putting  of  my 
conscience  to  compromise,  to  pleade  for  hir.  Perspicuitas 
enim,  argument atione  elevatur :  '  For  the  cleering  of  a  cause, 
'  is  lessened  by  the  arguing/  And  as  if  every  man  saw  into 
mee  as  cleare  as  I  doe  my  selfe,  in  lieu  of  withdrawing,  I 
advance  my  selfe  to  the  accusation  and  rather  endeare  it, 
by  an  erronious  and  scoffing  confession  :  except  I  flatly  hold 
my  peace,  as  of  a  thing  unworthy  any  answer.  But  such  as 
take  it  for  an  over-proud  confidence,  doe  not  much  lesse 
disesteeme  and  hate  me  for  it,  than  such  as  take  it  for  weak- 
nesse  of  an  indefensible  cause.  Namely  the  great,  with 
whom  want  of  submission,  is  the  extreame  fault.  Rude  to 
all  j  ustice,  that  is  knowne  or  felt:  not  demisse,  humble  or 
suppliant.  I  have  often  stumbled  against  that  piller.  So  it 
is,  that  by  the  harmes  which  befell  mee,  an  ambitious  man 
would  have  hanged  himselfe ;  and  so  would  a  covetous 
churle.  I  have  no  care  at  all  to  acquire  or  get. 


HOR.  i.  Epist. 
xviii.  107. 


304 


Sit  mihi  quod  nunc  est,  etiam  minus,  ut  mihi  vivam 
Quod  super  est  ami,  si  quid  superesse  volent  dij. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Let  me  have,  that  I  have,  or  lesse,  so  I  may  live  CHAPTER 

Unto  my  selfe  the  rest,  if  any  rest  God  give.  XII 

But  losses  that  come  unto  me  by  others  injury,  be  it 
larceny  or  violence,  pinch  me,  in  a  manner  as  one  sicke  and 
tortured  with  avarice.  An  offence  causeth  undoubtedly 
more  griefe  and  sharpnesse,  than  a  losse.  A  thousand 
severall  kindes  of  mischiefes  fell  upon  me  one  in  the  necke 
of  another  ;  I  should  more  stoutly  have  endured  them,  had 
they  come  all  at  once.  I  bethought  my  selfe,  amongst  my 
friends,  to  whom  I  might  commit  a  needy,  a  defective  and 
unfortunate  olde  age :  But  after  I  had  surveyed  them  all, 
and  cast  mine  eyes  every  where,  I  found  my  selfe  bare  and 
far  to  seeke.  For  one  to  sowse  himselfe  downe  head-long, 
and  from  so  great  a  height,  he  should  heedily  fore-cast  that 
it  may  be  in  the  armes  of  a  solide,  stedfast,  vigorous  and 
fortunate  affection.  They  are  rare,  if  there  be  any.  In 
the  end  I  perceived  the  best  and  safest  way,  was  to  trust 
both  my  selfe  and  my  necessity,  unto  my  selfe.  And  if  it 
should  happen  to  be  but  meanly  and  faintly  in  Fortunes 
grace,  I  might  more  effectually  recommend  my  selfe  unto 
mine  owne  favour,  more  closely  fasten  and  more  neerely 
looke  unto  my  selfe.  In  all  things  men  relie  upon  strange 
props,  to  spare  their  owne :  onely  certaine  and  oriely  power- 
full,  knew  they  but  how  to  arme  themselves  with  them. 
Every  man  runneth  out  and  unto  what  is  to  come,  because 
no  man  is  yet  come  into  himselfe.  And  I  resolved,  that 
they  were  profitable  inconveniences :  forsomuch  as  when 
reason  will  not  serve,  we  must  first  warne  untoward  Scholars 
with  the  rod ;  as  with  fire  and  violence  of  wedges,  we  bring 
a  crooked  peece  of  wood  to  be  straight.  It  is  long  since  I 
call,  to  keepe  my  selfe  unto  my  selfe,  and  live  sequestred 
from  alien  and  strange  things  ;  notwithstanding  I  daily  start 
out  and  cast  mine  eyes  aside.  Inclination,  a  great  mans 
favourable  word,  a  kind  looke  doth  tempt  me.  God  he 
knowes  whether  there  be  penury  of  them  now-adayes,  and 
what  sense  they  beare.  I  likewise,  without  frowning,  listen 
to  the  subornings,  framed  to  draw  mee  to  some  towne  of 
merchandise  or  city  of  trafficke ;  and  so  coldly  defend  my 
selfe,  that  it  seemes  I  should  rather  endure  to  be  overcome, 
than  not.  Now  to  a  spirit  so  indocile,  blowes  are  required  : 

2Q  305 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  this  vessell,  that  of  it  selfe  is  so  ready  to  warpe,  to 

XII         unhoope,   to   escape   and   fall   in   peeces,   must   be   closed, 

hisio-     hooped  and  strongly  knockt  with  an  adze.      Secondly,  that 

this  accident  served  me  as  an  exercitation  to  prepare  my  selfe 

for  worse,  if  worse  might  happen  :  if  I,  who  both  by  the 

benefit  of  fortune  and  condition  of  my  maners,  hoped  to  bee 

of  the  last,   should    by  this   tempest   be  one  of  the    first 

surprised.     Instructing  my  selfe  betimes,  to  force  my  life 

and  frame  it  for  a  new  state.      True-perfect  liberty,  is,  for 

one  to  be  able  to  doe  and  work  all  things  upon  himselfe. 

SEN.  Ep.  ix.  Potentissimus  est  qui  se  habet  in  potestate.  '  Hee  is  of  most 
'  power,  that  keepes  himselfe  in  his  owne  power/  In  ordinary 
and  peacefull  times,  a  man  prepares  himselfe  for  common 
and  moderate  accidents :  but  in  this  confusion,  wherein  we 
have  beene  these  thirty  yeeres,  every  French  man,  be  it  in 
generall  or  in  particular,  doth  hourely  see  himselfe  upon  the 
point  of  his  fortunes  over- throw  and  downefall.  By  so  much 
more  ought  each  one  have  his  courage  stored,  and  his  minde 
fraughted,  with  more  strong  and  vigorous  provisions  :  Let  us 
thanke  Fortune,  that  hath  not  made  us  live  in  an  effeminate, 
idle  and  languishing  age :  Some,  whom  other  meanes  could 
never  bring  unto  it,  shall  make  themselves  famous  by  their 
misfortunes.  As  I  reade  not  much  in  Histories,  these  con 
fusions  of  other  states,  without  regret,  that  I  could  not 
better  them  present ;  So  doth  my  curiosity  make  me  some 
what  please  my  selfe,  with  mine  eyes  to  see  this  notable 
spectacle  of  our  publike  death  :  her  symptomes  and  formes. 
And  since  I  could  not  hinder  the  same,  I  am  content  to  be 
appointed  as  an  assistant  unto  it,  and  therby  instruct  my 
selfe.  Yet  seeke  we  evidently  to  know  in  shadowes,  and 
understand  by  fabulous  representations  upon  Theaters,  to 
shew  of  the  tragicke  revolutions  of  humane  fortune.  It  is 
not  without  compassion  of  that  we  heare,  but  we  please  our 
selves  to  rowze  up  our  displeasure,  by  the  rarenesse  of  these 
pitifull  events.  Nothing  tickles,  that  pincheth  not.  And 
good  Historians  avoid  calme  narrations,  as  a  dead  water 
or  mort-mere ;  to  retreeve  seditions  and  finde  out  warres, 
whereto  they  know  we  cal  them.  I  doubt  whether  I 
may  lawfully  avow,  at  how  base  a  rate  of  my  lifes  rest  and 
tranquillity,  I  have  past  it  more  than  halfe  in  the  ruine  of 
306 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

my  Country.  In  accidents  that  touch  me  not  in  my  free-  CHAPTER 
hold,  I  purchase  patience  very  cheape  ;  and  to  complaine  to  XII 
my  selfe,  I  respect  not  so  much  what  is  taken  from  mee,  as  Phisio- 
what  is  left  me  both  within  and  without.  There  is  comfort  gn° 
in  sometimes  eschewing  one,  and  sometimes  another  of  the 
evills,  that  one  in  the  necke  of  another  surprise  us,  and 
elsewhere  stricke  us  round  about.  As  matters  of  publike 
interrests,  according  as  my  affection  is  more  universally  scat 
tered,  she  is  thereby  more  enfeebled.  Since  it  is  halfe  true  : 
Tantum  ex  publicis  malls  sentimus,  quantum  ad  privatas  res 
pertinet.  '  Wee  feele  so  much  of  common  harmes  as  apper- 
4  taine  to  our  private  estate/  And  that  the  health,  whence 
wee  fell  was  such,  that  her  selfe  solaceth  the  regret  we 
should  have  for  her.  It  was  health,  mary  but  in  comparison 
of  the  contagion,  which  hath  followed  the  same.  Wee  are 
not  falen  very  high.  The  corruption  and  the  brigandage, 
which  now  is  in  office  and  dignity,  seemes  to  me  the  least 
tolerable.  Wee  are  lesse  injuriously  robbed  in  the  midst  of 
a  wood,  then  a  place  of  security.  It  was  an  universall  co 
herency  of  members  spoiled  avie  one  another  ;  and  most  of 
them,  with  old-rankled  ulcers,  which  neither  admitted  nor 
demaunded  recovery.  Truely  this  shaking-fit  did  therefore 
more  animate  then  deterre  me,  onely  by  the  aide  of  my  con 
science,  which  not  onely  quietly,  but  fiercely  carried  it  selfe  ; 
and  I  found  no  cause  to  complaine  of  my  self :  likewise,  as 
God  never  sends  men  either  evils  or  goods  absolutely  pure, 
my  health  held  out  well  for  that  time,  yea  against  her 
ordinary  :  And  as  without  it  I  can  do  nothing,  so  with  it, 
there  are  few  things  I  cannot  doe.  She  gave  me  meanes  to 
summon  and  rouze  up  all  my  provisions,  and  to  beare  my 
hand  before  my  hurt,  which  happily  would  have  gone  fur 
ther  :  And  proved  in  my  patience,  that  yet  I  had  some 
hold  against  fortune,  and  that  to  thrust  me  out  of  my  saddle, 
there  was  required  a  stronger  counterbuffe.  This  I  speake 
not,  to  provoke  her  to  give  me  a  more  vigorous  charge.  I 
am  her  servant,  and  yeeld  my  selfe  unto  her :  For  Gods  sake 
let  her  be  pleased.  Demaund  you  whether  I  feele  her 
assaults  ?  I  doe  indeede.  As  those  whom  sorrow  possesseth 
and  overwhelmeth,  doe  notwithstanding  at  one  time  or 
other  suffer  themselves  by  intermissions  to  be  touched  by 

307  " 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  some  pleasure,  and  now  and  then  smile.      I  have  sufficient 

XII          power  over  my  selfe,  to  make  mine  ordinary  state  quiet  and 

Of  Phisio-     free  from  an  tedious  and  irkesome  imaginations  ;  but  yet  I 

gnomy       sometimes  suffer  my  selfe  by  starts  to  be  surprised  with  the 

pinchings  of  these  unpleasant  conceits,  which  whilst  I  arme 

my  selfe  to  expell  or  wrestle  against  them,  assaile  and  beate 

mee.     Loe  here  another  huddle  or  tide  of  mischiefe ;  that 

on  the  necke  of  the  former  came  rushing  upon  mee.     Both 

within   and    round   about   my  house,  I   was  overtaken,  in 

respect  of  all  other,  with  a  most  contagious  pestilence.    For, 

as  soundest  bodies  are  subject  to  grievous  diseases,  because 

they  onely  can  force  them :    so  the    aire  about  me  being 

very  healthy,  wher  in  no  mans  memory,  infection  (although 

very  neere)  could  ever  take  footing :    comming  now  to  be 

poisoned  brought  forth  strange  effects. 

HOR.  Car.  i.  Mista  senum  et  juvenum  densantur  funera  nullum 

Od.  xxviii.  19.  Sceva  caput  Proserpina  fugit. 

Of  old  and  young  thicke  funerals  are  shared  ; 
By  cruell  Proserpine  no  head  is  spared. 

I  was  faine  to  endure  this  strange  condition,  that  the 
sight  of  my  house  was  irkesome  unto  me.  Whatever  was 
therein,  lay  all  at  randon,  no  man  looked  thereunto  ;  and 
was  free  for  any  that  had  a  minde  unto  it.  I  who  have  so 
long  beene  a  good  housekeeper,  and  used  to  hospitality,  was 
much  troubled  and  put  to  my  shifts,  how  to  finde  out  some 
retreate  for  my  family.  A  dismaied  and  scattered  family, 
making  both  her  selfe  and  her  friends  afraide,  and  breeding 
horrour  where  it  sought  to  retire  for  shelter  ;  being  now  to 
shift  and  change  her  dwelling,  so  soone  as  any  of  the  com 
pany  beganne  to  feele  his  finger  ake,  all  the  rest  were 
dismaied.  Every  sicknesse  is  then  taken  for  the  plague : 
none  hath  leasure  to  consider  them.  And  the  mischiefe 
is,  that  according  to  rules  of  arte,  what  danger  soever  ap- 
procheth,  a  man  must  continue  forty  dayes  in  anxiety  or 
feare  of  that  evill ;  in  which  time  your  owne  imagination 
doth  perplex  you  as  she  list  and  infect  your  health.  All 
which  had  much  lesse  toucht  mee,  had  I  not  beene  forced  to 
beare  other  mens  burthens  and  partake  all  their  grievances, 
and  for  six  months  space,  in  miserable  maner,  to  be  a  woe- 

308 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

full  guide  to    so  great- confused  a  Caravane.        For  I  ever  CHAPTER 

carry  my  preservatives  above  me,  which  are  resolution  and          XII  ^ 

sufferance.     Apprehension  doth  not  greatly  presse  me,  which          Phisio- 

is  particularly  feared  in  this  sicknesse.     And  if  being  alone, 

I  should  have  taken  it,  it  had  beene  a  stronger  and  further 

flight :  It  is  a  death  in  mine  opinion,  not  of  the  worst :  It 

is  commonly  short  and  speeding,  voide  of  lingring  giddinesse, 

without  paine,  comforted  by  the  publike  condition  :  without 

ceremonie,  without  mourning,  and  without  thronging.     But 

for  the  people  about  us,  the  hundreth  part  of  soules  cannot 

be  saved. 

— videas  desertdque  regna 
Pastorum,  et  longe  saltus  lateque  vacantes. 

Kingdomes  of  Shepherds  desolate  forlorne, 
Parkes  farre  and  neere  lie  waste,  a  state  all  torne. 

In  that  place,  my  best  revenue  is  manuall :  what  a  hundred 
men  laboured  for  me,  lay  fallow  for  a  long  time.  What  ex 
amples  of  resolution  saw  we  not  then  in  all  this  peoples  sim 
plicity  ?  Each  one  generally  renounced  all  care  of  life.  The 
grapes  (which  are  the  countries  chiefe  commoditie)  hung 
still  and  rotted  upon  the  vines  untouch't :  all  indifferently 
preparing  themselves,  and  expecting  death,  either  that  night 
or  the  next  morrow  :  with  countenance  and  voice  so  little 
daunted,  that  they  seemed  to  have  compromitted  to  this 
necessitie,  and  that  it  was  an  universall  and  inevitable  con 
demnation.  It  is  ever  such.  But  what  slender  hold  hath 
the  resolution  of  dying  ?  The  difference  and  distance  of  some 
few  houres :  the  onely  consideration  of  the  company  yeelds 
the  apprehension  diverse  unto  us.  Behold  these  because 
they  die  in  one  same  month,  children,  yong,  old  ;  they  are 
no  more  astonied,  they  are  no  longer  wept  for.  I  saw  some 
that  feared  to  stay  behinde,  as  if  they  had  beene  in  some 
horrible  solitude :  And  commonly  I  knew  no  other  care 
amongst  them,  but  for  graves :  it  much  grieved  them,  to  see 
the  dead  carcasses  scattered  over  the  fields,  at  the  mercy  of 
wilde  beasts ;  which  presently  began  to  flocke  thither.  Oh 
how  humane  fantasies  differ  and  are  easily  disjoined  !  The 
Neorites,  a  nation  whilome  subdued  by  Alexander  the  Great, 
cast  out  their  dead  mens  bodies  into  the  thickest  of  their 
woods,  there  to  be  devoured  :  the  grave  onely  esteemed 

J309 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  happy  among  them.  Some  in  good  health  digged  already 
XII  their  graves  ;  othersome  yet  living  did  goe  into  them.  And 
Phisio-  a  day_labourer  of  mine,  as  he  was  dying,  with  his  owne  hands 
and  feet  pulled  earth  upon  him,  and  so  covered  himselfe. 
Was  not  this  a  lying  downe  in  the  shade  to  sleepe  at  ease  ? 
An  enterprise  in  some  sort  as  highly  noble,  as  that  of  some 
Romane  Souldiers,  who  after  the  battel  of  Canna,  were  found 
with  their  heads  in  certaine  holes  or  pits,  which  themselves 
had  made,  and  filled  up  with  their  hands,  wherein  they  were 
smothered.  To  conclude,  a  whole  nation  was  presently  by 
use  brought  to  a  march,  that  in  undantednesse  yeelds  not  to 
any  consulted  and  fore-meditated  resolution.  The  greatest 
number  of  learnings  instructions,  to  encourage  us  have  more 
shew  then  force,  and  more  ornament  then  fruit.  Wee  have 
forsaken  nature,  and  yet  wee  will  teach  her  her  lesson  :  Shee, 
that  lead  us  so  happily,  and  directed  us  so  safely :  And  in 
the  meane  while,  the  traces  of  her  instructions  and  that 
little,  which  by  the  benefit  of  ignorance,  remaineth  of  her 
image,  imprinted  in  the  life  of  this  rusticall  troupe  of  un 
polished  men  ;  learning  is  compelled  to  goe  daily  a  borrow 
ing,  thereby  to  make  her  disciples  a  patterne  of  constancy, 
of  innocency  and  of  tranquilitie.  It  is  a  goodly  matter  to 
see  how  these  men  full  of  so  great  knowledge,  must  imitate 
this  foolish  simplicitie ;  yea  in  the  first  and  chiefe  actions 
of  vertue.  And  that  our  wisedome  should  learne  of  beasts, 
the  most  profitable  documents,  belonging  to  the  chiefest  and 
most  necessary  parts  of  our  life.  How  we  should  live  and 
die,  husband  our  goods,  love  and  bring  up  our  children,  and 
entertaine  justice.  A  singular  testimonie  of  rnans  infirmitie  : 
and  that  this  reason  we  so  manage  at  our  pleasure,  ever  find 
ing  some  diversitie  and  noveltie,  leaveth  unto  us  no  maner  of 
apparant  tracke  of  nature.  Wherewith  men  have  done,  as 
perfumers  do  with  oyle,  they  have  adulterated  her,  with  so 
many  argumentations,  and  sofisticated  her  with  so  diverse 
farre-fetcht  discourses,  that  she  is  become  variable  and 
peculiar  to  every  man,  and  hath  lost  her  proper,  constant 
and  universall  visage  :  whereof  we  must  seeke  for  a  testi 
mony  of  beasts,  not  subject  to  favor  or  corruption,  nor  to 
diversity  of  opinions.  For  it  is  most  true,  that  themselves 
march  not  alwaies  exactly  in  natures  path,  but  if  they  chance 
310 


gnomy 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

to  stray  it  is  so  little,  that  you  may  ever  perceive  thetracke.  CHAPTER 
Even  as  horses  led  by  hand  doe  sometimes  bound  and  start  ^f  . 
out  of  the  way,  but  no  further  then  their  halters  length,  and 
neverthelesse  follow  ever  his  steps  that  leadeth  them :  And 
as  a  Hawke  takes  his  flight  but  under  the  limits  of  hir 
cranes,  or  twyne.  Exilia,  tormenta,  bella,  morbos,  naiifragia 
meditare,  ut  nullo  sis  malo  tyro.  4  Banishments,  torments, 
'  warres,  sicknesses,  shipwracks,  all  these  fore-cast  and  pre- 
4  meditate,  that  thou  maiest  seeme  no  novice,  no  freshwater 
'  souldier  to  any  misadventure.1  What  availeth  this  curiosity 
unto  us,  to  preoccupate  all  humane  natures  inconveniences, 
and  with  so  much  labour  and  toyling  against  them,  to  pre 
pare  our  selves,  which  peradventure  shall  nothing  concerne 
us  ?  (Parem  passis  tristitiam  facit,  pati  posse.  '  It  makes 
'  men  as  sad  that  they  may  suffer  some  mischiefe,  as  if  they 
4  had  suffred  it."  Not  onely  the  blow,  but  the  winde  and 
cracke  strikes  us.)  Or  as  the  most  febricitant,  for  surely  it  is 
a  kinde  of  fever,  now  to  cause  your  selfe  to  be  whipped,  be 
cause  fortune  may  one  day  chance  to  make  you  endure  it : 
and  at  Mid-Sommer  to  put-on  your  furr'd  Gowne,  because 
you  shall  neede  it  at  Christmas  ?  Cast  your  selves  into  the 
experience  of  all  the  mischiefes,  that  may  befall  you,  namely 
of  the  extreamest :  there  try  your  selfe  (say  they)  there  assure 
your  selfe.  Contrariwise,  the  easiest  and  most  natural!,  were 
even  to  discharge  his  thought  of  them.  They  will  not  come 
soone  enough,  their  true  being  doth  not  last  us  long  enough, 
our  spirit  must  extend  and  lengthen  them,  and  before-hand 
incorporate  them  into  himselfe,  and  therewith  entertaine 
himselfe,  as  if  they  lay  not  sufficiently  heavy  on  our  senses. 
They  will  weigh  heavy  enough  when  they  shall  be  there, 
(saith  one  of  the  maisters,  not  of  a  tender,  but  of  the  hardest 
Sect)  meane  while  favour  thy  selfe  :  Beleeve  what  thou  lovest 
best :  What  availes  it  thee  to  collect  and  prevent  thy  ill 
fortune  :  and  for  feare  of  the  future,  lose  the  present ;  and 
now  to  be  miserable,  because  in  time  thou  maiest  bee  so  ? 
They  are  his  owne  words.  Learning  doth  us  willingly  one 
good  office,  exactly  to  instruct  us  in  the  demensions  of  evils. 

Curis  acuens  mortalia  corda. 
Mens  cogitations  whetting-, 
With  sharpe  cares  inly  fretting. 

311 


Of  Phisio- 
gnomy 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  It  were  pitty,  any  part  of  their  greatnesse  should  escape 
our  feeling  and  understanding.  It  is  certaine,  that  prepara 
tion  unto  death,  hath  caused  more  torment  unto  most,  than 
the  very  sufferance.  It  was  whilome  truely  said,  of  and  by 
a  most  judicious  Authour  :  Minus  afficit  sensus  fatigatio, 
quam  cogitatio.  '  Wearinesse  lesse  troubleth  our  senses,  then 
4  pensivenesse  doth."1  The  apprehension  of  present  death, 
doth  sometimes  of  it  selfe  animate  us,  with  a  ready  resolution, 
no  longer  to  avoide  a  thing  altogether  inevitable.  Many 
Gladiators  have  in  former  ages  beene  scene,  having  at  first 
fought  very  cowardly,  most  couragiously  to  embrace  death  ; 
offering  their  throate  to  the  enemies  sword,  yea  and  bidde 
them  make  haste.  The  sight  distant  from  future  death  hath 
neede  of  a  slowe  constancy,  and  by  consequence  hard  to  bee 
found.  If  you  know  not  how  to  die,  take  no  care  for  it, 
Nature  her  selfe  will  fully  and  sufficiently  teach  you  in  the 
nicke,  she  will  exactly  discharge  that  worke  for  vou  ;  trouble 
not  your  selfe  with  it. 

CATUL.  Eleg.  Incertam  frustra  mortales  funeris  horam 

i.  29,  1 6.  Quteritis,  et  qua  sit  mors  aditura  via: 

Pcena  minor  certam  subito  perferre  ruinam, 
Quod  timeas.,  gravius  sustinuisse  diu. 

Of  death  th'  uncertaine  houre  you  men  in  vaine 
Enquire,,  and  what  way  death  shall  you  destraine  : 

A  certaine  sodaine  ruine  is  lesse  paine, 

More  grievous  long  what  you  feare  to  sustaine. 

We  trouble  death  with  the  care  of  life,  and  life  with  the  care 
of  death.  The  one  annoyeth,  the  other  affrights  us.  It  is 
not  against  death,  we  prepare  our  selves,  it  is  a  thing  too 
momentary.  A  quarter  of  an  houre  of  passion  without  con 
sequence  and  without  annoyance,  deserves  not  particular 
precepts.  To  say  truth,  we  prepare  our  selves  against  the 
preparations  of  death.  Philosophy  teacheth  us,  ever  to  have 
death  before  our  eyes,  to  fore-see  and  consider  it  before  it 
come  :  Then  giveth  us  rules  and  precautions  so  to  provide, 
that  such  foresight  and  thought  hurt  us  not.  So  doe 
Phisitions,  who  cast  us  into  diseases,  that  they  may  employ 
their  drugges  and  skill  about  them.  If  we  have  not  known 
how  to  live,  it  is  injustice  to  teach  us  how  to  die,  and  de- 
forme  the  end  from  all  the  rest.  Have  wee  knowne  how  to 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

live  constantly  and  quietly,  wee  shall  know  how  to  die  reso-  CHAPTER 

lately  and  reposedly.     They  may  bragge  as  much  as  they          XII 

please.      Tota   Philosophorum    vita  commentatio   mortis   est.          "nisio- 

'  The  whole  life  of  a  Philosopher  is  the  meditation  of  his 

4  death."     But  me  thinkes,  it  is  indeede  the  end,  yet  not  the 

scope  of  life.     It  is  her  last,  it  is  her  extremity,  yet  not  her 

object.     Hir  selfe  must  be  unto  hir  selfe,  hir  aime,  hir  drift 

and  her  designe.     Hir  direct  studie  is,  to  order,  to  direct  and 

to  suffer  hir  selfe.     In   the  number  of  many  other  offices, 

which  the  generall  and  principall  Chapter,  to  know  how  to 

live  containeth,  is  this  speciall  Article,  '  To  know  how  to  die." 

And  of  the  easiest,  did  not  our  owne  feare  weigh  it  downe. 

To  judge  them  by  their  profit  and  by  the  naked  truth,  the 

lessons  of  simplicity,  yeeld  not  much  to  those,  which  Doctrine 

preacheth  to  the  contrary  unto  us.     Men  are  different  in 

feeling,  and  diverse  in  force  :  they  must  be  directed  to  their 

good,  according  to  themselves,  and  by  diverse  waies : 

Quo  me  cumque  rapit  tempestas,  defer  or  hospes.  Hon.  i.  Epist. 

Where  I  am  whirld  by  winde  and  wether  ;  u  J5- 

I  guest-like  straight  am  carried  thether. 

I  never  saw  meane  paisant  of  my  neighbours,  enter  into 
cogitation  or  care,  with  what  assurance  or  countenance,  hee 
should  passe  this  last  houre.  Nature  teacheth  him  never  to 
muze  on  death  but  when  he  dieth.  And  then  hath  he  a 
better  grace  in  it,  than  Aristotle  ;  whom  death  perplexed 
doubly,  both  by  her  selfe  and  by  so  long  a  premeditation. 
Therefore  was  it  Caesars  opinion,  that  the  least  premedi 
tated  death,  was  the  happiest  and  the  easiest.  Plus  dolet, 
quam  necesse  est,  qui  ante  dolet^  quam  necesse  est.  '  He  grieves 
'  more  than  he  need,  That  grieves  before  he  neede.1  The 
sharpenesse  of  this  imagination  proceeds  from  our  curiosity. 
Thus  we  ever  hinder  our  selves  ;  desiring  to  fore-runne  and 
sway  naturall  prescriptions  :  It  is  but  for  Doctors  being 
in  health,  to  fare  the  worse  by  it,  and  to  frowne  and  startle 
at  the  Image  of  death.  The  vulgar  sort,  have  neither  neede 
of  remedy  nor  comfort,  but  when  the  shocke  or  stroke 
commeth.  And  justly  considers  no  more  of  it,  than  he 
feeleth.  And  is  it  not  as  we  say,  that  the  vulgars  stupidity 
and  want  of  apprehension,  affoorde  them  this  patience  in 

2R 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  private  evils,  and  this  deepe  carelesnes  of  sinister  future 
XII  accidents  ?  That  their  mind  being  more  grosse,  dull  and 
Of  Phisio-  blockish,  is  lesse  penetrable  and  agitable  ?  In  Gods  name, 
if  it  be  so,  let  us  henceforth  keepe  a  schoole  of  brutality. 
It  is  the  utmost  fruit  that  Sciences  promise  unto  us,  to 
which  she  so  gently  bringeth  her  disciples.  We  shall  not 
want  good  teachers,  interpreters  of  naturall  simplicity. 
Socrates  shall  be  one.  For,  as  neare  as  I  remember,  he 
speaketh  in  this  sense  the  ludges,  that  determine  of  his  life : 
4 1  feare  me  my  Maisters '  (saith  hee)  4  that  if  I  intreate  you 
4  not  to  make  me  die,  I  shall  continue  the  evidence  of  my 
4  accusers  ;  which  is,  That  I  professe  to  have  more  under- 
4  standing  than  others,  as  having  some  knowledge  more 
6  secret  and  hid  of  things  both  above  and  beneath  us.  I 
4  know  I  have  neither  frequented  nor  knowne  death,  nor 
4  have  I  scene  any  body,  that  hath  either  felt  or  tried  her 
4  qualities,  to  instruct  me  in  them.  Those  who  feare  her, 
4  presuppose  to  know  :  As  for  me,  I  neither  know  who  or 
4  what  she  is,  nor  what  they  doe  in  the  other  world.  Death 
4  may  perad venture  be  a  thing  indifferent,  happily  a  thing 
4  desirable.  Yet  is  it  to  bee  beleeved,  that  if  it  be  a  trans- 
4  migration  from  one  place  to  another,  there  is  some  amende- 
4  ment  in  going  to  live  with  so  many  worthy  famous  persons, 
4  that  are  deceased  :  and  be  exempted  from  having  any  more 
4  to  doe  with  wicked  and  corrupted  ludges.  If  it  be  a  con- 
4  summation  of  ones  being,  it  is  also  an  amendment  and 
4  entrance  into  a  long  and  quiet  night.  Wee  finde  nothing 
4  so  sweete  in  life,  as  a  quiet  rest  and  gentle  sleepe,  and 
4  without  dreames.  The  things  I  know  to  be  wicked,  as 
4  to  wrong  or  offend  ones  neighbour  :  and  to  disobey  his 
4  superiour,  be  he  God  or  man,  I  carefully  shunne  them  : 
4  Such  as  I  know  not  whether  they  bee  good  or  bad,  I  cannot 
4  feare  them.  If  I  goe  to  my  death,  and  leave  you  alive  : 
4  The  Gods  onely  see,  whether  you  or  I  shall  prosper  best. 
4  And  therefore,  for  my  regarde,  you  shall  dispose  of  it,  as  it 
4  shall  best  please  you.  But  according  to  my  fashion,  which 
4  is  to  counsell  good  and  profitable  things,  this  I  say,  that 
4  for  your  owne  conscience  you  shall  doe  best  to  free  and  dis- 
4  charge  mee  :  except  you  see  further  into  mine  owne  cause 
4  than  my  selfe.  And  judging  according  to  my  former 
314 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

actions,  both   publike   and   private,  according  to   my  in-  CHAPTER 
tentions  ;  and  to  the  profit,  that  so  many  of  our  Citizens, 


both  young  and  olde,  draw  dayly  from  my  conversation,  and 
the  fruit,  all  you  reape  by  me,  you  cannot  more  justly  or 
duely  discharge  your  selves  toward  my  desertes,  than  by 
appointing  (my  poverty  considered)  that  I  may  live,  and  at 
the  common  charge  bee  kept,  in  the  Brytaneo  :  which  for 
much  lesse  reasons,  I  have  often  scene  you  freely  graunt  to 
others.  Impute  it  not  to  obstinacy  or  disdaine  in  me,  nor 
take  it  in  ill  part,  that  I,  according  to  custome  proceede 
not  by  way  of  intreatie,  and  moove  you  to  commiseration. 
I  have  both  friends  and  kinsfolkes,  being  not  (as  Homer 
saith)  begotten  of  a  blocke  or  stone,  no  more  than  other 
men  :  capable  to  present  themselves  humbly  suing  with 
teares  and  mourning  :  and  I  have  three  desolate  wailing 
children,  to  move  you  to  pittie.  But  I  should  make  your 
Citie  ashamed,  of  the  age  I  am  in,  and  in  that  reputation 
of  wisedome,  as  now  I  stand  in  prevention  to  yeeld  unto  so 
base  and  abject  countenances.  What  would  the  world  say 
of  other  Athenians  ?  I  have  ever  admonished  such  as  have 
heard  me  speake,  never  to  purchase  or  redeeme  their  life, 
by  any  dishonest  or  unlawfull  act.  And  in  my  countries 
warres,  both  at  Amphipolis,  at  Potidea,  at  Delia,  and 
others,  in  which  I  have  beene,  I  have  shewen  by  effects, 
how  farre  I  was  from  warranting  my  safety  by  my  shame. 
Moreover,  I  should  interest  your  duty,  and  prejudice  your 
calling,  and  perswade  you  to  foule  unlawfull  things  ;  for, 
not  my  prayers,  but  the  pure  and  solid  reasons  of  justice 
should  perswade  you.  You  have  sworne  to  the  Gods,  so 
to  maintaine  your  selves.  Not  to  beleeve  there  were  any, 
might  seeme  I  would  suspect,  recriminate  or  retorte  the 
fault  upon  you.  And  my  selfe  should  witnesse  against  my 
selfe,  not  to  beleeve  in  them  as  I  ought  :  distrusting  their 
conduct,  and  not  meerely  remitting  my  affaires  into  their 
hands.  I  wholly  trust  and  relie  on  them,  and  certainely 
holde,  that  in  this,  they  will  dispose  as  it  shall  bee  meetest 
for  you,  and  fittest  for  me.  Honest  men,  that  neither  live, 
nor  are  dead,  have  no  cause  at  all  to  feare  the  Gods."  Is 

not  this  a  childish  pleading,   of  an  inimaginable  courage  ; 

and  in  what  necessity  employed  ?  Verily  it  was  reason,  hee 

315 


MONTAIGNE  S    ESS  AYES 

CHAPTER  should  preferre  it  before  that,  which  the  great  Orator  Lysias 
XII  had  set  downe  in  writing  for  him,  excellently  fashioned  in 
Of  Phisio-  a  jucliciary  Stile  ;  but  unworthy  of  so  noble  a  criminall. 
Should  a  man  have  heard  an  humbly-suing  voice  out  of 
Socrates  his  mouth  ?  Would  that  proud  vertue  have  failed 
in  the  best  of  her  shew  ?  And  would  his  rich  and  powerfull 
nature,  have  committed  her  defence  unto  arte,  and  in  her 
highest  Essay,  renounced  unto  truth  and  sinceritie,  the  orna 
ments  of  his  speech  to  adorne  and  decke  himselfe  with  the 
embellishment  of  the  figures  and  fictions  of  a  fore-learn't 
Oration  ?  Hee  did  most  wisely,  and  according  to  himselfe, 
not  to  corrupt  the  tenure  of  an  incorruptible  life,  and  so 
sacred  an  image  of  humane  forme,  to  prolong  his  decrepitude 
for  one  yeere ;  and  wrong  the  immortall  memory  of  so 
glorious  an  end.  He  ought  his  life,  not  to  himselfe,  but  to 
the  worlds  example.  Had  it  not  beene  a  publike  losse,  if  he 
had  finished  the  same  in  some  idle,  base  and  obscure  manner? 
Truely,  so  carelesse  and  effeminate  a  consideration  of  his  death, 
deserved,  posteritie  should  so  much  more  consider  the  same 
for  him  :  which  it  did.  And  nothing  is  so  just  in  justice,  as 
that,  which  fortune  ordained  for  his  commendation.  For 
the  Athenians  did  afterward  so  detest  and  abhorre  those, 
which  had  furthered  and  caused  his  death,  that  of  all  they 
were  loathed  and  shunned  as  cursed  and  excommunicated 
men  :  what  soever  they  had  but  touched  was  held  to  be 
polluted  :  No  man  would  so  much  as  wash  with  them  in 
bathes  or  hot  houses  :  no  man  affoord  them  a  salutation,  much 
lesse  accost  or  have  to  doe  with  them  :  so  that  being  in  the 
end  no  longer  able  to  endure  this  publike  hatred  and  generall 
contempt,  they  all  hanged  themselves.  If  any  man  thinkes, 
that  amongst  so  many  examples,  I  might  have  chosen  for 
the  service  of  my  purpose,  in  Socrates  his  sayings,  I  have 
chosen  or  handled  this  but  ill  :  and  deemeth  this  discourse, 
to  be  raised  above  common  opinions:  I  have  done  it  wit 
tingly  :  for  I  judge  otherwise  and  hold  it  to  bee  a  discourse, 
in  ranke  and  sincerity,  much  shorter  and  lower,  then  vulgar 
opinions.  It  representeth  in  an  un-artificiall  boldnesse,  and 
infantine  security,  the  pure  impression  and  first  ignorance  of 
nature.  Because  it  is  credible,  that  we  naturally  feare  paine, 
but  not  death,  by  reason  of  her.  It  is  a  part  of  our  being, 
316 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

no  lesse  essentiall  than  life.    To  what  end  would  Nature  have  CHAPTER 

else  engendred  the  hate  and  horror  of  it,  seeing  it  holdes          XII 

therein,  and  with  it  a  ranke  of  most  great  profit,  to  foster  the 

succession,  and  nourish  the  vicissitude  of  her  works  ?     And 

that  in  this  universall  Common- weale,  it  steadeth  and  serveth 

more  for  birth  and  augmentation,  then  for  losse,  decay  or 

ruine. 

Sic  rerum  summa  novatur.  LUCR.  ii.  73. 

So  doth  the  summe  of  all, 

By  courses  rise  arid  fall. 

Mille  animas  una  necata  dedit. 
We  thousand  soules  shall  pay, 
For  one  soule  made  away. 

The  decay  of  one  life,  is  the  passage  to  a  thousand  other 
lives.  Nature  hath  imprinted  in  beasts,  the  care  of  them 
selves  and  of  their  preservation.  They  proceede  even  to  the 
feare  of  their  empairing  ;  to  shocke  or  hurt  themselves  :  and 
that  we  should  not  shackle  or  beate  them,  accidents  subject 
to  their  sense  and  experience :  But  that  we  should  kill  them, 
they  cannot  feare  it,  nor  have  they  the  faculty  to  imagine  or 
conclude  their  death.  Yet  is  it  reported,  that  they  are  not 
scene  onely  to  embrace  and  endure  the  same  joyfully  (most 
Horses  neigh  in  dying,  and  Swannes  sing  when  it  seiseth 
them).  But  moreover,  they  seeke  it  when  they  neede  it  ; 
as  by  divers  examples  may  be  prooved  in  the  Elephants. 
Besides,  the  manner  of  arguing,  which  Socrates  useth  here, 
is  it  not  equally  admirable,  both  in  simplicitie  and  in 
vehemency  ?  Verily  it  is  much  easier,  to  speake  as  Aristotle, 
and  live  as  Caesar,  than  speake  and  live  as  Socrates.  Therein 
consists  the  extreame  degree  of  difficulty  and  perfection  ;  arte 
cannot  attaine  unto  it.  Our  faculties  are  not  now  so  ad 
dressed.  We  neither  assay,  nor  know  them  ;  we  invest  our 
selves  with  others,  and  suffer  our  own  to  be  idle.  As  by  some 
might  be  saide  of  me  :  that  here  I  have  but  gathered  a 
nosegay  of  strange  floures,  and  have  put  nothing  of  mine 
unto  it,  but  the  thred  to  binde  them.  Certes,  I  have  given 
unto  publike  opinion,  that  these  borrowed  ornaments  accom 
pany  me  :  but  I  meane  not  they  should  cover  or  hide  me  : 
it  is  contrary  to  mine  intention,  who  would  make  shew 
of  nothing  that  is  not  mine  owne.  yea  mine  owne  by 

317  * 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nature  :  And  had  I  believed  my  selfe,  at  all  adventure  I  had 
XIJ  .  spoken  alone.  I  dayly  charge  my  selfe  the  more  beyond  my 
nomS1°~  ProPosition  and  first  forme,  upon  the  fantasie  of  time,  and 
through  idlenesse.  If  it  mis-seeme  me  as  I  thinke  it  doth, 
it  is  no  great  matter  ;  it  may  be  profitable  for  some  other. 
Some  alleadge  Plato,  some  mention  Homer,  that  never  saw 
them,  or  as  they  say  in  English,  '  Many  a  man  speakes  of 
6  Robin  hood,  that  never  shot  in  his  bow1 :  And  I  have  taken 
divers  passages  from  others  then  in  their  spring.  Without 
paine  or  sufficiency ;  having  a  thousand  volumes  of  bookes 
about  mee,  where  now  I  write,  if  I  please,  I  may  presently 
borrow  from  a  number  of  such  botcherly-patchcotes  (men 
that  I  plod  not  much  upon)  wherewith  to  enamell  this  treaty 
of  Physiognomic.  I  need  but  the  liminary  epistle  of  a 
Germane  to  store  me  with  allegations  :  and  we  goe  questing 
that  way  for  a  fading  greedy  glory,  to  cousin  and  delude  the 
foolish  world.  These  rapsodies  of  common  places,  wherewith 
so  many  stuffe  their  study,  serve  not  greatly  but  for  vulgar 
subjects,  and  serve  but  to  shew  and  not  to  direct  us  :  A 
ridiculous-fond  fruite  of  learning,  that  Socrates  doth  so 
pleasantly  enveigh  and  exagirate  against  Euthydemus.  I 
have  scene  bookes  made  of  things  neither  studied  nor  ever 
understood  :  the  author  comming  to  divers  of  his  learned 
and  wise  friends  in  the  search  of  this  and  that  matter,  that 
so  hee  might  compile  them  into  a  booke,  contenting  himselfe 
for  his  owne  part,  to  have  cast  the  plot  and  projected  the 
desseigne  of  it,  and  by  his  industry  to  have  bound  up  the 
fagot  of  unknowne  provisions  :  at  least  is  the  inke  and  paper 
his  owne.  This  may  bee  saide  to  be  a  buying  or  borrowing, 
and  not  a  making  or  compiling  of  a  booke.  It  is  to  teach 
men,  not  that  one  can  make  a  booke,  but  to  put  them  out 
of  doubt,  that  hee  cannot  make  it.  A  president  of  the  law, 
in  a  place  where  I  was,  vanted  himselfe,  to  have  hudled  up 
together  two  hundred  and  od  strange  places  in  a  presidentiall 
law-case  of  his  :  In  publishing  of  which,  he  defaced  the  glory, 
which  others  gave  him  for  it.  A  weake,  childish  and  absurd 
boasting  in  my  opinion,  for  such  a  subject  and  for  such  a 
man.  I  doe  cleane  contrary  ;  and  amongst  so  many  borrow 
ings,  am  indeed  glad  to  filch  some  one  ;  disguising  and 
altering  the  same  to  some  new  service.  On  hazard,  to  let 
318 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

men  say,  that  it  is  for  lacke  of  understanding  it's  naturall  CHAPTER 
use,  I  give  it  some  particular  addressing  of  mine  own  hand,  XII 
to  the  end  it  may  be  so  much  lesse  meerely  strange.  Whereas  Df  Pmsio- 
these  put  their  larcenies  to  publike  view  and  garish  shew. 
So  have  they  more  credit  in  the  lawes,  then  I.  We  other 
naturalists  suppose,  that  there  is  a  great  and  incomparable 
preference,  betweene  the  honour  of  invention  and  that  of 
allegation.  Would  I  have  spoken  according  to  learning,  I 
had  spoken  sooner  :  I  had  written  at  such  times  as  I  was 
neerer  to  my  studies,  when  I  had  more  wit  and  more  memory; 
and  should  more  have  trusted  the  vigor  of  that  age,  then  the 
imperfection  of  this,  had  I  beene  willing  to  professe  writing 
of  bookes.  And  what  if  this  gratious  favour,  which  fortune 
hath  not  long  since  offered  me  by  the  intermission  of  this 
worke,  could  have  befalne  me  in  such  a  season,  in  liew  of 
this,  where  it  is  equally  desireable  to  possesse,  and  ready 
to  loose  ? 

Two  of  mine  acquaintance  (both  notable  men  in  this 
faculty)  have,  in  my  conceit,  lost  much  because  they  refused 
to  publish  themselves  at  forty  yeares  of  age,  to  stay  untill 
they  were  three  score.  Maturity  hath  her  defects,  as  well 
as  greenenesse,  and  worse.  And  as  incummodious  or  unfit  is 
old  age  unto  this  kinde  of  worke,  as  to  any  other.  Who 
soever  put's  his  decrepitude  under  the  presse,  committeth 
folly,  if  therby  he  hopes  to  wring  out  humors,  that  shall  not 
taste  of  dotage,  of  foppery,  or  of  drousinesse.  Our  spirit 
becommeth  costive  and  thickens  in  growing  old.  Of  ignor 
ance  I  speake  sumptuously  and  plentiously,  and  of  learning 
meagerly  and  pitiously  :  This  accessorily  and  accidentally : 
That  expressely  and  principally.  And  purposely  I  treate 
of  nothing,  but  of  nothing :  not  of  any  one  science  but  of 
unscience.  I  have  chosen  the  time,  where  the  life  I  have  to 
set  forth,  is  all  before  me,  the  rest  holds  more  of  death. 
And  of  my  death  onely  should  I  finde  it  babling,  as  others 
doe,  I  would  willingly,  in  dislodging,  give  the  World  advise. 
Socrates  hath  beene  a  perfect  patterne  in  all  great  quali 
ties.  I  am  vexed,  that  ever  he  met  with  so  unhansome 
and  crabbed  a  body,  as  they  say  he  had,  and  so  dissonant 
from  the  beauty  of  his  minde.  Himselfe  so  amorous  and 
so  besotted  on  beauty  ;  Nature  did  him  wrong.  There  is 

319 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nothing  more  truely-semblable,  as  the  conformity  or  rela 
tion  betweene  the  body  and  the  minde.  Ipsi  animi,  magni 
1S10~  refert,  quail  in  corpore  locati  sint  :  multa  enim  e  corpore 
existunt)  quce  acuant  mentem :  multa,  quce  obtundant.  '  It  is 
4  of  great  import  in  what  body  the  minde  is  bestowed :  for 
4  many  things  arise  of  the  body  to  sharpen  the  minde,  and 
4  many  things  to  dull  and  rebate  it.'  This  man  speakes 
of  an  unnaturall  ill-favourdnesse,  and  membrall  deformity  : 
but  we  call  ill  favourdnesse  a  kinde  of  unseemelinesse  at  the 
first  sight,  which  chiefely  lodgeth  in  the  face ;  and  by  the 
colour  worketh  a  dislike  in  us :  A  freckle,  a  blemmish,  a 
rude  countenance,  a  sower  looke,  proceeding  often  of  some 
inexplicable  cause,  may  be  in  well  ordered,  comely  and  com- 
pleate  limmes.  The  foulenesse  of  face,  which  invested  a 
beateous  minde  in  my  deare  friend  La  Boitie,  was  of  this 
predicament.  This  superficiall  ill-favourdnesse,  which  is 
notwithstanding  to  the  most  imperious,  is  of  lesse  prejudice 
unto  the  state  of  the  minde :  and  hath  small  certainty  in 
mens  opinion.  The  other,  by  a  more  proper  name  called 
a  more  substantiall  deformity,  beareth  commonly  a  deeper 
inward  stroke.  Not  every  shooe  of  smooth -shining  leather, 
but  every  well-shapen  and  hansome-made  shoe,  sheweth  the 
inward  and  right  shape  of  the  foote.  As  Socrates  said  of 
his,  that  it  justly  accused  so  much  in  his  mind  had  he  not 
corrected  the  same  by  institution.  But  in  so  saying,  I 
suppose,  that  according  to  his  wonted  use,  he  did  but  jest : 
and  so  excellent  a  mind,  did  never  frame  it  selfe.  I  can 
not  often  enough  repeate,  how  much  I  esteeme  beauty,  so 
powerfull  and  advantagious  a  quality  is  she.  He  named  it, 
a  short  tyranny  :  And  Plato  the  priviledge  of  Nature.  We 
have  none  that  exceeds  it  in  credit.  She  possesseth  the 
chiefe  ranke  in  the  commerce  of  society  of  men :  She  pre 
sents  it  selfe  forward  :  she  seduceth  and  preoccupates  our 
judgement,  with  great  authority  and  wonderfull  impression. 
Phryne  had  lost  her  plea,  though  in  the  hands  of  an  excel 
lent  lawyer,  if  with  opening  her  garments,  by  the  sodaine 
flashing  of  hir  beauty,  she  had  not  corrupted  her  judges. 
And  I  finde,  that  Cyrus,  Alexander  and  Caesar  those  three 
Masters  of  the  World,  have  not  forgotten  or  neglected  the 
same  in  atchieving  their  great  affaires.  So  hath  not  the 
320 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

first  Scipio.  One  same  word  in  Greeke  importeth  faire  and  CHAPTER 
good.  And  even  the  Holy-Ghost  calleth  often  those  good,  XII 
which  he  meaneth  faire.  I  should  willingly  maintaine  the  Phisio- 
ranke  of  the  goods,  as  imployed  the  song,  which  Plato  saith  gno 
to  have  beene  triviall,  taken  from  some  ancient  Poet  ; 
Health,  beauty  and  riches.  Aristotle  saith,  that  the  right 
of  commanding,  doth  of  duty  belong  to  such  as  are  faire  ; 
and  if  haply  any  be  found,  whose  beauty  approached  to  that 
of  the  Gods  images,  that  veneration  is  equally  due  unto 
them.  To  one  that  asked  him,  why  the  fairest  were  both 
longer  time  and  oftner  frequented  ?  '  This  question '  (quoth 
he)  '  ought  not  to  be  mooved  but  by  a  blinde  man."  Most, 
and  the  greatest  Philosophers,  paide  for  their  schooling 
and  attained  unto  Wisedome,  by  the  intermission  of  their 
beauty,  and  favour  of  their  comlines.  Not  onely  in  men  that 
serve  me,  but  in  beasts  also,  I  consider  the  same  within  two 
inches  of  goodnesse.  Yet  me  thinkes,  that  the  same  feature 
and  manner  of  the  face  and  those  lineaments,  by  which  some 
argue  certaine  inward  complexions,  and  our  future  fortunes, 
is  a  thing  that  doth  not  directly  nor  simply  lodge  under  the 
Chapter  of  beauty  and  ill  favourdnesse ;  no  more  than  all 
good  favours,  or  cleerenesse  of  aire,  doe  not  alwayes  promise 
health  :  nor  all  fogges  and  stinkes,  infection,  in  times  of  the 
plague.  Such  as  accuse  Ladies  to  contradict  the  beauty,  by 
their  manners,  guesse  not  alwayes  at  the  truth.  For,  an  ill 
favourd  and  ill  composed  face,  may  sometimes  harbour  some 
aire  of  probity,  and  trust.  As  on  the  contrary,  I  have 
sometimes  read  between  two  faire  eyes,  the  threats  of  a 
maligne  and  dangerous-ill-boding  nature.  There  are  some 
favourable  Physiognomies  ;  For  in  a  throng  of  victorious 
enemies,  you  shall  presently  ammiddest  a  multitude  of  un- 
knowne  faces,  make  choise  of  one  man  more  than  of  others, 
to  yeeld  your  selfe  unto,  and  trust  your  life ;  and  not  pro 
perly  by  the  consideration  of  beauty.  A  mans  looke  or  aire 
of  his  face,  is  but  a  weake  warrant ;  notwithstanding  it  is  of 
some  consideration.  And  were  I  to  whipe  them,  I  would 
more  rudely  scourge  such  as  maliciously  belay  and  betray 
the  promises,  which  Nature  had  charactred  in  their  front. 
And  more  severely  would  I  punish  malicious  craft  in  a 
debonaire  apparance  and  in  a  mild  promising  countenance. 
2  S 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  It  seemeth  there  be  some  lucky  and  well  boding  faces,  and 
XII  other  some  unlucky  and  ill  presaging :  And  I  thinke,  there 
Phisio-  -s  some  Art  to  distinguish  gently-milde  faces,  from  nyaes 
and  simple,  the  severe  from  the  rude ;  the  malicious  from 
the  froward ;  the  disdainefull  from  the  melancholike  and 
other  neighbouring  qualities.  There  are  some  beauties,  not 
onely  fierce-looking,  but  also  sharpe  working,  some  others 
pleasing-sweet  and  yet  wallowishly  tastlesse.  To  prognosti 
cate  future  successes  of  them,  be  matters  I  leave  undecided. 
I  have  (as  elsewhere  I  noted)  taken  for  my  regard  this 
ancient  precept,  very  rawly  and  simply  :  That  '  We  cannot 
'  erre  in  following  Nature':  and  that  the  soveraigne  document 
is,  for  a  man  to  comforme  himselfe  to  her.  I  have  not  (as 
Socrates)  by  the  power  and  vertue  of  reason,  corrected  my 
natural  complexions,  nor  by  Art  hindered  mine  inclination. 
Looke  how  I  came  into  the  World,  so  I  goe-on  :  I  strive 
with  nothing.  My  two  Mistris  parts,  live  of  their  owne 
kindnesse  in  peace  and  good  agreement ;  but  my  nurses 
milke,  hath  (thankes  be  to  God)  been  indifferently  whole 
some  and  temperate.  Shall  I  say  thus  much  by  the  way  ? 
That  I  see  a  certaine  image  of  bookish  or  scholasticall 
preucThommie,  onely  which  is  in  a  maner  in  use  amongst  us, 
held  and  reputed  in  greater  esteeme  than  it  deserveth,  and 
which  is  but  a  servant  unto  precepts,  brought  under  by 
hope,  and  constrained  by  feare  ?  I  love  it  such  as  lawes 
and  religions  make  not,  but  over-make  and  authorize  ;  that 
they  may  be  perceived  to  have  wherewith  to  uphold  her  selfe 
without  other  aide :  sprung  up  in  us  of  her  owne  proper 
roots,  by  and  from  the  seed  of  universall  reason,  imprinted 
in  every  man  that  is  not  unnaturall.  The  same  reason,  that 
reformeth  Socrates  from  his  vicious  habite,  yeelds  him 
obedient  both  to  Gods  and  men,  that  rule  and  command 
his  City  :  couragious  in  his  death  ;  not  because  his  soule  is 
immortall,  but  because  he  is  mortall.  A  ruinous  instruction 
to  all  common-weales,  and  much  more  harmefull,  than  inge 
nious  and  subtile,  is  that  which  perswadeth  men  that  onely 
religious  beliefe,  and  without  manners,  sufficeth  to  content 
and  satisfie  divine  justice.  Custome  makes  us  see  an  enor 
mous  distinction  betweene  devotion  and  conscience.  I  have  a 
favourable  apparence,  both  in  forme  and  in  interpretation. 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

TER.  Heau.         Quid  dixi  haberc  me  ?  Imb  habui  Chreme :  CHAPTER 

act.  i.  see.  i.  Heu  tantum  attriti  corporis  ossa  vides.  XII 

I  have  ;  what  did  I  say?  Of  Phisio- 

I  had  what 's  now  away.  gnomy 

Alas,  you  onely  now  behold 
Bones  of  a  body  worne  and  old. 

And  which  makes  a  contrary  shew  to  that  of  Socrates.  It 
hath  often  betided  me,  that  by  the  simple  credit  of  my  pre 
sence  and  aspect,  some  that  had  no  knowledge  of  me,  have 
greatly  trusted  unto  it,  were  it  about  their  owne  affaires 
or  mine.  And  even  in  forraine  countries,  I  have  thereby 
reaped  singular  and  rare  favours.  These  two  experiments,  are 
haply  worthy  to  be  particularly  related.  A  quidam  gallant, 
determined  upon  a  time  to  surprise  both  my  house  and  my 
selfe.  His  plot  was,  to  come  riding  alone  to  my  gate,  and 
instantly  to  urge  entrance.  I  knew  him  by  name,  and  had 
some  reason  to  trust  him,  being  my  neighbour  and  somwhat 
alide  unto  me.  I  presently  caused  my  gates  to  be  opened, 
as  I  do  to  all  men.  He  comes-in  all  afrighted,  his  horse 
out  of  breath  ;  both  much  harassed.  He  entertaines  me 
with  this  fable,  that  within  halfe  a  league  of  my  house  he 
was  sodainely  set-upon  by  an  enemy  of  his,  whom  I  knew 
well  and  had  heard  of  their  quarrell :  that  his  foe  had 
wondrously  put  him  to  his  spurres :  that  being  surprised 
unarmed,  and  having  fewer  in  his  company  then  the  other, 
he  was  glad  to  runne  away,  and  for  safety  had  made  haste 
to  come  to  my  house,  as  to  his  sanctuary  :  That  he  was 
much  perplexed  for  his  men,  all  which  he  supposed  to  be 
either  taken  or  slaine.  I  endevoured  friendly  to  comfort 
and  sincerely  to  warrant  and  refresh  him.  Within  a  while 
came  gallopping  foure  or  five  of  his  Souldiers,  amazed,  as 
if  they  had  beene  out  of  their  wits,  hasting  to  be  let-in  : 
Shortly  after  came  others,  and  others,  all  proper  men,  well 
mounted,  better  armed,  to  the  number  of  thirty  or  there 
abouts,  all  seeming  distracted  for  feare,  as  if  the  enemy 
that  pursued  them  had  beene  at  their  heeles.  This  mystery 
beganne  to  summon  my  suspicion.  I  was  not  ignorant  of 
the  age  wherein  I  lived,  nor  how  much  my  house  might  be 
envied :  and  had  sundry  examples  of  others  of  my  acquaint 
ance,  that  had  beene  spoiled,  beset  and  surprised  thus  and 

323 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  thus.  So  it  is,  that  perceiving  with  my  selfe,  there  was 
XI {  .  nothing  to  be  gotten,  though  I  had  begunne  to  use  them 
'hisio-  kindly,  if  i  continued  not,  and  being  unable  to  rid  my  selfe 
of  them  and  cleare  my  house  without  danger  and  spoiling  all ; 
as  I  ever  doe,  I  tooke  the  plainest  and  naturall  well  meaning 
way,  and  commanded  they  should  be  let-in  and  bid  welcome. 
And  to  say  truth,  I  am  by  nature  little  suspicious  or  mis- 
trustfull,  I  am  easily  drawen  to  admit  excuses  and  encline 
to  mild  interpretations.  I  take  men  according  to  common 
order,  and  suppose  every  one  to  meane  as  I  doe,  and  be- 
leeve  these  perverse  and  trecherous  inclinations,  except  I  be 
compelled  by  some  authenticall  testimony,  no  more  then 
monsters  or  miracles.  Besides,  I  am  a  man,  that  willingly 
commit  my  selfe  unto  fortune,  and  carelesly  cast  my  selfe 
into  her  armes  :  Whereof  hitherto  I  have  more  just  cause  to 
commend  my  selfe,  then  to  complaine.  And  have  found  her 
more  circumspect  and  friendly-care  full  of  my  affaires,  then 
I  am  my  selfe.  There  are  certaine  actions  in  my  life,  the 
conduct  of  which  may  justly  be  termed  difficult,  or  if  any  be 
so  disposed,  prudent.  And  of  those,  suppose  the  third  part 
of  them  to  be  mine  owne ;  truely  the  other  two  are  richly 
hirs.  We  are  to  blame,  and  in  my  conceit  we  erre,  that  we 
doe  not  sufficiently  and  so  much  as  we  ought,  trust  the 
heavens  with  our  selves.  And  pretend  more  in  our  owne 
conduct,  then  of  right  appertaines  unto  us.  Therefore 
doe  our  desseignes  so  often  miscarry,  and  our  intents  so 
seldome  sort  to  wished  effect.  The  heavens  are  angry, 
and  I  may  say  envious  of  the  extension  and  large  priviledge 
we  ascribe  unto  the  right  of  humane  wisedome,  to  the 
prejudice  of  theirs:  and  abridge  them  so  much  the  more 
unto  us,  by  how  much  more  we  endevour  to  amplifie  them. 
But  to  come  to  my  former  discourse.  These  gallants  kept 
still  on  horsebacke  in  my  court,  and  would  not  alight :  their 
Cap  tain  e  with  me  in  my  hall,  who  would  never  have  his 
horse  set-up,  still  saying  that  he  would  not  stay,  but  must 
necessarily  withdraw  hirnselfe,  so  soone  as  he  had  news  of  his 
followers.  He  saw  himselfe  master  of  his  enterprise ;  and 
nothing  was  wanting  but  the  execution.  Hee  hath  since 
reported  very  often,  (for  he  was  no  whit  scrupulous  or  afraid 
to  tell  this  story)  that  my  undaunted  lookes,  my  undismaide 
324 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

countenance,  and  my  liberty  of  speech,  made  him  reject  all  CHAPTER 
manner  of  treasonable  intents  or  trecherous  desseignes.  XJI 
What  shall  I  say  more  ?  He  bids  me  farewell,  calleth  for  his  Of 
horse,  gets  up,  and  offreth  to  be  gone,  his  people  having 
continually  their  eyes  fixed  upon  him,  to  observe  his  lookes 
and  see  what  signe  he  should  make  unto  them :  much 
amazed  to  see  him  be  gone,  and  wondring  to  see  him  omit 
and  forsake  such  an  advantage.  An  other  time,  trusting  to 
a  certaine  truce  or  cessation  of  armes,  that  lately  had  beene 
published  through  our  campes  in  France,  as  one  suspecting 
no  harme,  I  undertooke  a  journey  from  home,  through  a 
dangerous  and  very  ticklish  countrey ;  I  had  not  rid  far, 
but  I  was  discovered,  and  behold  three  or  foure  troupes 
of  horsemen,  all  severall  wayes,  made  after  me,  with  pur 
pose  to  entrap  me  :  One  of  which  overtooke  mee  the  third 
day ;  where  I  was  round  beset  and  charged  by  fifteene  or 
twenty  Gentlemen,  who  had  all  vizards  and  cases,  followed  a 
loofe-off  by  a  band  of  Argoletiers.  I  was  charged,  I  yeelded, 
I  was  taken  and  immediatly  drawne  into  the  bosome  of  a 
thicke  Wood,  that  was  not  far-off;  there  puld  from  my 
horse,  stripped  with  all  speed,  my  truncks  and  cloke-bags 
rifled,  my  box  taken;  my  horses,  my  equipage  and  such 
things  as  I  had,  dispersed  and  shared  amongst  them.  We 
continued  a  good  while  amongst  those  thorny  bushes,  con 
testing  and  striving  about  my  ransome  which  they  racked  so 
high,  that  it  appeared  well  I  was  not  much  knowne  of  them. 
They  had  long  contestation  among  themselves  for  my  life. 
And  to  say  truth  :  there  were  many  circumstances,  threatned 
me  of  the  danger  I  was  in. 

Tune  animis  opus,  jEnea,  tune  pectore  firmo.  VIRG.  ALn.  vi. 

Of  courage  then  indeed, 
Then  of  stout  brest  is  need. 

I  ever  stood  upon  the  title  and  priviledge  of  the  truce  and 
proclamation  made  in  the  Kings  name,  but  that  availed  not: 
I  was  content  to  quit  them  what  ever  they  had  taken  from 
me,  which  was  not  to  be  despised,  without  promising  other 
ransome.  After  we  had  debated  the  matter  to  and  fro,  the 
space  of  two  or  three  houres,  and  that  no  excuses  could  serve, 
they  set  me  upon  a  lame  jade,  which  they  knew  could  never 


CATUL.  EL 
iv.  65. 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  escape  them,  and  committed  the  particular  keeping  of  my 
XII  .       person  to  fifteene  or  twenty  harque-busiers,  and  dispersed 

~    my  people  to  others  of  their  crew,  commanding;  we  should  all 
g-nomv        ,y  "     "          ,  .    ,       .  5          . 

divers  wayes  be  carried  prisoners ;  and  my  seize  being  gone 

two  or  threescore  paces  from  them, 

lam  prece  Pollucis,  jam  Castoris  implorata. 

Pollux  and  Castors  aide^ 
When  I  had  humbly  praide, 

behold  a  sodain  and  unexpected  alteration  took  them.  I 
saw  their  Captaine  comming  towards  me,  with  a  cheerful 
countenance  and  much  milder  speeches  then  before :  care 
fully  trudging  up  and  down  through  all  the  troups,  to  find 
out  my  goods  againe,  which  as  he  found  al  scattred  he 
forced  every  man  to  restore  them  unto  me ;  and  even  my 
boxe  came  to  my  hands  againe.  To  conclude,  the  most 
precious  Jewell  they  presented  me,  was  in  liberty ;  as  for  my 
other  things,  I  cared  not  greatly  at  that  time.  What  the 
true  cause  of  so  unlookt-for  a  change  and  so  sodaine  an  altera 
tion  was,  without  any  apparent  impulsion,  and  of  so  wonder- 
full  repentance,  at  such  a  time,  in  such  an  opportunity  and 
such  an  enterprise,  fore-meditated,  consulted  and  effected 
without  controlement,  and  which  through  custome  and  the 
impiety  of  times  was  now  become  lawfull,  (for  at  the  first 
brunt  I  plainely  confessed,  and  genuinly  told  them  what  side 
I  was  of,  where  my  way  lay,  and  whither  I  was  riding)  I 
verily  know  not  yet,  nor  can  I  give  any  reason  for  it.  The 
chiefest  amongst  them  unmasked  himselfe,  told  me  his  name 
and  repeated  divers  times  unto  me,  that  I  should  acknow 
ledge  my  deliverance  to  my  countenance,  to  my  boldnesse 
and  constancy  of  speech,  and  be  beholding  to  them  for  it, 
insomuch  as  they  made  me  unworthy  of  such  a  misfortune ; 
and  demanded  assurance  of  me  for  the  like  curtesie.  It  may 
be,  that  the  inscrutable  goodnesse  of  God  would  use  this 
vaine  instrument  for  my  preservation  :  For,  the  next  morrow 
it  also  shielded  me  from  worse  mischiefe  or  amboscadoes, 
whereof  themselves  gently  forewarned  me.  The  last  is 
yet  living,  able  to  report  the  whole  successe  himselfe ;  the 
other  was  slaine  not  long  since.  If  my  countenance  had 
not  answered  for  me,  if  the  ingenuity  of  mine  inward  intent 
326 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

might  not  plainely  have  been  disciphered  in  mine  eyes  and  CHAPTER 
voice,  surely  I  could  never  have  continued  so  long,  without  XII 
quarrels  or  offences  :  with  this  indiscreete  liberty,  to  speake  Of  hisio- 
freely  (be  it  right  or  wrong)  what  ever  commeth  to  my  minde,  gnomy 
and  rashly  to  judge  of  things.  This  fashion  may  in  some 
sort,  (and  that  with  reason)  seeme  uncivill  and  ill  accomo- 
dated  in  our  customary  manners  :  but  outragious  or  malicious, 
I  could  never  meete  with  any,  would  so  judge  it,  or  that  was 
ever  distasted  at  my  liberty  if  he  received  the  same  from 
my  mouth.  Words  reported  againe  have  as  another  sound, 
so  another  sense.  And  to  say  true,  I  hate  no  body  ;  And 
am  so  remisse  to  offend,  or  slow  to  wrong  any,  that  for  the 
service  of  reason  it  selfe,  I  cannot  doe  it.  And  if  occasions 
have  at  any  time  urged  me  in  criminall  condemnations  to  doe 
as  others,  I  have  rather  beene  content  to  be  amearced  then 
to  appeare.  Vt  magis  peccari  nolim,  quam  satis  animi,  ad 
vmdicanda  peccata  habeam.  '  So  as  I  had  rather  men  should 
'  not  offend,  then  that  I  should  have  courage  enough  to 
'  punish  their  offences. '  Some  report,  that  Aristotle  being 
up-braided  by  some  of  his  friends,  that  he  had  beene  over 
mercifull  toward  a  wicked  man  :  '  I  have  indeede '  (quoth  he) 
'  beene  mercifull  toward  the  man,  but  not  toward  his  wicked- 
'  nesse.1  Ordinary  j  udgements  are  exasperated  unto  punish 
ment  by  the  horror  of  the  crime.  And  that  enmildens  mee. 
The  horror  of  the  first  murther,  makes  me  feare  a  second. 
And  the  uglinesse  of  one  cruelty,  induceth  me  to  detest  all 
maner  of  imitation  of  it.  To  me,  that  am  but  a  plaine 
fellow  and  see  no  higher  then  a  steeple,  may  that  concerne, 
which  was  reported  of  Charillus  King  of  Sparta  :  '  He  cannot 
4  be  good,  since  he  is  not  bad  to  the  wicked.'  Or  thus ;  for 
Plutarke  presents  it  two  wayes,  as  he  doth  a  thousand  other 
things  diversly  and  contrary  ;  '  He  must  needs  be  good,  since 
4  he  is  so  to  the  wicked.'  Even  as  in  lawfull  actions,  it  grieves 
me  to  take  any  paines  about  them,  when  it  is  with  such  as 
are  therewith  displeased.  So,  to  say  truth,  in  unlawfull, 
I  make  no  great  conscience,  to  employ  my  selfe  or 
take  paines  about  them,  being  with  such  as 
consent  unto  them. 


327 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


THE    THIRTEENTH    CHAPTER 

Of  Experience. 


MANIL.  i.  Ast.  61. 


HERE  is  no  desire  more  naturall,  then  that 
of  knowledge.  We  attempt  all  meanes 
that  may  bring  us  unto  it.  When  reason 
failes  us,  we  employ  experience. 

Per  varios  usus  artem  experientia  fecit, 
Exemplo  monstrante  viam. 

By  divers  proofes  experience  art  hath  bred, 
Whilst  one  by  one  the  way  examples  led. 


Which  is  a  meane  by  much  more,  weake  and  vile.  But 
truth  is  of  so  great  consequence,  that  wee  ought  not  dis- 
daine  any  induction,  that  may  bring  us  unto  it.  Reason 
hath  so  many  shapes,  that  wee  know  not  which  to  take  hold 
of.  Experience  hath  as  many.  The  consequence  we  seeke 
to  draw  from  the  conference  of  events,  is  unsure,  because 
they  are  ever  dissemblable.  No  quality  is  so  universall  in 
this  surface  of  things,  as  variety  and  diversity.  The  Greekes, 
the  Latines,  and  wee  use  for  the  most  expresse  examples  of 
similitude,  that  of  egs.  Some  have  neverthelesse  beene 
found,  especially  one  in  Delphos,  that  knew  markes  of 
difference  betweene  egges,  and  never  tooke  one  for  another ; 
And  having  divers  hennes,  could  rightly  judge  which  had 
laid  the  egge.  Dissimilitude  doth  of  it  selfe  insinuate 
into  our  workes,  no  arte  can  come  neere  unto  similitude. 
Neither  Perozet  nor  any  other  carde-maker  can  so  indus 
triously  smoothe  or  whiten  the  backeside  of  his  cardes,  but 
some  cunning  gamester  will  distinguish  them,  onely  by  seeing 
some  other  player  handle  or  shuffle  them.  Resemblance  doth 
not  so  much  make  one,  as  difference  maketh  another.  Nature 
hath  bound  herselfe  to  make  nothing  that  may  not  be  dis 
semblable.  Yet  doth  not  the  opinion  of  that  man  greatly 
please  mee,  that  supposed  by  the  multitude  of  lawes,  to  curbe 
the  authority  of  judges,  in  cutting  out  their  morsels.  He 
perceived  not,  that  there  is  as  much  liberty  and  extension  in 

328 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

the  interpretation  of  lawes,  as  in  their  fashion.  And  those  CHAPTER 
but  mocke  themselves,  who  thinke  to  diminish  our  debates 
and  stay  them,  by  calling  us  to  the  expresse  word  of  sacred 
Bible.  Because  our  spirit  findes  not  the  field  lesse  spacious, 
to  controule  and  checke  the  sense  of  others,  then  to  repre 
sent  his  own :  and  as  if  there  were  as  litle  courage  and 
sharpnesse  to  glose  as  to  invent.  Wee  see  how  farre  hee  was 
deceived.  For  we  have  in  France  more  lawes  then  all  the 
world  besides  ;  yea  more  then  were  needefull  to  governe  all 
the  worlds  imagined  by  Epicurus  :  Vt  olimjlagitiis,  sic  nuiw 
legibus  labor amns.  '  As  in  times  past  we  were  sicke  of 
4  offences,  so  now  are  we  of  lawes."  As  we  have  given  our 
judges  so  large  a  scope  to  moote,  to  opinionate,  to  suppose 
and  deceide,  that  there  was  never  so  powerfull  and  so  licen 
tious  a  liberty.  What  have  our  lawmakers  gained  with 
chusing  a  hundred  thousand  kinds  of  particular  cases,  and 
adde  as  many  lawes  unto  them  ?  That  number  hath  no  pro 
portion,  with  the  infinite  diversity  of  humane  accidents.  The 
multiplying  of  our  inventions  shall  never  come  to  the  varia 
tion  of  examples.  Adde  a  hundred  times  as  many  unto 
them,  yet  shall  it  not  follow,  that  of  events  to  come,  there 
be  any  one  found,  that  in  all  this  infinite  number  of  selected 
and  enregistred  events,  shall  meete  with  one,  to  which  he 
may  so  exactly  joy ne  and  match  it,  but  some  circumstance 
and  diversity  will  remaine,  that  may  require  a  diverse  con 
sideration  of  judgement.  There  is  but  little  relation  be- 
tweene  our  actions,  that  are  in  perpetuall  mutation,  and  the 
fixed  and  unmoveable  lawes.  The  most  to  be  desired,  are 
the  rarest,  the  simplest  and  most  generall.  And  yet  I  be 
lieve,  it  were  better  to  have  none  at  all,  then  so  infinite  a 
number  as  we  have.  Nature  gives  them  ever  more  happy, 
then  those  we  give  our  selves.  Witnesse  the  image  of  the 
golden  age  that  Poets  faine  ;  and  the  state  wherein  we  see 
divers  nations  to  live,  which  have  no  other.  Some  there  are, 
who  to  decide  any  controversie,  that  may  rise  amongst  them, 
will  chuse  for  judge  the  first  man  that  by  chance  shall  travell 
alongest  their  mountaines  :  Others,  that  upon  a  market  day 
will  name  some  one  amongst  themselves,  who  in  the  place 
without  more  wrangling  shall  determine  all  their  questions. 
What  danger  would  ensue,  if  the  wisest  should  so  decide 
2  T  329 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  ours,  according  to  occurrences  and  at  the  first  sight ;  without 
XIII  being  tied  to  examples  and  consequences  ?  Let  every  foote 
jlaye  jj-g  owne  ghooe.  Ferdinando  King  of  Spaine  sending 
certaine  Colonies  into  the  Indies,  provided  wisely,  that  no 
lawyers  or  students  of  the  lawes  should  bee  carried  thither, 
for  feare  lest  controversies,  sutes  or  processes  should  people 
that  new-found  world.  As  a  Science  that  of  her  owne  nature 
engendreth  altercation  and  division,  judging  with  Plato,  that 
Lawyers  and  Phisitions  are  an  ill  provision  for  any  countrey. 
Wherefore  is  it,  that  our  common  language  so  easie  to  be 
understood  in  all  other  matters,  becommeth  so  obscure,  so 
harsh  and  so  hard  to  bee  understood  in  law-cases,  bils,  con 
tracts,  indentures,  citations,  wils  and  testaments  ?  And  that 
hee  who  so  plainely  expresseth  himselfe,  what  ever  he  spake 
or  writ  of  any  other  subject,  in  law  matters  findes  no  manner 
or  way  to  declare  himselfe  or  his  meaning,  that  admits  not 
some  doubt  or  contradiction  :  Unlesse  it  be,  that  the  Princes 
of  this  art  applying  themselves  with  a  particular  attention, 
to  invent  and  chuse  strange,  choise  and  solemne  words,  and 
frame  artificiall  cunning  clauses,  have  so  plodded  and  poized 
every  syllable  ;  canvased  and  sifted  so  exquisitely  every  seame 
and  quiddity,  that  they  are  now  so  entangled  and  so  con 
founded  in  the  infinity  of  figures  and  so  severall-small  parti 
tions,  that  they  can  no  more  come  within  the  compasse  of 
any  order,  or  prescription,  or  certaine  understanding.  Con- 
fusum  est  quidquid  usque  in  pulverem  sectum  est.  '  Whatso- 
6  ever  is  sliced  into  very  powder  is  confused.1 

Whosoever  hath  scene  children,  labouring  to  reduce  a 
masse  of  quicke-silver  to  a  certaine  number,  the  more  they 
presse  and  worke  the  same,  and  strive  to  force  it  to  their 
will,  so  much  more  they  provoke  the  liberty  of  that  generous 
metall,  which  scorneth  their  arte,  and  scatteringly  disperseth 
it  selfe  beyond  all  imagination.  Even  so  of  lawyers,  who 
in  subdividing  their  suttleties  or  quiddities,  teach  men  to 
multiply  doubts  :  and  by  extending  and  diversifying  difficul 
ties  ;  they  lengthen  and  amplifie,  they  scatter  and  disperse 
them.  In  sowing  and  retailing  of  questions,  they  make  the 
World  to  fructifie  and  abound  in  uncertainty,  in  quarrels, 
in  sutes  and  in  controversies.  As  the  ground  the  more  it 
is  crumbled,  broken  and  deeply  remooved  or  grupped  up, 

330 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

becommeth  so  much  more  fertile.  Dijficultatem  facit  doc-  CHAPTER 
trina.  6  Learning  breeds  difficulty/  We  found  many  doubts  XIII 
in  Vlpian,  we  finde  more  in  Bartolus  and  Baldus.  The 
trace  of  this  innumerable  diversity  of  opinions  should  never 
have  been  used  to  adorne  posterity,  and  have  it  put  in  her 
head,  but  rather  have  beene  utterly  razed  out.  I  know  not 
what  to  say  to  it ;  but  this  is  scene  by  experience,  that  so 
many  interpretations,  dissipate  and  confound  all  truth. 
Aristotle  hath  written  to  bee  understood :  Which  if  he 
could  not,  much  lesse  shall  another  not  so  learned  as  he 
was ;  and  a  third,  than  he  who  treateth  his  owne  imagina 
tion.  We  open  the  matter,  and  spill  it  in  distempering  it. 
Of  one  subject  we  make  a  thousand:  And  in  multiplying 
and  subdividing  we  fal  againe  into  the  infinity  of  Epicurus 
his  Atonies.  It  was  never  scene,  that  two  men  j  udged  alike 
of  one  same  thing.  And  it  is  impossible  to  see  two  opinions 
exactly  semblable :  not  onely  in  divers  men,  but  in  any  one 
same  man,  at  severall  houres.  I  commonly  find  something 
to  doubt-of,  where  the  commentary  happily  never  deigned 
to  touch,  as  deeming  it  so  plaine.  I  stumble  sometimes  as 
much  in  an  even  smooth  path ;  as  some  horses  that  I  know, 
who  oftner  trip  in  a  faire  plaine  way,  than  in  a  rough  and 
stony.  Who  would  not  say,  that  glosses  increase  doubts 
and  ignorance,  since  no  booke  is  to  be  seene,  whether  divine 
or  profane,  commonly  read  of  all  men,  whose  interpretation 
dimmes  or  tarnisheth  not  the  difficulty  ?  The  hundred 
commentary  sends  him  to  his  succeeder,  more  thorny  and 
more  crabbed,  than  the  first  found  him.  When  agreed  we 
amongst  our  selves,  to  say,  this  booke  is  perfect,  there  's  now 
nothing  to  be  said  against  it  ?  This  is  best  seene  in  our 
French-pedling  Law.  Authority  of  Law  is  given  to  infinite 
Doctors,  to  infinite  arrests,  and  to  as  many  interpretations. 
Finde  we  for  all  that  any  end  of  need  of  interpreters  ?  Is 
there  any  advancement  or  progresse  towards  tranquility 
seene  therein  ?  Have  we  now  lesse  need  of  Advocates  and 
ludges,  then  when  this  huge  masse  of  Law  was  yet  in  hir 
first  infancy  ?  Cleane  contrary :  we  obscure  and  bury 
understanding.  We  discover  it  no  more  but  at  the  mercy 
of  so  many  Courts,  Barres,  or  Plea-benches.  Men  mis- 
acknowledge  the  naturall  infirmity  of  their  minde.  She 

331 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  doth  but  quest  and  firret,  and  uncessantly  goeth  turning, 
XIII  winding,  building  and  entangling  her  selfe  in  hir  owne 
Of  Experi-  wor^e  .  as  doe  our  silke-wormes,  and  therein  stifleth  hir 
selfe.  Mus  in  pice.  '  A  Mouse  in  pitch.'  He  supposeth 
to  note  a  farre-off  I  wot  not  what  apparence  of  cleerenesse 
and  imaginary  truth  ;  but  whilest  he  runneth  unto  it,  so  many 
lets  and  difficulties  crosse  his  way,  so  many  impeachments 
and  new  questings  start  up,  that  they  stray  loose  and  besot 
him.  Not  much  otherwise  than  it  fortuned  to  ^Esops  Dogs, 
who  farre-off  discovering  some  shew  of  a  dead  body  to  flote 
upon  the  Sea,  and  being  unable  to  approach  the  same, 
undertooke  to  drinke  up  all  the  Water,  that  so  they  might 
drie-up  the  passage ;  and  were  all  stifeled.  To  which 
answereth  that,  which  Crates  said  of  Heraclitus  his  com 
positions,  that  they  needed  a  Reader,  who  should  bee  a 
cunning  swimmer,  lest  the  depth  and  weight  of  his  learning 
should  drowne  and  swallow  him  up.  It  is  nothing  but  a 
particular  weakenesse,  that  makes  us  contend  with  that 
which  others  or  we  our  selves  have  found  in  this  pursuite 
of  knowledge.  A  more  sufficient  man  will  not  be  pleased 
therewith.  There  is  place  for  a  follower,  yea  and  for  our 
selves,  and  more  waves  to  the  Wood  than  one.  There  is  no 
end  in  our  inquisitions.  Our  end  is  in  the  other  World. 
It  is  a  signe  his  wits  grow  short,  when  he  is  pleased  ;  or  a 
signe  of  wearinesse.  No  generous  spirit  stayes  and  relies 
upon  himselfe.  He  ever  pretendeth  and  goeth  beyond  his 
strength.  He  hath  some  vagaries  beyond  his  effects.  If 
hee  advance  not  himselfe,  presse,  settle,  shocke,  turne, 
winde  and  front  himselfe,  he  is  but  halfe  alive  ;  His  pur 
suits  are  termelesse  arid  formelesse.  His  nourishment  is  ad 
miration,  questing  and  ambiguity :  Which  Apollo  declared 
sufficiently,  alwayes  speaking  ambiguously,  obscurely  and 
obliquely  unto  us ;  not  feeding,  but  busying  and  ammusing 
us.  It  is  an  irregular  uncertaine  motion,  perpetuall,  pat- 
ternelesse  and  without  end.  His  inventions  enflame,  follow 
and  enter-produce  one  another. 

Ainsi  voit-on  en  un  ruisseau  coulant, 
Sans  fin  I'une  eau,  apres  I'autre  roulant, 
Et  tout  de  rang,  d'un  eternel  conduit., 
L'une  suit  I'autre,  et  I'une  I'autre  fuit. 

332 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Par  cette-cy,  celle-la  est  poussee,  CHAPTER 
Et  cette-cy,  par  I'autre  est  devancee  :  XIII 

Tousiours  I'eau  va  dans  I'eau,  et  tousiours  est  ce  Of  Experi- 
Mesme  ruisseau,  et  tousiours  eau  diverse.  ence 

As  in  a  running  river  we  behold 

How  one  wave  after  th'  other  still  is  rold, 

And  all  along  as  it  doth  endlesse  rise, 

Th'  one  th'  other  followes,  th'  one  from  th'  other  flyes. 

By  this  Wave,  that  is  driv'n  ;  and  this  againe, 

By  th'  other  is  set  forward  all  amaine  : 

Water  in  Water  still,  one  river  still, 

Yet  divers  Waters  still  that  river  fill. 

There 's  more  adoe  to  enterpret  interpretations,  than  to  ^ 
interpret  things  :  and  more  bookes  upon  bookes,  then  upon 
any  other  subject.  We  doe  but  enter-glose  our  selves.  All 
swarmeth  with  commentaries :  Of  Authors  their  is  great 
penury.  Is  not  the  chiefest  and  most  famous  knowledge  of 
our  ages,  to  know  how  to  understand  the  wise  ?  Is  it  not 
the  common  and  last  scope  of  our  study  ?  Our  opinions  are 
grafted  one  upon  an  other.  The  first  serveth  as  a  stocke 
to  the  second  ;  the  second  to  the  third.  Thus  we  ascend 
from  steppe  to  steppe.  Whence  it  followeth,  that  the 
highest-mounted  hath  often  more  honour,  than  merit.  For, 
hee  is  got-up  but  one  inch  above  the  shoulders  of  the  last 
save  one.  How  often  and  peradventure  foolishly,  have  I 
enlarged  my  Booke  to  speake  of  himselfe  ?  Foolishly  if  it 
were  but  for  this  reason  :  That  I  should  have  remembred, 
that  what  I  speake  of  others,  they  doe  the  like  of  me. 
That  those  so  frequent  glances  on  their  workes,  witnes  their 
hart  shivereth  with  their  love  they  beare  them ;  and  that 
the  disdainfull  churlishnesse  wherewith  they  beate  them, 
are  but  mignardizes  and  affectations  of  a  motherly  favour. 
Following  Aristotle,  in  whom,  both  esteeming  and  dis- 
esteeming  himselfe,  arise  often  of  an  equall  aire  of  arro- 
gancy.  For  mine  excuse ;  That  in  this  I  ought  to  have 
more  liberty  than  others,  forsomuch  as  of  purpose,  I  write 
both  of  my  selfe  and  of  my  writings,  as  of  my  other  actions  : 
that  my  theame  doth  turne  into  it  selfe :  I  wot  not  whether 
every  man  will  take  it.  I  have  scene  in  Germany,  that 
Luther  hath  left  as  many  divisions  and  altercations,  con 
cerning  the  doubt  of  his  opinions,  vea  and  more,  than  him- 

333 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  selfe  moveth  about  the  Holy  Scriptures.  Our  contestation 
XIII  is  verball.  I  demaund  what  Nature  voluptuousnesse,  circle 

Of  Expen-  an(j  substitution  is  ?  The  question  is  of  words,  and  with 
words  it  is  answered.  A  stone  is  a  body :  but  he  that 
should  insist  and  urge  :  And  what  is  a  body  ?  A  substance  : 
And  what  a  substance  ?  And  so  goe-on  :  Should  at  last 
bring  the  respondent  to  his  Calepine  or  wits  end.  One 
word  is  changed  for  another  word,  and  often  more  un- 
knowne.  I  know  better  what  Homo  is,  then  I  know  what 
Animal  is,  either  mortall  or  reasonable.  To  answere  one 
doubt,  they  give  me  three :  It  is  Hidraes  head.  Socrates 
demanded  of  Memnon  what  vertue  was ;  There  is,  answered 
Memnon,  the  vertue  of  a  Man,  of  a  Woman,  of  a  Magis 
trate,  of  a  private  Man,  of  a  Childe,  of  an  old  Man  :  What 
vertue  meane  you  ?  Yea  marry,  this  is  very  well,  quoth 
Socrates  ;  we  were  in  search  of  one  vertue,  and  thou  bringest 
me  a  whole  swarme.  We  propose  one  question,  and  we 
have  a  whole  huddle  of  them  made  unto  us  againe.  As  no 
event  or  forme  doth  wholly  resemble  another,  so  doth  it  not 
altogether  differ  one  from  another.  Oh  ingenious  mixture 
of  Nature.  If  our  faces  were  not  like,  we  could  not  discerne 
a  man  from  a  beast :  If  they  were  not  unlike,  we  could  not 
distinguish  one  man  from  another  man.  All  things  hold  by 
some  similitude  :  Every  example  limpeth.  And  the  relation, 
which  is  drawne  from  experience,  is  ever  defective  and  im 
perfect.  Comparisons  are  neverthelesse  joyned  together  by 
some  end.  So  serve  the  Lawes,  and  so  are  they  sorted  and 
fitted  to  all  our  sutes  or  affaires  ;  by  some  wire-drawen, 
forced  and  collaterall  interpretation.  Since  the  morall 
Lawes  which  respect  the  particular  duty  of  every  man  in 
himselfe,  are  so  hard  to  be  taught  and  observed,  as  we  see 
they  are :  It  is  no  wonder,  if  those  which  governe  so  many 
particulars,  are  more  hard.  Consider  the  forme  of  this  Law, 
by  which  we  are  ruled :  It  is  a  lively  testimony  of  humane 
imbecility ;  so  much  contradiction,  and  so  many  errours  are 
therin  contained.  That  which  we  thinke  favour  or  rigour 
in  Law  (wherein  is  so  much  of  either,  that  I  wot  not  well 
whether  we  shall  so  often  find  indifferency  in  them,  or 
crazed-infected  parts  and  unjust  members  of  the  very  body 
and  essence  of  Law).  Certaine  poore  country-men  came 
334 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

even  now  to  tell  me  in  a  great  haste,  that  but  now  in  a  CHAPTER 
forrest  of  mine,  they  have  left  a  man  wounded  to  death,  XIH 
with  a  hundred  hurts  about  him,  yet  breathing,  and  who  for  Experi- 
Gods  sake  hath  begged  a  little  water  and  some  helpe  to 
raise  himselfe  at  their  hands.  But  that  they  durst  not  come 
neere  him,  and  ran  all  away,  for  feare  some  officers  belong 
ing  to  the  Law  should  meete  and  catch  them  ;  and  as  they 
doe  with  such  as  they  find  neere  unto  a  murthered  body,  so 
they  should  bee  compelled  to  give  an  account  of  this  mis 
chance,  to  their  utter  undooing ;  having  neither  friends 
nor  mony  to  defend  their  innocency.  What  should  I  have 
said  unto  them  ?  It  is  most  certaine,  that  this  Office  of 
humanity  had  brought  them  to  much  trouble.  How  many 
innocent  and  guiltlesse  men  have  we  scene  punished  ?  I  say 
without  the  Judges  fault ;  and  how  many  more  that  were 
never  discovered  ?  This  hath  hapned  in  my  time.  Certaine 
men  are  condemned  to  death  for  a  murther  committed  ;  the 
sentence,  if  not  pronounced,  at  least  concluded  and  deter 
mined.  This  done,  the  Judges  are  advertised  by  the  Officers 
of  a  subalternall  Court,  not  farre-off,  that  they  have  certaine 
prisoners  in  hold,  that  have  directly  confessed  the  foresaid 
murther,  and  thereof  bring  most  evident  markes  and  tokens. 
The  question  and  consultation  is  now  in  the  former  Court, 
whether  for  all  this,  they  might  interrupt,  or  should  deferre 
the  execution  of  the  sentence  pronounced  against  the  first. 
They  consider  the  novelty  of  the  example  and  consequence 
thereof,  and  how  to  reconcile  the  judgement.  They  con 
clude,  that  the  condemnation  hath  passed  according  unto 
Law,  and  therefore  the  ludges  are  not  subject  to  repentance. 
To  be  short,  these  miserable  Wretches  are  consecrated  to 
the  prescriptions  of  the  Law.  Philip,  or  some  other,  pro 
vided  for  such  an  inconvenience,  in  this  manner.  He  had 
by  an  irrevocable  sentence  condemned  one  to  pay  another  a 
round  summe  of  money  for  a  fine.  A  while  after,  the  truth 
being  discovered,  it  was  found,  he  had  wrongfully  con 
demned  him.  On  one  side  was  the  right  of  the  cause,  on 
the  other  the  right  of  judiciary  formes.  He  is  in  some  sort 
to  satisfie  both  parties,  suffering  the  sentence  to  stand  in 
full  power :  and  with  his  owne  purse  recompenced  the  in 
terest  of  the  condemned.  But  hee  was  to  deale  with  a 

335 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  reparable  accident,  my  poore  slaves  were  hanged  irreparably. 
XIII         How  many  condemnations  have  I  scene  more  criminall,  than 

the  crime  il  selfe?      A11  this  Put  me  in   minde  of  those 
ancient  opinions ;    That  '  Hee  who  will  doe  right  in  grosse, 

6  must  needs  doe  wrong  by  retaile  ;  and  injustly  in  small 
'  things,  that  will  come  to  doe  justice  in  great  matters1; 
That  humane  justice  is  framed  according  to  the  modell  of 
physicke,  according  to  which,  whatsoever  is  profitable  is  also 
just  and  honest :  And  of  that  the  Stoickes  hold,  that  Nature 
her  selfe  in  most  of  her  workes,  proceedeth  against  justice : 
And  of  that  which  the  Cyreniaques  hold,  that  there  is 
nothing  just  of  it  selfe:  That  customes  and  lawes  frame 
justice.  And  the  Theodorians,  who  in  a  wise  man  allow  as 
just,  all  manner  of  theft,  sacriledge  and  paillardise,  so  he 
thinke  it  profitable  for  him.  There  is  no  remedy :  I  am  in 
that  case,  as  Alcibiades  was,  and  if  I  can  otherwise  chuse, 
will  never  put  my  selfe  unto  a  man  that  shall  determine  of 
my  head ;  or  consent  that  my  honour  or  life,  shall  depend 
on  the  industry  or  care  of  mine  atturney,  more  then  mine 
innocency.  I  could  willingly  adventure  my  selfe,  and  stand 
to  that  Law,  that  should  as  well  recompence  me  for  a  good 
deed,  as  punish  me  for  a  mis-deede :  and  where  I  might 
have  a  just  cause  to  hope,  as  reason  to  feare.  Indemnitie 
is  no  sufficient  coyne  for  him,  who  doth  better  than  not  to 
trespasse.  Our  Law  presents  us  but  one  of  her  hands,  and 
that  is  her  left  hand.  Whosoever  goes  to  Law,  doth  in  the 
end  but  lose  by  it.  In  China,  the  policy,  arts  and  govern 
ment  of  which  kingdome,  having  neither  knowledge  or  com 
merce  with  ours ;  exceed  our  examples  in  divers  parts  of 
excellency  ;  and  whose  Histories  teach  me,  how  much  more 
ample  and  divers  the  World  is,  than  eyther  we  or  our  fore 
fathers  could  ever  enter  into  ;  The  Officers  appointed  by 
the  Prince  to  visite  the  state  of  his  Provinces,  as  they  punish 
such  as  abuse  their  charge,  so  with  great  liberality  they 
reward  such  as  have  uprightly  and  honestly  behaved  them 
selves  in  them,  or  have  done  any  thing  more  then  ordinary, 
and  besides  the  necessity  of  their  duty :  There,  all  present 
themselves,  not  onely  to  warrant  themselves,  but  also  to  get 
something :  Not  simply  to  be  paid,  but  liberally  to  be  re 
warded.  No  judge  hath  yet,  God  be  thanked,  spoken  to  me 
336 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

as  a  judge  in  any  cause  whatsoever,  either  mine  or  another  CHAPTER 
mans  ;  criminal  or  civill.  No  prison  did  ever  receive  me,  no  XIII 
not  so  much  as  for  recreation  to  walke  in.  The  very  imagi-  Of  Experi- 
nation  of  one,  maketh  the  sight  of  their  outside  seeme  irke- 
some  and  loathsome  to  mee.  I  am  so  besotted  unto  liberty, 
that  should  any  man  forbid  me  the  accesse  unto  any  one 
corner  of  the  Indiaes  I  should  in  some  sort  live  much  dis 
contented.  And  so  long  as  I  shall  finde  land  or  open  aire 
elsewhere,  I  shall  never  lurke  in  any  place,  where  I  must 
hide  my  selfe.  Oh  God,  how  hardly  could  I  endure  the 
miserable  condition  of  so  many  men,  confined  and  immured 
in  some  corners  of  this  kingdome,  barred  from  entring  the 
chiefest  Cities  ;  from  accesse  into  Courts  ;  from  conversing 
with  men,  and  interdicted  the  use  of  common  wayes,  onely 
because  they  have  offended  our  lawes.  If  those  under  which 
I  live,  should  but  threaten  my  fingers  end,  I  would  pre 
sently  goe  finde  out  some  others,  wheresoever  it  were.  All 
my  small  wisedome,  in  these  civill  and  tumultuous  warres, 
wherin  we  now  live,  doth  wholly  employ  it  selfe,  that  they 
may  not  interrupt  my  liberty,  to  goe  and  come  where  ever 
I  list.  Lawes  are  now  maintained  in  credit,  not  because 
they  are  essentially  j  ust,  but  because  they  are  lawes.  It  is 
the  mysticall  foundation  of  their  authority ;  they  have  none 
other  :  which  availes  them  much  :  They  are  often  made  by 
fooles ;  more  often  by  men,  who  in  hatred  of  equality,  have 
want  of  equity  ;  But  ever  by  men,  who  are  vaine  and  ir 
resolute  Authours.  There  is  nothing  so  grossely  and  largely 
offending,  nor  so  ordinarily  wronging  as  the  Lawes.  Whoso 
ever  obeyeth  them  because  they  are  just,  obeyes  them  not 
justly  the  way  as  he  ought.  Our  French  lawes  doe  in  some 
sort,  by  their  irregularity  and  deformity,  lend  an  helping 
hand  unto  the  disorder  and  corruption,  that  is  seene  in 
their  dispensation  and  execution.  Their  behest  is  so  con 
fused,  and  their  command  so  inconstant,  that  it  in  some 
sort  excuseth,  both  the  disobedience  and  the  vice  of  the 
interpretation,  of  the  administration  and  of  the  observation. 
Whatsoever  then  the  fruit  is  we  may  have  of  Experience, 
the  same  which  we  draw  from  forraine  examples,  will  hardly 
stead  our  institution  much  ;  if  we  reape  so  small  profit  from 
that  wee  have  of  our  selves,  which  is  most  familiar  unto  us : 
2U  337 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  and  truely  sufficient  to  instruct  us  of  what  we  want.  I 
study  my  selfe  more  than  any  other  subject.  It  is  my 
supernaturall  Metaphisike,  it  is  my  naturall  Philosophy. 

PROPERT.  iii.  Qua  Deus  hanc  mundi  temperet  arte  domum, 

El.  iv.  26.  Qua  venit  exoriens,  qua  deficit,  unde  coactis 

Cornibus  in  plenum  menstrua  luna  redit : 

Vnde  salo  superant  venti,  quidflamine  captet 

Eurus,  et  in  nubes  unde  perennis  &qua. 

Sit  ventura  dies  mundi  qucv  subruat  arces. 

This  Worlds  great  house  by  what  arte  God  doth  guide  ; 
From  whence  the  monethly  Moone  doth  rising  ride, 
How  wane,  how  with  clos'd  homes  returne  to  pride, 
How  winds  on  seas  beare  sway,  what  th'  Easterne  winde 
Would  have,  how  still  in  clouds  we  water  finde  ; 
If  this  worlds  Towers  to  rase  a  day  be  signde. 

Qucerite  quos  agitat  mundi  labor  : 

All  this  doe  you  enquire 
Whom  this  worlds  travailes  tyre. 

In  this  universality  I  suffer  my  selfe  ignorantly  and  negli 
gently  to  be  menaged  by  the  generall  law  of  the  world.  I 
shall  sufficiently  know  it  when  I  shall  feele  it.  My  learning 
cannot  make  her  change  her  course :  she  will  not  diversifie 
her  selfe  for  me ;  it  were  folly  to  hope  it :  And  greater  folly 
for  a  man  to  trouble  himselfe  about  it;  since  it  is  neces 
sarily  semblable,  publicke  and  common.  The  governours 
capacity  and  goodnesse,  should  throughly  discharge  us  of 
the  governments  care.  Philosophicall  inquisitions  and  con 
templations  serve  but  as  a  nourishment  unto  our  curiosity. 
With  great  reason  doe  Philosophers  addresse  us  unto 
natures  rules :  But  they  have  nought  to  doe  with  so  sublime 
a  knowledge :  They  falsifie  them,  and  present  her  to  us  with 
a  painted  face,  too-high  in  colour  and  overmuch  sophisti 
cated  ;  whence  arise  so  many  different  pourtraits  of  so  uni- 
forme  a  subject.  As  she  hath  given  us  feete  to  goe  withall, 
so  hath  she  endowed  us  with  wisedome  to  direct  our  life.  A 
wisedome  not  so  ingenious,  sturdy  and  pompous,  as  that  of 
their  invention ;  but  yet  easie,  quiet  and  salutairie.  And 
that  in  him  who  hath  the  hap  to  know  how  to  employ  it 
orderly  and  sincerely,  effecteth  very  well  what  the  other 
saith  :  that  is  to  say  naturally.  For  a  man  to  commit  him- 

388 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

selfe  most  simply  unto  nature,  is  to  doe  it  most  wisely.  Oh  CHAPTER 
how  soft,  how  gentle,  and  how  sound  a  pillow  is  ignorance  XIII 
and  incuriosity  to  rest  a  well  composed  head  upon.  I  had 
rather  understand  my  selfe  well  in  my  selfe,  then  in  Cicero. 
Out  of  the  experience  I  have  of  my  selfe,  I  finde  sufficient 
ground  to  make  my  selfe  wise,  were  I  but  a  good  proficient 
scholler.  Whosoever  shall  commit  to  memory  the  excesse 
or  inconvenience  of  his  rage  or  anger  past,  and  how  farre 
that  fit  transported  him,  may  see  the  deformity  of  that 
passion,  better  then  in  Aristotle,  and  conceive  a  more  just 
hatred  against  it.  Whosoever  calleth  to  minde,  the  dangers 
he  hath  escaped,  those  which  have  threatned  him,  and  the 
light  occasions  that  have  remooved  him  from  one  to  another 
state,  doth  thereby  the  better  prepare  himselfe  to  future 
alterations,  and  knowledge  of  his  condition.  Caesars  life 
hath  no  more  examples  for  us,  then  our  owne ;  Both  im- 
periall  and  popular ;  it  is  ever  a  life  that  all  humane  acci 
dents  regard.  Let  us  but  give  eare  unto  it,  we  recorde  all 
that  to  us,  that  we  principally  stand  in  neede  of.  He  that 
shall  call  to  minde  how  often  and  how  severall  times  he 
hath  beene  deceived,  and  mis-accompted  his  owne  judge 
ment  :  is  he  not  a  simple  gull,  if  he  doe  not  for  ever  after 
ward  distrust  the  same  ?  When  by  others  reason,  I  finde 
my  selfe  convicted  of  a  false  opinion,  I  learne  not  so  much, 
what  new  thing  hee  hath  told  me ;  and  this  particular  ignor 
ance  ;  which  were  but  a  small  purchase  ;  as  in  generall  I 
learne  mine  owne  imbecility  and  weakenesse,  and  the  treason 
of  my  understanding :  whence  I  draw  the  reformation  of  all 
the  masse.  The  like  I  doe  in  all  my  other  errours :  by 
which  rule  I  apprehend  and  feele  great  profit  for,  and  unto 
my  life.  I  regarde  not  the  species  or  individuitm,  as  a  stone 
whereon  I  have  stumbled.  I  learne  every  where  to  feare  my 
going,  and  endevour  to  order  the  same.  To  learne  that 
another  hath  eyther  spoken  a  foolish  jest,  or  committed  a 
sottish  act,  is  a  thing  of  nothing.  A  man  must  learne,  that 
he  is  but  a  foole :  A  much  more  ample  and  important  in 
struction.  The  false  steps  my  memory  hath  so  often  put 
upon  me,  at  what  time  she  stood  most  upon  her  selfe,  have 
not  idlely  beene  lost :  she  may  sweare  and  warrant  me  long 
enough  ;  I  shake  mine  eares  at  her  :  the  first  opposition 

339 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  made  in  witnesse  of  her,  makes  me  suspect.  And  I  durst 
XI11  .  not  trust  her  in  a  matter  of  consequence  ;  nor  warrant  her 
Of  Experi-  Couching  others  affaires.  And  were  it  not,  that  what  I  doe 
for  want  of  memory,  others  more  often  doe  the  same  for 
lacke  of  faith,  I  would  even  in  a  matter  of  fact  rather 
take  the  truth  from  anothers  mouth,  then  from  mine  own. 
Would  every  man  pry  into  the  effects  and  circumstances  of 
the  passions  that  sway  him,  as  I  have  done  of  that  where- 
unto  I  was  allotted  ;  he  should  see  them  comming ;  and 
would  somewhat  hinder  their  course  and  abate  their  im 
petuosity  :  They  doe  not  alwayes  surprise  and  take  hold  of 
us  at  the  first  brunt,  there  are  certaine  forethreatnings  and 
degrees  as  forerunners. 

Fluctus  uti  primb  coepit  cum  albescere  ponto, 

Paulatim  sese  tollit  mare,  et  altius  undas 

Erigit,  inde  imo  consurgit  ad  (ether a  f undo. 

As  when  at  sea,  floods  first  in  whitenesse  rise, 

Sea  surgeth  softly,  and  then  higher  plies 

In  waves,  then  from  the  ground  mounts  up  to  skies. 

Judgement  holds  in  me  a  presidentiall  seate,  at  least  he 
carefully  endevours  to  hold  it :  He  suffers  my  appetits  to 
keep  their  course,  both  hatred  and  love,  yea  and  that  I  beare 
unto  my  selfe  ;  without  feeling  alteration  or  corruption.  If 
he  can  not  reforme  other  parts  according  to  himselfe,  at  least 
he  will  not  be  deformed  by  them  :  he  keepes  his  court  apart. 
That  warning-lesson  given  to  all  men,  to  know  themselves, 
must  necessarily  be  of  important  effect,  since  that  God  of 
wisedome,  knowledge  and  light,  caused  the  same  to  be  fixed 
on  the  frontispice  of  his  temple  :  as  containing  whatsoever 
he  was  to  counsell  us.  Plato  saith  also,  that  wisedome  is 
nothing  but  the  execution  of  that  ordinance :  And  Socrates 
doth  distinctly  verifie  the  same  in  Zenophon.  Difficulties 
and  obscurity  are  not  perceived  in  every  science,  but  by  such 
as  have  entrance  into  them :  For,  some  degree  of  intelli 
gence  is  required,  to  be  able  to  marke  that  one  is  ignorant : 
and  wee  must  knocke  at  a  gate,  to  know  whether  it  bee 
shutte.  Whence  ensueth  this  Platonicall  subtilty,  that 
neyther  those  which  know  have  no  further  to  enquire,  forso- 
much  as  they  know  already  :  nor  they  that  know  not,  be 
cause  to  enquire,  it  is  necessary  they  know  what  they  enquire 

340 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

after.  Even  so  in  this,  for  a  man  to  know  himselfe :  that  CHAPTER 
every  man  is  scene  so  resolute  and  satisfied,  and  thinks  him-  XIII 
selfe  sufficiently  instructed  or  skilfull,  doth  plainely  signifie  " 
that  no  man  understands  any  thing,  as  Socrates  teacheth 
Euthydemus.  My  selfe,  who  professe  nothing  else,  finde 
therein  so  bottomlesse  a  depth,  and  infinite  variety,  that 
my  apprentisage  hath  no  other  fruit,  than  to  make  me  per 
ceive  how  much  more  there  remaineth  for  me  to  learne.  To 
mine  owne  weaknesse  so  often  acknowledged,  I  owe  this  in 
clination  which  I  beare  unto  modesty;  to  the  obedience 
of  beliefes  prescribed  unto  me  ;  to  a  constant  coldnesse  and 
moderation  of  opinions  ;  and  hatred  of  this  importunate  and 
quarrellous  arrogancy,  wholy  beleeving  and  trusting  it  selfe, 
a  capitall  ennemy  to  discipline  and  verity.  Doe  but  heare 
them  sway  and  talke.  The  first  fopperies  they  propose,  are 
in  the  stile,  that  Religions  and  Lawes  are  composeth  in. 
Nihil  est  turpius  quam  cognitioni  et  prceceptioni,  assertionem  Cic.  Acad. 
approbationemque  prascurrere.  'Nothing  is  more  absurd,  QU<B-  *•  f- 
4  than  that  avouching  and  allowance  should  runne  before 
4  knowledge  and  praecept."  Aristarchus  saide,  that  in  ancient 
times,  there  were  scarse  seven  wise  men  found  in  the  world  : 
and  in  his  time,  hardly  seven  ignorant.  Have  not  we  more 
reason  to  say  it  in  our  dayes,  than  he  had  ?  Affirmation  and 
selfe-conceit,  are  manifest  signes  of  foolishnesse.  Some  one, 
who  a  hundred  times  a  day  hath  had  the  canvase  and  beene 
made  a  starke  coxcombe,  shall  notwithstanding  be  seene  to 
stand  upon  his  Ergoes,  and  as  presumptuously-resolute  as 
before.  You  would  say,  he  hath  since  some  new  minde  and 
vigor  of  understanding  infused  into  him.  And  that  it  be 
tides  him,  as  to  that  ancient  childe  of  the  Earth,  who  by  his 
falling  to  the  ground  and  touching  his  Mother,  still  gathered 
new  strength  and  fresh  courage. 

— cui  cum  tetigere  parentem,  Antgeus. 

lam  defecta  vigent  renovato  robore  membra. 

Whose  failing  limmes  with  strength  renewM  regrow, 
When  they  once  touch  his  mother  Earth  below. 

Doth  not  this  indocile,  blocke-headed  asse,  thinke  to 
reassume  a  new  spirit,  by  undertaking  a  new  disputation  ? 
It  is  by  my  experience  I  accuse  humane  ignorance,  which 

341 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  (in  mine  opinion)  is  the  surest  part  of  the  Worlds  schoole. 
XIII  Those  that  will  not  conclude  it  in  themselves,  by  so  vaine 
an  example  as  mine,  or  theirs,  let  them  acknowledge  it 
by  Socrates,  the  Maister  of  Maisters.  For  the  Philosopher 
Antisthenes,  was  wont  to  say  to  his  Disciples  :  Come  on  my 
Maisters,  let  you  and  me  goe  to  heare  Socrates.  There  shall 
I  be  a  fellow  Disciple  with  you.  And  upholding  this  Doctrine 
of  the  Stoickes  Sect,  that  only  vertue  sufficed  to  make  a  life 
absolutely-happy  ;  and  having  no  need  of  any  thing,  but  of 
Socrates  his  force  and  resolution,  he  added  moreover :  This 
long  attention,  I  employ  in  considering  my  selfe,  enableth  me 
also  to  judge  indifferently  of  others  :  And  there  are  few 
things  whereof  I  speake  more  happily  and  excusably.  It 
often  fortuneth  me  to  see  and  distinguish  more  exactly  the 
conditions  of  my  friends,  than  themselves  do.  I  have  astonied 
some  by  the  pertinency  of  mine  own  description,  and  have 
warned  him  of  himselfe.  Because  I  have  from  mine  infancy 
enured  my  selfe  to  view  mine  owne  life  in  others  lives  ;  I 
have  thereby  acquired  a  studious  complexion  therein.  And 
when  I  thinke  on  it,  I  suffer  few  things  to  escape  about  me, 
that  may  in  any  sort  fit  the  same  ;  whether  countenances, 
humour  or  discourses.  I  studiously  consider  all  I  am  to 
eschew  and  all  I  ought  to  follow.  So  by  my  friends  produc 
tions  I  discover  their  inward  inclinations.  Not  to  marshall 
or  range  this  infinit  variety  of  so  divers  and  so  distracted 
actions  to  certaine  Genders  or  Chapters,  and  distinctly  to 
distribute  my  parcels  and  divisions  into  formes  and  knowne 
regions. 

VIRG.  Georg.  Sed  neque  quam  multce  species,  et  nomina  qucB  sint. 

i-  103.  Est  numerus. 

But  not  how  many  kinds,  nor  what  their  names  : 
There  is  a  number  of  them  (and  their  frames). 

The  wiser  sort  speake  and  declare  their  fantasies  more 
specially  and  distinctly :  But  I,  who  have  no  further  insight 
then  I  get  from  common  use,  without  rule  or  methode, 
generally  present  mine  owne,  but  gropingly.  As  in  this  :  I 
pronounce  my  sentence  by  articles,  loose  and  disjoynted :  it 
is  a  thing  cannot  be  spoken  at  once  and  at  full.  Relation 
and  conformity  are  not  easily  found  in  such  base  and  com- 

342 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

mon  minds  as  ours.  Wisedome  is  a  solide  and  compleate  CHAPTER 
frame;  every  severall  piece  whereof  keepeth  his  due  place  XIII 
and  beareth  his  marke.  Sola  sapientia  in  se  tota  conversa  ^  Experi- 
est.  '  Onely  wisedome  is  wholy  turned  into  it  selfe.'  I  leave 
it  to  Artists,  and  I  wot  not  whether  in  a  matter  so  confused, 
so  severall  and  so  casuall,  they  shall  come  to  an  end,  to 
range  into  sides  this  infinit  diversity  of  visages ;  and  settle 
our  inconstancy  and  place  it  in  order.  I  doe  not  onely  find 
it  difficult  to  combine  our  actions  one  unto  another  ;  but 
take  every  one  apart,  it  is  hard,  by  any  principall  quality  to 
desseigne  the  same  properly  :  so  double,  so  ambiguous  and 
party-coloured  are  they  to  divers  lusters.  Which  in  Perseus 
the  Macedonian  King  was  noted  for  a  rare  matter,  that  his 
spirit  fastning  it  selfe  to  no  kinde  of  condition ;  went  wan- 
dring  through  every  kinde  of  life :  and  representing  so  new 
fangled  and  gadding  maners,  that  he  was  neyther  knowne  of 
himselfe  nor  of  others,  what  kinde  of  man  he  was  :  me  thinkes 
may  well-nigh  agree  and  sute  with  all  the  world.  And  above 
all,  I  have  seene  some  other  of  his  coate  or  humour,  to  whom 
(as  I  suppose)  this  conclusion  might  also  more  properly  be 
applied.  No  state  of  mediocrity  being  ever  transported  from 
one  extreame  to  another,  by  indivinable  occasions  :  no  maner 
of  course  without  crosse,  and  strange  contrarieties  :  no  faculty 
simple :  so  that  the  likeliest  a  man  may  one  day  conclude  of 
him,  shall  be,  that  he  affected  and  laboured  to  make  himselfe 
knowne  by  being  not  to  bee  knowne.  A  man  had  neede 
of  long- tough  eares,  to  heare  himselfe  freely  judged.  And 
because  there  be  few  that  can  endure  to  heare  it  without 
tingling:  those  which  adventure  to  undertake  it  with  us, 
shew  us  a  singular  effect  of  true  friendship.  For,  that  is  a 
truely  perfect  love,  which  to  profit  and  doe  good,  feareth 
not  to  hurt  or  offend.  I  deeme  it  absurd,  to  censure  him,  in 
whom  bad  qualities  exceed e  good  conditions.  Plato  requireth 
three  parts  in  him  that  will  examine  anothers  minde  :  Learn 
ing,  goodwill,  and  boldnesse.  I  was  once  demanded,  what  I 
would  have  thought  my  selfe  fit-for,  had  any  beene  dis 
posed  to  make  use  of  me,  when  my  yeares  would  have  fitted 
service : 

Dum  melior  vires  mnguis  dabat,  fcmula  nee  dum  VIRG.  ALn.  v. 

Temporibm  geminis  canebat  ttparsa  aenectus.  415. 

343 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  While  better  blood  gave  strength,  nor  envious  old  yeares 

XIII  Ore-laid  with  wrinckled  temples  grew  to  hoary  haires. 

en^g6ri  I  answered,  for  nothing.  And  I  willingly  excuse  my  selfe 
that  I  can  doe  nothing  which  may  enthrall  me  to  others. 
But  had  my  fortune  made  me  a  servant,  I  would  have  told 
my  maister  all  truths;  and,  had  he  so  wild  it,  controled 
his  maners :  Not  in  grosse,  by  scholasticall  lessons,  which  I 
cannot  doe :  besides,  I  see  no  true  reformation  to  ensue  in 
such  as  know  them :  but  faire  and  softly  and  with  every 
opportunity  observing  them ;  and  simply  and  naturally 
judging  them  distinctly  by  the  eye.  Making  him  directly 
to  perceive,  how  and  in  what  degree  he  is  in  the  common 
opinion ;  opposing  my  selfe  against  his  flatterers  and  syco 
phants.  There  is  none  of  us,  but  would  be  worse  then  Kings, 
if  as  they  are,  we  were  continually  corrupted  with  that 
rascally  kinde  of  people.  But  what?  if  Alexander  that 
mighty  King  and  great  Philosopher,  could  not  beware  of 
them  ?  I  should  have  had  sufficient  fidelity,  judgement  and 
liberty  for  that.  It  would  be  a  namelesse  office,  otherwise 
it  should  lose  both  effect  and  grace ;  And  is  a  part,  which 
cannot  indifferently  belong  to  all.  For,  truth  it  selfe,  hath 
not  the  priviledge  to  be  employed  at  all  times  and  in  every 
kinde  :  Be  her  use  never  so  noble,  it  hath  his  circumscriptions 
and  limits.  It  often  commeth  to  passe,  the  world  standing 
as  it  doth,  that  truth  is  whispered  into  Princes  eares,  not 
onely  without  fruit,  but  hurtfully  and  therewithall  unjustly. 
And  no  man  shall  make  me  beleeve,  but  that  an  hallowed 
admonition  may  bee  viciously  applied,  and  abusively  em 
ployed  :  and  that  the  interest  of  the  substance  should  not 
sometimes  yeeld  to  the  interest  of  the  forme.  For  such  a 
purpose  and  mystery  I  would  have  an  unrepining  man  and 
one  contented  with  his  owne  fortune, 

MART.  x.  Epig.  Quod  sit,  esse  velit,  nihilque  malit : 

xlviu  I2'  Willing  to  be  as  him  you  see, 

Or  rather  nothing  else  to  be : 

and  borne  of  meane  degree :  Forsomuch  as  on  the  one  side, 
hee  should  not  have  cause  to  feare,  lively  and  neerely  to  touch 
his  maisters  heart,  thereby  not  to  lose  the  course  of  his 
preferment :  And  on  the  other  side,  being  of  a  low  condition, 
344 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

he  should  have  more  easie  communication  with  all  sorts  of  CHAPTER 
people.  Which  I  would  have  in  one  man  alone ;  for,  to  XIII 
empart  the  priviledge  of  such  liberty  and  familiarity  unto  Of  Experi- 
many,  would  beget  an  hurtfull  irreverence.  Yea,  and  of 
that  man,  I  would  above  all  things  require  trusty  and 
assured  silence.  A  King  is  not  to  bee  credited,  when  for  his 
glory,  he  boasteth  of  his  constancy,  in  attending  his  enemies 
encounter ;  if  for  his  good  amendment  and  profit,  hee  cannot 
endure  the  liberty  of  his  friends  words,  which  have  no  other 
working  power,  then  to  pinch  his  learning :  the  rest  of  their 
effect  remaining  in  his  owne  hands.  Now,  there  is  not  any 
condition  of  men,  that  hath  more  neede  of  true,  sincerely- 
free  and  open  hearted  advertisements,  then  Princes.  They 
undergoe  a  publike  life  ;  and  must  applaude  the  opinion  of  so 
many  spectators,  that  if  they  be  once  enured  to  have  that 
concealed  from  them,  which  diverteth  them  from  their  course, 
they  at  unawares  and  insensibly  finde  themselves  deepely  en 
gaged  in  the  hatred  and  detestation  of  their  subjects,  many 
times  for  occasions,  which  had  they  beene  forewarned,  and  in 
time  gently  reformed,  they  might  no  doubt  have  eschewed,  to 
no  interest  or  prejudice  of  their  private  delights.  Favorits 
doe  commonly  respect  themselves  more  then  their  masters. 
And  surely  it  toucheth  their  free -hold,  forsomuch  as  in 
good  truth,  the  greatest  part  of  true  friendships -offices, 
are  towards  their  soveraigne  in  a  crabbed  and  dangerous 
Essay.  So  that,  there  is  not  onely  required  much  affection 
and  liberty,  but  also  an  undanted  courage.  To  conclude, 
all  this  galiemafry  which  I  huddle-up  here,  is  but  a  register 
of  my  lives-Essayes  :  which  in  regard  of  the  internall  health 
are  sufficiently  exemplary  to  take  the  instruction  against  the 
haire.  But  concerning  bodily  health,  no  man  is  able  to 
bring  more  profitable  experience,  then  my  selfe ;  who  pre 
sent  the  same  pure,  sincere,  and  in  no  sort  corrupted  or 
altred,  either  by  art  or  selfe- wilFd  opinion.  Experience 
in  her  owne  precinct,  may  justly  be  compared  to  Physicke, 
unto  which,  reason  giveth  place.  Tiberius  was  wont  to  say, 
that  whosoever  had  lived  twenty  yeares,  should  be  able 
to  answer  himselfe  of  all  such  things  as  were  either  whole 
some  or  hurtfull  for  him,  and  know  how  to  live  and  order 
his  body  without  Phisicke.  Which  he  peradventure  had 
2X  345 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  learned  of  Socrates  ;  who  industriously  advising  his  disciples 
XI11  .  (as  a  study  of  chiefe  consequence)  to  study  their  health,  told 
Experi-  £ijem  moreover,  that  it  was  very  hard,  if  a  man  of  under 
standing,  needfully  observing  his  exercises,  his  eating  and 
drinking,  should  not  better  then  any  Phisition  discerne  and 
distinguish  such  things  as  were  either  good  or  bad  or  indif 
ferent  for  him.  Yet  doth  Physicke  make  open  profession 
alwayes  to  have  experience  for  the  touch-stone  of  her  opera 
tion.  And  Plato  had  reason  to  say,  that  to  be  a  good 
Physition,  it  were  requisite,  that  he  who  should  undertake 
that  profession,  had  past  through  all  such  diseases  as  hee 
will  adventure  to  cure,  and  knowne  or  felt  all  the  accidents 
and  circumstances  he  is  to  judge  of.  It  is  reason,  them 
selves  should  first  have  the  pox,  if  they  will  know  how  to 
cure  them  in  others.  I  should  surely  trust  such  a  one  better 
then  any  else.  Others  but  guide  us,  as  one  who  sitting  in 
his  chaire  paints  seas,  rockes,  shelves  and  havens  upon  a 
board,  and  makes  the  modell  of  a  tall  ship,  to  saile  in  all 
safety :  But  put  him  to  it  in  earnest,  he  knowes  not  what  to 
doe,  nor  where  to  begin.  They  make  even  such  a  descrip 
tion  of  our  infirmities  as  doth  a  towne-crier,  who  crieth  a  lost 
horse,  or  dog,  and  describeth  his  haire,  his  stature,  his  eares, 
with  other  markes  and  tokens,  but  bring  either  unto  him  he 
knowes  him  not.  Oh  God,  that  physicke  would  one  day  aftbord 
me  some  good  and  perceptible  helpe,  how  earnestly  would 
I  exclaime. 

Tandem  ejficaci  do  manua  6-cientia;. 

I  yeeld,  I  yeeld  at  length, 

To  knowledge  of  chiefe  strength. 

The  Arts  that  promise  to  keepe  our  body  and  minde  in 
good  health,  promise  much  unto  us ;  but  therewith  there  is 
none  performeth  lesse  what  they  promise.  And  in  our  dayes, 
such  as  make  profession  of  these  Arts  amongst  us,  doe  lesse 
then  all  others  shew  their  effects.  The  most  may  be  said  of 
them,  is,  that  they  sell  medicinable  drugs  ;  but  that  they 
are  Physitians,  no  man  can  truly  say  it.  I  have  lived  long 
enough  to  yeeld  an  account  of  the  usage  that  hath  brought 
mee  to  this  day.  If  any  bee  disposed  to  taste  of  it,  as  his 
taster  I  have  given  him  an  assay.  Loe  here  some  articles, 
digested  as  memory  shall  store  me  with  them.  I  have  no 

346 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

fashion,  but  hath  varied  according  to  accidents:  I  onely  CHAPTER 
register  those  I  have  most  beene  acquainted  with  ;  and  XI11 
hitherto  possesse  roe  most.  My  forme  of  life  is  ever  alike,  Of  Experi- 
both  in  sicknesse  and  in  health  :  one  same  bed,  the  same 
houres,  the  same  meate,  the  same  drinke  doth  serve  me.  I 
adde  nothing  to  them  but  the  moderation  of  more  or  lesse, 
according  to  my  strength  or  appetite.  My  health  is  to  keepe 
my  accustomed  state  free  from  care  and  trouble.  I  see  that 
sicknesse  doth  on  the  one  side  in  some  sort  divert  me  from 
it,  and  if  I  beleeve  Physitians,  they  on  the  other  side  will 
turne  me  from  it :  So  that  both  by  fortune  and  by  art  I  am 
cleane  out  of  my  right  bias.  I  beleeve  nothing  more  cer- 
tainely  then  this,  that  I  cannot  be  offended  by  the  use  of 
things,  which  I  have  so  long  accustomed.  It  is  in  the  hands 
of  custome  to  give  our  life  what  forme  it  pleaseth  :  in  that 
it  can  do  all  in  all.  It  is  the  drinke  of  Circes,  diversifieth 
our  nature  as  she  thinkes  good.  How  many  nations  neere 
bordering  upon  us  imagine  the  feare  of  the  sereine  or  night- 
calme  to  be  but  a  jest,  which  so  apparantly  doth  blast  and 
hurt  us  ?  and  whereof  our  Mariners,  our  watermen,  and  our 
countrey  men  make  but  a  laughing-stocke  ?  You  make  a 
Germane  sicke,  if  you  lay  him  upon  a  matteras,  as  you  dis 
temper  an  Italian  upon  a  fetherbed,  and  a  French  man  to 
lay  him  in  a  bed  without  curtaines,  or  lodge  him  in  a 
chamber  without  a  fire.  A  Spaniard  can  not  well  brooke 
to  feede  after  our  fashion,  nor  we  endure  to  drinke  as  the 
Swizzers.  A  Germane  pleased  me  well  at  Augusta  to  raile 
against  the  commodity  of  our  chimnies,  using  the  same 
reasons  or  arguments,  that  wee  ordinarily  imploy  in  con 
demning  their  stoves.  For,  to  say  truth,  the  same  close- 
smoothered  heate,  and  the  smell  of  that  oft-heated  matter, 
whereof  they  are  composed,  fumeth  in  the  heads  of  such  as 
are  not  accustomed  unto  them  ;  not  so  with  me.  But  on  the 
other  side,  that  heate  being  equally  dispersed,  constant  and 
universall,  without  flame  or  blazing,  without  smoake,  and 
without  that  wind  which  the  tonnels  of  our  chimnies  bring 
us,  may  many  wayes  be  compared  unto  ours.  Why  doe  we 
not  imitate  the  Romanes  architecture  ? 

It  is  reported  that  in  ancient  times  they  made  no  fire  in 
their  houses,  but  without  and  at  the  foote  of  them  :  Whence 

347 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  by  tonnels,  which  were  convaide  through  their  thickest  wals, 


X11!  .  and  contrived  neere  and  about  all  such  places  as  they  would 
6"  ^ave  warmed  ;  so  that  the  heat  was  convaied  into  every  part 
of  the  house.  Which  I  have  scene  manifestly  described  in 
some  place  of  Seneca,  though  I  can  not  well  remember  where. 
This  Germane,  hearing  me  commend  the  beauties  and  com 
modities  of  this  City  (which  truely  deserveth  great  commenda 
tion)  beganne  to  pity  mee,  because  I  was  shortly  to  goe  from 
it.  And  the  first  inconvenience  he  urged  me  withall,  was  the 
heavinesse  in  the  head,  which  Chimnies  in  other  places  would 
cause  me.  He  had  heard  some  other  body  complaine  of  it, 
and  therefore  alleadged  the  same  against  me,  being  wont  by 
custome  to  perceive  it  in  such  as  came  to  him.  All  heat 
comming  from  fire  doth  weaken  and  dull  me  :  Yet  said 
Evenus,  that  fire  was  the  best  sauce  of  life.  I  rather  allow 
and  embrace  any  other  manner  or  way  to  escape  cold.  Wee 
feare  our  Wines  when  they  are  low  ;  whereas  in  Portugall. 
the  fume  of  it  is  counted  delicious,  and  is  the  drinke  of 
Princes.  To  conclude,  each  severall  Nation  hath  divers  cus- 
tomes,  fashions  and  usages  ;  which,  to  some  others,  are  not 
onely  unknowne  and  strange,  but  savage,  barbarous  and 
wondrous.  What  shall  we  doe  unto  that  people,  that  admit 
no  witnesse,  except  printed  ;  that  will  not  believe  men,  if  not 
printed  in  Bookes,  nor  credit  truth,  unlesse  it  be  of  compe 
tent  age  ?  We  dignifie  our  fopperies,  when  we  put  them  to 
the  presse.  It  is  another  manner  of  weight  for  him,  to  say, 
I  have  seene  it,  then  if  you  say,  I  have  heard  it  reported. 
But  I,  who  mis-believe  no  more  the  mouth,  than  the  hand  of 
men  ;  and  know  that  men  write  as  indiscreetly  as  they  speake 
unadvisedly  ;  and  esteeme  of  this  present  age,  as  of  another 
past  ;  alleadge  as  willingly  a  friend  of  mine  as  Aulus  Gellius 
or  Macrobius,  and  what  my  selfe  have  seene,  as  that  they 
have  written.  And  as  they  accompt  vertue  to  be  nothing 
greater  by  being  longer,  so  deeme  I  truth  to  be  nothing 
wiser  by  being  more  aged.  I  often  say  it  is  meere  folly  that 
makes  us  runne  after  strange  and  scholasticall  examples.  The 
fertility  of  them  is  now  equall  unto  that  of  Homer  and 
Platoes  times.  But  is  it  not,  that  we  rather  seeke  the  honour 
of  allegations,  than  the  truth  of  discourses  ?  As  if  it  were 
more  to  borrow  our  proofes  from  out  the  shop  of  Vascosan  or 
348 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

Plantin,  then  from  that  we  dayly  see  in  our  village.  Or  CHAPTER 
verily  that  wee  have  not  the  wit  to  blanch,  sift  out  or  make  XIII 
that  to  prevaile,  which  passeth  before  us,  and  forcibly  judge  Of  Experi- 
of  it,  to  draw  the  same  into  example.  For,  if  we  say,  that 
authority  failes  us,  to  adde  credit  unto  our  testimony,  we 
speake  from  the  purpose.  Forsomuch  as  in  my  conceit, 
could  we  but  finde  out  their  true  light,  Natures  greatest 
miracles  and  the  most  wonderfull  examples,  namely  upon  the 
subject  of  humane  actions,  may  be  drawne  and  formed  from 
most  ordinary,  most  common  and  most  knowne  things.  Now 
concerning  my  subject,  omitting  the  examples  I  know  by 
bookes  ;  And  that  which  Aristotle  speaketh  of  Andron  of 
Argos,  that  he  would  travell  all  over  the  scorching  sands  of 
Lybia,  without  drinking  :  A  Gentleman,  who  hath  worthily 
acquitted  himselfe  of  many  honourable  charges,  reported 
where  I  was,  that  in  the  parching  heate  of  Summer,  hee  had 
travelled  from  Madrill  to  Lisbone,  without  ever  drinking. 
His  age  respected,  he  is  in  very  good  and  healthy  plight,  and 
hath  nothing  extraordinary  in  the  course  or  custom e  of  his 
life,  saving  (as  himselfe  hath  told  me,)  that  he  can  very  well 
continue  two  or  three  moneths,  yea  a  whole  yeere,  with 
out  any  manner  of  beverage.  He  somtimes  finals  himselfe 
thirsty,  but  let^s  it  passe ;  and  holds,  that  it  is  an  appetit, 
which  will  easily  and  of  it  selfe  languish  away :  and  if  he 
drinke  at  any  time,  it  is  more  for  a  caprice  or  humor,  than 
for  any  need  or  pleasure.  Loe  here  one  of  another  key.  It 
is  not  long  since,  that  I  found  one  of  the  wisest  men  of 
France,  (among  those  of  so  meane  fortune)  studying  hard  in 
the  corner  of  a  great  Hall,  which  for  that  purpose  was  hung 
about  with  tapistry,  and  round  about  him  a  disordered  rable 
of  his  servants,  groomes  and  lackeis ;  pratling,  playing  and 
hoyting :  who  told  me  (as  Seneca  in  a  manner  saith  of  him 
selfe)  that  he  learn'd  and  profited  much  by  that  hurly-burly 
or  tintimare,  as  if  beaten  with  that  confused  noyse,  he  did  so 
much  the  better  recall  and  close  himselfe  into  himselfe  for  seri 
ous  contemplation ;  and  that  the  said  tempestuous  rumours 
did  strike  and  repercusse  his  thoughts  inward.  Whilst  he 
was  a  scholler  in  Padua,  his  study  was  ever  placed  so  neere 
the  jangling  of  bels,  the  ratling  of  coaches  and  rumbling 
tumults  of  the  market  place,  that  for  the  service  of  his  study, 

349' 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  he  was  faine,  not  onely  to  frame  and  enure  himselfe  to  con- 
XHI  .  temne,  but  to  make  good  use  of  that  turbulent  noise.  Socrates 
xpei  answered  Alcibiades,  who  wondered  how  he  could  endure  the 
continuall  tittle-tattle  and  uncessant  scoulding  of  his  Wife  : 
Even  as  those  who  are  accustomed  to  heare  the  ordinary 
creaking  of  the  squeaking  wheeles  of  wells.  My  selfe  am 
cleane  contrary,  for  I  have  a  tender  braine,  and  easie  to  take 
snuffe  in  the  nose,  or  to  be  transported  :  If  my  minde  be 
busie  alone,  the  least  stirring,  yea  the  buzzing  of  a  flie  doth 
trouble  and  distemper  the  same.  Seneca  in  his  youth,  having 
earnestly  undertaken  to  follow  the  example  of  Sextius,  to 
feed  on  nothing  that  were  taken  dead  :  could  with  pleasure 
(as  himselfe  averreth)  live  so  a  whole  yeere.  And  left  it, 
onely  because  he  would  not  be  suspected  to  borrow  this  rule 
from  some  new  religions,  that  instituted  the  same.  He  there- 
withall  followed  some  precepts  of  Attalus,  not  to  lie  upon 
any  kinde  of  carpets  or  bedding  that  would  yeeld  under  one  ; 
and  untill  he  grew  very  aged,  he  never  used  but  such  as  were 
very  hard  and  un-yeelding  to  the  body.  What  the  custome 
of  his  dayes  makes  him  accompt  rudenesse,  ours  makes  us 
esteeme  wantonnesse.  Behold  the  difference  betweene  my 
varlets  life  and  mine  :  The  Indians  have  nothing  further 
from  my  forme  and  strength.  Well  I  wot,  that  I  have  her- 
tofore  taken  boyes  from  begging,  and  that  went  roaguing  up 
and  down,  to  serve  me ;  hoping  to  doe  some  good  upon 
them,  who  have  within  a  little  while  after  left  me,  my  fare 
and  my  livery ;  onely  that  they  might  without  controule  or 
checke  follow  their  former  idle  loytring  life.  One  of  which 
I  found  not  long  since  gathering  of  muskles  in  a  common 
sincke,  for  his  dinner ;  whom  (doe  what  I  could)  I  was  never 
able,  neyther  with  entreaty  to  reclaime,  nor  by  threatning 
to  withdraw,  from  the  sweetnesse  he  found  in  want,  and 
delight  he  felt  in  roaguing  lazinesse.  Even  vagabondine 
roagues,  as  well  as  rich  men,  have  their  magnificences  and 
voluptuousnesse,  and  (as  some  say)  their  dignities,  prehemi- 
nences  and  politike  orders.  They  are  effects  of  custome  and 
use  :  and  what  is  bred  in  the  bone,  will  never  out  of  the 
flesh.  Both  which  have  power  to  enure  and  fashion  us,  not 
onely  to  what  forme  they  please  (therefore,  say  the  wise, 
ought  we  to  be  addressed  to  the  best,  and  it  will  immediately 
350 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

seeme  easie   unto   us)    but   also  to  change  and    variation  :  CHAPTER 

Which  is  the  noblest  and  most  profitable  of  their  appren-         XIII 

tisages.     The  best  of  my  corporall  complexions,  is,  that  I  am      lf 

flexible  and  little  opiniative.     I  have  certaine  inclinations, 

more  proper  and  ordinary,  and  more  pleasing  than  others. 

But  with  small  adoe  and  without  compulsion,  I  can  easily 

leave  them  and  embrace  the  contrary.     A  yong  man  should 

trouble  his  rules,  to  stirre-up  his  vigor ;  and  take  heed  he 

suffer  not  the  same  to  grow  faint,  sluggish  or  teasty  :  For, 

there  is  no  course  of  life  so  weake  and  sottish,  as  that  which 

is  mannaged  by  Order,  Methode  and  Discipline. 

Ad  primum  lapidem  vectari  cum  placet,  hora  IUVEN.  Sat.  vi. 

Sumitur  ex  libro,  si  prurit  f rictus  ocelli  477- 

Anguibus,  inspecta  genesi  collyria  quterit. 

List  he  to  ride  in  coach  but  to  Mile-end,, 
By  th'  Almanacke  he  doth  the  houre  attend  : 
If  his  eye-corner  itch,  the  remedy,, 
He  fets  from  calculation  of  nativity. 

If  he  beleeve  me,  he  shall  often  give  himselfe  unto  all 
manner  of  excesse :  otherwise  the  least  disorder  wil  utterly 
overthrow  him  ;  and  so  make  him  unfit  and  unwelcome  in  all 
conversations.  The  most  contrary  quality  in  an  honest  man, 
is  nice-delicatenesse,  and  to  bee  tied  to  one  certaine  particu 
lar  fashion.  It  is  particular,  if  it  be  not  supple  and  pliable. 
It  is  a  kinde  of  reproch,  through  impuissance  not  to  doe  or 
not  to  dare,  what  one  seeth  his  other  companions  doe  or  dare. 
Let  such  men  keepe  their  kitchin.  It  is  undecent  in  all  other 
men,  but  vitious  and  intolerable  in  one  professing  Armes : 
who  (as  Philopoemen  said)  should  fashion  himselfe  to  all 
manner  of  inequality  and  diversity  of  life.  Although  I  have 
(as  much  as  might  bee)  beene  inured  to  liberty,  and  fashioned 
to  indifFerency ;  yet  in  growing  aged,  I  have  through  careles- 
nesse  relied  more  upon  certaine  forms  (my  age  is  now  ex 
empted  from  institution,  and  hath  not  any  thing  else  to  looke 
unto,  but  to  maintaine  it  selfe)  which  custome  hath  already, 
without  thinking  on  it,  in  certaine  things  so  wel  imprinted 
her  character  in  me,  that  I  deeme  it  a  kind  of  excesse  to  leave 
them.  And  without  long  practise,  I  can  neither  sleepe  by 
day  ;  nor  eate  betweene  meales  ;  nor  break e  my  fast ;  nor  goe 
to  bed  without  some  entermission  ;  (as  of  three  houres  after 

351 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  supper)  nor  get  children,  but  before  I  fall  asleepe,  and  that 

XIII         never  standing  ;  nor  beare  mine  owne  sweate  ;  nor  quench  my 

Of  Expen-    thirst,  either  with  cleere  water  or  wine  alone  ;  nor  continue 

long  bare-headed;  nor  have  mine   haire   cut   after  dinner. 

And  I  could  as  hardly  spare  my  gloves  as  my  shirt :  or  for- 

beare  washing  of  my  hands,  both  in  the  morning  and  rising 

from  the  table ;  or  lye  in  a  bed  without  a  testerne  and  cur- 

taines  about  it,  as  of  most  necessary  things:  I  could  dine 

without  a  table-cloth,  but  hardly  without  a  cleane  napkin, 

as  Germans  commonly  doe.     I  foule  and  sully  them  more 

than  either  they  or  the  Italians :  and  I  seldome  use  eyther 

spoone  or  forke.     I  am  sory  we  follow  not  a  custome,  which 

according  to  the  example  of  Kings  I  have  seene  begunne  by 

some  ;  that  upon  every  course  or  change  of  dish,  as  we  have 

shift  of  cleane  trenchers,  so  we  might  have  change  of  cleane 

napkins.      We  read   that   that  laborious   souldier  Marius, 

growing  olde,  grew  more  nicely  delicate  in  his  drinking,  and 

would  taste  no  drincke,  except  in  a  peculiar  cuppe  of  his. 

As  for  me,  I  observe  a  kinde  of  like  methode  in  glasses,  and 

of  one  certaine  forme,  and  drinke  not  willingly  in  a  common- 

glasse,  no  more  than  of  one  ordinary  hand :    I  mislike  all 

manner  of  metall  in  regard  of  a  bright  transparent  matter  : 

let  mine  eyes  also  have  taste  of  what  I  drinke  according  to 

their  capacity.     I  am  beholding  to  custome  for  many  such 

nicenesses  and  singularities.     Nature  hath  also  on  the  other 

side  bestowed  this  upon  me,  that  I  can  not  wel  brooke  two 

full  meales  in  one  day,  without  surcharging  my  stomacker  ; 

nor  the  meere  abstinence  of  one,  without  filling  my  selfe  with 

winde,  drying  my  mouth  and  dulling  my  appetite  :  And  I  doe 

finde  great  offence  by  a  long  sereine  or  night-calme.     For 

some  yeeres  since,  in  the  out-roades  or  night-services  that 

happen  in  times  of  warres,  which  many  times  continue  all 

night,  five  or  sixe  houres  after  my  stomacke  beginnes  to 

qualme,  my  head  feeleth  a  violent  aking,  so  that  I  can  hardly 

hold-out  till  morning  without  vomiting.     When  others  goe 

k6  breakefast,  I  goe  to  sleepe :  and  within  a  while  after  I 

shall  be  as  fresh  and  jolly  as  before.     I  ever  thought  that 

the  serein  never  fell,  but  in  the  shutting  in  of  night,  but 

having  in  these   latter  yeeres   long   time   frequented    very 

familiarly  the  conversation  of  a  Gentleman,  possessed  with 

352 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

this  opinion,  that  it  is  more  sharpe  and  dangerous  about  the  CHAPTER 
declination  of  the  Sunne,  an  houre  or  two  before  it  set,  which 
he  carefully  escheweth,  and  dispiseth  that  which  falls  at 
night :  hee  hath  gone  about  to  perswade  and  imprint  into 
me,  not  onely  his  discourse,  but  also  his  conceit.  What  if 
the  very  doubt  and  inquisition,  woundeth  our  imagination 
and  chancheth  us  ?  Such  as  altogether  yeelde  to  these  bend- 
ings,  draw  the  whole  ruine  upon  themselves.  And  I  bewaile 
divers  Gentlemen,  who  being  young  and  in  perfect  health, 
have  by  the  ignorant  foolishnes  of  their  Physitians  brought 
themselves  into  consumptions  and  other  lingering  diseases ; 
and  as  it  were  in  Physicks  fetters.  Were  it  not  much  better 
to  be  troubled  with  a  rheume,  than  for  ever  through  discus- 
tome,  in  an  action  of  so  great  use  and  consequence,  lose  the 
commerce  and  conversation  of  common  life  ?  Oh  yrkesome 
learning  !  Oh  Science  full  of  molestation  ;  that  wasteth  us 
the  sweetest  houres  of  the  day.  Let  us  extend  our  possession 
unto  the  utmost  meanes.  A  man  shall  at  last,  in  opinion- 
ating  himselfe,  harden  and  enure  himselfe  for  it,  and  so  cor 
rect  his  complexion  :  as  did  Caesars  the  falling  sicknesse,  with 
contemning  and  corrupting  the  same.  A  man  should  apply 
himselfe  to  the  best  rules,  but  not  subject  himselfe  unto 
them  :  except  to  such  (if  any  there  be)  that  duty  and  thral- 
dome  unto  them,  be  profitable.  Both  Kings  and  Philosophers 
obey  nature,  and  goe  to  the  stoole,  and  so  doe  Ladies : 
Publike  lives  are  due  unto  ceremony :  mine  which  is  obscure 
and  private,  enjoyeth  all  naturall  dispensations.  To  be  a 
Souldier  and  a  Gascoyne,  are  qualities  somwhat  subject  to 
indiscretion.  And  I  am  both.  Therefore  will  I  say  thus 
much  of  this  action  ;  that  it  is  requisite  we  should  remit  the 
same  unto  certaine  prescribed  night-houres  ;  and  by  custome 
(as  I  have  done)  force  and  subject  our  selves  unto  it:  But 
not  (as  I  have  done)  growing  in  yeeres,  strictly  tie  himselfe 
to  the  care  of  a  particular  convenient  place,  and  of  a  com 
modious  Aiax  or  easie  close-stoole  for  that  purpose  :  and 
make  it  troublesome  with  long  sitting  and  nice  observation. 
Neverthelesse  in  homeliest  matters  and  fowlest  offices,  is  it 
not  in  some  sort  excusable,  to  require  more  care  and  cleanli- 
nesse  ?  Natura  homo  mundum  et  elegans  animal  est.  '  By  SEN.  Epist. 
4  nature  man  is  a  cleanely  and  neate  creature."  xcii- 

2  Y  353 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Of  all  naturall  actions,  there  is  none  wherein  I  am  more 
XIII  loath  to  be  troubled  or  interrupted,  when  I  am  at  it.  I 
:  Experi-  nave  seene  divers  great  men  and  souldiers,  much  troubled 
and  vexed  with  their  bellies  untune  and  disorder,  when  at 
untimely  houres  it  calleth  upon  them  :  whilst  mine  and  my 
selfe  never  misse  to  call  one  upon  another  at  our  appoint 
ment  :  which  is,  as  soone  as  I  get  out  of  my  bed,  except  some 
urgent  business  or  violent  sicknesse  trouble  me.  Therefore 
(as  I  saide)  I  judge  no  place  where  sicke  men  may  better 
seate  themselves  in  security,  then  quietly  and  wisht  to  hold 
themselves  in  that  course  of  life,  wherein  they  have  been 
brought  up  and  habituated.  Any  change  or  variation  soever, 
astonieth  and  distempereth.  Will  any  beleeve  that  Chest- 
nuttes  can  hurt  a  Perigordin  or  a  Luquois,  or  that  milke  or 
whit-meates  are  hurtfull  unto  a  mountaine  dwelling  people  ? 
whom  if  one  seeke  to  divert  from  their  naturall  diet,  he 
shall  not  onely  prescribe  them  a  new,  but  a  contrary  forme 
of  life  :  A  change  which  healthy  man  can  hardly  endure. 
Appoint  a  Bretton  of  threescore  yeeres  of  age  to  drinke 
water  ;  put  a  Sea-man  or  Mariner  into  a  Stove ;  forbid  a 
lackey  of  Baske  to  walke  :  you  bring  them  out  of  their  ele 
ment,  you  deprive  them  of  all  motion,  and  in  the  end,  of 
aire,  of  light  and  life. 

COR.  GAL.  El.  — an  vivere  tanti  est? 

K  J55'  Doe  we  reckon  it  so  deare, 

Onely  living  to  be  here  ? 

Cogimur  a  suetia  animum  mspendere  rebus ; 
Atque  ut  vivamus,  vivere  desinimus  : 
From  things  erst  us'd  we  must  suspend  our  miude, 
We  leave  to  live  that  we  may  live  by  kinde. 

Hos  superesse  reor  quibus  et  spirabilis  aer, 
Et  lux  quid  regimur,  redditur  ipsa  gravis. 

Doe  I  thinke  they  live  longer,  whom  doth  grieve 
Both  aire  they  breathe,,  and  light  whereby  they  live  : 

If  they  doe  no  other  good,  at  least  they  doe  this,  that  be 
times  they  prepare  their  patients  unto  death,  by  little  under 
mining  and  cutting-off'  the  use  of  life.  Both  in  health  and 
in  sicknesse,  I  have  willingly  seconded  and  given  my  selfe 
over  to  those  appetites  that  pressed  me.  I  allow  great 
authority  to  my  desires  and  propensions.  I  love  not  to  cure 

354 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

one  evill  by  another  mischiefe.     I  hate  those  remedies,  that  CHAPTER 
importune  more  then  sicknesse.     To  be  subject  to  the  cholike,         XIII 
and  to  be  tied  to  abstaine  from  the  pleasure  I  have  in  eating  xpen 

of  oysters,  are  two  mischiefes  for  one.  The  disease  pincheth 
us  on  the  one  side,  the  rule  on  the  other.  Since  we  are  ever 
in  danger  to  misdoe,  let  us  rather  hazard  our  selves  to  follow 
pleasure.  Most  men  doe  contrary  and  thinke  nothing  pro 
fitable,  that  is  not  painefull :  Facility  is  by  them  suspected. 
Mine  appetite  hath  in  divers  things  very  happily  accom 
modated  and  ranged  it  selfe  to  the  health  of  my  stomake. 
Being  yong,  acrimony  and  tartnesse  in  sawces  did  greatly  de 
light  me,  but  my  stomacke  being  since  glutted  therewith,  my 
taste  hath  likewise  seconded  the  same.  Wine  hurts  the  sicke  ; 
it  is  the  first  thing  that  with  an  invincible  distaste,  brings 
my  mouth  out  of  taste.  Whatsoever  I  receive  unwillingly 
or  distastefully  hurts  me,  whereas  nothing  doth  it  whereon  I 
feed  with  hunger  and  rellish.  I  never  received  harme  by  any 
action  that  was  very  pleasing  unto  me.  And  yet  I  have 
made  all  medicinall  conclusions,  largely  to  yeeld  to  my 
pleasures.  And  when  I  was  yong, 

Quern  circumcursans  hue  atque  hue  scepe  Cupido  CATUL.  EL  iv. 

Fulgebat  crocina  splendidus  in  tunica.  I3I< 

About  whom  Cupid  running  here  and  there, 
Shinde  in  the  saffron  coate  which  he  did  weare, 

I  have  as  licentiously  and  inconsiderately  as  any  other, 
furthred  al  such  desires  as  possessed  me  ; 

Et  militavi  non  sine  gloria.  HOR.  Car.  iii. 

A  o      IT         f i  Od.  xxvi.  2. 

A  Souldier  of  loves  hoast, 

I  was  not  without  boast. 

More  notwithstanding  in  continuation  and  holding  out, 
then  by  snatches  or  by  stealth. 

Sex  me  vix  memini  sustinuisse  vices. 

I  scarse  remember  past 
Six  courses  I  could  last. 

It  is  surely  a  wonder  accompanied  with  unhappinesse,  to 
confesse  how  young  and  weake  I  was  brought  under  it^s  sub 
jection.  Nay,  shall  I  not  blush  to  tell  it  ?  It  was  long 
before  the  age  of  choise  or  yeeres  of  discretion  :  I  was  so 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  young,  as  I  remember  nothing  before.     And  fitly  may  my 
XIII         fortune  bee  compared  to  that  of  Quartilla,  who  remembred 
OfExperi-    not  her  maydenhead. 
ence 

Inde  tragus  celeresque  pili,  miranddque  matri 
Barba  mece. 

Thence  goatishnesse,  haires  over-soone  a  beard 
To  make  my  mother  wonder,  and  afear'd. 

Physitians  commonly  enfold  and  joyne  their  rules  unto 
profit,  according  to  the  violence  of  sharpe  desires  or  earnest 
longings,  that  incidently  follow  the  sicke.  No  longing  desire 
can  be  imagined  so  strange  and  vicious,  but  nature  will  apply 
herselfe  unto  it.  And  then  how  easie  is  it  to  content  ones 
fantasie  ?  In  mine  opinion,  this  part  importeth  all  in  all  ; 
at  least  more  and  beyond  all  other.  The  most  grievous  and 
ordinary  evils  are  those,  which  fancy  chargeth  us  withall. 
That  Spanish  saying  doth  every  way  please  me  :  Deffienda 
me  Dios  de  my.  '  God  defend  me  from  my  selfe/  Being 
sicke,  I  am  sory  I  have  not  some  desire  may  give  me  the 
contentment  to  satiate  and  cloy  the  same  :  Scarsly  would  a 
medicine  divert  me  from  it.  So  doe  I  when  I  am  in  health  : 
I  hardly  see  any  thing  left  to  be  hoped  or  wished-for.  It  is 
pitty  a  man  should  bee  so  weakned  and  enlanguished,  that  he 
hath  nothing  left  him  but  wishing.  The  art  of  Physicke  is 
not  so  resolute,  that  whatsoever  we  doe,  we  shall  be  void  of  all 
authority  to  doe  it.  Shee  changeth  and  she  varieth  accord 
ing  to  climats  ;  according  to  the  Moones  ;  according  to  Fer- 
nelius ;  and  according  to  Scala.  If  your  Physitian  thinke  it  not 
good  that  you  sleepe,  that  you  drinke  wine,  or  eate  such  and 
such  meates  :  Care  not  you  for  that ;  I  will  finde  you  another 
that  shall  not  be  of  his  opinion.  The  diversity  of  physicall 
arguments  and  medicinall  opinions,  embraceth  all  manner  of 
formes.  I  saw  a  miserable  sicke  man,  for  the  infinite  desire  he 
had  to  recover,  ready  to  burst,  yea  and  to  die  with  thirst ; 
whom  not  long  since  another  Physitian  mocked,  utterly  con 
demning  the  others  counsell,  as  hurtfull  for  him.  Had  not 
hee  bestowed  his  labour  well  ?  A  man  of  that  coate  is  lately 
dead  of  the  stone,  who  during  the  time  of  his  sicknesse  used 
extreame  abstinence  to  withstand  his  evill ;  his  fellowes  affirme 
that  contrary,  his  long  fasting  had  withered  and  dried  him 
356 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

up,  and  so  concocted  the  gravell  in  his  kidnies.  I  have  found,  CHAPTER 
that  in  my  hurts  and  other  sicknesses,  earnest  talking  dis-  XIII 
tempers  and  hurts  me  as  much  as  any  disorder  I  commit.  Of  Experi- 
My  voice  costs  me  deare,  and  wearieth  me  ;  for  I  have  it 
lowd,  shrill  and  forced  :  So  that,  when  I  have  had  occasion 
to  entertaine  the  eares  of  great  men,  about  weighty  affaires, 
I  have  often  troubled  them  with  care  how  to  moderate  my 
voice.  This  story  deserveth  to  be  remembred  and  to  divert 
me.  A  certaine  man,  in  one  of  the  Greeke  schooles  spake 
very  lowde,  as  I  doe  ;  the  maister  of  the  ceremonies  sent  him 
word,  he  should  speake  lower:  Let  him  (quoth  he)  send  me 
the  tune  or  key  in  which  he  would  have  me  speake.  The 
other  replied,  that  he  should  take  his  tune  from  his  eares  to 
whom  he  spake.  It  was  well  said,  so  he  understood  himselfe: 
Speake  according  as  you  have  to  doe  with  your  auditory. 
For  if  one  say,  let  it  suffice  that  he  heareth  you  ;  or  governe 
your  selfe  by  him  :  I  do  not  thinke  he  had  reason  to  say  so. 
The  tune  or  motion  of  the  voyce,  hath  some  expression  or 
signification  of  my  meaning  :  It  is  in  me  to  direct  the  same, 
that  so  I  may  the  better  represent  my  selfe.  There  is  a 
voyce  to  instruct  one  to  flatter,  and  another  to  chide.  I 
will  not  onely  have  my  voyce  come  to  him,  but  perad venture 
to  wound  and  pierce  him.  When  I  brawle  and  rate  my 
lackey,  with  a  sharpe  and  piercing  tune  ;  were  it  fit  he  should 
come  to  me  and  say,  Master  speake  softly,  I  understand 
and  heare  you  very  well  ?  Est  qucedam  vox  ad  auditum 
accormnodata  non  magnitudine  sed  proprietate.  c  There  is  a 
'  kinde  of  voyce  well  applied  to  the  hearing,  not  by  the 
'  greatnesse  of  it,  but  by  the  proprietie/  The  word  is 
halfe  Ins  that  speaketh,  and  halfe  his  that  harkeneth  unto 
it.  The  hearer  ought  to  prepare  himselfe  to  the  motion  or 
bound  it  taketh.  As  betweene  those  that  play  at  tennis,  he 
who  keepes  the  hazard,  doth  prepare,  stand,  stirre  and  march, 
according  as  he  perceives  him  who  stands  at  the  house,  to 
looke,  stand,  remoove  and  strike  the  ball,  and  according  to 
the  stroake.  Experience  hath  also  taught  me  this,  that 
we  lose  our  selves  with  impatience.  Evils  have  their  life, 
their  limits ;  their  diseases  and  their  health.  The  con 
stitution  of  diseases  is  framed  by  the  patterne  of  the  con 
stitution  of  living  creatures.  Thev  have  their  fortune 

357 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  limited  even  at  their  birth,  and  their  dayes  allotted  them. 
jje  that  shall  imperiously  goe  about,  or  by  compulsion 
(contrary  to  their  courses)  to  abridge  them,  doth  lengthen 
and  multiply  them;  and  in  stead  of  appeasing,  doth  harsell 
and  wring  them.  I  am  of  Grantors  opinion,  that  a  man  must 
neither  obstinately  nor  frantikely  oppose  himselfe  against 
evils  ;  nor  through  demissenesse  of  courage  faintingly  yeeld 
unto  them,  but  according  to  their  condition  and  ours,  natur 
ally  incline  to  them.  A  man  must  give  sickenesses  their 
passage  :  And  I  finde  that  they  stay  least  with  me,  because 
I  allow  them  their  swinge,  and  let  them  doe  what  they 
list.  And  contrary  to  common  received  rules,  I  have  with 
out  ayde  or  art  ridde  my  selfe  of  some,  that  are  deemed  the 
most  obstinately  lingring,  and  unremoovably-obstinate.  Let 
nature  worke  :  Let  hir  have  hir  will :  She  knoweth  what  she 
hath  to  doe,  and  understands  hir  selfe  better  then  we  do. 
But  such  a  one  died  of  it,  wil  you  say  ;  so  shal  you  doubt- 
lesse  ;  if  not  of  that,  yet  of  some  other  disease.  And  how 
many  have  we  seene  die  when  they  have  had  a  whole  Colledge 
of  Physitians  round  about  their  bed,  and  looking  in  their 
excrements  ?  Example  is  a  bright  looking-glasse,  universall 
and  for  all  shapes  to  looke  into.  If  it  be  a  lushious  or  taste- 
pleasing  potion,  take  it  hardly ;  it  is  ever  so  much  present 
ease.  So  it  be  delicious  and  sweetly  tasting,  I  will  never 
stand  much  upon  the  name  or  colour  of  it.  Pleasure  is  one 
of  the  chiefest  kinds  of  profit.  I  have  suffered  rheumes, 
gowty  defluxions,  relaxions,  pantings  of  the  heart,  megreimes 
and  other  such-like  accidents,  to  grow  old  in  me,  and  die 
their  naturall  death  ;  all  which  have  left  me,  when  I  halfe 
enured  and  framed  my  selfe  to  foster  them.  They  are  better 
conjured  by  curtesie,  then  by  bragging  or  threats.  We  must 
gently  obey  and  endure  the  lawes  of  our  condition  :  We  are 
subject  to  grow  aged,  to  become  weake  and  to  fall  sicke,  in 
spight  of  all  physicke.  It  is  the  first  lesson  the  Mexicans 
give  their  children  ;  When  they  come  out  of  their  mothers 
wombes,  they  thus  salute  them  :  '  My  childe,  thou  art  come 
'  into  the  world  to  suffer  ;  Therefore  suffer  and  hold  thy 
'  peace.1  It  is  injustice  for  one  to  grieve,  that  any  thing  hath 
befallen  to  any  one  ;  which  may  happen  to  all  men.  Indig- 
nare  si  quid  in  te  mique  proprw  constitutum  est.  '  Then  take 
358 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

'  it  ill,  if  any  thing  be  decreed  unjustly  against  thee  alone."  CHAPTER 
Looke  on  an  aged  man,  who  sueth  unto  God  to  maintaine         XIII 
him  in  perfect,  full  and  vigorous  health,  that  is  to  say,  he 
will  be  pleased  to  make  him  yong  againe  : 

Stulte  quid  hcEcfrustra  votis  puerilibus  optas  .**  OVID.  Trist.  v. 

Foole,  why  dost  thou  in  vaine  desire, 
With  childish  prayers  thus  t'  aspire  ? 

Is  it  not  folly  ?  his  condition  will  not  beare  it.  The  gowt : 
the  stone,  the  gravell  and  indigestion  are  symptomes  or 
effects  of  long  continued  yeares  ;  as  heats,  raines  and  winds, 
are  incident  to  long  voyages.  Plato  cannot  beleeve,  that 
^Esculapius  troubled  himselfe  with  good  rules  and  diet  to 
provide  for  the  preservation  of  life,  in  a  weake,  wasted  and 
corrupted  body  :  being  unprofitable  for  his  country,  incon 
venient  for  his  vocation,  and  unfit  to  get  sound  and  sturdy 
Children  :  and  deeme  not  that  care  inconvenient  unto  divine 
justice  and  heavenly  Wisedome,  which  is  to  direct  all  things 
unto  profit.  My  good  sir,  the  matter  is  at  an  end  :  You 
cannot  be  recovered ;  for  the  most,  you  can  be  but  tampered 
withall,  and  somewhat  under  propt,  and  for  some  houres 
have  your  misery  prolonged. 

Non  secus  instantem  cupiens  fulcire  ruinam  CORN.  GAL. 

Diversis  contrci  nititur  obicibus,  EL  clxxiii. 

Donee  certa  dies  omni  compage  solutd 

Ipsum  cum  rebus  subruat  auxilium. 
So  he  that  would  an  instant  ruine  stay 

With  divers  props  strives  it  underlay,, 
Till  all  the  frame  dissolv'd  a  certaine  day, 

The  props  with  th'  edifice  doth  oversway. 

A  man  must  learne  to  endure  that  patiently,  which  he 
cannot  avoyde  conveniently.  Our  life  is  composed,  as  is  the 
harmony  of  the  World,  of  contrary  things  ;  so  of  divers 
tunes,  some  pleasant,  some  harsh,  some  sharpe,  some  flat, 
some  low  and  some  high  :  What  would  that  Musition  say, 
that  should  love  but  some  one  of  them  ?  He  ought  to  know 
how  to  use  them  severally  and  how  to  entermingle  them. 
So  should  we  both  of  goods  and  evils,  which  are  consub- 
stantiall  to  our  life.  Our  being  cannot  subsist  without  this 
commixture,  whereto  one  side  is  no  lesse  necessary  than  the 
other.  To  goe  about  to  kicke  against  natural  necessity, 

359 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  were  to  represent  the  folly  of  Ctesiphon,  who  undertooke  to 
strike  or  wince  with  his  mule.  I  consult  but  little  about 
the  alterations  which  I  feele  :  For  these  kinde  of  men  are 
advantagious,  when  they  hold  you  at  their  mercy.  They 
glut  your  eares  with  their  Prognostications,  and  surprising 
me  heretofore,  when  by  my  sicknesse  I  was  brought  very 
low  and  weake,  they  have  injuriously  handled  me  with  their 
Doctrines,  positions,  prescriptions,  magistrall  fopperies  and 
prosopopeyall  gravity  ;  sometimes  threatning  me  with  great 
paine  and  smart,  and  other  times  menacing  me  with  neere  and 
unavoydable  death  :  All  which  did  indeede  move,  stirre  and 
touch  me  neere,  but  could  not  dismay,  or  remoove  me  from 
my  place  or  resolution  :  If  my  judgement  be  thereby  neither 
changed  nor  troubled,  it  was  at  least  hindred  :  It  is  ever  in 
agitation  and  combating.  Now  I  entreate  my  imagination 
as  gently  as  I  can,  and  were  it  in  my  power  I  would  cleane 
discharge  it  of  all  paine  and  contestation.  A  man  must 
further,  help,  flatter  and  (if  he  can)  cozen  and  deceive  it. 
My  spirit  is  fit  for  that  office.  There  is  no  want  of  appar- 
ances  every  where.  Did  he  perswade,  as  he  preacheth,  hee 
should  successefully  ayde  me.  Shall  I  give  you  an  example  ? 
He  tels  me,  it  is  for  my  good,  that  I  am  troubled  with  the 
gravell :  That  the  compositions  of  my  age,  must  naturally 
suffer  some  leake  or  flaw  :  It  is  time  they  begin  to  relent 
and  gainesay  themselves  :  It  is  a  common  necessity  :  And  it 
had  beene  no  new  wonder  for  me.  That  way  I  pay  the 
reward  due  unto  age,  and  I  could  have  no  better  reckoning 
of  it.  That  such  company  ought  to  comfort  me,  being 
fallen  into  the  most  ordinary  accident  incident  to  men  of  my 
dayes.  I  every  where  see  some  afflicted  with  the  same  kinde 
of  evill ;  whose  society  is  honourable  unto  mee,  forsomuch 
as  it  commonly  possesseth  the  better  sort  of  men  :  and  whose 
essence  hath  a  certaine  nobility  and  dignity  connexed  unto 
it :  That  of  men  tormented  therewith,  few  are  better  cheape 
quit  of  it :  and  yet,  it  costs  them  the  paine  of  a  troublesome 
dyet,  tedious  regiment,  and  daily  loathsome  taking  of  medi- 
cinall  drugges  and  physicall  potions :  Whereas  I  meerely 
owe  it  to  my  good  fortune.  For,  some  ordinary  broths  made 
of  Eringos  or  Sea-Holme,  and  Burstwort,  which  twice  or 
thrice  I  have  swallowed  downe,  at  the  request  of  some  Ladies, 
360 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

who  more  kindely  then  my  disease  is  unkind,  offred  me  the  CHAPTER 
moity  of  theirs,  have  equally  seemed  unto  me  as  easie  to  XIII 
take,  as  unprofitable  in  operation.  They  must  pay  a  thou-  ^  Experi- 
sand  vowes  unto  ^Esculapius,  and  as  many  crownes  to  their 
Physitian,  for  an  easie  profluvion  or  aboundant  running  of 
gravell,  which  I  often  receive  by  the  benefit  of  Nature.  Let 
mee  be  in  any  company,  the  decency  of  my  countenance  is 
thereby  nothing  troubled  :  and  I  can  hold  my  water  full 
tenne  houres,  and  if  neede  be,  as  long  as  any  man  that  is  in 
perfect  health  :  The  feare  of  this  evill  (saith  he)  did  hereto 
fore  affright  thee,  when  yet  it  was  unknowne  to  thee.  The 
cries  and  despaire  of  those,  who  through  their  impatience 
exasperate  the  same ;  bred  a  horror  of  it  in  thee.  It 
is  an  evill  that  comes  and  fals  into  those  limmes,  by,  and 
with  which  thou  hast  most  offended  :  Thou  art  a  man  of 
conscience : 

Qufs  venit  indigne  pcena,  dolenda  venit.  OVID.  Epist. 

The  paine  that  comes  without  desart,  v.  8. 

Comes  to  us  with  more  griefe  and  smart. 

Consider  but  how  milde  the  punishment  is,  in  respect  of  others, 
and  how  favourable.  Consider  his  slowenesse  in  comming : 
hee  onely  incommodeth  that  state  and  encombreth  that 
season  of  thy  life,  which  (all  things  considered)  is  now  be 
come  barren  and  lost,  having  as  it  were  by  way  of  composi 
tion  given  place  unto  the  sensuall  licenciousnesse  and  wanton 
pleasures  of  thy  youth.  The  feare  and  pitty,  men  have  of 
this  evill,  may  serve  thee  as  a  cause  of  glory.  A  quality, 
whereof,  if  thy  judgement  be  purified  and  thy  discourse 
perfectly  sound,  thy  friends  doe  notwithstanding  discover 
some  sparkes  in  thy  complexion.  It  is  some  pleasure  for  a 
man  to  heare  others  say  of  him  :  '  Loe  there  a  patterne  of 
4  true  fortitude  :  loe  there  a  mirrour  of  matchlesse  patience/ 
Thou  art  scene  to  sweate  with  labour,  to  grow  pale  and  wanne, 
to  wax  red,  to  quake  and  tremble,  to  cast  and  vomit  blood, 
to  endure  strange  contractions,  to  brooke  convulsions,  to 
trill  downe  brackish  and  great  teares,  to  make  thicke,  muddy 
blacke,  bloody  and  fearefull  urine,  or  to  have  it  stopt  by 
some  sharpe  or  rugged  stone,  which  pricketh  and  cruelly 
wringeth  the  necke  of  the  yarde :  entertaining  in  the  meane 
while  the  bystanders  with  an  ordinary  and  undanted  coun- 
2  Z  361 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  tenance,  by  pawses  jesting  and  by  entermissions  dallying 
Of  F111  '  w^  thy  servants:  keeping  a  part  in  a  continued  discourse; 
61  with  words  now  and  then  excusing  thy  griefe,  and  abating 
thy  painefull  sufferance.  Dost  thou  remember  those  men 
of  former  ages,  who  to  keep  their  vertue  in  breath  and 
exercise,  did  with  such  greedinesse  seeke  after  evils  ?  Sup 
pose  Nature  driveth  and  brings  thee  unto  that  glorious 
Schoole,  into  which  thou  hadst  never  come  of  thine  owne 
accord  and  free  will.  If  thou  tell  me,  it  is  a  dangerous  and 
mortall  evill :  what  others  are  not  so  ?  For,  it  is  a  kinde  of 
physicall  cousenage,  to  except  any,  and  so  they  goe  directly 
unto  death  :  what  matter  is  it,  whether  they  goe  by  accident 
unto  it ;  and  easily  slide  on  either  hand,  toward  the  way  that 
leadeth  us  thereunto  ?  But  thou  diest  not  because  thou  art 
sicke  ;  thou  diest  because  thou  art  living.  Death  is  able  to 
kill  thee  without  the  helpe  of  any  sicknesse.  Sicknesses  have 
to  some  prolonged  their  death ;  who  have  lived  the  longer, 
in  asmuch  as  they  imagined  they  were  still  dying.  Seeing  it 
is  of  wounds,  as  of  diseases,  that  some  are  medicinall  and 
wholesome.  The  chollike  is  often  no  lesse  long-lived  than 
you.  Many  are  scene,  in  whom  it  hath  continued  even  from 
their  infancy  unto  their  extreamest  age,  who  had  they  not 
forsaken  her  company ;  she  was  like  to  have  assisted  them 
further.  You  oftner  kill  her,  than  she  doth  you.  And  if 
she  did  present  thee  with  the  image  of  neer-imminent  death, 
were  it  not  a  kinde  office  for  a  man  of  that  age,  to  reduce  it 
unto  the  cogitations  of  his  end  ?  And  which  is  worse,  thou 
hast  no  longer  cause  to  bee  cured  :  Thus  and  howsoever, 
common  necessity  calls  for  thee  against  the  first  day.  Con 
sider  but  how  artificially  and  how  mildely  she  brings  thee  in 
distaste  with  life,  and  out  of  liking  with  the  world  ;  not 
forcing  thee  with  a  tyrannicall  subjection,  as  infinit  other 
diseases  doe,  wherewith  thou  seest  old  men  possessed,  which 
continually  hold  them  fettered  and  ensnared,  and  without 
release  of  weakenesse  nor  intermission  of  paines  but  by  adver 
tisements  and  instructions,  reprised  by  intervalles  :  entermix- 
ing^certaine  pawses  of  rest,  as  if  it  were,  to  give  thee  meane, 
at  thy  ease,  to  meditate  and  repeate  her  lesson.  To  give 
thee  leasure  and  ability  to  judge  soundly,  and  like  a  man  of 
a  courage  to  take  a  resolution,  she  presents  thee  with  the 
362 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

state  of  thy  condition  perfect,  both  in  good  and  evill,  and  in  CHAPTER 
one  same  day,  sometimes  a  most  pleasing,  sometimes  a  most         XIII 
intolerable  life.     If  thou  embrace  not  death,  at  least  thou     OfExpen- 
shakest  her  by  the  hand  once  a  moneth.     Whereby  thou 
hast  more  cause  to  hope,  that  she  will  one  day  surprise  thee 
without  threatning.     And  that  being  so  often  brought  into 
the  haven ;  supposing  to  be  still  in  thy  accustomed  state,  one 
morning  at  unawares,  both  thy  selfe  and  thy  confidence  shall 
be  transported  over.     A  man  hath  no  reason  to  complain e 
against  those  diseases,  which  so  equally  divide  time  with  health. 
I  am  beholding  to  Fortune,  that  she  so  often  assailes  mee  with 
one  same  kinde  of  weapon :  she  by  long  use  doth  fashion  and 
enure  mee  unto  it,  harden  and  habituate  me  thereunto :  I 
now  know  within  a  little  which  way  and  how  I  shall  be  quit. 
For  want  of  naturall  memory  I  frame  some  of  paper.     And 
when  some  new  symptome  or  accident  commeth  to  my  evill, 
I  set  it  downe  in  writing :  whence  it  proceedeth,  that  having 
now  (in   a  manner)  passed  over  and  through  all  sorts  of 
examples,  if  any  astonishment  threaten   me ;    running  and 
turning  over  these  my  loose  memorialles  (as  Sibyllaes  leaves) 
I  misse  no  more  to  finde  to  comfort  me  with  some  favourable 
prognostication  in  my  former  past  experience.    Custome  doth 
also  serve  mee,  to  hope  the  better  hereafter.     For,  the  con 
duct  of  this  distribution,  having  so  long  beene  constituted, 
it  is  to  be  supposed  that  Nature  will  not  change  this  course, 
and  no  other  worse  accident  shall  follow,  then  that  I  feele. 
Moreover,  the    condition  of  this  disease  is  not  ill  seeming 
to  my  ready  and  sodaine  complexion.     When  it  but  faintly 
assailes  mee,  it  makes  mee  afraid,  because  it  is  like  to  con 
tinue  long  :    But  naturally  it  hath    certaine   vigorous   and 
violent    excesses.     It  doth    violently    shake  me  for  one  or 
two  dayes.     My  reines  have  continued  a  whole  age  without 
alteration,  an  other  is  now  well-nigh  come,  that  they  have 
changed  state.     Evils  as  well  as  goods  have  their  periods : 
this  accident  is  happily  come  to  his  last.    Age  weakneth  the 
heat  of  my  stomacke  :  his  digestion  being  thereby  lesse  per 
fect,  hee  sendeth  this  crude  matter  to  my  reines.     Why  may 
not,  at  a  certaine  revolution,  the  heat  of  my  reines  be  like 
wise  infeabled  :    so  that  they  may  no  longer  putrifie  my 
fleagme ;  and  Nature  addresse  her  selfe  to  finde  some  other 

363 


ence 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  course  of  purgation?    Yeares  have  evidently  made  me  drie 
up  certaine  rheumes :  And  why  not  these  excrements,  that 
Of  Expen-    minister  matter  to  the  stone  or  gravell  ?    But  is  there  any 

on  no  .  C5  •/ 

thing  so  pleasant,  in  respect  of  this  sodame  change,  when 
by  an  extreame  paine,  I  come  by  the  voyding  of  my  stone, 
to  recover,  as  from  a  lightning,  the  faire  Sunne-shine  of 
health ;  so  free  and  full,  as  it  happeneth  in  our  sodaine  and 
most  violent  cholliks  ?  Is  there  any  thing  in  this  paine  suf 
fered  that  may  be  counter  poised  to  the  sweet  pleasure  of  so 
ready  an  amendment  ?  By  how  much  more  health  seemeth 
fairer  unto  me  after  sicknesse,  so  neere  and  so  contiguous, 
that  I  may  know  them  in  presence  one  of  another,  in  their 
richest  ornaments  ;  wherein  they  attyre  themselves  avy,  as  it 
were  confront  and  counterchecks  one  another :  Even  as  the 
Stoickes  say,  that  '  Vices  were  profitably  brought  in  ;  to  give 
'  esteeme  and  make  head  unto  vertue1;  So  may  we  with 
better  reason  and  bold  conjecture,  affirme,  that  Nature  hath 
lent  us  griefe  and  paine,  for  the  honour  of  pleasure  and 
service  of  indolency.  When  Socrates  (after  he  had  his  yrons 
or  fetters  taken  from  him)  felt  the  pleasure  or  tickling  of 
that  itching,  which  their  weight  and  rubbing  had  caused  in 
his  legges;  he  rejoyced,  to  consider  the  neere  affinity  that 
was  between  paine  and  pleasure:  how  they  combined  to 
gether  by  a  necessary  bond ;  so  that  at  turnes  they  enter- 
engender  and  succeed  one  another  :  And  cry  out  to  good 
/^Esope,  that  he  should  from  that  consideration  have  taken  a 
proper  body  unto  a  quaint  fable.  The  worst  I  see  in  other 
diseases,  is,  that  they  are  not  so  grievous  in  their  effect,  as 
in  their  issue.  A  man  is  a  whole  yeare  to  recover  himselfe ; 
ever  full  of  weakenesse,  alwayes  full  of  feare. 

There  is  so  much  hazard  and  so  many  degrees  before  one 
can  be  brought  to  safety,  that  hee  is  never  at  an  end. 
Before  you  can  leave  off  your  coverchiefe  and  then  your 
night-cap  ;  before  you  can  brooke  the  ayre  againe,  or  have 
leave  to  drinke  Wine,  or  lye  with  your  Wife,  or  eate  melons, 
it  is  much,  if  you  fall  not  into  some  relapse  or  new  misery. 
The  gravell  hath  this  priviledge,  that  it  is  cleane  carried 
away.  Whereas  other  maladies,  leave  ever  some  impression 
and  alteration,  which  leaveth  the  body  susceptible  or  under 
taking  of  some  new  infirmity  ;  and  they  lend  one  an  other 

364 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

their  hands.  Such  are  to  be  excused,  as  are  contented  with  CHAPTER 
the  possession  they  have  over  us,  without  extending  the  same, 
and  without  introducing  their  sequell :  But  curteous,  kind 
and  gracious  are  those,  whose  passage  brings  us  some  profit 
able  consequence.  Since  I  have  had  the  stone  chollike,  I 
finde  my  selfe  discharged  of  other  accidents :  more  (as  me 
thinks)  then  I  was  before,  and  never  had  ague  since.  I  argue, 
that  the  extreame  and  frequent  vomits  I  endure,  purge  mee ; 
and  on  the  other  side,  the  distastes  and  strange  abstinences 
I  tolerate,  disgest  my  offending  humours  :  and  Nature  voyd- 
eth  in  these  stones  and  gravell,  whatsoever  is  superfluous  and 
hurtfull  in  her.  Let  no  man  tell  me,  that  it  is  a  medicine 
too  deere  sold.  For,  what  availe  so  many  loathsome  pils, 
stincking  potions,  cauterizings,  incisions,  sweatings,  setons, 
dyets  and  so  divers  fashions  of  curing,  which,  because  we 
are  not  able  to  undergoe  their  violence  and  brooke  their 
importunity,  doe  often  bring  us  unto  our  graves?  And 
therefore,  when  I  am  surprised,  I  take  it  as  physicke :  and 
when  I  am  free,  I  take  it  as  a  constant  and  full  deliverance. 
Lo  here  an  other  particular  favour  of  my  disease,  which  is, 
that  he  in  a  manner,  keepes  his  play  a-part,  and  let's  me 
keepe  mine  owne  ;  or  else  I  want  but  courage  to  doe  it :  In 
his  greatest  emotion,  I  have  held  out  tenne  houres  on  Horse- 
backe  with  him.  Doe  but  endure,  you  neede  no  other  rule  or 
regiment :  Play,  dally,  dyne,  runne,  be  gamesome,  doe  this, 
and  if  you  can,  doe  the  other  thing,  your  disorder  and 
debauching  will  rather  availe  then  hurt  it.  Say  thus  much 
to  one  that  hath  the  pox,  or  to  one  that  hath  the  gowt,  or 
to  one  that  is  belly-broken  or  cod-burst.  Other  infirmites 
have  more  universall  bonds,  torment  farre-otherwise  our 
actions,  pervert  all  our  order,  and  engage  all  the  state  of 
mans  life  unto  their  consideration  :  Whereas  this  doth  only 
twitch  and  pinch  the  skin,  it  neyther  medleth  with  your 
understanding,  nor  with  your  will,  tongue,  feete  nor  hands, 
but  leaves  them  all  in  your  disposition ;  it  rather  rouzeth 
and  awaketh  you,  then  deterre  and  drouzy  you.  The  mind 
is  wounded  by  the  burning  of  a  feaver,  suppressed  by  an 
Epilepsie,  confounded  by  a  migrane,  and  in  conclusion, 
astonied  and  dismayed  by  all  the  diseases  that  touch  or 
wound  the  whole  masse  of  his  body,  and  it's  noblest  parts  : 

365 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  This  never  medleth  with  it.  If  therefore  it  go  ill  with  it, 
XIII  his  be  the  blame :  she  bewrayeth,  she  forsaketh  and  she  dis- 
F-Lxpen-  piace-j;h  ner  selfe.  None  but  fools  will  be  perswaded,  that 
this  hard,  gretty  and  massie  body,  which  is  concocted  and 
petrified  in  our  kidneis,  may  be  dissolved  by  drinks.  And 
therefore  after  it  is  stirred,  there  is  no  way,  but  to  give  it 
passage  ;  For  if  you  doe  not,  he  will  take  it  himselfe.  This 
other  peculiar  commodity  I  observe,  that  it  is  an  infirmity, 
wherein  we  have  but  little  to  divine.  We  are  dispensed 
from  the  trouble,  whereinto  other  maladies  cast  us,  by  the 
uncertainty  of  their  causes,  conditions  and  progresses.  A 
trouble  infinitly  painfull.  We  have  no  need  of  doctorall 
consultations,  or  collegiall  interpretations.  Our  senses  tell 
us  where  it  is,  and  what  it  is.  By,  and  with  such  arguments, 
forcible  or  weake  (as  Cicero  doth  the  infirmity  of  his  old-age) 
I  endevour  to  lull  asleepe,  and  study  to  ammuse  my  imagina 
tion,  and  supple  or  annoint  her  sores.  If  they  grow  worse 
to  morrow ;  to  morrow  we  shall  provide  for  new  remedies  or 
escapes.  That  this  is  true  :  loe  afterward  againe,  haply  the 
lightest  motion  wrings  pure  blood  out  of  my  reines.  And 
what  of  that  ?  I  omit  not  to  stirre  as  before,  and  with  a  youth - 
full  and  insolent  heate  ride  after  my  hound.  And  find  that 
I  have  great  reason  of  so  important  an  accident,  which  costs 
me  but  a  deafe  heavinesse  and  dombe  alteration  in  that  part. 
It  is  some  great  stone  that  wasteth  and  consumeth  the  sub 
stance  of  my  kidneis  and  my  life,  which  I  avoyde  by  little  and 
little  :  not  without  some  naturall  pleasure,  as  an  excrement 
now  superfluous  and  troublesome.  And  feele  I  something 
to  shake  ?  Expect  not  that  I  ammuse  my  selfe  to  feele  my 
pulse,  or  looke  into  my  urine,  thereby  to  finde  or  take  some 
tedious  prevention.  I  shall  come  time  enough  to  feele  the 
smart,  without  lengthening  the  same  with  the  paine  of  feare. 
Who  feareth  to  suffer,  suffereth  already,  because  he  feareth. 

Seeing  the  doubt  and  ignorance  of  those,  who  will  and  do 
meddle  with  expounding  the  drifts  and  shifts  of  nature,  with 
her  internall  progresse ;  and  so  many  false  prognostications 
of  their  arte  should  make  us  understand  her  meanes  infinitly 
unknowne.  There  is  great  uncertainty,  variety  and  obscurity, 
in  that  shee  promiseth  and  menaceth  us.  Except  old-age, 
which  is  an  undoubted  signe  of  deaths  approching:  of  all 

366 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

other  accidents,  I  see  few  signes  of  future  things,  whereon  CHAPTER 
we  may  ground  our  divination.  I  onely  judge  my  selfe  by  XIII 
true-feeling  sense,  and  not  by  discourse  :  To  what  end  ?  Of  Experi- 
since  I  will  adde  nothing  thereunto  except  attention  and 
patience.  Will  you  know  what  I  gaine  by  it  ?  Behold 
those  who  doe  otherwise,  and  who  depend  on  so  many 
diverse  perswasions  and  counsels ;  how  oft  imagination 
presseth  them  without  the  body.  I  have  divers  times,  being 
in  safety  and  free  from  all  dangerous  accidents,  taken  plea 
sure  to  communicate  them  unto  Physitions,  as  but  then 
comming  upon  me.  I  endured  the  arrest  or  doome  of  their 
horrible  conclusions,  and  remained  so  much  the  more  bounden 
unto  God  for  his  grace,  and  better  instructed  of  the  vanity 
of  this  arte.  Nothing  ought  so  much  be  recommended  unto 
youth,  as  activity  and  vigilancy.  Our  life  is  nothing  but 
motion,  I  am  hardly  shaken,  and  am  slow  in  all  things,  be  it 
to  rise,  to  goe  to  bed,  or  to  my  meales.  Seaven  of  the  clocke 
in  the  morning  is  to  me  an  early  houre  :  And  where  I  may 
command,  I  neither  dine  before  eleven,  nor  sup  till  after  six. 
I  have  heretofore  imputed  the  cause  of  agues  or  maladies, 
whereinto  I  have  falne,  to  the  lumpish  heavinesse  or  drowzy 
dulnesse,  which  my  long  sleeping  had  caused  me.  And  ever 
repented  mee  to  fall  asleepe  againe  in  the  morning.  Plato 
condemnes  more  the  excesse  of  sleeping,  then  the  surfet  of 
drinking.  I  love  to  lie  hard  and  alone,  yea  and  without  a 
woman  by  me  :  after  the  kingly  manner :  somewhat  well  and 
warme  covered.  I  never  have  my  bed  warmed ;  but  since  I 
came  to  be  an  old  man,  if  need  require,  I  have  clothes  given 
me  to  warme  my  feete  and  my  stomacke.  Great  Scipio  was 
taxed  to  bee  a  sluggard  or  heavy  sleeper  (in  my  conceit)  for 
no  other  cause,  but  that  men  were  offended,  hee  onely  should 
bee  the  man,  in  whom  no  fault  might  justly  bee  found.  If 
there  be  any  curiosity  in  my  behaviour  or  manner  of  life,  it 
is  rather  about  my  going  to  bed,  then  any  thing  else ;  but 
if  neede  bee,  I  generally  yeeld  and  accommodate  my  selfe  unto 
necessity,  as  well  and  as  quietly,  as  any  other  whosoever. 
Sleeping  hath  possessed  a  great  part  of  my  life  :  and  as  old  as 
I  am,  I  can  sleepe  eight  or  nine  houres  together.  I  doe 
with  profit  withdraw  my  selfe  from  this  sluggish  propension, 
and  evidently  finde  my  selfe  better  by  it.  Indeede  I  some- 

367 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  what  feele  the  stroke  of  alteration,  but  in  three  dayes  it  is 
past.  And  I  see  few  that  live  with  lesse  (when  need  is)  and 
Kxperi-  faofc  more  constantly  exercise  themselves,  nor  whom  toyling 
and  labour  offend  lesse.  My  body  is  capable  of  a  firme 
agitation,  so  it  be  not  vehement  and  sodaine.  I  avoide 
violent  exercises,  and  which  induce  mee  to  sweate :  my  limbs 
will  sooner  be  wearied,  then  heated.  I  can  stand  a  whole 
day  long,  and  am  seldome  weary  with  walking.  Since  my 
first  age,  I  ever  loved  rather  to  ride  then  walke  upon  paved 
streets.  Going  a  foote,  I  shall  durty  my  selfe  up  to  the 
waste  :  and  little  men,  going  alongst  our  streets,  are  subject 
(for  want  of  presentiall  apparence)  to  be  justled  or  elbowed. 
I  love  to  take  my  rest,  be  it  sitting  or  lying-along,  with  my 
legs  as  high  or  higher  then  my  seate.  No  profession  or  occu 
pation  is  more  pleasing  then  the  military  ;  A  profession  or 
exercise,  both  noble  in  execution  (for  the  strongest,  most 
generous  and  prowdest  of  all  vertues,  is  true  valour)  and 
noble  in  it's  cause.  No  utility,  either  more  just  or  universall 
then  the  protection  of  the  repose,  or  defence  of  the  great- 
nesse  of  ones  country.  The  company  and  dayly  conversation 
of  so  many  noble,  young  and  active  men,  cannot  but  bee  well- 
pleasing  to  you :  the  dayly  and  ordinary  sight  of  so  divers 
tragicall  spectacles :  the  liberty  and  uncontroled  freedome 
of  that  artelesse  and  unaffected  conversation,  masculine  and 
ceremonilesse  maner  of  life  :  the  hourely  variety  of  a  thou 
sand  ever  changing  and  differing  actions  :  the  couragious 
and  minde  stirring  harmony  of  warlike  musicke,  which  at 
once  entertaineth  with  delight  and  enflameth  with  longing, 
both  your  eares  and  your  minde  :  the  imminent  and  match- 
lesse  honour  of  that  exercise :  yea  the  very  sharpnesse  and 
difficulty  of  it,  which  Plato  esteemeth  so  little,  that  in  his 
imaginary  commonwealth,  he  imparteth  the  same  both  to 
women  and  to  children.  As  a  voluntary  Souldier,  or  adven 
turous  Knight  you  enter  the  lists,  the  bands  or  particular 
hazards,  according  as  your  selfe  judge  of  their  successes  or 
importance :  and  you  see  when  your  life  may  therein  be 
excusably  employed. 

VIRG.  s£n.  iii.  Pulchrumque  mori  succurrit  in  armis. 

317-  And  nobly  it  doth  come  in  minde, 

To  die  in  armes  may  honor  finde, 

368 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

Basely  to  feare  common  dangers,  that  concerne  so  number-  CHAPTER 
lesse  a  multitude,  and  not  to  dare,  what  so  many  sorts  of 
men  dare,  yea  whole  nations  together,  is  onely  incident  to 
base,  craven  and  milke-sop-hearts.  Company  and  good 
fellowship  doth  harten  and  encourage  children.  If  some 
chance  to  exceed  and  outgoe  you  in  knowledge,  in  experience, 
in  grace,  in  strength,  in  fortune,  you  have  third  and  collate- 
rall  causes  to  blame  and  take  hold-of ;  but  to  yeeld  to  them 
in  constancy  of  minde,  and  resolution  of  courage,  you  have 
none  but  your  selfe  to  find  fault  with.  Death  is  much  more 
abject,  languishing,  grisly  and  paineful  in  a  downe-bed,  then 
in  a  field-combate  ;  and  agues,  catarres  or  apoplexies,  as 
painefull  and  mortall,  as  an  harquebusado.  He  that  should 
be  made  undantedly  to  beare  the  accidents  of  common  life, 
should  not  need  to  bumbast  his  courage,  to  become  a  man 
at  armes.  Vivere,  mi  Lucilli,  milltare  est.  '  Friend  mine,  to  SEN.  Epist. 
6  live  is  to  goe  on  warre-fare."1  I  cannot  remember  that  ever  xcvi-  £ 
I  was  scabbed  :  yet  is  itching  one  of  natures  sweetest  grati 
fications,  and  as  ready  at  hand.  But  repentance  doth  over- 
importunately  attend  on  it.  I  exercise  the  same  in  mine 
eares  (and  by  fits)  which  within  doe  often  itch.  I  was  borne 
with  al  my  senses  sound,  almost  in  perfection.  My  stomacke 
is  commodiously  good ;  and  so  is  my  head  :  both  which, 
together  with  my  winde,  maintaine  themselves  athwart  my 
agues.  I  have  outlived  that  age,  to  which  some  nations  have 
not  without  some  reason  prescribed  for  a  just  end  unto  life, 
that  they  allowed  not  a  man  to  exceede  the  same.  I  have 
notwithstanding  some  remyses  or  intermissions  yet :  though 
unconstant  and  short,  so  sound  and  neate,  that  there  is  little 
difference  between  them  and  the  health  and  indolency  of  my 
youth.  I  speake  not  of  youthly  vigor  and  chearefull  blith- 
nesse ;  there  is  no  reason  they  should  follow  me  beyond 
their  limits : 

Non  h&c  amplius  est  liminis,  aut  aqua  HOR.  Car.  iii. 

Ccelestis,  patiens  latus.  Od.  x.  15. 

These  sides  cannot  still  sustaine 
Lying  without  doores,  showring  raine. 

My  visage  and  eyes  doe  presently  discover  me.    Thence 
begin  all  my  changes,  and  somewhat  sharper  then  they  are 
3  A  369 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  in  effect.  I  often  move  my  friends  to  pitty,  ere  I  feele  the 
XIII  cause  of  it.  My  looking  glasse  doth  not  amaze  me :  for  even 
in  my  youth  it  hath  divers  times  befalne  me,  so  to  put-on  a 
dusky  looke,  a  wan  colour,  a  troubled  behaviour  and  of  ill 
presage,  without  any  great  accident ;  so  that  Physitions  per 
ceiving  no  inward  cause  to  answer  this  outward  alteration, 
ascribed  the  same  to  the  secret  minde  or  some  concealed 
passion,  which  inwardly  gnawed  and  consumed  me.  They 
were  deceived  ;  were  my  body  directly  by  me,  as  is  my  minde, 
we  should  march  a  little  more  at  our  ease.  I  had  it  then, 
not  onely  exempted  from  all  trouble,  but  also  full  of  satis 
faction  and  blithenesse,  as  it  is  most  commonly,  partly  by 
it's  owne  complexion,  and  partly  by  it^s  owne  desseigne  : 

OVID.  Trist.  Nee  vitiant  artus  agree  contagia  mentis. 

iii.  El.  viii.  25.  Nor  doth  gicke  mindes  infection, 

Pollute  strong  joynts  complexion. 

I  am  of  opinion,  that  this  her  temperature  hath  often 
raised  my  body  from  his  fallings  :  he  is  often  suppressed, 
whereas  she,  if  not  lasciviously  wanton,  at  least  in  quiet  and 
reposed  estate.  I  had  a  quartan  ague  which  held  me  foure 
or  five  moneths,  and  had  altogether  disvisaged  and  altered 
my  countenance,  yet  my  minde  held  ever  out,  not  onely 
peaceably  but  pleasantly.  So  I  feele  no  paine  or  smart ; 
weakenesse  and  languishing  doe  not  greatly  perplex  me.  I 
see  divers  corporall  defailances,  the  onely  naming  of  which 
breede  a  kind  of  horror,  and  which  I  would  feare  lesse  then 
a  thousand  passions  and  agitations  of  the  mind,  which  I  see 
in  use.  I  resolve  to  runne  no  more  :  it  sufficeth  me  to  goe- 
on  faire  and  softly  ;  nor  doe  I  complaine  of  their  naturall 
decadence  or  empairing  that  possesseth  me. 

IUVEN.  Sat.  Quis  tumidum  guttur  miratur  in  Alpibus  ? 

Who  wonders  a  swolne  throate  to  see, 
In  those  about  the  Alpes  that  be  ? 

No  more,  then  I  grieve  that  my  continuance  is  not  as  long 
and  sound,  as  that  of  an  oake.  I  have  no  cause  to  finde 
fault  with  my  imagination.  I  have  in  my  life  had  very  few 
thoughts  or  cares,  that  have  so  much  as  interrupted  the 
course  of  my  sleepe,  except  of  desire  to  awaken  without 

370 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

dismay  or  afflicting  me.     I  seldome  dreame,  and  when  I  doe,  CHAPTER 
it  is  of  extravagant  things  and  chymeras  ;  commonly  produced         XIII 
of  pleasant  conceits,  rather  ridiculous  then  sorrowfull.    And 
thinke  it  true,  that  dreames  are  the  true  interpreters  of  our 
inclinations  :  but  great  skill  is  required  to  sort  and  under 
stand  them. 

Res  qucR  invita  usurpant  homines,  cogitant,  curant,  vident, 
Qu&que   agunt   vigilantes,   agitantque  ea   sicut  in   somno 

accidunt 
Minus  mirandum  est. 

It  is  no  wonder  if  the  things,  which  we 
Care  for,,  use,  thinke,  doe-oft,  or  waking  see, 
Unto  us  sleeping  represented  be. 

Plato  saith  moreover,  that  is  the  office  of  wisedome  to 
draw  divining  instructions  from  them,  against  future  times. 
Wherein  I  see  nothing  but  the  wonderfull  experience,  that 
Socrates,  Xenophon  and  Aristotle  relate  of  them  :  men  of 
unreproovable  authority.  Histories  report,  that  the  in 
habitants  of  the  Atlantique  lies  never  dreame  :  who  feed  on 
nothing  that  hath  beene  slaine.  Which  I  adde,  because  it 
is  peradventure  the  occasion  they  dreame  not.  Pythagoras 
ordained  therefore  a  certaine  methode  of  feeding,  that 
dreames  might  be  sorted  of  some  purpose.  Mine  are  tender, 
and  cause  no  agitation  of  body  or  expression  of  voice  in  me. 
I  have  in  my  dayes  seene  many  strangely  stirred  with  them. 
Theon  the  Philosopher  walked  in  dreaming ;  and  Pericles  his 
boy,  went  upon  the  tiles  and  top  of  houses.  I  stand  not 
much  on  nice  choice  of  meates  at  the  table  :  and  commonly 
begin  with  the  first  and  neerest  dish  :  and  leape  not  willingly 
from  one  taste  to  another.  Multitude  of  dishes,  and  variety 
of  services  displease  me  as  much  as  any  other  throng.  I  am 
easily  pleased  with  few  messes,  and  hate  the  opinion  of 
Favorinus,  that  at  a  banquet  you  must  have  that  dish  where 
on  you  feed  hungerly  taken  from  you,  and  ever  have  a  new 
one  set  in  the  place  :  And  that  it  is  a  niggardly  supper, 
if  all  the  guests  be  not  glutted  with  pinions  and  rumps 
of  divers  kinds  of  fowle  :  and  that  onely  the  dainty  bird 
heccafico  or  snapfig  deserveth  to  bee  eaten  whole  at  one 
morsell.  I  feede  much  upon  salt  cates,  and  love  to  have  my 
bread  somewhat  fresh  :  And  mine  owne  Baker  makes  none 

371 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  other  for  my  bord  ;  against  the  fashion  of  my  country.  In 
XIII  my  youth  my  overseers  had  much  a  doe  to  reforme  the 
Experi-  refusan  I  made  of  such  meats  as  youth  doth  commonly  love 
best ;  as  sweet  meates,  confets  and  marchpanes.  My  Tutor 
was  wont  to  find  great  fault  with  my  lothing  of  such  dainties, 
as  a  kinde  of  squeamish  delicacy.  And  to  say  truth,  it  is 
nothing  but  a  difficulty  of  taste,  where  it  once  is  applyed. 
Whosoever  remooveth  from  a  child  a  certaine  particular  or 
obstinate  affection  to  browne  bread,  to  bakon,  or  to  garlike, 
taketh  friandize  from  him.  There  are  some,  that  make  it  a 
labour,  and  thinke  it  a  patience  to  regret  a  good  piece  of 
pawdred  beefe,  or  a  good  gemmon  of  bakon,  amongst  par 
tridges.  Are  not  they  wise  men  in  the  meane  time  ?  It  is 
the  chiefe  dainty  of  all  dainties  :  It  is  the  taste  of  nice 
effeminate  fortune,  that  wil  be  distasted  with  ordinary  and 
usual  things.  Per  quce  luxur'm  divitiarum  tcedio  ludit. 
'Whereby  the  lavishnesse  of  plenty  playes  with  tedious 
4  pleasure.1  To  forbeare  to  make  good  cheare,  because  an 
other  doth  it ;  for  one  to  have  care  of  his  feeding,  is  the 
essence  of  that  vice. 

HOR.  i.  Ep.  v.  Si  modica  ccenare  times  olus  omne  patella. 

If  in  a  sorry  dish  to  sup 
You  brooke  not  all  th'  hearbe  pottage  up. 

Indeede  there  is  this  difference,  that  it  is  better  for  one  to 
tye  his  desires  unto  things  easiest  to  be  gotten,  yet  is  it  a 
vice  to  tie  himselfe  to  any  strictnesse.  I  was  heretofore  wont 
to  name  a  kinsman  of  mine  over  delicate,  because,  whilest 
hee  lived  in  our  Gallies,  he  had  unlearn't  and  left  to  lie  upon 
a  bedde,  and  to  strippe  himselfe  to  goe  to  bedde.  Had  I 
any  male-children,  I  should  willingly  wish  them  my  fortune. 
That  good  Father,  it  pleased  God  to  allot  me  (who  hath 
nothing  of  mee  but  thankefulnesse  for  his  goodnesse,  which 
indeed,  is  as  great  as  great  may  be)  even  from  my  cradle  sent 
mee  to  be  brought-up  in  a  poore  village  of  his,  where  he  kept 
me  so  long  as  I  suckt,  and  somewhat  longer :  breeding  me 
SEN.  Epist.  after  the  meanest  and  simplest-common  fashion  :  Magnapars 
cxxiii.  libertatis  est  bene  moratus  venter.  '  A  mannerly  belly  is  a 

4  great  part  of  a  mans  liberty."     Never  take  unto  your  selfe, 
and  much  lesse  never  give  your  wives  the  charge  of  your 
372 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

childrens  breeding  or  education.  Let  fortune  frame  them  CHAPTER 
under  the  popular  and  naturall  Lawes :  Let  custome  enure  XIII 
them  to  frugality,  and  breed  them  to  hardnesse  :  That  they  Of  ExPer1' 
may  rather  descend  from  sharpenesse,  than  ascend  unto  it. 
His  conceipt  aymed  also  at  another  end ;  To  acquaint  and 
re-aly  me  with  that  people  and  condition  of  men  that  have 
most  need  of  us  :  And  thought  I  was  rather  bound  to  respect 
those  which  extend  their  armes  unto  me,  than  such  as  turne 
their  backe  toward  me.  And  that  was  the  reason  he  chose 
no  other  gossips  to  hold  me  at  the  font,  than  men  of  abject 
and  base  fortune,  that  so  I  might  the  more  be  bound  and  tied 
unto  them.  His  purpose  hath  not  altogether  succeded  ill. 
I  willingly  give  and  accost  my  selfe  unto  the  meaner  sort ; 
whether  it  be  because  there  is  more  glory  gotten  by  them,  or 
through  some  naturall  compassion,  which  in  me  is  infinitely 
powerfull.  The  faction  which  I  condemne  in  our  civill 
warres,  I  shall  more  sharpely  condemne  when  it  prospers 
and  flourisheth.  I  shall  in  some  sort  be  reconciled  unto  it, 
when  I  see  it  miserably-depressed  and  overwhelmed.  Oh  how 
willingly  doe  I  remember  that  worthy  humour  of  Chelonis, 
daughter  and  wife  to  King  of  Sparta.  Whilest  Cleombrotus 
her  husband,  in  the  tumultuous  disorders  of  his  City,  had  the 
upper  hand  of  Leonidas  her  father,  she  played  the  part  of  a 
good  daughter  :  allying  her  selfe  with  her  father,  in  his  exile 
and  in  his  misery,  mainely  opposing  hir  selfe  against  the 
Conquerour  :  Did  fortune  turne  ?  So  changed  she  hir  minde, 
couragiously  taking  hir  husbands  part :  Whom  she  never 
forsooke,  whither-soever  his  ruine  or  distresse  carryed  him. 
Having  (in  my  seeming)  no  other  choise,  than  to  follow  that 
side,  where  she  might  doe  most  good,  where  she  was  most 
wanted,  and  where  she  might  shew  her  selfe  most  truely 
pittifull.  I  doe  more  naturally  encline  toward  the  example 
of  Flamineus,  who  more  and  rather  yeelded  to  such  as  had 
need  of  him,  than  to  those  who  might  doe  him  good  :  than 
I  bend  unto  that  of  Pyrrhus,  who  was  ever  wont,  demissely 
to  stoope  and  yeeld  to  the  mighty,  and  insolently  to  grow 
proud  over  the  weake.  Long  sitting  at  meales  doth  much 
weary  and  distemper  me  :  for,  be  it  for  want  of  better  coun 
tenance  and  entertainment,  or  that  I  used  my  selfe  unto  it 
when  I  was  a  child,  I  feede  as  long  as  I  sitte  at  the  table. 

373 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  And  therefore,  being  in  mine  owne  house,  though  my  board 
XIII  be  but  short,  and  that  wee  use  not  to  sit  long,  I  doe  not 
Of  Experi-  commonly  sit  downe  with  the  first,  but  a  pretty  while  after 
others  :  According  to  the  forme  of  Augustus  :  yet  I  imitate 
him  not  in  his  rising  before  others.  Contrary,  I  love  to  sit 
a  great  while  after,  and  to  heare  some  discourse  or  table- 
talke.  Alwayes  provided  I  beare  not  a  part  my  selfe  ;  for, 
if  my  belly  bee  full,  I  shall  soone  bee  weary,  and  hurt  my 
selfe  with  talking  :  and  I  finde  the  exercise  of  lowde-speaking 
and  contesting  before  meate  very  pleasant  and  wholesome. 
The  ancient  Grecians  and  Romanes  had  better  reason  than 
wee,  allotting  unto  feeding,  which  is  a  principall  action  of 
mans  life  (if  any  other  extraordinary  businesse  did  not  let  or 
divert  them  from  it)  divers  houres,  and  the  best  part  of  the 
night :  eating  and  drinking  more  leisurely  than  we  doe,  who 
passe  and  runne-over  all  our  actions  in  post-haste  :  and  ex 
tending  this  naturall  pleasure  unto  more  leisure  and  use : 
entermixing  therewith  divers  profitable  and  mind-pleasing 
offices  of  civill  conversation.  Such  as  have  care  of  me,  may 
easily  steale  from  me  what  soever  they  imagine  may  be  hurt- 
full  for  me :  in  asmuch  as  about  my  feeding,  I  never  desire 
or  find  fault  with  that  I  see  not :  That  Proverb  is  verified  in 
me  ;  '  What  eye  seeth  not,  the  heart  rueth  not."  But  if  a  dish 
or  any  thing  else  be  once  set  before  me,  they  lose  their 
labour,  that  goe  about  to  tell  me  of  abstinence :  so  that, 
when  I  am  disposed  to  fast  I  must  be  sequestred  from  eaters, 
and  have  no  more  set  before  me,  than  may  serve  for  a  stinted 
and  regular  collation  :  for  if  I  but  sit  downe  at  a  set  table, 
I  forget  my  resolution.  If  I  chance  to  bidde  my  cooke 
change  the  dressing  of  some  kinde  of  meate  or  dish,  all  my 
men  know,  I  inferre  my  appetit  is  wallowish  and  my  stomacke 
out  of  order,  and  I  shall  hardly  touch  it.  I  love  all  manner 
of  flesh  or  fowle  but  greene  rosted  and  raw  sodden,  namely, 
such  as  may  beare  it  without  danger ;  and  love  to  have  them 
throughly  mortified  ;  and  in  divers  of  them  the  very  altera 
tion  of  their  smell.  Onely  hardnesse  or  toughnesse  of  meate 
doth  generally  molest  me  (of  all  other  qualities,  I  am  as  care- 
lesse,  and  can  as  well  brook e  them,  as  any  man  that  ever  I 
knew)  so  that  (contrary  to  received  opinion)  even  amongst 
fishes,  I  shall  finde  some,  both  too  new  and  over-hard  and 
374 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

firme.  It  is  not  the  fault  or  want  of  teeth,  which  I  ever  had  CHAPTER 
as  perfectly-sound  and  compleate  as  any  other  man  :  and  XIII 
which  but  now,  being  so  olde,  beginne  to  threaten  me.  I  ^  Experi- 
have  from  my  infancy  learn'd  torubbe  them  with  my  napkin, 
both  in  the  morning  when  I  rise,  and  sitting  down  and  rising 
from  the  table.  God  doth  them  a  grace,  from  whom  by 
little  and  little  he  doth  substract  their  life.  It  is  the  onely 
benefit  of  old  age.  Their  last  death  shall  be  so  much  the 
lesse  full,  languishing  and  painefull :  it  shall  then  kill  but 
one  halfe  or  a  quarter  of  a  man.  Even  now  I  lost  one  of  my 
teeth,  which  of  it  selfe  fell  out,  without  strugling  or  paine : 
it  was  the  naturall  terme  of  it's  continuance.  That  part  of 
my  being,  with  divers  others,  are  already  dead  and  mortified 
in  mee,  others  of  the  most  active,  halfe  dead,  and  which, 
during  the  vigor  of  my  age  held  the  first  ranke.  Thus  I 
sinke  and  scape  from  my  selfe.  What  foolishnes  will  it  be  in 
my  understanding,  to  feele  the  start  of  that  fall,  already  so 
advanced,  as  it  were  perfectly  whole  ?  I  hope  it  not ;  verely 
I  receive  a  speciall  comfort  in  thinking  on  my  death,  and 
that  it  shall  be  of  the  most  just  and  naturall :  and  cannot 
now  require  or  hope  other  favor  of  destiny,  concerning  that, 
then  unlawfull.  Men  perswade  themselves,  that  as  hereto 
fore  they  have  had  a  higher  stature,  so  their  lives  were 
longer ;  But  they  are  deceived  :  for  Solon,  of  those  ancient 
times,  though  he  were  of  an  exceeding  high  stature,  his 
life  continued  but  70  yeeres.  Shal  I,  that  have  so  much  and 
so  universally  adored,  that  apiarov  perpov,  '  a  meane  is  best,1 
of  former  times :  and  have  ever  taken  a  meane  measure  for 
the  most  perfect,  therefore  pretend  a  most  prodigious  and 
unmeasurable  life  ?  Whatsoever  commeth  contrary  to  Natures 
course,  may  be  combersome,  but  what  comes  according  to  her, 
should  ever  please.  Omnia  quce  secundum  naturam  jiunt, 
sunt  habenda  in  bonis.  '  All  things  are  to  be  accompted 
4  good,  that  are  done  according  to  nature.1  And  therfore 
(saith  Plato)  is  that  death  violent,  which  is  caused  either  by 
wounds  or  sicknesses ;  but  that  of  all  others  the  easiest  and 
in  some  sort  delitious,  which  surprizeth  us  by  meanes  of  age. 
Vitam  adolescentibus  vis  aufert,  sembus  maturitas.  '  A 
6  forcible  violence  takes  their  life  from  the  young,  but  a  ripe 
'  maturity  from  the  old.1  Death  entermedleth,  and  every 

375  " 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  where  confounds  it  selfe  with  our  life  :  declination  doth  pre- 
XIII  occupate  her  houre,  and  insinuate  it  selfe  in  the  very  course 
Jirxperi-  Qf  Qur  advancement :  I  have  pictures  of  mine  owne,  that 
were  drawne  when  I  was  five  and  twenty,  and  others  being 
thirty  yeeres  of  age,  which  I  often  compare  with  such  as 
were  made  by  me,  as  I  am  now  at  this  instant.  How  many 
times  doe  I  say,  I  am  no  more  my  selfe  ;  how  much  is  my 
present  image  further  from  those,  then  from  that  of  my 
decease  ?  It  is  an  over-great  abuse  unto  nature  to  dragge 
and  hurry  her  so  farre,  that  she  must  be  forced  to  give  us 
over ;  and  abandon  our  conduct,  our  eyes,  our  teeth,  our 
legges  and  the  rest,  to  the  mercy  of  a  forraine  help  and 
begged  assistance :  and  to  put  our  selves  into  the  hands  of 
art,  weary  to  follow  us.  I  am  not  overmuch  or  greedily 
desirous  of  sallets  or  of  fruits,  except  melons.  My  father 
hated  all  manner  of  sawces  ;  I  love  them  all.  Overmuch 
eating  doth  hurt  and  distemper  me :  but  for  the  quality  I 
have  yet  no  certaine  knowledge  that  any  meate  offends  me  : 
I  never  observe  either  a  full  or  waned  Moone,  nor  make  a 
difference  betweene  the  Spring  time  or  Autumne.  There  are 
certaine  inconstant  and  unknowne  motions  in  us.  For  (by 
way  of  example)  I  have  heretofore  found  redish-rootes  to  be 
very  good  for  mee,  then  very  hurtfull,  and  now  againe  very 
well  agreeing  with  my  stomacke.  In  divers  other  things,  I 
feele  my  appetit  to  change,  and  my  stomacke  to  diversifie 
from  time  to  time.  I  have  altred  my  course  of  drinking, 
sometimes  from  white  to  claret  wine,  and  then  from  claret 
to  white  againe. 

I  am  very  friand  and  gluttonous  of  fish  ;  and  keepe  my 
shroving  dayes  upon  fish  dayes ;  and  my  feasts  upon  fasting- 
dayes.  I  believe  as  some  others  doe,  that  fish  is  of  lighter 
disgestion  than  flesh.  As  I  make  it  a  conscience  to  eate  flesh 
upon  a  fish  day,  so  doth  my  taste  to  eate  fish  and  flesh  to 
gether.  The  diversity  betweene  them,  seemes  to  mee  over- 
distant.  Even  from  my  youth  I  was  wont  now  and  then  to 
steale  some  repast,  either  that  I  might  sharpen  my  stomake 
against  the  next  day  ;  (for,  as  Epicurus  was  wont  to  fast, 
and  made  but  sparing  meales,  thereby  to  accustome  his 
voluptuousnesse,  to  neglect  plenty  :  I,  contrary  to  him  to 
enure  my  sensuality  to  speede  the  better,  and  more  merrily 
376 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

to  make  use  of  plenty)  or  else  I  fasted,  the  better  to  main-  CHAPTER 
taine  my  vigor  for  the  service  or  performance  of  some  bodily  XIII 
or  mentall  action  :  for  both  are  strangely  dulled  and  ideled  Of  Expen- 
in  me,  through  over-much  fulnesse  and  repleatenesse.  (And 
above  all,  I  hate  that  foolish  combination,  of  so  sound  and 
bucksome  a  Goddesse,  with  that  indigested  and  belching  God 
all  puffed  with  the  fume  of  his  liquor)  or  to  recover  my 
crazed  stomake,  or  because  I  wanted  some  good  company. 
And  I  say  as  Epicurus  said,  that  a  man  should  not  so  much 
respect  what  he  eateth,  as  with  whom  he  eateth.  And 
commend  Chilon  ;  that  he  would  not  promise  to  come  to 
Perianders  feast,  before  he  knew  certainely  who  were  the 
other  bidden  guests.  No  viands  are  so  sweetly  pleasing,  no 
sauce  so  tastefull,  as  that  which  is  drawne  from  conversable 
and  mutuall  society.  I  thinke  it  wholesome  to  eate  more 
leisurely,  and  lesse  in  quality,  and  to  feede  oftner  :  But  I  will 
have  appetit  and  hunger  to  be  endeared :  I  should  finde  no 
pleasure,  after  a  phisicall  maner,  to  swallow  three  or  foure 
forced  and  spare  meales  a  day.  Who  can  assure  me,  if  I  have 
a  good  taste  or  stomacke  in  the  morning,  that  I  shall  have 
it  againe  at  supper  ?  Let  us  old  men  ;  let  us,  I  say,  take  the 
first  convenient  time  that  commeth  :  Let  us  leave  hopes  and 
prognostikes  unto  Almanacke-makers.  The  extreame  fruit 
of  my  health,  is  pleasure  :  Let  us  hold  fast  on  the  present, 
and  to  us  knowne.  I  eschew  constancy  in  these  Lawes  of 
fasting.  Who  so  will  have  a  forme  to  serve  him,  let  him 
avoyd  continuance  of  it :  but  we  harden  our  selves  unto  it, 
and  thereunto  wholy  apply  our  forces  :  sixe  moneths  after, 
you  shall  finde  your  stomacke  so  enured  unto  it,  that  you 
shall  have  gotten  nothing  but  this,  to  have  lost  the  liberty 
to  use  it  otherwise  without  domage.  I  use  to  goe  with  my 
legges  and  thighs  no  more  covered  in  Sommer  than  in  Winter  ; 
for  I  never  weare  but  one  paire  of  single  silke  stockins.  For 
the  easing  of  my  rhume  and  helpe  of  my  chollike,  I  have  of 
late  used  to  keepe  my  head  and  belly  warme.  My  infirmi 
ties  did  in  few  dayes  habituate  themselves  thereunto,  and 
disdained  my  ordinary  provisions  :  From  a  single  night-cappe, 
I  came  to  a  double  coverchef,  and  from  a  bonnet,  to  a  lined 
and  quilted  hat.  The  bumbasting  of  my  doublet,  serves  me 
now  for  no  more  use  then  a  stomacher :  it  is  a  thing  of 
3B  377 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  nothing,  unlesse  I  adde  a  hare  or  a  vultures  skin  to  it;  and 

X111  .      some  warme  wrapping  about  my  head.     Follow  this  grada- 

Of  Expen-     j.-on  anj  yOU  ghaji  gOe  a  fajre  pace.     I  wiH  do  no  such  thing. 

If  I  durst  I  could  find  in  my  hart  to  revoke  the  beginning  I 
have  given  unto  it.  Fall  you  into  any  new  inconvenience  ? 
This  reformation  will  no  longer  availe  you.  You  are  so 
accustomed  unto  it,  that  you  are  driven  to  seeke  some  new 
one.  So  are  they  overthrowne,  that  suffer  themselves  with 
forced  formalities  or  strict  rules,  to  be  intangled,  and  do 
superstitiously  constraine  themselves  unto  them  :  they  have 
need  of  more,  and  of  more  after  that :  they  never  come  to  an 
end.  It  is  much  more  commodious  both  for  our  businesse 
and  for  our  pleasure  (as  did  our  forefathers)  to  lose  our 
dinner,  and  deferre  making  of  good  cheere,  unto  the  houre 
of  withdrawing  and  of  rest,  without  interrupting  the  day  : 
So  was  I  wont  to  doe  heretofore.  I  have  for  my  health  found 
out  since  by  experience,  that  on  the  contrary,  it  is  better  to 
dine,  and  that  one  shall  digest  better  being  awake.  Whether 
I  be  in  health  or  in  sicknesse,  I  am  not  much  subject  to  be 
thirsty :  indeede  my  mouth  is  somewhat  dry,  but  without 
thirst.  And  commonly  I  use  not  to  drinke,  but  when  with 
eating  I  am  forced  to  desire  it,  and  that  is  when  I  have  eaten 
well.  For  a  man  of  an  ordinary  stature  I  drinke  indifferent 
much.  In  Sommer,  and  at  an  hungry  meale,  I  not  onely  ex- 
ceede  the  limits  of  Augustus,  who  drunke  but  precisely  three 
times :  but,  not  to  offend  the  rule  of  Democritus,  who  for 
bade  us  to  stay  at  foure,  as  an  unlucky  number ;  if  need  be, 
I  come  to  five  :  Three  demisextiers,  or  thereabouts.  I  like 
little  glasses  best;  and  I  love  to  empty  my  glasse :  which 
some  others  dislike,  as  a  thing  unseemely.  Sometimes,  and 
that  very  often,  I  temper  my  wine  one  halfe,  and  many  times 
three  parts  with  water.  And  when  I  am  in  mine  owne  house, 
from  an  antient  custome,  which  my  fathers  Physitian  ordained 
both  for  him,  and  himselfe,  looke  what  quantity  of  Wine  is 
thought  will  serve  mee  a  meale,  the  same  is  commonly  tem 
pered  two  or  three  houres  before  it  be  served  in,  and  so  kept 
in  the  celler.  It  is  reported  that  Cranaus  King  of  the 
Athenians,  was  the  first,  that  invented  the  mingling  of  Wine 
with  Water.  Whether  it  were  profitable  or  no,  I  will  not 
now  dispute  or  stand  upon.  I  thinke  it  more  decent  and 
378 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

more  wholesome,  that  children  should  drinke  no  Wine,  untill  CHAPTER 
they  be  past  the  age  of  sixteene  or  eighteene  yeares.  The  XIII 
most  usuall  and  common  forme  of  life,  is  the  best :  Each  Of  Experi- 
particularity,  doth  in  mine  opinion  impugne  it.  And  I 
should  as  much  detest  a  Germane,  that  should  put  Water 
in  his  Wine,  as  a  French-man,  that  should  drinke  it  pure. 
Publike  custome  giveth  Law  unto  such  things.  I  feare  a 
foggy  and  thicke  ayre,  and  shunne  smoke  more  than  death ; 
(the  first  thing  I  began  to  repaire  when  I  came  to  be  maister 
of  mine  owne  house,  was  the  chimnies  and  privies,  which,  in 
most  of  our  buildings,  is  a  generall  and  intolerable  fault) 
and  rnischiefes  and  difficulties  attending  on  Warre,  there  is 
none  I  hate  more,  than  in  hot-sweltring  wether,  to  ride  up 
and  downe  all  the  day  long  in  smoky  dust,  as  many  times  our 
Souldiers  are  faine  to  doe.  I  have  a  free  and  easie  respira 
tion,  and  doe  most  commonly  passe  over  my  murres  and  colds 
without  offence  to  my  lungs,  or  without  coughing.  The 
soultry  heate  of  sommer  is  more  offensive  to  me,  than  the 
sharpnesse  of  Winter :  for,  besides  the  incommodity  of  heat, 
which  is  lesse  to  bee  remedied,  than  the  inconvenience  of 
cold  ;  and  besides  the  force  of  the  Sunnes  beames,  which 
strike  into  the  head,  mine  eyes  are  much  offended  with  any 
kinde  of  glittring  or  sparkling  light ;  so  that  I  cannot  well 
sit  at  dinner  over  against  a  cleare-burning  fire.  To  allay  or 
dim  the  whitenesse  of  paper,  when  I  was  most  given  to  read 
ing,  I  was  wont  to  lay  a  piece  of  greene  glasse  upon  my 
booke,  and  was  thereby  much  eased.  Hitherto  I  never  used 
spectacles,  nor  know  not  what  they  meane ;  and  can  yet  see 
as  farre  as  ever  I  could,  and  as  any  other  man ;  true  it  is, 
that  when  night  comes,  I  begin  to  perceive  a  dimnes  and 
weakenesse  in  reading ;  the  continual!  exercise  whereof,  and 
specially  by  night,  was  ever  somewhat  troublesome  unto 
mine  eyes.  Loe  here  a  steppe-backe,  and  that  very  sensible. 
I  shall  recoyle  no  more,  from  a  second  to  a  third,  and  from 
a  third  to  a  fourth,  so  gently,  that  before  I  feele  the  declina 
tion  and  age  of  my  sight,  I  must  be  starke  blinde.  So 
artificiall  doe  the  Fates  untwist  our  lives-threede.  Yet  am 
T  in  doubt,  that  my  hearing  is  about  to  become  thicke  :  and 
you  shall  see,  that  I  shall  have  lost  it  halfe,  when  yet  I  shall 
finde  fault  with  their  voyces  that  speake  unto  me.  The 

379 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  minde  must  be  strained  to  a  high  pitch,  to  make  it  perceive 
X111    .     how  it  declineth.     My  going  is  yet  very  nimble,  quicke  and 

611 


n°t  which  of  the  two  I  can  more  hardly 
stay  at  one  instant,  eyther  my  minde  or  my  body.  I  must 
like  that  preacher  well,  that  can  tie  mine  attention  to  a 
whole  sermon.  In  places  of  ceremonies,  where  every  man 
doth  so  nicely  stand  upon  countenance,  where  I  have  scene 
Ladies  hold  their  eyes  so  steady,  I  could  never  so  hold  out, 
but  some  part  of  mine  would  ever  be  gadding  :  although  I 
be  sitting  there,  I  am  not  well  settled.  As  Chrysippus  the 
Phylosophers  chamber-maide,  saide  of  hir  Master,  that  he 
was  never  drunke  but  in  his  legges  ;  for  whersoever  he  sate, 
he  was  ever  accustomed  to  be  wagging  with  them  :  and  this 
she  saide  at  what  time  store  of  Wine  had  made  his  com 
panions  cuppe-shotten,  and  yet  he  felt  no  alteration  but  con 
tinued  sober  in  minde.  It  might  likewise  have  beene  said  of 
me,  that  even  from  mine  infancy,  I  had  either  folly  or  quicke- 
silver  in  my  feete,  so  much  stirring  and  naturall  inconstancy 
have  I  in  them,  where  ever  I  place  them.  It  is  unmannerli- 
nesse,  and  prejudiciall  unto  health,  yea  and  to  pleasure  also, 
to  feede  grosely  and  greedily,  as  I  doe.  I  shall  sometimes 
through  haste  bite  my  tongue  and  fingers  ends.  Diogenes 
meeting  with  a  childe,  that  did  eate  so,  gave  his  tutor  a 
whirret  on  the  eare.  There  were  men  in  Rome,  that  as  others 
teach  youth  to  go  with  a  good  grace,  so  they  taught  men 
to  chew,  with  decency.  I  doe  sometimes  lose  the  leisure  to 
speake,  which  is  so  pleasing  an  entertainment  at  the  table, 
provided  they  be  discourses  short,  witty  and  pleasant.  There 
is  a  kinde  of  jelousie  and  envy  betweene  our  pleasures,  and 
they  often  shocke  and  hinder  one  another.  Alcibiades,  a 
man  very  exquisitely-skilfull  in  making  good  cheere,  inhibited 
all  manner  of  musicke  at  tables,  because  it  should  not  hinder 
the  delight  of  discourses,  for  the  reason  which  Plato  affords 
him  :  that  it  is  a  custome  of  popular  or  base  men  to  call  for 
minstrels  or  singers  at  feasts,  and  an  argument,  they  want 
witty  or  good  discourses,  and  pleasing  entertainement,  where 
with  men  of  conceipt  and  understanding  know  how  to  enter- 
feast  and  entertaine  themselves.  Varro  requireth  this  at  a 
banket  :  an  assembly  of  persons,  faire,  goodly  and  handsome 
of  presence,  affable  and  delightfull  in  conversation,  which 
380 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

must  not  be  dumbe  nor  dull,  sullaine  nor  slovenly  :  cleanli-  CHAPTER 
nesse  and  neatnesse  in  meates  :  and  faire  wether.  A  good  XIII 
minde-pleasing  table-entertainement,  is  not  a  little  voluptu 
ous  feast,  nor  a  meanly  artificiall  banquet.  Neither  great  or 
sterne  commanders  in  Warres,  nor  famous  or  strict  Philo 
sophers  have  disdained  the  use  or  knowledge  of  it.  My 
imagination  hath  bequeathed  three  of  them  to  the  keep 
ing  of  my  memory,  onely  which,  fortune  did  at  severall 
times,  yeeld  exceedingly  delightsome  unto  me.  My  present 
state  doth  now  exclude  me  from  them.  For,  every  one, 
according  to  the  good  temper  of  body  or  mind,  wherein  he 
finds  himselfe,  addeth  either  principal!  grace  or  taste  unto 
them.  My  selfe  who  but  grovell  on  the  ground,  hate  that 
kinde  of  humane  Wisedome,  which  would  make  us  disdaine- 
full  and  enemies  of  the  bodies  reformation.  I  deeme  it  an 
equall  injustice,  either  to  take  naturall  sensualities  against 
the  hart,  or  to  take  them  too  neere  the  hart.  Xerxes  was 
a  ninny-hammer,  who  enwrapped  and  given  to  all  humane 
voluptuousnesse,  proposed  rewards  for  those,  that  should 
devise  such  as  he  had  never  heard  of.  And  hee  is  not  much 
behinde  him  in  sottishnesse  that  goes  about  to  abridge  those, 
which  nature  hath  devised  for  him.  One  should  neither 
follow  nor  avoyd  them  :  but  receive  them.  I  receive  them 
somewhat  more  amply  and  graciously,  and  rather  am  con 
tented  to  follow  naturall  inclination.  We  need  not  ex 
aggerate  their  inanity :  it  will  sufficiently  be  felt,  and  doth 
sufficiently  produce  it  selfe.  Godamercy  our  weake,  crazed 
and  joy-diminishing  spirit,  which  makes  us  distaste  both 
them  and  himselfe.  Hee  treateth  both  himselfe  and  what 
soever  hee  receiveth  sometimes  forward  and  other  times 
backeward,  according  as  himselfe  is  either  insaciate,  vaga 
bond,  new  fanged  or  variable. 

Sincerum  est  nisi  vas,  quodciinque;  infundis  aceacit.  HOR.  \,  Epistle 

In  no  sweete  vessell  all  you  poure,  n<  54- 

In  such  a  vessell  soone  will  sowre. 

My  selfe,  who  brag  so  curiously  to  embrace  and  particu 
larly  to  allow  the  commodities  of  life  ;  whensoever  I  looke 
precisely  into  it  I  finde  nothing  therein  but  winde.  But 
what  ?  we  are  nothing  but  winde.  And  the  very  winde  also, 

381 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  more  wisely  then  we  loveth  to  bluster  and  to  be  in  agita- 
XIII  tion :  And  is  pleased  with  his  owne  offices,  without  desiring 
fPeri  stabilitJ  or  solidity;  qualities  that  be  not  his  owne.  The 
meere  pleasures  of  imagination,  as  well  as  displeasure  (say 
some)  are  the  greatest :  as  the  ballance  of  Critolaus  did 
expresse.  It  is  no  wonder,  she  composeth  them  at  her 
pleasure,  and  cuts  them  out  of  the  whole  cloath.  I  see 
dayly  some  notable  presidents  of  it,  and  peradventure  to  be 
desired.  But  I,  that  am  of  a  commixt  condition,  homely 
and  plaine,  cannot  so  throughly  bite  on  that  onely  and  so 
simple  object :  but  shall  grosely  and  carelesly  give  my  selfe 
over  to  the  present  delights,  of  the  generall  and  humane 
law,  intellectually  sensible,  and  sensibly-intellectuall.  The 
Cirenaique  Philosophers  are  of  opinion,  that  as  griefes,  so 
corporall  pleasures  are  more  powerfull ;  and  as  double,  so, 
more  just.  There  are  some  (as  Aristotle  saith)  who  with  a 
savage  kinde  of  stupidity,  will  seeme  distastefull  or  squemish 
of  them.  Some  others  I  know,  that  doe  it  out  of  ambition. 
Why  renounce  they  not  also  breathing  ?  why  live  they  not 
of  their  own,  and  refuse  light,  because  it  commeth  of 
gratuity :  and  costs  them  neither  invention  nor  vigor  ? 
That  Mars,  or  Pallas,  or  Mercuric,  should  nourish  them  to 
see,  instead  of  Ceres,  Venus,  or  Bacchus?  Will  they  not 
seeke  for  the  quadrature  of  the  circle,  even  upon  their 
wives  ?  I  hate  that  we  should  be  commanded  to  have  our 
minds  in  the  clouds,  whilst  our  bodies  are  sitting  at  the 
table ;  yet  would  I  not  have  the  minde  to  be  fastned  there 
unto,  nor  wallow  upon  it,  nor  lie  along  thereon,  but  to 
apply  it  selfe  and  sit  at  it.  Aristippus  defended  but  the 
body,  as  if  wee  had  no  soule  :  Zeno  embraced  but  the  soule, 
as  if  we  had  no  body.  Both  viciously.  Pythagoras  (say  they) 
hath  followed  a  Philosophic,  all  in  contemplation  :  Socrates 
altogether  in  manners  and  in  action :  Plato  hath  found  a 
mediocrity  between  both.  But  they  say  so  by  way  of  dis 
course.  For,  the  true  temperature  is  found  in  Socrates  ; 
and  Plato,  is  more  Socratical  then  Pythagorical,  and  it 
becomes  him  best.  When  I  dance,  I  dance ;  and  when  I 
sleepe,  I  sleepe.  And  when  I  am  solitarie  walking  in  a  faire 
orchard,  if  my  thoughts  have  a  while  entertained  themselves 
with  strange  occurrences,  I  doe  another  while  bring  them  to 
382 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

walke  with  mee  in  the  orchard,  and  to  be  partakers  of  the  CHAPTER 
pleasure  of  that  solitarinesse  and  of  my  selfe.  Nature  hath  XIII  . 
like  a  kinde  mother  observed  this,  that  such  actions  as  shee  '  e^n 
for  our  necessities  hath  enjoyned  unto  us,  should  also  be 
voluptuous  unto  us.  And  doth  not  onely  by  reason  but 
also  by  appetite  envite  us  unto  them :  it  were  injustice  to 
corrupt  her  rules.  When  I  behold  Caesar  and  Alexander  in 
the  thickest  of  their  wondrous  great  labours,  so  absolutely 
to  enjoy  humane  and  corporall  pleasures,  I  say  not,  that 
they  release  thereby  their  minde,  but  rather  strengthen  the 
same ;  submitting  by  vigor  of  courage  their  violent  occupa 
tion,  and  laborious  thoughts  to  the  customary  use  of  ordi 
nary  life.  Wise  had  they  beene,  had  they  beleeved,  that 
that  was  their  ordinary  vocation,  and  this  their  extra 
ordinary.  What  egregious  fooles  are  we?  Hee  hath  past 
his  life  in  idlenesse,  say  we ;  alas  I  have  done  nothing  this 
day.  What  ?  have  you  not  lived  ?  It  is  not  onely  the 
fundamentall,  but  the  noblest  of  your  occupation.  Had  I 
beene  placed  or  thought  fit  for  the  managing  of  great 
aflPaires,  I  would  have  shewed  what  I  could  have  performed. 
Have  you  knowen  how  to  meditate  and  mannage  your  life  ? 
you  have  accomplished  the  greatest  worke  of  all.  For  a 
man  to  shew  and  exploit  himselfe,  nature  hath  no  neede  of 
fortune,  she  equally  shewes  herselfe  upon  all  grounds,  in  all 
sutes,  before  and  behinde,  as  it  were  without  curteines,  welt 
or  gard.  Have  you  knowne  how  to  compose  your  manners? 
you  have  done  more  then  he  who  hath  composed  bookes. 
Have  you  knowne  how  to  take  rest  ?  you  have  done  more 
then  he,  who  hath  taken  Empires  and  Citties.  The  glorious 
masterpeice  of  man,  is,  to  live  to  the  repulse:  All  other 
things,  as  to  raigne,  to  governe,  to  hoard  up  treasure,  to 
thrive  and  to  build,  are  for  the  most  part  but  appendixes 
and  supports  therunto.  It  is  to  thee  a  great  pleasure,  to 
see  a  Generall  of  an  armie  at  the  foote  of  a  breach,  which 
ere  long  intendeth,  to  charge  or  enter?  all  whole,  undis- 
tracted  and  carelesly  to  prepare  himselfe,  whilst  he  sits  at 
dinner  with  his  friends  about  him,  to  talke  of  any  matter. 
And  I  am  delighted  to  see  Brutus,  having  both  heaven  and 
earth  conspired  against  him  and  the  liberty  of  Rome,  by 
stealth  to  take  some  houres  of  the  night  from  his  other 

383 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  cares,  and   walking  of  the    round,  in  al  security  to  reade, 

XI II         to   note   and  to  abbreviate    Polibius.     It  is  for  base   and 

Lxpen-     petty  minds,  dulled   and    overwhelmed  with  the  weight  of 

affaires,  to  be  ignorant   how    to    leave    them,   and   not   to 

know  how  to  free  themselves  from  them ;  nor  how  to  leave 

and  take  them  againe. 

HOR.  Car.  i.  0  fortes  peiordque  passi, 

Od.  vii.  30.  Mecum  scepe  viri,  nunc  vino  pellite  curas, 

Cras  ingens  iterabimus  cequor. 

Valiant  compeeres,  who  oft  have  worse  endured 
With  me,  let  now  with  wine  your  cares  be  cured  : 
To  morrow  we  againe 
Will  launch  into  the  maine. 

Whether  it  be  in  jest  or  earnest,  that  the  Sorbonicall  or 
theologicall  wine,  and  their  feasts  or  gaudy  dayes  are  now 
come  to  bee  proverbially  jested  at :  I  thinke  there  is  some 
reason,  that  by  how  much  more  profitably  and  seriously 
they  have  bestowed  the  morning  in  the  exercise  of  their 
schooles,  so  much  more  commodiously  and  pleasantly  should 
they  dine  at  noone.  A  cleare  conscience  to  have  well  em 
ployed  and  industriously  spent  the  other  houres  is  a  perfect 
seasoning  and  savory  condiment  of  tables.  So  have  wise 
men  lived.  And  that  inimitable  contention  unto  vertue, 
which  so  amazeth  us,  in  both  Catoes,  their  so  strictly-severe 
humor,  even  unto  importunity,  hath  thus  mildly  submitted 
my  selfe,  and  taken  pleasure  in  the  lawes  of  humane  con 
dition,  and  in  Venus  and  Bacchus.  According  to  their 
Sects-precepts,  which  require  a  perfectly  wise  man,  to  be 
fully  expert  and  skillfull  in  the  true  use  of  sensualities,  as  in 
Cic.  Fin.  ii.  all  other  duties  or  devoires  belonging  to  life.  Cui  cor  sapiat, 
ei  et  sapiat  palatus.  '  Let  his  palate  be  savoury,  whose  heart 
4  is  savoury.1  Easie-yeelding  and  facility  doth,  in  my  con 
ceit,  greatly  honour  and  is  best  befitting  a  magnanimos  and 
noble  minde.  Epaminondas  thought  it  no  scorne,  to  thrust 
himselfe  amongst  the  boyes  of  his  citie,  and  dance  with  them, 
yea  and  to  sing  and  play,  and  with  attention  busie  himselfe. 
were  it  in  things  that  might  derogate  from  the  honor  and 
reputation  of  his  glorious  victories,  and  from  the  perfect 
reformation  of  manners,  that  was  in  him.  And  amongst  so 

384 


THE    THIRD    BOOKE 

infinite  admirable  actions  of  Scipio  the  grand  father,  a  man  CHAPTER 
worthy  to  be  esteemed  of  heavenly  race,  nothing  addeth  so  XIII 
much  grace  unto  him,  as  to  see  him  carelesly  to  dallie  and  Of  Experi- 
childishly  to  trifle  in  gathering  and  chusing  of  cockle-shels, 
and  play  at  cost  castle  along  the  sea-shoare  with  his  friend 
Laelius.  And  if  it  were  fowle  weather,  amusing  and  solacing 
himselfe,  to  represent  in  writing  and  comedies  the  most 
popular  and  base  actions  of  men.  And  having  his  head 
continually  busied  with  that  wonderfull  enterprise  against 
Hanibal  and  Affricke,  yet  hee  still  visited  the  schooles  in 
Cicily,  and  frequented  the  lectures  of  Philosophy,  arming 
his  enemies  teeth  at  Rome  with  envy  and  spight.  Nor  any 
thing  more  remarkeable,  in  Socrates,  then,  when  being  old 
and  crazed,  hee  would  spare  so  much  time  as  to  be  instructed 
in  the  art  of  dancing  and  playing  upon  instruments  :  and 
thought  the  time  well  bestowed.  Who  notwithstanding 
hath  been  seen  to  continue  a  whole  day  and  night  in  an 
extasie  or  trance,  yea  ever  standing  on  his  feet  in  presence 
of  all  the  Greeke  armie,  as  it  were  surprised  and  ravished 
by  some  deep  and  minde-distracting  thought.  He  hath 
beene  noted  to  be  the  first,  amongst  so  infinite  valiant  men 
in  the  army,  headlong  to  rush  out,  to  helpe  and  bring-off 
Alcibiades,  engaged  and  enthronged  by  his  enemies :  to 
cover  him  with  his  body,  and  by  maine  force  of  armes  and 
courage,  bring  him  off  from  the  rout :  And  in  the  Deliane 
battell,  to  save  and  disingage  Xenophon,  who  was  beaten 
from  his  horse.  And  in  the  midst  of  all  the  Athenian 
people,  wounded,  as  it  were  with  so  unworthy  a  spectacle, 
headlong  present  himselfe  to  the  first  man,  to  recover 
Theramenes,  from  out  the  hands  of  the  officers  and  satelites, 
of  the  thirty  tyrants  of  Athens,  who  were  leading  him  to 
his  death  ;  and  never  desisted  from  his  bold  attempt,  until 
hee  met  with  Theramenes  himselfe,  though  hee  were  followed 
and  assisted  with  two  more.  He  hath  beene  scene  (pro 
voked  thereunto  by  a  matchlesse  beauty,  wherewith  he  was 
richly  endowed  by  nature)  at  any  time  of  neede  to  maintaine 
severe  continency.  Hee  hath  continually  beene  noted  to 
march  to  the  warres  on  foote ;  to  breake  the  ice  with  his 
bare  feete ;  to  weare  one  same  garment  in  summer  and 
winter,  to  exceed  all  his  companions  in  patience  of  any 
3  C  385  " 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  labour  or  travell;  to  eate  no  more,  or  otherwise  at  any 
XIII  banquet,  then  at  his  ordinary:  He  hath  beene  scene  seven 
Of  Expen-  anj  twenty  yeares  together  with  one  same  undismaid  coun 
tenance,  patiently  to  beare  and  endure  hunger,  poverty,  the 
indocility  and  stubbornesse  of  his  children,  the  frowardnes 
and  scratchings  of  his  wife ;  and  in  the  end  malicious  de 
traction,  tyranny,  enprysonment,  shakels  and  poyson.  But 
was  that  man  envited  to  drinke  to  him  by  duty  of  civility  ? 
he  was  also  the  man  of  the  army,  to  whom  the  advantage 
thereof  remained  ?  And  yet  he  refused  not,  nor  disdained 
to  play  for  nuts  with  children,  nor  to  run  with  them  upon 
a  hobby-horse ;  wherin  he  had  a  very  good  grace :  '  For  all 
4  actions'  (saith  Philosophy)  '  doe  equally  beseeme  well,  and 
'  honour  a  wise  man.'  Wee  have  good  ground  and  reason, 
and  should  never  be  weary  to  present  the  image  of  this  in 
comparable  man,  unto  al  patternes  and  formes  of  perfections. 
There  are  very  few  examples  of  life,  absolutly  full  and  pure. 
And  our  instruction  is  greatly  wronged,  in  that  it  hath 
certaine  weak,  defective  and  imperfect  formes  proposed  unto 
it,  scarcely  good  for  any  good  use,  which  divert  and  draw  us 
backe  ;  and  may  rather  be  termed  corrupters  then  correcters. 
Man  is  easily  deceived.  One  may  more  easily  goe  by  the 
sides,  where  extremity  serveth  as  bound,  as  a  stay  and  as  a 
guide,  then  by  the  mid-way,  which  is  open  and  wide  :  and 
more  according  unto  art,  then  according  unto  nature,  but 
therewithal!  lesse  nobly  and  with  lesse  commendation.  The 
greatnesse  of  the  minde  is  not  so  much,  to  drawe  up  and 
hale  forward,  as  to  know  how  to  range  direct  and  circum 
scribe  it  selfe.  It  holdeth  for  great  whatsoever  is  sufficient. 
And  sheweth  her  height,  in  loving  meane  things  better  then 
eminent.  There  is  nothing  so  goodly,  so  faire  and  so  lawfull 
as  to  play  the  man  well  and  duely  :  Nor  Science  so  hard  and 
difficult,  as  to  know  how  to  live  this  life  well.  And  of  all 
the  infirmities  we  have,  the  most  savage,  is  to  despise  our 
being.  Whoso  will  sequester  or  distract  his  minde,  let  him 
hardily  doe  it,  if  he  can,  at  what  time  his  body  is  not  well 
at  ease,  thereby  to  discharge  it  from  that  contagion  :  And 
elsewhere  contrary :  that  shee  may  assist  and  favour  him, 
and  not  refuse  to  be  partaker  of  his  natural!  pleasures,  and 
conjugally  be  pleased  with  them:  adding  thereunto,  if  shee 
386 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

be  the  wiser,  moderation,  lest  through  indiscretion,  they  CHAPTER 
might  be  confounded  with  pleasure.  Intemperance  is  the  XIII 
plague  of  sensuality :  and  temperance  is  not  her  scourge,  {  Experi- 
but  rather  her  seasoning.  Eudoxus,  who  thereon  established 
his  chiefe  felicity :  and  his  companions,  that  raised  the  same 
to  so  high  a  pitch,  by  meanes  of  temperance,  which  in  them 
was  very  singular  and  exemplar,  favoured  the  same  in  her 
most  gracious  sweetnesse.  I  enjoyne  my  mind,  with  a  looke 
equally  regular,  to  behold  both  sorrow  and  voluptuousenesse  : 
JEodem  enim  vitio  est  effusio  animi  in  Icetitia,  quo  indolore  con-  Cic.  Tusc.  Qu. 
tractio.  '  As  faulty  is  the  enlarging  of  the  minde  in  mirth,  lVf 
'  as  the  contracting  it  in  griefe":  and  equally  constant:  But 
the  one  merrily  and  the  other  severely :  And  according  to 
that  shee  may  bring  unto  it,  to  be  as  carefull  to  extinguish 
the  one,  as  diligent  to  quench  the  other.  To  have  a  perfect 
insight  into  a  good,  drawes  with  it  an  absolute  insight  into 
evil.  And  sorrow  hath  in  her  tender  beginning  something 
that  is  unavoydable :  and  voluptuousnesse  in  her  excessive 
end,  something  that  is  evitable.  Plato  coupleth  them 
together,  and  would  have  it  to  bee  the  equall  office  of 
fortitude,  to  combat  against  sorrowes,  and  fight  against 
the  immoderate  and  charming  blandishments  of  sensuality. 
They  are  two  fountaines,  at  which  whoso  draweth,  whence, 
when  and  as  much  as  he  needeth,  be  it  a  city,  be  it  a  man, 
bee  it  a  beast,  he  is  very  happy.  The  first  must  be  taken 
for  physicke  and  necessity,  and  more  sparingly  :  The  second 
for  thirst  but  not  unto  drunkennesse.  Paine,  voluptuous 
nesse,  love  and  hate,  are  the  first  passions  a  childe  feeleth  : 
if  reason  approach,  and  they  apply  themselves  unto  it ;  that 
is  vertue.  I  have  a  Dictionary  severally  and  wholly  to  my 
selfe :  I  passe  the  time  when  it  is  foule  and  incommodious : 
when  it  is  faire  and  good  I  will  not  passe  it :  I  runne  it 
over  againe,  and  take  hold  of  it.  A  man  should  runne  the 
badde,  and  settle  himselfe  in  the  good.  This  vulgar  phrase 
of  passe  time,  and  to  passe  the  time,  represents  the  custome 
of  those  wise  men,  who  thinke  to  have  no  better  account  of 
their  life,  then  to  passe  it  over  and  escape  it :  to  passe  it 
over  and  bawke  it,  and  so  much  as  in  them  lyeth,  to  ignore 
and  avoyd  it,  as  a  thing  of  an  yrkesome,  tedious,  and  to  bee 
disdained  qualitv.  But  I  know  it  to  bee  otherwise  ;  and 

387 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  finde  it  to  be  both  priseable  and  commodious,  yea  in  her 
XHI  last  declination ;  where  I  hold  it.  And  Nature  hath  put 
Expen-  .j^g  same  ^0  our  hands,  furnished  with  such  and  so  favour 
able  circumstances,  that  if  it  presse  and  molest  us,  or  if 

SEN.  Epist.  xv.  unprofitably  it  escape  us,  we  must  blame  our  selves.  Stulti 
vita  ingrata  est,  trepida  est,  tota  infuturumfertur.  '  A  fooles 
6  life  is  all  pleasant,  all  fearefull,  all  fond  of  the  future."  I 
therefore  prepare  and  compose  my  selfe,  to  forgoe  and  lose 
it  without  grudging ;  but  a  thing  that  is  loseable  and  tran 
sitory  by  it's  owne  condition  :  not  as  troublesome  and 
importunate.  Nor  beseemes  it  a  man  to  bee  grieved  when 
he  dieth,  except  they  be  such  as  please  themselves  to  live 
still.  There  is  a  kinde  of  husbandry  in  knowing  how  to 
enjoy  it.  I  enjoy  it  double  to  others.  For  the  measure  in 
jovissance  dependeth  more  or  lesse  on  the  application  we 
lend  it.  Especially  at  this  instant,  that  I  perceive  mine  to 
be  short  in  time,  I  wil  extend  it  in  weight :  I  wil  stay  the 
readines  of  her  flight,  by  the  promptitude  of  my  holdfast  by 
it :  and  by  the  vigor  of  custome,  recompence  the  haste  of 
her  fleeting.  According  as  the  possession  of  life  is  more 
short,  I  must  endcvour  to  make  it  more  profound  and  full. 
Other  men  feele  the  sweetnesse  and  contentment  and  pro 
sperity.  I  feele  it  as  well  as  they  ;  but  it  is  not  in  passing 
and  gliding  :  yet  should  it  be  studied,  tasted  and  ruminated, 
thereby  to  yeeld  it  condigne  thanks,  that  it  pleased  to  grant 
the  same  unto  us.  They  enjoy  other  pleasures,  as  that  of 
sleepe,  without  knowing  them.  To  the  end  that  sleepe 
should  not  dully  and  unfeelingly  escape  me,  and  that  I 
might  better  taste  and  be  acquainted  with  it,  I  have  hereto 
fore  found  it  good,  to  bee  troubled  and  interrupted  in  the 
same.  I  have  a  kinde  of  contentment  to  consult  with  my 
selfe :  which  consultation  I  doe  superficially  runne  over,  but 
considerately  sound  the  same,  and  apply  my  reason  to  enter 
tain  e  and  receive  it,  which  is  now  become  fro  ward,  peevish 
and  distasted.  Doe  I  finde  my  selfe  in  some  quiet  moode  ? 
is  there  any  sensuality  that  tickles  me  ?  I  doe  not  suffer 
the  same  to  busie  it  selfe  or  dally  about  sences,  but  asso 
ciate  my  mind  unto  it:  Not  to  engage  or  plunge  it  selfe 
therein,  but  therein  to  take  delight :  not  to  lose,  but  therein 
to  finde  it  selfe.  And  for  her  part  I  employ  her,  to  view 
388 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

herselfe  in  that  prosperous  state,  to  ponder  and  esteeme  the  CHAPTER 
good  fortune  she  hath,  and  to  amplifie  the  same.  She  XIII 
measureth  how  much  she  is  beholding  unto  God,  for  that  OfExPen" 
she  is  at  rest  with  her  conscience,  and  free  from  other  testine 
passions,  and  hath  in  her  body  her  natural  disposition : 
orderly  and  competently  enjoying  certaine  flattering  and 
effeminate  functions,  with  which  it  pleaseth  him  of  his 
grace  to  recompence  the  griefes,  wherewith  his  justice  at 
his  pleasure  smiteth  us.  Oh  how  availfull  is  it  unto  her 
to  be  so  seated,  that  wherever  she  casteth  her  eyes,  the 
heavens  are  calme  round  about  her;  and  no  desire,  no 
feare  or  doubt  troubleth  the  ayre  before  her :  here  is  no 
difficulty,  either  past,  or  present,  or  to  come,  over  which 
her  imagination  passeth  not  without  offence.  This  con 
sideration  takes  a  great  lustre  from  the  comparison  of 
different  conditions.  Thus  doe  I  in  a  thousand  shapes 
propose  unto  my  selfe  those  to  whom  either  fortune,  or 
their  owne  errour  doth  transport  and  torment.  And  these 
nearer,  who  so  slackly  and  incuriously  receive  their  good 
fortune.  They  are  men  which  indeed  passe  their  time : 
they  overpasse  the  present  and  that  which  they  possesse, 
thereby  to  serve  their  hopes  with  shadowes  and  vaine 
images,  which  fancy  sets  before  them, 

Morte  oblita  qualesfama  est  volitarefiguras  VIRG.  ALH. 

Aut  qacB  sopitos  deludunt  somnia  sensus.  x.  641. 

Such  walking  shapes  we  say,  when  men  are  dead, 
Dreames,  whereby  sleeping-  senses  are  misse-led, 

which  hasten  and  prolong  their  flight,  according  as  they 
are  followed.  The  fruit  and  scope  of  their  pursuit,  is  to 
pursue:  As  Alexander  said,  that  the  end  of  his  Travell, 
was  to  travell. 

Nil  actum  credem  cam  quid  superesset  agendum.  LUCAN.  ii.  656. 

Who  thought  that  nought  was  done, 
When  ought  remain'd  undone. 

As  for  me  then,  I  love  my  selfe  and  cherish  it,  such  as  it 
hath  pleased  God  to  graunt  it  us.  I  desire  not  hee  should 
speake  of  the  necessity  of  eating  and  drinking.  And  I  would 
thinke  to  offend  no  lesse  excusably,  in  desiring  it  should  have 

389 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  it  double.    Sapiens  divitiarum  naturalium  qucesitor  acerrimus. 

XIII         « A  wise  man  is  a  most  eager  and  earnest  searcher  of  those 

fExpen-    « things  that  are  naturall.'     Nor  that  we  should  sustaine  our 

SEN  Ei)i  cxix  se^ves  by  on^y  putting  a  little  of  that  drugge  into  our  mouth, 
*  wherewith  Epimenedes  was  wont  to  alay  hunger,  and  yet 
maintained  himselfe.  Nor  that  wee  should  insensibly  pro 
duce  children  at  our  fingers  endes  or  at  our  heeles,  but  rather 
(speaking  with  reverence)  that  wee  might  with  pleasure  and 
voluptuousnesse  produce  them  both  at  our  heeles  and  fingers 
endes.  Nor  that  the  body  should  be  voyde  of  desire,  and 
without  tickling  delight.  They  are  ungratefull  and  impious 
complaints.  I  cheerefully  and  thankefully,  and  with  a  good 
heart,  accept  what  nature  hath  created  for  me  ;  and  am  there 
with  well  pleased,  and  am  proud  of  it.  Great  wrong  is 
offered  unto  that  great  and  all-puissant  Giver,  to  refuse  his 
gift,  which  is  so  absolutely  good  ;  and  disanull  or  disfigure 

Cic.  Fin.  Bon.  the  same,  since  hee  made  perfectly  good.     Omnia  quce  secun- 

m-  dum  naturam  sunt,  estimatione  digna  sunt.  '  All  things  that 

'  are  according  to  nature,  are  worthy  to  bee  esteemed.1  Of 
Philosophies  opinions,  I  more  willingly  embrace  those,  which 
are  the  most  solide,  and  that  is  to  say,  such  as  are  most 
humane  and  most  ours  :  My  discourses  are  sutable  to  my 
manners  :  low  and  humble.  She  then  brings  forth  a  childe 
well  pleasing  me,  when  she  betakes  herselfe  to  her  Quiddities 
and  Ergoes,  to  perswade  us,  that  it  is  a  barbarous  aliance, 
to  marry  what  is  divine  with  that  which  is  terrestriall :  wedde 
reasonable  with  unreasonable  ;  combine  severe  with  indulgent, 
and  couple  honest  with  unhonest :  that  voluptuousnesse  is  a 
brutall  quality,  unworthy  the  taste  of  a  wiseman.  The  onely 
pleasure  he  drawes  from  the  enjoying  of  a  faire  young  bride, 
is  the  delight  of  his  conscience,  by  performing  an  action  ac 
cording  unto  order ;  As  to  put  on  his  bootes  for  a  profitable 
riding.  Oh  that  his  followers  had  no  more  right,  or  sinewes, 
or  pith,  or  juyce,  at  the  dismaydening  of  their  wives,  than 
they  have  in  his  Lesson.  It  is  not  that,  which  Socrates,  both 
his  and  our  Master,  saith  ;  Hee  valueth  rightly  as  hee  ought 
corporall  voluptuousnesse  :  but  he  preferreth  that  of  the 
minde,  as  having  more  force,  more  constancy,  facility,  variety 
and  dignity.  This  according  to  him,  goeth  nothing  alone,  he 
is  not  so  phantasticall ;  but  onely  first.  For  him,  temperance 
390 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

is  a  moderatrix,  and  not  an  adversary  of  sensualities.    Nature  CHAPTER 

is  a  gentle  guide  :  Yet  not  more  gentle,  then  prudent  and         XI11 

just.     Intrandum  est  in  rerum  naturam,  et  penitus  quid  ea       tJixperi- 

postulet, pervidendum.    'Wee  must  enter  into  the  nature  of  c      „.     „ 

6  things,  and  throughly  see  what  shee  inwardly  requiers."1     I  v. 

quest  after  her  track  ;  we  have  confounded  her  with  artificiall 

traces.     And  that  Academicall  and  Peripateticall  summum 

bonum  or  soveraigne  felicity,  which  is,  to  live  according  to 

her  rules  :  by  this  reason  becommeth  difficult  to  be  limited. 

and   hard   to    bee    expounded.     And  that  of  the    Stoicks, 

cousin  germane  to  the  other,  which  is,  to  yeeld  unto  nature. 

Is  it  not  an  errour,  to  esteeme  some  actions  lesse  worthy, 

forsomuch    as   they  are    necessary  ?     Yet  shall  they  never 

remove  out  of  my  head,   that  it  is  not  a  most  convenient 

marriage,  to  wedde  Pleasure  unto  Necessity.     With  which 

(saith  an   antient  Writer)  the  Gods  doe  ever  complot  and 

consent. 

To  what  end  doe  wee  by  a  divorce  dismember  a  frame 
contexted  with  so  mutuall,  coherent  and  brotherly  corre 
spondency.  Contrariwise,  let  us  repaire  and  renue  the  same 
by  enterchangeable  offices  :  that  the  spirit  may  awake  and 
quicken  the  dul  heavinesse  of  the  body,  and  the  body  stay 
the  lightnesse  of  the  spirit,  and  settle  and  fixe  the  same.  Qui  AUG.  Verb. 
velut  summum  bonum,  laudat  animcc  naturam,  et  tanquamA.tostol'^r- 
malum,  naturam  carnis  accusat,  profectb  et  animam  carna-  * 
liter  appetit,  et  carnem  incarnaliterjugit,  quoniam  id  vanitate 
sentit  humana,  non  veritate  divina.  '  He  that  praiseth  the 
4  nature  of  the  soule,  as  his  principall  good,  and  accuseth 
4  nature  of  the  flesh  as  evill,  assuredly  he  both  carnally 
'  affecteth  the  soule,  and  carnally  escheweth  the  flesh,  since 
'  he  is  of  this  mind  not  by  divine  verity,  but  humane 
vanity/  There  is  no  part  or  parcell  unworthy  of  our  care 
in  that  present,  which  God  hath  bestowed  upon  us  :  We 
are  accoumptable  even  for  the  least  haire  of  it.  And  it 
is  no  commission  for  fashions  sake  for  any  man,  to  direct 
man  according  to  his  condition  :  it  is  expresse,  naturall  and 
principall :  And  the  Creator  hath  seriously  and  severely 
given  the  same  unto  us.  Onely  authority  is  of  force  with 
men  of  common  reach  and  understanding  ;  and  is  of  more 
weight  in  a  strange  language.  But  here  let  us  charge  again e. 

391 


MONTAIGNE'S    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER  Stultitice  proprium  quis  non  dixerit,  ignave  et  contumaciter 
facere  quce  facienda  sunt:  et  atib  corpus  impellere,  olio  animum, 
'  distrahique  inter  diver  sissimos  motus?  'Who  will  not  call  it 
'  a  property  of  folly  to  doe  sloath  fully  and  frowardly  what  is 
'  to  be  done,  and  one  way  to  drive  the  body,  and  another 
4  way  the  minde,  and  himselfe  to  bee  distracted  into  most 
6  divers  motions  ?'  Which,  the  better  to  see,  let  such  a  man 
one  day  tell  you  the  ammusements  and  imaginations,  which 
he  puts  into  his  owne  head,  and  for  which  he  diverteth 
his  thoughts  from  a  good  repast,  and  bewaileth  the  houre, 
he  imployeth  in  feeding  himselfe  :  you  shall  finde  there  is 
nothing  so  wallowish  in  all  the  messes  of  your  table,  as 
is  that  goodly  entertainement  of  his  minde  (it  were  often 
better  for  us  to  bee  sound  a  sleepe,  than  awake  unto  that 
we  doe)  and  you  shall  find,  that  his  discourses  and  intentions 
are  not  worth  your  meanest  dish.  Suppose  they  were  the 
entrancings  of  Archimedes  himselfe  :  and  what  of  that  ?  I 
here  touch  not,  nor  doe  I  blend  with  that  rabble  or  raskality 
of  men,  as  wee  are,  nor  with  that  vanity  of  desires  and 
cogitations,  which  divert  us,  onely  those  venerable  mindes, 
which  through  a  fervency  of  devotion  and  earnestnesse  of 
religion,  elevated  to  a  constant  and  consciencious  meditation 
of  heavenly-divine  things,  and  which  by  the  violence  of  a 
lively,  and  vertue  of  a  vehement  hope,  preoccupating  the  use 
of  eternall  soule-saving  nourishment ;  the  finall  end,  only 
stay  and  last  scope  of  Christian  desires  ;  the  onely  constant 
delight  and  incorruptible  pleasure  ;  disdaine  to  rely  on  our 
necessitous,  fleeting  and  ambiguous  commodities  :  and  easily 
resigne,  the  care  and  use  of  sensuall  and  temporall  feeding 
unto  the  body.  It  is  a  priviledged  study.  Super-celestiall 
opinions,  and  under- terrestriall  manners,  are  things,  that 
amongst  us,  I  have  ever  seene  to  bee  of  singular  accord. 
^Esope  that  famous  man,  saw  his  Master  pisse  as  he  was 
walking :  What  (said  hee)  must  we  not  etc.  when  we  are 
running?  Let  us  husband  time  as  well  as  wee  can.  Yet 
shall  we  employ  much  of  it,  both  idely  and  ill.  As  if  our 
minde  had  not  other  houres  enough  to  doe  hir  businesse, 
without  disassociating  hir  selfe  from  the  body  in  that  little 
space  which  shee  needeth  for  her  necessity.  They  will  be 
exempted  from  them  and  escape  man.  It  is  meere  folly, 
392 


THE   THIRD    BOOKE 

insteade  of  transforming  themselves  into  Angels,  they  trans-  CHAPTER 

change  themselves  into  beastes  :   in  lieu  of  advancing,  they         XIII 

abase  themselves.     Such  transcending  humours  affright  me 

as  much,  as  steepy,  high  and  inaccessible  places.     And  I 

tinde  nothing  so  hard  to  be  disgested  in  Socrates  his  life,  as 

his  extasies  and  communication  with  Daemones.     Nothing 

so  humane  in  Plato,  as  that  which  they  say,  hee  is  called 

divine.     And  of  our  sciences  those  which  are  raised  and 

extolled  for  the  highest,  seeme  to  me,  the  most  basest  and 

terrestriall.      I  finde   nothing   so    humble   and    mortall   in 

Alexanders  life,  as  his  concepts  about  his  immortalization. 

Philotas  by  his  answer  quipped  at  him  very  pleasantly  and 

wittily.     Hee  had  by  a  letter  congratulated  with  him,  and 

rejoyced  that  the   Oracle   of  lupiter  Hammon    had  placed 

him   amongst  the  Gods ;    to   whom   he   answered,  that  in 

respect  and  consideration  of  him,  he   was   very  glad  ;    but 

yet  there  was  some   cause  those   men    should   be    pittyed, 

that  were  to  live  with  a  man  and  obay  him,  who  outwent 

others,  and    would  not  bee  contented   with   the  state  and 

condition  of  mortall  man. 

— Dijs  te  ininoreiit  quod  yeris,  imperas.  HOR.  Car.  iii. 

Since  thou  lesse  then  the  Gods 
Bear'st  thee,  thou  rul'st  with  ods. 

The  quaint  inscription,  wherewith  the  Athenians  honored 
the  comming  of  Pompey  into  their  Citty,  agreeth  well,  and 
is  conformable  to  my  meaning. 

D'aatant  tu  ea  Dieu,  comine  PLUT.  vit. 

Tu  te  recognois  homme.  Pomp. 

So  farre  a  God  thou  maiest  accompted  be 
As  thou  a  man  doest  reaekiiowledge  thee. 

It  is  an  absolute  perfection,  and  as  it  were  divine  for  a 
man  to  know  how  to  enjoy  his  being  loyally.  We  seeke  for 
other  conditions  because  we  understand  not  the  use  of  ours  : 
and  goe  out  of  our  selves,  forsomuch  as  we  know  not  what 
abiding  there  is.  Wee  may  long  enough  get  upon  stilts,  for 
be  wee  upon  them,  yet  must  we  goe  with  our  owne  legges. 
And  sit  we  upon  the  highest  throne  of  the  World,  yet  sit  we 

3  D  393 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

CHAPTER    upon  our  owne  taile.    The  best  and  most  commendable  lives, 
XIII         and  best  pleasing  men  are  (in  my  conceit)  those  which  with 
^      ^en"     order  are  fitted,  and  with  decorum  are  ranged  to  the  common 
mould  and  humane  model:    but  without  wonder  or  extrava 
gancy.     Now  hath  old  age  need  to  be  handled  more  tenderly. 
Let  us  recommend  it  unto  that  God,  who  is  the  protector  of 
health,  and  fountaine  of  all  wisedome :  but  blithe  and  sociall : 

Frui  paratis  et  valido  mihi 

HOR    Car  i  Latoe  dones  et  precor  Integra 

Od  xxxi   n  Cum  mente,  nee  turpem  senectam, 

Degere,  nee  cythara  carentem. 

Apollo  graunt,  enjoy  health  I  may 
That  I  have  got,  and  with  sound  minde,  I  pray  : 
Nor  that  I  may  with  shame  spend  my  old  yeares, 
Nor  wanting  musicke  to  delight  mine  eares. 


THE  END  OF  THE  THIRD  AND  LAST  BOOKE. 


394 


AN   INDEX    OR   TABLE 


Directing  to  Many  of  the  Principall  Matters 
and  Personages  mentioned  in  this  Booke 


ABSENCE,  in.  224 

Achaians,  their  manner  of  warre, 

I.  32 

Action  better  than  speech,  I.  181,  etc. 
Actives  and  contemplatives,  1. 259,  etc. 
Activity  on  horsebacke,  I.  341 
Action    of  men  full  of  inconstancy, 

II.  10,,  etc. 

Action  to  some  is  rest,,  III.  258 

Actors,  vide  Players 

Accusations  by  torture,  II.  48 

Academicks,  11.  280 

Adrianus  Turnebus,  I.  141 

Adrianus  the  Emperor,  II.  412 

Advise,  II.  362 

Advocates,  II.  306 

Adversity,  III.  187 

jEmilius  Lepidus,  I.  76 

.^Egyptians  custome  at  Banquets,  I.  78 

jElius  Verus  the  Emperor,  I.  215 

Affection  will  have  some  object,  I.  30 

Affection  toward  Children,  u.  66,  etc. 

Affection  diverted  by  other  affections, 
ill.  56 

Affection  in  brute  beasts,  II.  167 

Affections,  I.  21 

Affectation,  I.  177  ;  II.  363 

Afflictions,  in.  34 

Agesilaus,  I.  24,  69 

Age,  I.  376,  etc. 

Age  as  imperfect  as  youth  in  repent 
ance,  in.  34 

Age  as  imperfect  as  youth  in  vertues, 
ibid. 

Aire,  II.  297 


Alexander  the  great,  I.  16,69  '•>  n-  499 

Alexander  Trivaltio,  I.  34 

Alcibiades,  I.  178  ;  his  dogge,  III.  57 

Alteration,  vide  Inconstancy 

Alcmseon,  II.  222 

Almanacke  makers,  I.  52  ;  II.  390 

Albucilla,  n.  336 

Ambassadors,  I.  61,  etc. 

Amasis  king  of  .ZEgypt,  1.  95 

Amitie,  vide  Friendship 

Ambition,  i.  265  ;  II.  470  ;  HI.  152,  278 

Ammunition,  vide  Armes 

Amestris,  n.  230 

Amphitheaters,  II.  159;  in.  138 

America,  in.  145 

Antigonus,  I.  34,  303  ;  III.  229 

Antiochus,  I.  91 

Anger,  n.  452,  etc. 

Antipathies,  I.  177 

Antisthenes,  I.  255,  257 

Antiquity,  I.  342,  etc. 

Ant,  vide  Emmets 

Androdus,  II.  175 

Anaximander,  n.  222 

Anaximenes,  ibid. 

Anaxagoras,  ibid. 

Auncestors,  n.  400,  etc. 

Apparrell,  I.  33,  310,  343  ;  II.  150,  etc. 

Appetite,  I.  358 

Apprehension,  vide  Imagination 

An   apology   for   Raymund    Sebond, 

II.  127 

Apparances,  n.  99  ;  in.  196 
Acquaintance,  vide  Familiarity 
Aristippus,  I.  182,  198 

395 


'• 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Aristophanes  the  Gramarian,  I.  184 

Art,  i.  242  ;  in.  47 

Armes,  vide  coat  Armes 

Armes,  I.  334,  etc.  ;  II.  90,  etc. 

Armies,  n.  482 

Artificiall     workes     among      bruit 

creatures,  n.  148 
Arrogance,  II.  140,  241 
Aristotle,  n.  119 
Aristo,  I.  144 
Astiages,  I.  145 
Asinius  Pollio,  n.  106 
Assassinate  why  so  called,  II.  449 
Attilius  Regulus,  I.  356 
Atheists  and  Atheisme,  II.  139 
Athalanta,  ill.  52 
Athenians,  I.  28 
Augustus  Caesar,  I.  31,  123,  etc. 
Aufidius,  I.  76 
Aurelius  Augustinus,  I.  92 
Authors  of  Bookes,  I.    149,  etc.  ;  II. 

96,  98,  etc. 

Avarice,  vide  Covetousnesse 
Ancient  Customes,  I.  342,  etc. 


OASHFULNESSE,  I.  26, 94;  11. 185; 
±J     in.  92 

Banquets,  see  Feasts 

Balladmakers,  vide  Rymers 

Bartholomew  of  Alvino,  I.  24 

Bayart,  I.  25 

Barbarians,  i.  217,  etc. 

Battels,  I.  315 

Bathes,  I.  343  ;  II.  536 

Barbell,  II.  177 

Babels  Towre,  II.  270 

Bad  meanes  for  goods,  n.  418 

Betis  his  stoutnesse,  I.  16 

Bertrand  of  Gwisgni,  I.  24 

Behaviour,  I.  184 

Beleefe,  i.  191  ;  n.  132,  etc. 

Beauty,  I.  201  ;  II.  182  ;  in.  in,  145 

Beginnings,  III.  272 

Beasts,  i.  298  ;  II.  124,  125,  156 

Beasts  and  men  considered  together, 

II.  145 
Beasts  have  providence,  II.  158 

396 


Beasts  more  strong  than  men,  n.  156 

Beasts  are  Physitians,  Logitians, 
Musitians,  Artists,  Students,  Poli- 
tikes,  Docible,  Capable  of  military 
order,  of  Affections,  of  Justice,  of 
Friendship,  of  Husbandry,  of 
thankefulnesse,  and  of  compassion, 
etc.,  II.  158,  etc.,  164,  etc.,  174,  177 

Being,  II.  329 

Bellay,  II.  108 

Bees,  n.  147,  173 

Bion,  i.  30 

Bias,  I.  254 

Birth,  in.  107 

Blindnesse,  n.  425 

Blabbing,  in.  88 

Boldnesse,  I.  129,  130 

Books  and  Bookishnesse,  I.  139,  174, 
178,  263  ;  in.  46,  102,  1 80,  318 

Bookes  not  so  profitable  as  Confer 
ence,  in.  159;  as  deare  as  children, 
n.  86,  93,  etc. 

Borrowing,  I.  289 

Boniface  the  Pope,  II.  5 

Bondage,  II.  25 

To  be  well  borne,  II.  116 

Bodily  beauty,  n.  182,  184 

The  Body,  1/159 ;  n.  167;  HI.  122 

Bodily  Pleasures,  in.  383 

Boasting,  vide  Vaunting 

Boccace,  n.  96 

Bounty  in  Kings,  III.  135 

Boges,  ii.  34 

Brutus,  n.  102 

Brevity  and  length  of  speech,  n.  370 

Bruit  Creatures  have  imagination,  1. 99 

Brotherhood,  I.  198 

Breakefasts,  I.  345 

Buriall  places,  I.  8l 

Burialls,  n.  29 

Busibodies,  III.  258 


(CALIGULA,  i.  31  ;  n.  50 

Captaines,  I.  33  ;  II.  478 
Carnall  copulation,  II.  72 
Carnall  copulation  hindred  by  fancy, 
I.  93,  etc.;  III.  106 


THE   TABLE 


Casualty,  vide  Fortune 

Calistenes,  I.  177 

Canibals,  I.  217 

Cato  the  younger,  I.  245 

Contrary  effects  in  one  and  the  same 

cause,  II.  132 

Caninius  the  Philosopher,  II.  50 
Care  in  every  calling,  I.  256 
Cares  of  Richmen,  I.  290 
Catullus  Luctatius,  I.  296 
Catullus,  ii.  98 
Cameleon,  n.  165 
Camell,  n.  184 
Certainties,  n.  288,  etc. 
Censure,  vide  Judgement 
Caesar,  i.  358  ;  II.  104,  471,  501 
Cea  an  Hand,  II.  39 
Celestiall  pleasures,  II.  226 
Celestiall  bodies,  n.  248 
Ceremony,  I.  56  ;  II.  364 
Chastity,  I.  379;  II.  17,  etc.  ;  III.  33, 

86 

Charondas,  I.  60,  255 
Child  bearing,  I.  283 
Chrisippus,  I.  37,  114,  182 
Change,  I.  68,  250,  etc. 
Chiron,  I.  88 

Children  habituated   in  evill  by  in 
discreet  Parents,  I.  105 
Childrens  Playes,  I.  106 
Childrens  Patrimonies,  III.  190 
Children  and  of  Childrens  institution, 

I.  144,  etc.,  154,  etc.,  198,  288;  II. 

66,  etc.,  452  ;  III.  252 
Childhood,  I.  105 
Christianity,  I.  119 
Chance,  vide  Fortune 
Choice,  II.  339 
Choller,  II.  452,  etc. 
Changes  in  Physicke,  II.  519 
Charrets,  III.  131 
A  Charter  of  a  Burgouship  of  Rome, 

III.  254 

Chimneyes,  ill.  348 
Cicero,  I.  267  ;  II.  100 
Civility,  III.  159,  etc. 
Cittizens  of  the  least  wit  prove  richest, 

III.  174. 
Civill  warres,  III.  13 


Cleanthes,  I.  182  ;  n.  338 
Cloysters  not  without  cares,  I.  256 
Clyneas    wife   of  king   Pyrrhus,    I. 

309 

Clothes,  vide  Apparell 
Cleomenes  his  trechery,  I.  35 
Clement  the  seaventh,  I.  57 
Clemency,  I.  123,  etc.  ;  n.  121 
Clymates  alter   the   constitution,   11. 

297 

Community  in  friendship,  I.  203,  etc. 
Confidence,  I.  129,  204 
Contraries,  I.  216,  250 
Conquerors  and  conquestes,  I.  229 
111  company,  I.  254 
Cold,  I.  241,  etc. 
Commendations  must  be   sutable  to 

the  person,  I.  268 
Complement,  I.  57,271  ;  n.  364 
Conscience,  I.  277  ;  II.  222,  etc.,  400, 

etc. ;  III.  15 
Constancy,  I.  227,  etc.,   283  ;   II.  9, 

etc.,  462 

Contempt  of  paine,  I.  283 
Covetousnesse,  I.  289  ;  in.  135 
Content,  I.  294 
Command,  vide  Soveraignty 
Courtiers,  I.  162,  308,  311 
Coat  of  Armes,  I.  320 
Cookerie,  I.  364 
Contradiction,  n.  no,  120,  etc. 
Conradus  the  Emperor,  I.  14 
Compassion,  vide  Pitty 
Colophonians  enemies  to  divinations, 

I.  52 

Cowardize,  I.  59,  etc. ;  n.  28,  428 
Cornelius  Tacitus,   II.   91,   404;    III. 

182 

Cornelius  Gallus,  I.  76 
Counsell  and  Events,  I.  129,  etc.;  in. 

32 

Contemplation  without  Action,  I.  135 
Contempt  of  Riches  and  honour,   I. 

136 

Cockering,  I.  160 
Commerce,  I.  164,  etc.;  in.  36 
Colledge  discipline,  I.  174,  etc.,  iSS 
Corporall  beauty,  II.  182 
Confusion  in  opinions,  11.  270 

397 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Contrary  interpretations  of  the  same 

thing,  ii.  309,  etc. 
Common  people,,  vide  the  Vulgar 
Colour  and  Proportion,,  II.  183 
Commendation  of  others,  II.  394 
Combats,  II.  430 
Constellations,  II.  520 
Cousnage,  vide  Deceit 
Common  wealths,  III.  203 
Our  Country  not  to  bee  preferred  be 
fore  all  duties,  III.  20 
Commodity  not  to  be  preferred  before 

honesty,  III.  20 
Counterfeiting,  III.  59 
Confession,  III.  67 
Codpeeces,  in.  83 
Coaches,  in.  131 
Coaches  drawne  by  divers  creatures, 

III.  132 
Contradiction   sometime  in  the  best 

Teachers,  ill.  159 
Conference,  ibid. 
Correction,  III.  161 
Contradiction,  ibid. 
Consanguinity,  III.  213 
Courage  and  courtesie  equivalent,  III. 

216 

Communication  of  thoughts,  III.  237 
Companions  and  company,  III.  238 
Contentious  occasions,  III.  271 
Common  peace  not  to  be  violated, 

III.  302 

Commentaries,  III.  331 
Corporall  pleasures,  ill.  384 
Crates,  I.  136  ;  II.  309 
Crocodile,  II.  178 
Crosses,  III.  34 
Cranes,  II.  166 
Cruelty,  n.  428 
Crampfish,  II.  166 
Crepils,  ill.  292 
The  Creatures  preach  God  unto  us, 

II.  137,  etc. 

Cuckoldry,  I.  288  ;  III.  96,  etc. 
Curiosity,  II.  217;  111-95 
Custome  and  customes,  I.   103,  etc., 

311,  342,  etc.;  II.  25,  304;  III.  347, 

351,  etc. 
Cupid  not  without  Venus,  in.  45 

398 


Cutlefish,  II.  157 
Cyrus,  I.  31,  68 


r)ARIUS,  i.  54 

Damidas  the  Lacedemonian,  n. 

25 

Desperation,  I.  13 
Death,  I.  68,  73,  etc.,  78,  229,  236, 

377  ;  n.  25,  50,  90,  506 ;  III.  226, 

235 

Death  occasioned  and  escaped  by  con 
trary  meanes,  I.  13,  14,  etc. 

Death  contemned,  I.  274,  etc. ;  II.  25 

Dead  mens  bones,  I.  24 

Demosthenes,  I.  268 

Delay,  II.  42 

Deformity,  in.  320.     See  Beauty 

Destiny,  h.  238 

Deifications,  11.  239 

Deceit,  I.  32,  33,  106  ;  in.  7,  11 

Deceitfulnesse  in  judgement,  II.  283 

Deception  of  the  senses,  n.  325,  etc. 

Desire,  II.  338,  341 

Defensive  houses,  n.  346 

Diseases,  i.  98  ;  II.  504,  508 

Desperation    causeth     desperate 
attempt,  I.  13 

Demades  the  Athenian,  I.  102 

Demetrius  the  Grammarian,  I.  169 

Deiotarus,  I.  230 

Detraction,  I.  248 

Devotion,  I.  263  ;  II.  134  ;  III.  31 

Debts,  I.  289 

Democritus,  I.  348 

Devices,  I.  359,  etc. 

Dionysius  the  elder,  I.  15 

Diodorus  the  Logician  dieth  of  shame, 
I.  21 

Diomedon  his  piety  and  courage,  I.  28 

Divination,  vide  prognostications 

Diagoras  the  Atheist,  I.  52  ;  II.  223 

Dying.  I.  70 

Dion,  I.  128  ;  II.  461  ;  III.  229 

Distrust,  I.  128  ;  III.  194 

Discipline,  I.  145 

Diogenes,  I.  178 

Divinity,  I.  213,  372;  II.  226,  etc. 

Divine  Lawes,  vide  Lawes 


THE   TABLE 


Discretion,  i.  260 

Difference,  I.  298,  301,  etc.;  n.  153 

Disparity,  vide  Equality 

Dioclesian,  44 

Diet,  I.  309  ;  II.  167,  168 

Disguise,  I.  327 

Digressions,  III.  247 

Disobedience,  vide  Obedience 

Dialoguising,  II.  215 

Diomedes  the  Grammarian,  III.  185 

Dispraise  and  praise,  II.  394 

Diogenes  Apollionates,  n.  223 

Discordance,  vide  Disagreement 

Dissimilitude  in  Customes,  II.  295 

Difficulties,  II.  341,  etc.,  404 

Disagreement,  II.  270,  279,  etc. 

Dignities,  III.  172 

Descriptions  of  our  selves,  n.  400 

Diversions,  III.  53 

Discovery  is  that  we  most  feare,  III.  67 

Disputations,  ill.  163 

Disputations  on  wager,  III.  161 

Dogges,  n.  159,  etc.;  in.  132 

Doubting,  n.  208 

Doctrine  not  to   be  judged    by  the 

Teachers  manners,  n.  454 
Dreux  battell,  I.  316 
Drinking,  II.  20,  etc. ;  III.  349 
Drinks,  n.  17,  1 8 
Drunkennesse,  II.  13,  etc. 
Dreames,  HI.  371 
Duels,  n.  430,  431 


EASE,  ii.  507 

Easie   arid  naturall   things  are 
best,  HI.  38 
Eating,  III.  107 

Education,  I.  1 54,  etc. ;  vide  Children 
Edward  the  blacke  prince,  I.  13,  297 
Edward  the  first,  I.  24 
Ecclesiasticall  policy,  I.  195 
Effects,  i.  252,  360 
Elephants,  II.  160,  etc. 
Election,  vide  Choice 
Empedocles,  i.  136  ;  n.  216 
Emperors,  vide  Kings 
Emmets,  II.  164 
Emperickes,  n.  528  ;  vide  Physitiaiis 


Entertainment,  I.  57  ;  in.  196 

Entervowes,  I.  56 

Endimeon,  in.  i  n 

Envy,  I.  247 

Engines,  I.  335,  etc. 

Enjoying,  in.  no 

Epaminondas,  I.  15,  70,  214  ;  II.  503  ; 
ill.  19 

Epistles  and  Epistolizing,  I.  270,  etc. ; 
II.  42 

Epimenides,  I.  315 

Epicures,  II.  316 

Epicurus,  n.  117,  189 

Epicharis  a  woman,  her  constancy, 
II.  463 

Epictetus,  n.  190 

Equality  and  inequality,  I.  298,  etc. 

Erasmus,  III.  27 

Errors,  III.  282 

Eschilus,  i.  76 

Esteeme,  i.  299,  etc. 

Estridges,  n.  184;  in.  132 

Eumenes,  i.  34 

Event  and  counsell,  i.  122  ;  III.  171 

Eudamidas,  i.  205 

Evils,  I.  273 

Eudoxus  his  curiosity,  II.  217 

Eternity,  II.  331 

Exercises,  i.  176 

Experience,  i.  177  ;  in.  328,  etc. 

Excesse,  i.  310  ;  in.  62 ;  vide  Temper 
ance 

Expence,  i.  290,  etc.,  310,  etc.;  ill. 

133,  189 

Example  and  Examples,  I.  310;  111.348 
Exercise  and  practise,  II.  49 
Excrements,  n.  185 
Extreames,  n.  194 
Extremity,  vide  Moderation 
Exterior  involuntary  Acts  are  none  of 

ours,  n.  56 
Extasies,  n.  288 
Experiments  in  physicke  are  casuall, 

II.  532 


JTABLES,  i.  1 88 

Falshood,  i.  191 
Fantasie,  vide  Imagination 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Farts  and  Farters,  I.  97  ;  II.  307 

Fashions,,  I.  116,  310,  etc.;  vide 
Customes 

Fatherly  affection,  II.  66 

Familiarity,,  II.  76  ;  III.  39 

Faith,  n.  132,  etc.,  137,  204;  III.  13 

Fabius,  II.  356 

Fame,  n.  357 

Fate  and  fatall  necessity,  vide  Des 
tiny 

Faultinesse  sooner  found  in  others 
than  in  our  selves,  III.  167 

Favorites,  in.  345 

Feare,  II.  435  ;  III.  129 

Feete  serving  for  hands,  I.  106 

Feastes,  I.  174;  in.  377 

Felicity,  u.  299  ;  vide  Happinesse 

Filching  Authors,  I.  149,  etc. 

Fish,  I.  346 

Filial  affection,  II.  71 

Fidelity  in  Souldiers,  n.  485 

Flora,  ii.  342  ;  III.  46 

Florentines,  I.  33 

Flatterers,  ill.  156 

Fooles  and  wisemen,  in.  341 

Folly,  II.  258 

Forgetfulnesse,  n.  197,  359,  384 

Fortitude,  I.  54,  etc. 

Fortune,  I.  68,  127  ;  n.  236,  292,  352, 
511  ;  ill.  173. 

Francis  the  first,  I.  46,  57 

Francis  Taverna,  I.  44 

Francis  Marquis  of  Salu/zo,  I.  50 

Francis  Sforza,  I.  44 

French  hoods,  I.  116 

Friends  and  Friendship,  I.  18,  196, 
etc.  ;  H.  167  ;  III.  39,  137,  220,  224 

Friendship  not  enjoyed  by  kings,  in. 
308 

Frost,  vide  Cold 

Frugality,  I.  288,  etc.,  356,  etc.  ;  in. 

133 

Fruites  of  the  minde,  II.  86 
Froyhard,  II.  144 
Freedome  in  speach  and  behaviour, 

n.  355 

Frenchmen,  II.  200 
Future  things  most  desired,  I.  20 
Fury,  I.  324 

400 


flAINE,  i.  103,  276 

1     Gallus  Vrbius,  I.  91 
Garments,  vide  Apparell 
Galen,  n.  274 
Games,  II.  386 

Gaming  inwardly  disquiets,  III.  270 
Generals  in  warre,  1.315 
Geruntius  Cordus,  II.  87 
Generation,  n.  313  ;  in.  106 
Gestures,  II.  371 
Glory  annexed  to  the  names  of  men, 

I.  319,  etc. 
Glory  or  Gaine  the  end  of  our  labours, 

I.  278 

Gladiators,  n.  124  ;  vide  Fencers 
Glory,  I.  295,  etc. ;  II.  348,  etc. ;  III.  27, 

280 

Ghosts  represented  by  feare,  I.  65 
Governour,  vide  Tutor 
Good,  I.  273 

Goodnesse  by  bad  meanes,  n.  418 
Goodfellowship,  n.  21 
Goate,  II.  158 
Goats  bloud,  n.  529 
Gobrias,  II.  275 
God,  n.  203,  220,  etc.,  232,  237,  etc., 

332 
Good  succeedeth  not  so  ordinarily  as 

evill,  in.  201 
Governments,  III.  201 
Governement  of  the  will,  in.  257 
Good  fortune  not  to  be  despised  alto 
gether,  in.  261 
Griefe,  vide  Sorrow 
Grammarians,  I.  180 
Greeke,  I.  185 
Gratifications,  I.  213 
Greatnes  incommodious,  I.  306  ;  in. 

49,  152 
Greatnes  begets  opinion  of  sufficiency 

where  none  is,  III.  174 
Granius  Silvanus,  n.  34 
Grace,  II.  138 
Grace  and  nature  joyned  together,  n. 

J55 
Gronings  and  outcryes  in  torments, 

n.  507 
Gravell  and  stone  in  the   kidneyes 

and  bladder,  in.  359. 


THE    TABLE 


Guelph,  i.  14 

Guiltinesse,  n.  47,  etc. 

Guicciardine,  II.  107 

Gifts,  in.  136,  211 

Giving  and  taking,  III.  214 

Gunnes,  III.  151 

Guests  and  entertainements,  in.  196 

Gymnosophists,  II.  434  ;  in.  85 


flAPPINESSE,  I.  68,  etc.;  n.  300: 

ill.  279 

Hannibal,  I.  330 
Hazard,  vide  Fortune 
Halcyon,  II.  179 
Heraclitus,  I.  136,  348 
Henry  the  seaventh,  I.  37 
Hermodotus  the  poet,  I.  303 
Heliodorus,  II.  86 
Hedgehog,  n.  165 
Health,  n.  186,  512  ;  III.  65 
Heathen  divinities,  II.  224,  245 
Hermes  Tresmigistus,  II.  241 
Heraphilus,  II.  257 
Heliogabulus,  n.  335 
Hegesias  the  philosopher,  in.  53 
Hispanis  a  fish  that  lives  but  a  day,  I. 

85 
Historian  and  history,  I.  101,  163  ;  II. 

105  ;  III.  181 
Hieron  his  complaint  of  royalty,    I. 

306,  etc. 

Hipparchia,  I.  309 
Hippomenes  his  Apples,  in.  52 
Homes  by  imagination,  I.  91,  etc. 
Honor,  I.  135  ;  III.  267,  280 
Honors  reverend,  n.  62,  etc. 
Horse,  I.  331,  etc. 
Horse  and  Horsmanship,  I.  332,  etc. ; 

III.  221 
Holy  things  not  to  be  prophaned,  I. 

375 

Holy  fury,  n.  23 
Horace,  II.  97 
Houses  of  defence,  n.  347 
Homer,  II.  496,  etc. 
Honesty,  in.  i 
Househoulders,  in.  188 

3E 


Husbandry,  I.  260 
Humane  infirmities,  i.  303 
Humanity  to  be  used  toward  beasts, 

II.  125 

Humanity,  III.  19 
Humane  perfections,  n.  288 
Humane  arrogance,  II.  241 
Humility,  II.  189,  204 
Saint  Hillary,  his  prayer  for  his  \vife 

and  daughter,  I.  236 
Humor  produceth  seeming  vertues, 

II.  9 
Hypocrites,  n.  257 


TASON  PHEREUS  cur'd  by  chance, 

I.  238 

Ignorance  of  letters,  i.  145 
Ignorance,  I.  178,  193,  232 
lealousie,  I.  230;  in.  88,  etc. 
Testing    at    the    houre   of  death,    i. 

274 

lesting,  III.  177 
lewes,  I.  276 
Idlenesse,  I.  39  ;  II.  412 
Immortality,  II.  228 
Imagination,  I.  90,  etc.,  229;  II.  155; 

III.  58 
Imaginary  paines  and  pleasures,  in. 

382 

Impossibility,  vide  Possibility 
Immoderation,  vide  Temperance 
Impious  prayers,  I.  373 
Imitation,  III.  102 
Impartiality,  III.  267 
Intention,  i.  37  ;  n.  10 
Inathirses  King  of  Scythia,  I.  55 
Inchantments  restraining  copulation, 

1.94 
Infections    gotten     by    imagination, 

I.  98 

Innovation,  I.  115,  etc. ;  II.  390  ;  III.  20 
Infancy,  vide  Children 
Invention,  I.  181 

Institution  of  Children,  we  Children 
Incredulity,  I.  192 
Instinct,  II.  148 
Intelligence,  n.  240 

401 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Inequality,  vide  Equality 

Injuries,  I.  326 

Infection,  I.  364 

Inconstancy,  II.  8,  etc. 

Inclinations  corrected  by  industry, 
II.  118 

Injustice,  vide  lustice 

Incertainty,  n.  235,  etc. 

Incertainties  in  physicke,  II.  519 

Interpreters  and  Interpretations,  II. 
311,  etc.;  in.  333 

Irresolution,  II.  388 

Instability,  II.  390 

Ink  pot  termes,  in.  101 

loy,  I.  20 

Isocrates,  I.  119 

lulius  Caesar,  II.  476 

ludgement  blinded  by  Custome,  I.  107 

ludgements  of  God  not  to  be  cen 
sured,  I.  232 

ludging  others  by  our  selves  is  not 
just,  i.  246 

Our  ludgement  uncertaine,  I.  41 

ludging  and  ludgement,  II.  116,  280, 
etc.,  465 

ludges,  II.  304,  328,  363,  etc. ;  in.  5 

lupiter,  I.  214 

lulian  the  Emperor,  I.  308  ;  II.  204 

lulius  Drusus,  III.  25 

lustice,  II.  132,  302 

lustice  in  bruit  Creatures,  II.  167 


TTINGS,  i.  21,  etc.,  69,  302,  etc.;  IT. 
173,381,411  ;  in.  154 

Kingly  Authority,  III.  174 

Kings  Actions  examined  after  death, 
I.  22 

Kings  actions  are  a  kinde  of  com 
mands,  I.  311 

Kings  liberalities,  III.  134 

Kings  Children,  in.  153 

King  fisher,  II.  179 

Kissing,  I.  344  ;  III.  no 

Kitchins,  I.  346 

Knighthoods,  II.  62 

Knowledge,  n.  127,  188,  203  ;  in.  331 

Knowledge  in  bruit  Creatures,  n.  145 

402 


The  Knowledge  of  these  times,  in.  334 
Know  thy  selfe,  II.  58 
Knowne  things  least  affected,  I.  2 1 
Knowledge  without  ludgement,  1. 137 


f  AMEFOLKE,  vide  Crepills 

Labienus,  n.  86 
Lawes,  i.  115,  232,  310,  etc.  ;  II.  82, 

1 8 1,  302  ;  HI.  337,  347 
Lawyers,  I.  115;  II.  52;  III.  12,  330 
Lawing,  III.  274,  336 
Lawmakers,  III.  337 
Language,  I.  184  ;  III.  101,  232 
Laughing,  i.  250 
Latine,  I.  185  ;  III.  101 
Lampries,  II.  164 
Lacedemonians,  I.  23 
Lenity,  vide  Mildenesse 
Laurence  de  Medicis,  1.55 
Leo  the  tenth,  i.  233 
Leonidas,  I.  228 

Learning  without  discretion,  I.  138 
Lentulus,  I.  353 
Learning,  I.  141 ;  II.  192;  in.  43,  164, 

299 

Learned  mens  vanities,  II.  395 
Letters,  n.  190;  vide  Epistles 
Liers  and  lying,  i.  41,  etc.,  42  ;  n. 

38i,  398 
Life,  i.  75,  84,  etc.,  234  ;  n.  113,  505, 

^14;  in.  312 
Livia,  I.  230 
Lions,  II.  176  ;  III.  132 
Likelihoods,  II.  280 
Licentiousnesse   in   Philosophers,   II. 

307,  etc. 

Liberty  of  conscience,  n.  404,  etc. 
Liberality  of  kings,  in.  134 
Liberty,  in.  337 

Likenesse  and  unlikenesse,  III.  328 
Lodowick  Sforza,  I.  69 
Lodowicke  Marquesse  of  Mantua,  I.  76 
Lookes  what  they  effect,  I.  99,  etc. 
Losse  to  one  is  gaine  to  another,  i.  102 
Logitians,  I.  180 
Losse,  i.  257 
Love,  ii.  22,  200,  469 ;  in.  120,  122 


THE    TABLE 


Lucius  Marcius,  I.  32 

Lucius  .ZEmilius  Regulus,  i.  35,,  etc. 

Lucius  Cassitius,  I.  91 

Lucius  Volumnius,  I.  353 

Lucius  Piso,  II.  15 

Lucius  Domitius,  II.  336 

Lucius  Vibulus  Rufus,  n.  417 

Lucilius,  II.  364 

Lucretius  the  poet,  II.  97 

Lucanus  the  Poet,,  II.  87 

Lucullus,  I.  353 

Lycon  the  philosopher,  I.  27 

Ly  sander,  I.  122 

Lust,  I.  213,  etc.;  II.  168  ;  ill.  73,  105 

Lycurgus,  n.  304 

Lycas,  n.  198 


1V/JAXIMILIAN  the  Emperor,  I.  25 

Marcus  JSmilius  Lepidus,  i.  27 

Margaret  Queene  of  Navar,  I.  56  ;  III. 

126 
Mary   German    her    metamorphosis, 

I.  92 
Marriage,  I.  200,  213  ;   II.  72,   345  ; 

III.  21,  72,  96 

Man-eaters,  vide  Canniballs 
Man,  I.  298,  etc.;  n.  50,  etc.,  140,  151, 

154,  250,  274,  310 
Majesty  exempteth  not  from  frailties, 

I.  304 

Marius,  I.  315  ;  II.  92 
Maidenhead,  II.  72  ;  III.  86,  93  ;  vide 

Virginity 

Marcellinus,  II.  92 
Martiall,  II.  98 

Many  feete,  a  fish  so  called,  II.  165 
Mahomet,  II.  201 
Manners,  II.  214 
Mansiphanes,  n.  236 
Mastrupation,  II.  309 
Mary  Gourney,  II.  397 
Masking  of  Actions.  III.  67 
Magistrates,  III.  174,  506 
Magistrates  their  Ambition,  III.  278 
Memory,  I.  41,  etc.;  II.  263,  384 
The  Members  have  voluntary  actions, 

1.96 


Meats,  i.  104  ;  II.  371 

Meanings  and  words  should  be  the 
same,  I.  184 

Menander,  i.  208 

Mediocrity,  I.  361 

Metrodorus,  II.  23 

Metellius,  n.  n 

Melissus,  ii.  236 

Metrocles,  n.  307 

Mexico,  in.  175 

The  Minde,  I.  41  ;  in.  27 

Minde  and  body  mutually  to  be  re 
garded,  I.  174,  etc. ;  III.  123 

Miracles,  i.  194  ;  III.  286 

Military  Actions,  I.  325,  etc. ;  II.  92, 
482,  etc.;  III.  259,  368 

Mildenesse  toward  Children,  II.  71 

Mischiefes,  in.  190 

Memorancy  constable  of  France,  I.  58 

Moderation,  I.  212;  II.  276:  vide  Tem 
perance 

Money,  I.  291;  vide  Riches 

Mourning,  I.  348  ;  III.  59 

To  Morrow  is  a  new  day,  II.  41 

Mothers,  II.  82,  84 

Mortality,  vide  Immortality 

Mountaine,  III.  59,  etc. 

Moly  Moluch  King  of  Fez,  n.  414 

Monsters,  n.  450 

Motion  of  the  earth,  II.  290 

Musicke,  I.  319  ;  III.  380 

Mules,  I.  337  ;  n.  170 

Muleasses  king  of  Thunnis,  II.  72 

Murthers,  n.  123 

Murtherers  of  themselves,  II.  27, 
etc.,  336 

Munkeys,  II.  169 

Muses,  in.  70 

Mutuall  pleasures,  III.  125 


"VTATURE  how  continued,  I.  103 

Nature  the  best  physitian,  I.  126 
Nature,  I.  138,  144  ;  II.  154,  221,  248, 


T 

Naturall  deaths,  I.  375,  etc. 
Naturall  divinity,  II.  128,  etc. 
Naturall  instinct,  II.  148 


405 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Nature  furnisheth  with  all  necessaries., 

n.  150 
Naturall  and  easie  actions  the  best, 

ill.  37 

Nature  a  good  Teacher,  III.  296 
Nature  the  best  physitian,  III.  358 
Naturall     displeasures     not    to     be 

despised,  III.  388 
Nakednesse,  I.  242,  etc.;  III.  85 
Names,  I.  317,  etc. 
Nationall  Customes,  I.  222,  etc. 
Nacre  a  fish,  II.  178 
Nero,  I.  23 
The  Necke  used  instead  of  hands,  I. 

106 

Newes,  i.  193;  n.  44,  290,  357 
New  fangles,  vide  Newes 
Newtrality,  in.  8,  etc. 
Necessary   actions    are    alway    mixt 

with  pleasure,  III.  384 
Nicias,  I.  24 

Nicocreon  the  tyrant  of  Cyprus,  1 1.  23 
Niggards,  II.  76 
Ninacheron     an    East-Indian    kings 

resolution,  II.  34 
Nightingale,  II.  160 
Novelties,  vide  Newes 
Nobility,  ill.  73 
Nurses,"  I.  125 
Numa,  II.  361 
Number  makes  not  victorious,  n.  483 


(  )BEDIENCE,  i.  62;   n.  189 

^     Oblivion,  II.  197,  360  :  vide  For- 

getfulnesse 
Obstinacy,  n.  464 
Obscurity,  III.  248 
Occasion  charges  the  minde,  II.  12 
Occasion,  III.  272 
Odours,  I.  362,  etc. 
Oeconomicall  Vertues  the  best  in   a 

wife,  in.  222 

Off-spring  of  the  minde,  II.  87 
Offices,  ill.  171,  175 
Officers,  I.  142 
Old  age,  i.  375,  etc.;  II.  75  ;  III.  64, 

124 

404 


Opinion,  I.  273,  etc.;  II.  281,  305  ;  III 

23 

Oppianus,  n.  169 

Opinions  of  the  Godhead,  II.  220,  etc. 

Oracles,  I.  49 

Opposition,  ill.  53 

Orators,  I.  352,  etc.;  III.  59 

Orlando  furioso,  II.  99 

Order    and    method    among    bruit 

creatures,  n.  146 
Origen,  n.  271  ;  III.  68 
Orizons,  vide  Prayer 
Ostentation,  I.  161  ;  II.  354 
Otho  the  Emperor,  I.  313,  326 
Over  weening,  II.  140 
Ovid,  II.  96 
Oxen  used  like  horses  both  to  beare 

and  draw,  I.  339 ;  III.  132 


OAULUS  ^EMILIUS,  i.  78  ;  II.  356 

Passion,  I.  29,  etc.;  II.  286  ;  III. 

263 

Passion  agitateth  contrarily,  I.  25 
Parents,  I.  105,  159;  n.  66,  etc. 
Pastime,  vide  Recreation 
Pageants,  in.  137 
Paine,  I.  277,  283,  etc.;  II.  195,  437, 

506 
Paine  increased  by  fantasie,   I.   282, 

etc.;  II.  506 
Paine  greatest  in  apprehension,    II. 

504 

Paulina,  II.  243 

Parcimony,  II.  69 ;  vide  Frugality 
Pater  noster,  I.  366 
Paracelsus,  II.  291 
Patrimonies,  II.  81  ;  III.  190 
Parthians  Armes,  II.  90 ;  vide  Armes 
Painted  beauty,  III.  126 
Paris  in  France,  III.  218 
Partiality,  vide  Impartiality 
Parley,  I.  32,  33,  etc. 
Pelopidas,  I.  15,  214 
Pedantisme  and  Pedants,  I.  23,  115 
Pericles,  i.  215 
Petronius,  II.  485 
Petus,  II.  490 


THE    TABLE 


Petifoggers,  n.  528 

Person    and   office  gives   esteeme  to 

vaine  matters,  in.  168 
Pedigrees,  I.  319  ;  III.  229 
Pestilence,,  II.  308 
Perseus  King  of  Macedon,  I.  315;  in. 

343 

Perfumes,  I.  363,  etc. 
Periander,  III.  in 
Peasants  and  Princes,  II.  173 
Phiton  his  stoutnesse,  I.  15 
Phylosophy,  I.  168,  169,  etc.;  II.  249; 

HI.  122 

Philosophers,  I.  136,  153,  etc,;  II.  306 
Philosophizing  what  it  is,  I.  71 
Philopoemon,  I.  132 
Phisicke,  I.  126  ;  II.  511,  513,  etc, 
Physitians,  III.  346,  356 
Physiognomy,  in.  294 
Philip  de  Comines,  II.  108 
Phantasies,  n.  315 
Pitty  moved  by  contrary  meanes,  I. 

13 

Pitty,  I.  14;  II.  119;  in.  373 

Pirrhus,  I.  217,  309  ;  II.  174 

Pirro  the  philosopher,  n.  210,  442 

Pinotere  a  fish,  II.  178 

Pirronites  a  sect,  II.  207 

Pismires,  vide  Emmets 

Piso,  II.  456 

Plato  his  opinion  of  lots,  I.  52 

Plato,  I.  175  ;  II.  102 

Place,  II.  10 

Plutarch,  I.  163,  298  ;  II.  loo,  465 

Pledging,  I.  177,  237 

Pleasure,  I.  282,  etc.;  II.  195,  224; 
III.  121,  364 

Playes  and  Players,  I.  1 90,  etc. 

Plinie,  I.  194;  n.  I47>  337 

Pleasure  but  in  opinion,  I.  287 

Pleasure  hindred  by  Creatures,  I.  306 

Place  in  speaking  or  writing,  I.  346 

Pleasure  and  profit  equally  to  be  re 
garded,  in.  216 

Pleasures  and  all  commodities  to  bee 
enjoyed  with  thanks,  in.  381 

Pompey,  I.  16 

Pomponius  Atticus,  II.  337 

Poysons,  I.  104 


Poesie,  I.  149,  211,  362;  II.  24,  249; 
in.  41,  248 

Poets  and  poetry,  i.    181,   182,  229, 
etc. ;  II.  249,  367 

Possibilities  and  impossibilities,  I.  194 

Policy,  I.  240 

Policy  Ecclesiasticall,  I.  192 

Postes,  II.  416 

Pompea  Paulina  Senecas  wife,  II.  491 

Powtings  of  Authority,  II.  90 

Popular  agreements,  III.  201 

Promises,  ill.  211 

Possidonius  the  Philosopher,  I.  279 

Poverty,  I.  288,  etc. 

Pride  feeles  no  paine,  I.  285 

Privities,  I.  288  ;  III.  84 

Prejudice,  n.  209 

Principles,  n.  253 

Princes  and  peasants,  II.  173 

Princes,  III.  213  ;  vide  Kings 

Precepts    of  generall   institution,    I. 
161,  etc. 

Prayer,  I.  236,  365,  etc. ;  III.  302 

Private  life,  vide  Retire 

Private  and  publike  life  require  differ 
ing  sufficiencies,  in.  245 

Preferment,  II.  379 

Prerogatives  of  honor,  n.  61,  etc. 

Practise,  vide  Exercise 

Presumption,  II.  140,  229  ;  III.  34 

Prescience,  III.  309 

Private  Actions,,  ill.  26 

Praise,  vide  Commendation 

Praise  and  dispraise,  in.  68 

Printing,  in.  141 

Prisons,  III.  337 

Preparation,  in.  207 

Precedency,  ill.  230 

Promises,  I.  38 

Probabilities,  vide  Likelihoods 

Prognostications,  I.  49,  etc.  ;  II.   167, 
390 

Prodigality,  I.  290 

Providence  according  to  the  world, 
".  379 

Proportion  and  colour,  n.  182 

Provocation,  I.  325 

Provisions  for  warre,  I.  339 

Progenitors,  vide  Ancestors 

405 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Prophanation  of  holy  things,  i.  375 
Providence  in  bruit  Creatures,  II.  151 
Profit,,  in.  5,  etc. 
Proofes,  in.  41 
Prosperity,,  III.  187 
Psamneticus  King  of  Egypt,  I.  17 
Psalmes,  I.  369 
Publius  Crassus,  I.  64 
Publius  Sulpitius  Galba,  I.  217 
Publike  benefits,  n.  85 
Pusillanimity  in  Alexander,  II.  1 1 
Punishment  doth  not  encrease  vertue, 

II-  345 

Purgations,  II.  515 

Publike  and  private  respects,  ill.  267 
Pythagoras,  I.  44;  II.  124 


QUEENE  MARGARET  of  Navar, 
I.  56 

Queene  Isabel  of  England,  i.  238 
Quarrells,  III.  274 
Quaksalvers,  vide  Empericks 
Quaffing,  vide  Drunkennesse 
Questions,  I.  365 
Quintus  Fabius,  I.  253 
Quintus  Fulvius  Flaccus,  I.  339 
Quintilian,  III.  59 
Quotation  of  Authors,  I.  148 


R  ACKING,  n.  48 

Raimound  Sebond,  n.  127 
Ravens,  II.  161 
Rariety,  II.  342 
Revenge,  i.  31,  226  ;  n.  429 
Repetitions,  i.  43 
Religious  impostures,  I.  107 
Religion,  i.  119,  232,  277;  n.  133,  etc., 

225 

Reason  blinded  by  custome,  I.  113 
Reason  the  best  authority,  I.  156,  157, 

etc. 

Reason  in  bruit  creatures,  II.  145,  etc. 
Reason,  i.  260  ;  II.  134,  255 
Recreation,  i.  176  ;  III.  64 
Rhetoricke,  i.  166,  181,  etc. 

406 


Rhetoricians,  i.  166 
Reports,  i.  193  ;  in.  284 
Reputations,  I.  228  ;  vide  Glory 
Retire,  I.  235,  254,  etc.,  329  ;  n.  75 
Retaliation,  I.  236 
Reproaches,  I.  327  ;  III.  229 
Repasts,  i.  345 
Recompence,  vide  Reward 
Resignation  of  estates,  II.  74 
Reading,  11.  94 
Readers,  III.  43 
Rewards,  II.  61 
Remora,  n.  165 
Resemblance,  n.  184 
Representations  of  the  Godhead,   n. 

233 

Registers,  II.  292,  etc. 
Repenting,  in.  21,  29 
Reformation,  in.  159 
Reproofe,  in.  141,  168 
Rimers,  I.  182 

Riming  makes  not  a  poem,  1.181 
Riches  and  Rich  men,  i.  136,  287,  etc. ; 

II.  62 
Ridiculousnesse   is   all    our   actions, 

n.  351 

Rediculous  devises,  I.  359 
Rigor  in  parents,  II.  71 
Rigour,  vide  Cruelty 
Romanes,  I.  30 
Romane  greatnesse,  II.  422 
Rome,  in.  203,  249,  etc. 
Rogues,  in.  ^50 
Roialty,  vide  Soveraignty 
Rule,  vide  Soveraignty 
Running  horses,  in.  291 


CADNESSE,  vide  Sorrow 
Sacrifices,  I.  216,  217 
Salvage  people  which  are,  I.  219 
Satiety,  I.  305  ;  n.  341 
Scanderbeg  the  Prince  of  Epirus,  I. 

13;  n.483 
Scipio,  i.  129  ;  n.  46 
Salust,  n.  104 
Schoolemaster,  vide  Tutor 
Meere  Schollers,  I.  135 


THE    TABLE 


Schooles,  vide  Colledges 

Science  humane,  II.  317 

Sciences  of  old  times,  III.  139 

Sciences,,  in.  297 

Sccevola,  I.  248 

Scaurus  a  fish,  n.  177 

Scriptures  abused,  I.  369 

Scriblers,  vide  Writers 

Servants,  I.  17  ;  II.  78  ;  III.  344 

Severus  Crassus,  I.  48 

Sense  and  the  senses,  I.  104;  u.  312, 

314,  etc.,  319,  etc. 
Severity  of  Tutors,  I.  1 76 
Severity,  I.  212 
Secresies,  I.  234  ;  ill.  10 
Selfe  opinion,  I.  245,  246  ;  II.  60 
Selfe  losse,  I.  258,  etc. 
Selfe  murtherers,  II.  336 
Selfe  being  not  knowne  to  our  selves, 

II.  251  ;  III.  23 

Selfe  study,  II.  58,  400  ;  III.  256 
Selfe  praises,  ill.  158 
Selfe  examples  best,  in.  344 
Selfe  care  and  selfe  dependance,  in. 

213 

Seleucus,  I.  304 

Sensuality  worse  then  paine,  II.  24 
Seneca,  II.  100,  465,  493 
Seconds  in  duells,  II.  340 
Sea  sickenesse,  in.  129 
Shame,  I.  84 
Shaddowes,  in.  108 
Sickenesse  and  sicke  men,  I.  83  ;   II. 

513,  etc.;  in.  226,  354 
Sickenesse    lesse    painefull    then    it 

seemeth,  I.  82 

Sickenesse  counterfeit,  II.  266 
Sickenesse  of  the  minde,  in.  52 
Singularity,  I.  31 
Sinne,  I.  3*67 
Simplicity,  II.  371,  etc. 
Silence  exasperates  anger,  n.  456 
Sincerity,  III.  7 

Sleepe  and  sleeping,  I.  313  ;  n.  323 
Slavery,  vide  Bondage 
Smels,  I.  362,  etc. 
Sneesing,  ill.  129 
Sorrow,  I.  17,  etc. 
Socrates,  i.  27,  171 ;  III.  130,  294,  385 


Souldiers,  I.  35,  324 

Solon,  I.  68 

Sophistries,  I.  169,  183 

Sophocles,  I.  215 

Songs  and  poetry  among  Barbarians, 

I.  229,  etc. 

Solitarmes,  I.  253,  254,  etc.;  in.  42 
Soule,  I.  282;  n.  250,  255,  261,  etc., 

272,  329 

Soveraignty,  I.  304,  etc.;  II.  141,  etc. 
Society  not  enjoyed  by  kings,  i.  308 
Societies,  in.  36 
Society  of  faire  and  honest  women, 

ill.  43 

Societie  of  bookes,  in.  37 
Speach  and  speaking,  i.  46,  180,  182, 
^  etc.  ;  n.  145,  152,  370 
Speucippus,  I.  176 
Sports,  vide  Exercises 
Spirit,  II.  340  ;  vide  Soule 
Spargapises,  II.  34 
Spiders,  II.  160 
Spurina,  II.  468 
Spanish  cruelties,  in.  148 
Stoickes  what  they  hold  of  pitie,  I. 

14 

Stoicks,  II.  no 

Stoutnesse,  i.  17  ;  vide  Boldnesse 
Stratagems,  I.  32 
Stupidity,  I.  160  ;  n.  195 
Studies  of  these  times,  11.  394 
Strictnesse,  vide  Severity 
Strength  of  body.,  I.  228 
Stilphon,  I.  257" 
Study  of  our  selves,  n.  58,  400  ;  in. 

256 

Steeds,  vide  Horses 
Statius  Proximus,  II.  34 
Stature,  II.  373 

Stone  Chollicke,  n.  504 ;  in.  360 
Stagges,  in.  132 
States,  in.  182 
Stoves,  III.  348 

Submission,  I.  1 5  ;  vide  Humility 
Superstition,  I.  28,  216 
Suspition,  vide  Distrust 
Superscriptions  of  letters,  I.  272 
Subtilties,  i.  359,  etc. 
Simne,  n.  268 

407 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 


Substances    discerned   by   shadowes, 

in.  108 

Sumptuous  shadowes,  vide  Pageants 
Suffrance,  III.  358 
Switzers  wives,,  i.  283 
Swallowes,  II.  160 
Sympathy  in  customes,  II.  294 


'"TACITUS,  vide  Cornelius  Tacitus 

Taking  and  giving,  in.  214 
Taurea  lubellius,  II.  37 
Talva  died  for  loy,  I.  21 
Testaments,  n.  83  ;  in.  233 
Terence,  n.  97 
Teares,  n.  120 
Temptations,  ill.  272 
The  Thebanes,  I.  17 
The  Ternates  their  custome  in  Warre, 

I-  33 

Theodor  Trivultio,  I.  24 
The  Thracians,  I.  31 
Theophilus  the  Emperor,  I.  66 
Thales,  I.  89 
Thoughts,  i.  1 1 6,  184 
Theory  without  practise,  i.   135  ;  n. 

102 

Tedious  speaches,  I.  181 
Temperance,  i.  212  ;  III.  33,  62,  65 
Theft,  n.  304 

Temporall  prosperity,  I.  233 
Theologia  naturalis,  II.  128 
Thrasilaus  his  fantasie,  II.  199 
Thumbs,  II.  426 
Thirst,  III.  349 
Titus  Levius,  I.  22  ;  II.  90 
Tigillinus,  I.  76 
Timoleon,  III.  17 
Titles  of  bookes,  I.  272 
Timon,  I.  351 
Titles  ridiculously  plaied  on  men,  I. 

355 

Time,  II.  330 
Tigers,  III.  132 
Towre  of  Babell,  n.  269 
Torment,  vide  Paine 
Torquato  Tasso,  II.  194 
Toleration  of  divers  religions,  n.  310 

408 


Treason  and  Traitors,  I.  128  ;  III.  5, 

12,  13 

Truth,  I.  191  ;  n.  400,  410 
Transmigration    of    soules,    11.    124, 

271 

Trechery,  in.  5,  12,  13  ;  vide  Treason 
Travell  and  Travellers,  I.  73,  220  ;  III. 

189,  220,  226,  229,  235 
Trifles  beget  greatest  quarrells,  ill. 

274 
Treasure  not  to  be  lost,  I.  257  ;    III. 

13 

Tunnis  a  fish,  n.  178 
Tullius  Marcellinus,  II.  338 
Tutors  of  Children,  I.  155,  etc.,  170, 

etc. 


YALOUR,  i.  228 ;  n.  65 

Vaineglory,  I.  226 
Valuation,  vide  Esteeme 
Vanity  of  words,  I.  352 
Vanity,  I.  166;  II.  396;  III.  185 
Vaine  devises,  vide  Devises 
Vaunting,  II.  191 
Valentinianus,  II.  201 
Varro,  II.  243,  247 
Variablenesse  of  man,  II.  276,  285 
Versifying,  i.  181  ;  vide  Poesie 
Vexations  in  every  estate,  I.  256 
Vehemency  in  disputations  not  fitting, 

III.  167 

Vespasianus,  II.  412 
Venus,  in.  45,  105 
Victory,  i.  54,  228,  324 
Virtue,  I.  72,  171,  203,  247,  etc.,  258; 

II.   10,  109,  344,  352,  441  ;  ill.  27, 

35,93 

Vice,  I.  105  ;  II.  13  ;  in.  27 
Virgins,  I.  108 
Virginity,  vide  Maidenhead 
Vitellius,  I.  326 
Vices  not  equall,  n.  13 
Virgil,  n.  97 
Vicissitude,  II.  331 
Vnity  in  true  friendship,  I.  206 
Vncertainety  of  our  Judgement,  I.  323; 

II.  27 


THE    TABLE 


Vncertainty,  vide  Certainty 
Vnknowne    things    most    desired,    I. 

358 
Vnworthinesse    dishonours   titles   of 

honor,  II.  64 
Vnderstanding    in   bruite   creatures, 

ii.  144,  etc. 
Vnknowne  things  are  more  in  number 

then  the  knowne,  III.  141 
Vnnaturalnesse  to  our  selves  is  un 
seemly,  II.  459 
Voluptuousnesse  aymed  at  by  Vertue, 

I.  72 
Voluptuousnesse,    I.    215,   234;    in. 

386 
Voluptuousnesse  not  to  bee  rejected 

but  moderated,  III.  387 
Vowes,  i.  375 
Voluntary  death,  II.  25 
Voice,  II.  319  ;  III.  357 
Vse,  vide  Custome 
Vsefull  things  are  the  best,  II.  188 
Vse  of  riches,  I.  292 
Vpbraydings,  I.  326 
Vpright  stature,  II.  184 
Vtterance,  I.  180 
The  Vulgar,  II.  150 


\YARRE,  i.  328 ;  n.  476 ;  m.  300 

Warre  anciently  with  deceits, 

I.  32,  etc. 

Want,  vide  Poverty 
Wantonnesse,  in.  91 
Wavering,  vide  Doubting 
Wagers  in  disputations,  in.  161 
Weeping,  I.  250;  u.  120 
Weapons,  vide  Armes 
Wedlocke,  vide  Marriage 
West  Indies,  in.  142,  etc. 
Wenches   naked   drew   Coaches,   III. 

132 

The  Will,  I.  96  ;  in.  239,  etc.,  257 
To  Will  only  is  in  our  power,  I.  38 
The  Will  rebellious,  i.  96 
Wives,  I.  230;   II.  78,  8 1,    in,  342, 

486  ;  in.  85,  94,  96,  etc. 
Wisemen,  I.  351  ;  II.  203,  330 ;  III.  342 

3F 


Wisedome,  II.  101,  486  ;  in.  140 
Wills  and  Testaments,  in.  202  ;   vide 

Testaments 
Wishes,  II.  298 
Wit,  II.  390,  392  ;  TIL  140 
Witches,  in.  288 
Witnesses  in  print,  III.  348 
Womens  Jealousies,  ill.  97 
Women  restrained,  in.  113 
Womens  Piety,  I.  14 
Woman  changed  into  a  man,  I.   91, 

etc. 
Woman,  I.  143,  199,  283  ;  II.  309,  464  ; 

III.  41,  76,  119 

Womens  affection,  n.  487;  in.  127 
Women  not  uncapable  of  Poesie,  in. 

41 

All  Women  are  faire,  in.  44 
Women  that  are  crooked,  ill.  292 
The  World  is  our  first  booke,  I.  165 
Wordmongers,  I.   182,  352,  etc.;  in. 

100 
Words  and  meaning  should  agree,  I. 

185 

Words,  II.  233,  310  ;  III.  58,  211 
Worldly  providence,  I.  289  ;  IT.  204 
World,  II.    233,    258,  etc.,  293  ;  in. 

150 

Worthinesse  of  the  minde,  in.  27 
Worthinesse  in  few  of  this  age,   n. 

394- 

The  Worthiest  men,  II.  496 
Wonders,  vide  Miracles 
Writers,  I.  149,  etc. ;  II.  94,  etc. ;  TIT. 

186 

Writing  ex  tempore,  I.  271 
Wrenn,  II.  178 
Wresting   and    writings   and    words, 

II.  310 
Wrongs,  I.  326 


VERXES,  I.  31  ;  n.  230 

Xenophanes,  I.  52  ;  II.  215,  223 
Xeuxidamas,  I.  179 
Xantippus,  II.  127 
Xenocrates,  n.  222 
Xenophon,  ibid. 

409 


MONTAIGNES    ESSAYES 

VOUTHS  losse  greater  then  losse  7AMOLXIS,  n.  230,  362 

of  life,  I.  83  ^     Zeno,  I.  16, 184;  II.  223,  319;  in. 

Youth  judgeth  as  truely  of  things  as  107 

old  Age,  in.  34  Zenobia,  I.  214 

Youth,  i.  176,  378  Zeleucus,  i.  311 

Yeelding    oft    gets   the   victory,    I.  Zeale,  11.  134 

54  Zisca  his  skin  made  into  a  drum,  I.  25 

The  Yeares  reformation,  in.  282  Zeroastres,  11.  362 


FINIS
