Philosophical Studies (G. E. Moore, 1922)
Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive: pre-1931 edition scan (https://archive.org/details/dli.ministry.18546). Moore's collected papers including 'The Refutation of Idealism' — the founding documents of analytic philosophy.
Hosted by the Tower of Babel library, antarctic-labs.com.

==============================================================================

Coo2s


PHILOSOPHICAL STUDIES


International Library of Psychology
Philosophy and Scientific Method


Garraaz Eprroz: C.K, Ouper, wa.


(Magia Caliar, Conbradgr}


VOLUMES ALREADY sexawceD


sue, suse oF xD
“Peary ats by Haar rpm,
CONFLICT ARO, DREAM.
aw HR Rivas FRR
‘rue weasuneMeNT OF EMOTION
liye sven a
“itrtnanoe ty Pics Brom,
‘Tite, ANALYAIS OF MATER
Sy Banvwono Mowat ¥ 5S.
MATHBRATICS,FOm PiTLOSOPMEAS
TH: atone oF, THE UNCONSCIOUS


revgnote) eat Te
‘eve, Ds ELD.

aumienrs ‘or ravcrioTwenary
“p Wittioe Beows, MDs DSe

‘Tu PQUNGATIONY OF MOsICAL arstmerics


"scent J
mi, piiotecy or mum
SOME CONCEPTS Gr, scomnrTine THOUGHT
"ED Brow tat
wmizosorattaL LOCI
eee
TO MARIS OF FARING,


a
‘rue puicosorny OF «as 16°
‘oy Vantec
ook tame oe FEELING
‘THa WStORY OF MATERIALISM
rk Laver
‘rum STATISTICAL METHOD OF BcO1
STATISTICAL, NOMIC


ty F Sansaey Fooeence
rad piecirias oF oxic


Philosophical Studies


By
G. E. MOORE, LittD.


Zaher of Prana hi


LONDON
KNGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUSNER & CO, LTD
aw YORK ARCOURT. ACE #90 UNC.


CONTENTS


L Tae Revoraniow oy Iomsume . hoe
M1, Tax Naroms ano Raauste oy Onzers o Paa-


cernor aoe a. ee ae
MY, Wosus Jaume! “Pascua”

IY, Huw Pinowoeer er |
Y. Tun Sraroa or SeumeDira ||. 18


‘Vi, Tun Conearnon of Ruatry 5.
VIL. Sous Joocuswes ov Pracernon


‘YUL Tua Coucernion or frrunine Vain. 059,
BX Bema ao Lrrman Reanors |. 078
Tax Navona ov Mout Pamosorny 5. p10


va Projet


1 doubt my owe abilty to topror upon. ‘The onl
Sabin wbich [dou whether hs pxcaa pp of
ebrn papes—" The Refatanon of Fda Talspaper
bow ape 29m be vr cond a we ie
embody «good any makes; 90 [am
Ggubcatwhether Cough tobure included it. Bot {ats

ht aotber tue: cel ht 8 prper fo wich


‘many a ands by contesy
efles oe Palonophy und Tow eld Une ft eoee
fader at ll events, would Vern convenicice that


‘Soule be repormied along woth the ret only for the
take of refereoce.

nd tow hat the oaly one ofthe proviualy pbiahed
apes im mich changes have bert sade, 1X ce
Eifeteral wed toternalReltioca™ Tn thin can. the
hunger te not dar to any change my vem bt tthe
flevNae in tat purtot tbe pager in which syabols ae
the, her om ft pan ie cans
the Aratctcuon Sscaty, to te the ayabois adopted by
Gteheed and Ruwelle Prac Hathematea 2nd sted
there too wkoct ging av expansion of thes mening
trish wovld be suficest for senders ot sogomoted with
Gat wack: The symias on quesice ere gymbols wna
Ti dita tr peter to aves teres
fore, thought beter, co ton oceon, to use ancier act
SP yebcly wuch soem to me ro be adequate fr the
inte purpowe 1 hdc vw. T hve ted 10 give en
taplinaion of ter meting. whics wil enable s7yona
{Sundewtand them, and L Bove taken the opportay of
reeaing some of the parts of he paper im wich thay
Goer way whch wily 1 hope, thake worn pote

we,


‘ei
remution to rept thn Mage eatubar ef
Pit, Th, v, Vt, Vil ad 1X), which
8 a the tf unt SoSetys
the New fr permissen toro
it the artcle on floges” Pelocenay (IV). Whi
Efe le tat Joural in Novena, 190s

@ F, MOORE.


Philosophical Studies
THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


Moons Idealism, if it asserts any genera! con.
Slusion gbout the wnivers at all, ast that i i
spiritual. ‘There are two points about thie assertion
to which I wish to call attention. These points are
that, whatever be its exact meaning, it is certainly
meant to assert (:) that the universe is very
aiferene inded from what it sooms, aed (3) vat
it has quite a large aumber of properties which ic
floes ‘noe sccm © have. Chal sad tables and
rmonntains seem to be very diferent from us;
Sier gn wine tairees B dered he atten
in ia cermainly meant to assert that they are fat
more like us than we thiok. ‘The idealist means
to assert that they are ix some sense neither lifeless
poy consciny Boas nem to be; and
fo not think Bis i 30 grossly deceptive,
bat dt we may aansoe him to Bcheve ther they
really are very different indeed from what they
teem, And secoodly when he declares that they
are spirituad, be means to include in dat term quice
a large number of diferent properties When the
whole universe is declared to be spiritual it ls
Either hb what we recogaoe fs euncive oo
that it we in ourselves as
the Jicker fore of conscouaness That. is


intelligent; that it is purposeful; that it ia noe


2 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


‘mechanical ; all these different things are commoaly
amereed of it In it may be said, this
phrase ‘reality is spiétual” excites and expresses
the belief that the askols universe possesses alf the
qualities the possession of which is held to make
{tn 30 superior to things which seem to be icani-
inate at leat i it dows not pores exactly those
which we possess, it possesses not one only, but
several others, wblch, by the same ethical standard,
would be judged equal co or better than our awn,
When we say it is spérstual we mean to say that tt
has quite a number of excellent qualities, different
from any which we commonly attribute either to
‘Mars or planets or to cups and saucers.

Now why I mention these two points is that
when engoged in the intricacies of philosophic
iscussiog, we are apt to overlook the vastness
of the difference between this idealistic view and
the ordinary view of the world, end to overiook the


number of diferent propositions which the ideal
‘must prove. Tt ia, T thiak, owing to the vastness
of this difference and owing to the number of
different excellences which Idealist attribute to


the universe, that it seen such an interesting and.
important question whether Idealiam be rue of not.
Bot, when we begin to argue about it, I think we
fare upt to forget what a vast umber of arguments
thie interesting question must involve : we ere apt
to assume, that if one or two poicts be made oo
itor id, the whole cas ia woo, I sty this let
i tha f ment
wes wil be adtaned ie paper would be
suflicient to disprove, or any refutation of them
fufcent to prove, he, tly ite sed i
portant proposition ity is spintoal, For
‘my own part I wish it to be clearly uederstood that


T do sot su; ‘that anythi ahall say bas
te aio Raceory to plo that waley heat


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 3


ipbinsdi 1 deat bere Beatle ns
single one of the many important propositi
contained in the essection that i is so, Reali
may be epizitual, for all I know; and I devoutly
hope it in Bor 1 take ‘Idealism’ to be a wide
term and tw inclede not only this interesting
conclusion but a, cumber of arguasent which are
tuppated to be, if not sufficient, at least necessary,
Breve Indeed | in & dee coder Kmlbip
are chiefly distingui ‘certain arguments whic
they have ie. coremon, ‘That realy is apitual
has) 1 believe, been the tenet of macy thealgians
and yet, for believing that alone, they should hardly
be caled Ideas "There are boven, 1 belive
many persons, not improperly idealists, wt
told” Grain, chameteiie propositions, without
veaturing to think them quite eulficlent to prove 20
id ae conclsion It ia, therefor, only: with
enlargements that T am concerned and if
lealist holds that mo tis necessary 10
prove that ceality is apictcal 1 abal ceriialy hot
ve refuted him. 1 shall, however, attack at least
‘one argument, which, co the best of my belief, is
considered necessary to their position by af
Walaa And wich to_polet ont a certain

Wantage which, this re gives mean
Sdvaniage wbich jostibes the aseerien that, iy
upumecis are soved, they will bave_ refuted

ism, can refute a single proposition
which is a necessary and. eecotil thep in all
Tdealie argument, chen, oo matter how good
the rest of these arguments may be, 1 sball kave
rove that (deafes bave av ria eer for
their conclusion.

Suppose we have a chain of argument which
takes the form: Since Ais Band Bos C, and Cis
D, it folows A is D. In such an argument, though
‘Bis C' and ‘C is D* may both be perfectly true,


4 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


yetit A in B’ be foe, we have no mare resson for
Gmeting A is D than ff all thee were fale Tt
docs nok indeed, follow that A in D ie false not
does it follow that no otber arguments would prove
{veo be true Hut ft does follow that x0 far se thia
Argument goes it is tbe barest supposition, withoat
tte leant bic of evidence. 1 propose to stack
ition which seems 0 me to stand io this
Fete to he chain Rey is sna
not propose to Reality it epiital;*
Tabnot deny that there may be reazons for thinking
uate: Bd do pope sow tat ons reason
a to the jadgment, ail other
guments ever ated by Idealist depend is fade
Bese othe Segumens may, fora Total say,
ominently ingenious and true; they are very
any and various and diferent ideaiis ase the
most diferent argucients to prove the stime most
important conclusions. Sone of these, may be
auficient 19 prove that Bis Cand C is D, txt i
a5 L shall ty to thom, cheir/A is Bie false the
coaclasioa A in D remains a pleasant supposition,
Teo not deny that to suggest pleasant and plain:
ible” supposidons ‘may be the proper faction of
Jnlosopey: but I'am amuming that the name
Facotinm can only be properly applied where there
is a cenain amount Of argument intended to be


t
"Fhe enbject of hin is, therefore, quite
oiterestage Even 9 iy point, 1 shal
hhave proved nothing about the Universe in general
Upon the important question whether Reality is or
ia! not apicitval my argument will not have the
remotest bearing. I chall coly attempt to arrive at
the teuth about a matier, which ix in iteelf quite
trivial and iosigaificany, and from which, so far'as I
san nee and certainly 20 far as 1 ghall cay, no con-
elusioca can be drawn aboot aay of the subjects


‘THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 5


about which we most want to know, The only
importance [ can claim for the subject 1 shall in-
‘vestigate is that it seems to me to be a matter upon
‘which not Idealises only, but all philosophers and
paychologists alo, bave_ boo in error, and rom
‘hei


importance J cannot hope to prove.
importance, i wil indeed (allow that all the mort
ftrkig eal of pilwopy— Sensational,
‘Agoocticiam and Idealiem alike—Bave, for all that
hhas hitherto bees urged io their favour, no more
foundation than the supposition chat a chimera lives
in the moon, It will flow that, unless new reasone
never urged hitherto can be found, all the most im-
portant philoophic doctrines have as litle claim to
Aiasent af the most euperstitious beliefs of the lowest
tavages. Upon the question what we have reason
40 believe in the most interesting marverg 1 do
therefore think that my results will bave an import.
tant bearing ; bot I cannot too clearly insist that
. ‘the question whether these beliefs are true


thy wil have none whatever. i

¢ trivial proposition which 1 propose to dispute

in thi: hat esa is perespé. This iea very ambiguous

roposcon, bu i some sense or ober, it has been
widely held. it is in some sense, essent

very widely is, 96,


jealism, 1 aust for the present merely assume,
What I propose to show is that, in all the senses
ever given to it, it is false,

But, first of all, be useful to point out
briefly in what relation I conceive it to stand to
Tdealistic arguments. ‘Thet wherever you can truly
predicate este you cao truly predicaie perips, in
tome sense or other, is, I take it, a necessary
in all arguments, properly to be called Ideal


and, what is more, in all argumests hitherto offered


6 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


for tho Idealistic conclusion. If esse fs poreipi, this
Is at once equivalent to saying that whatever is, in
experienced and this, again, is cquivalect, in a
sense, to saying that whatever is, 19 something
mental. But this is not the sense ic which the
Idealist conclusion enost maintain that Reality is
tmontoh ‘The Idealist conclusion in. that one ls
ipere; and hence, whether azzt be fereipé or nok,
3 fore and diferent discussion i needed to show
whether or not it is aluo percifers. And again,
ven If esse be percipers, wo deed a vast quantity of
Grieg eum wow tat waa ie ‘ahs
lao those higher mental qualides which are denot
by epicitual, This is why 1 suid that the question T
dliseusy namely, whether or ao ers porehy,
must be utterly lnvuficient either to prove of tO
disprove that reality is spiriteal But, on the otber
fuand, T believe that every angument ever used t0
show that realty (s spirisual has inferred thie (validly
‘or invalidly) from," aie is pereypers’ as one of ita
‘premivsea; and that this again has never bea
Betended to be proved excep by use of the premiee
that amis prep. The ype of argument one for
the latter ‘pucpose is familiar enough, It is said
that since whatever is, ie experienced, and sinae
some things are which re aot experienced by the
Individual, there must at least form part of some
‘experience, Or agai ‘ince an object neces-
‘rly Inplics a wobjecs, and sce the whole world
Aust be an objec, we mst conceive it to belong to
some subject or subjects, in the same sense in which
‘whatever is the object of our experience belongs t0
ut Or again, that, since thougbt enters into the
fesuence ofall reality, we mist conceive behind fy la
essence, & spirit akin to ours, who think:
it greets’ spirit’ ta its object. Into the
lidty of these inferences T do not propose to enter:
they obviously require a great deal of dizcussion I


‘HE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 7


only desire to point out that, however correct they
aay be, yet if esce is not perespe, chey leave us ab
far from a proof that reality is spiritual, av if they
ver nee secur. ini ica te
ft now’ Io as are three ve
ine Se Sa eb peoreal pad oe 4 oat
Woy dacoguhing reat things Tat
nye fam opene df then
at wih regard to port Tha tora
need not trouble us long. at present. It wan
fe oben wet a mea aranton ey
Tem not golog to be so wslair to modera
Toelitrthe only ‘Ideaits to ‘whom. the term
should now be applied without qualification—as to
hrold that, f it ‘asus is perv, they mean by
rith ‘hem ‘ow a ore sie
Sot ue ma
cunt be understood to Bao noc ent mn on!
Sain er po wen et ih al


ogg and whether er be fe
cote baie Sarat renee de wpe
feboo, to which modern Idelists belong, that they
Ihave ‘insisted on distinguishing ‘sensation’

‘thoughe and on empbariing. the importance of
the laiter, Against Sensati and Eropiricions
they have safotained the true view. But the dis-
Yinction between senmation and thought need not
detain us here. For, ia whatever respects they
Aiffer, they have at least this io common, that they
‘are both forms of consciousness or, 10 ust a ter
that seems to be crore in fashion just now, they
are both ways of experiencing. Accordingly,
whatover esse le percifi may mead, it docs af east
amert that whatever i, is experienced. And since
‘what I wish to maintain is, that even this is untrue,
the question whether it be experienced by way of


sensation or thought, or both is for a
Que irclcrast “it hbo wor expeteneel Ba


3 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


sanoot be sither an object of thought or ea objoxt
Of sense. It is only if being involves ‘experieace’
that the question, whether 3 iavolvea sensation or
thought or both, becomes important. I beg,
therolare, that seri may be uedersioad, in what
follows, to refer mezely to what is common to
sensation and thought. A very recent article
‘matea the meaning of ose is forcyés with all de-
sirable clearness ia +0 far,as percipé is concerned.
+7 will undertake to show,’ says Mr. Taylor, ' ‘that
what makes [any pieee of fact] real can be nothing
‘but ite presence ‘as an inseparable aspect of &
Sentient experionce? am giad to think that Me.
‘Taylor bis been in tis. c9 eupply. me with so

ite » statement thar this isthe timate premise
of Ideallar. |My will at Teast refute Mr,
Tels Idealism, iff refaten anyting a all: for |
shall uadertake to show that what makes a fbi
real cannot possibly be ite presence as an inseparat

t of @ senient experience.

jut Mr. Taylor's statement though clear, I think,
with regurd to the meacing of fereypi is highly
ambiguous in other respects Twill leave it for
the present to consider the next ambiguity in the
weacrent Eien fri Whe dows te copia
eat at om be meant by saying that Bose
AE pecgl? There are jum tree meanings, one or
other of which such @ statement mst have, i
4s to be true; and of these there is ooly one which
it can have, if it is to be important (1) The
aieect iy be sot eer at he ord
‘esse’ Is used to signify nothing eitber more or
than the word “paca {la ee, weeds te
precise synonyms: ‘are merely
ames for one aod tho sume thing : that what is
‘meant by este is absolutely identical with what i


“International Journal of Ethics, October, 1502.


‘THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 9


meant by ferespi. 1 think 1 need not prove that
the principe ee is feria nef that intended
merely to defoe a word; nor yet that I it were,
would be an extremely bad definition. But if it
does of mean this, only two alternatives remain,
‘The second is (a) that what in meant by cise,
though not absolutely identical with wbat is meant
Dy parapi yet inches the lace as a fart of ie
meaning, Tf this were the meaning of ‘ese is
Bera then co ay tate hing wat real wold oot
the same thing as to say that it wax ex} .
‘That it was read would mean that it was experienced
and tise besides: “being. experienced’
would cally exrential to reality, but would
snot be the whole meaning of the term. From the
fact that a thing was real we should be able to
Jnfer, by the law of contradiction, that it wax
experienced; since the latter would be far? of what
is tieant by the former. But, on the other hand,
from the fact a thing was experienced we should
niet be able to infer that it was real; since it would
not follow from the fact that it bad one of the
attributes essential to reality, thet it abe bad the
ther or others. Now, if we undertand eit it
percipi in this second senas, we must distinguis
‘hoes diferent things whica it amert, First ofall,
It gives a defisition of the word ‘reality,’ asaertio
that word stands for a complex whole, of whic
what is meant by ‘percpi” forma a part. And
secondly i¢ asserts that ‘being experieciced’ forms
a part of & certain whole. oth these pro-
tions may be true, and at all events 1 do not
‘wink to dispute them.” [do not, indeed, think that
the word ‘reality’ ia commonly wed’ to include
“ but Ido rot wish to argue about the
meaning of words. And that many things which
are experienced are also something elee—thet to be
‘experienced forms part of certain wholes is, of


10 ‘THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


i tha either of thse
‘real’ ina convenient name for a union of attributes
which rpaetimes cecur, it could not be worth any
while to assert: no lnferences of any_iti-
tance could be drawn from avch an assertion,
ur principle could only mean thet when « thing
appens to have feraft ag well athe other
itles included under asus, it has Aereipi: and we
abould never be able to éa/er that it was experienced,
except from a ition which already asserted
that it was both experienced and something else,
Accordingly, ifthe assertion that areas forms
fat of the whole meant by reality to have any
Importance, it must mean that the whole iz organic,
at least In tbis sense, that the other constituent ot
constituents of it comnct occur without perciph, even
ff percipi cac occur without them. Let ue call these
jer constituents =, The proposition that esa
laches forelgs, and chet therefore from esce percifl
san be inferred, can only be ienportant if it i meant
to assert that peveifi can be inferred from x.
The only importance of the question whether the
whole eite includes the part percips rests therefore
fon the question whether the part = ie necessarily
‘coanected with the pare perespi. And this is (3) the
third pomible meaniog of the aserdon arse ts
Perripi: and, a8 we now see, the only important
can, Lem is pompl mares, tat whoever you
have 4 you aio Lave geri that mbatever bs
‘ erty property, that it
rleied’ vd. thig being 80 ie Will be cOD-
‘venleat if, for the future, I may be allowed to use
the term ‘as to denote = aloe, dat wah
by to question whether what we
commonly mest, by the word ‘Yel does or doce
ot include ferriéé an well as <x. i am quite content


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 11


that ny definition of ‘ess0’ to denote =, should be

ded merely ax an arbitrary verbal definition,

ther it ts 30 oF not, the ooly question of interest
la whether from = gereipi can be inferred, and I
should prefer to be able to express this in the form :
ean porvipi be inferred from sie? Only let it be
understood that when I say esse, that term will 90
for the future inctads persipt it denotes only that »,
which Idealists perhaps rightly, include along with
pereipi under thair term ese. That there is wh


‘a they must admit on pain of making the
proposition an absolade taut and. that ‘from
thie = in be inferred they most admit, on


pain of making it a barren anelytic pra-
Foson, "Wheer 2 one soul or abou sot be
called «ise ig not worth @ dispote: what ts worth
Aingate iv whether ser Is neocearily connected

the

‘Wo bave thercfore discovered the ambiguity of
the copula in esse is fersips, so far as to seo that
this principle amserts ‘two distinct terms to be sa
related, that whatever bas the ons, which 1 call es,
bas alls the property that it is experienced Tt


sureria a necessary conzexion betweca esse on the
fone band and fercsff on the other these two words
denoting each a distinct term, and asa denoting a


term in which that denoted by percipi is not in-
sluded. We have, then in asve ts percipi, » necessary
synthetic proposition which I have undertaken to
fefute, And I may say at once that, understood as
auch, I¢ cacnot be refuted. Ifthe Idealist chooses
to anert that It is merely a seifevideot truth, 1
have only to say that it does not appear 19 me to be
po, But I believe that no Idealist ever has maio-
tained It to be so, Although thie—that two
istinct terms are necessarily related—ia the only
enue which ‘nme Is perp" can have iit is 0 be
rue and important, {t caw bave another sense, if it


12 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


is to be an imporeant filschood. 1 believe that
ata all bold this impoctant falsehood, They
do not perceive that Fastin percipi mom, if true, be
mare 'n slf-vidant syatbeic cut they liber
identify wich i or give as a reason for it another
proposition which must be false because itis self
contradictory. Unless they did 10, they would
bave to admit that it was a perfectly unfounded
‘assumption ; and if they recogoieed thet it
I do not think they would caaintain its
truth t0 be evident. Esse is Pereifi, in the sense
T have found for it, may indeed be true; I cannot
refute it: but if this sense were clearly apprehended,
m0 one, J think, would dedieee that
Laealists, we have seeo, must assert that what-
ever is experienced, ic necessarily wo. And this
serng ey commonly eapren_by saying tat
‘the object of experience is inconceivable” apart
from the mubject” I have bitharen been concerned
‘with pointing out what meaning this amsertion ust
have, if it t0 be an important truth, I now
Propose to show that it may ave an important
meaning, which must be false, because it fe self
comer,
tiga well known fact ia the history of philosophy
that necessary truths in bot especialy those
‘of which it i said that the opposite ia inconceivable,
Ihave been commonly supposed to be anaiptic, in
the sents that the proportion denying them waa
eelfccontradictory. It was io this way, commonly
muppoted, before Kant, chat macy truths could be
proved by the law of contradiction alone. This is
therefore, & mistake which it is plainly easy for the
beat philosophers to make. Even since Kant many
have continued to assert it; but I am aware that
among those Idealists, who most properly deserve
‘the ame, it has become more fashionable to assert
that truths are dotd analytic and eyothetic. Now


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 13


with many of their reasons for axerting this 1 am
ot concermed: it is posible that in some coo.
‘erions the ausertion may bear a useful and tue
some De cadena, semiyth fo the
sense just defined, namely, what ie prov "
law of contradiction. elma ic in plo. tha, if
‘aynthetic’ means what is aot proved by this alone,
no truth ceo be both analytic and syothetic, Now
it seems to me that those who do maintain truthe
to be both, do nevertheless maintain tbat they are
0 in thia as well as in other senses. [t is indeed,
eraremely wally tha, 20 esenil 4 par of be
historical meaning of ‘analytic’ and ‘synthetic
abould have been entirely discarded, especially
since we find no express tion bat it ia dis
carded. Is that case it is fair to suppoce that
modem Idealists have been influenced by the view
that certaia truths can be proved by the kaw of
sontradiction alone. 1 admit they also expressly
deelare that they can sof: but this is by no means
suicient to prove that they do not also think they
fare; since it 13 very easy to bold two mutually
contradictory opinions. T soggest then
that Idealists hold the particular doctrine
question, concerning the relation of subject and
Object in experience, because they think it is an
analytic truth in this restricted ‘sense dhat it ix
proved by the law of contradiction alone,

Tam suggesting that the Idealist maintaing that
objet and mbject are necenariy connected, minly
because he fails t0 see that they are dlutinct, that
they are fn a all” When he thinks of *yelow
and wben he thinks of the ‘sensation of yellow,’
he fails to see that there is anything whatever
the latier which is not ia the former. This being
0, to deny that yellow can ever dv spat from the
necsation of yellow is merely to deny that yellow
can ever be other than it is; since yellow and the


14 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


neesation of yellow aro chsolctely identical To
E ‘an object of exe
low is necessarily


Course, the proposition also implies that experience
ia afize alt soothing dieting: from yellow-—alee
there would be 00 reason for iosisting that yellow
isa seomtion: and that the argument thus both
afGrms and denies that yellow and. sensation of
plow, ae dition 6 what suficenly eftes ie
jut this contradiction can etsily be overlooked,
‘necause though we are convinced, Ia other com
exiong, that ‘experience’ does mean something
and something mos important, yet we are never
diticly aware what ft meang and thus in every
cular case we do not notice its presence, The
ta_present themselves as & Kind of antinomy :
(0) Experience 4 unique and different
anything, el; (2) Experience of green is
entirely Indiatioguishable, from green; two pro-
Ferien, he caper bo be woe,
, can. on! " com
tig one ine esesons vo ow ike oles a
ert,

But I am well aware that there are many Ideallts
vwbo would repel tts an utterly unfounded charge
that they fail to distinguish between 4 sensation or
Idea and what 1 will cll its object. And there are,
1 adit, any ho not nly imply, an we all do,
that green is distinct from the sensation of green,
‘but expressly icsist upon the distisetion as an
important part of thelr system, They would
perhaps ooly assert that the two form en insepar-
ble unity. But 1 wish to point out that many,
qb ave this phrase, and whe do dit che dic.
toa, are aot thereby absolved from the charge thar
they deny it For there is a certain doctrine, very


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 15


valent among philosophers nowadays, which by
"very aiple reduction may be acon 2 amere that
‘two distinct things both are and are not distinct.
Adistinctioa is asserted ; but it is also asserted that
the Ghings distinguished form aa, “onganig unity,
But, forming auch a unity, ic isbeld, each would
‘aot be what it ia apart from sts relation to the ather.
Hence to consider either by itself is to make oa
egitimate obstraction. ‘The recognition that thera
are ‘organic unities’ and ‘illegitimate abstractions’
in thin "env ig seguro of the chef cone
uests of modern r. But what is the
Sit adel w tog seas? Au cbamactiea f
‘legitimate, when and only when we sitempt to
ausert of 3 part—of something abstracted —that
shh is ue ny of the le 0 which blog:
and it may perhaps 10 point out that this
abould not be done. But the application actually
made of this principle, and whst ‘perhaps would be
expressly acknowledged a its meaning, 1s some
thing much the reverse of usefol, The principle ia
used’ to assert that certain aburactions are te aif
case illegitimate; that whenever yoo try 10 amert
anything whatever of that which ta fart of 0a
organic whole, what you assert can only be true of
the whole. And this principle, so far from being a
useful truth, Is necessarily For if the whole
fan, nay mast, be substituted for the part in all
ropettlons and for ll prpones his can only be

cause the whole is absolutely identical with the
part. When, therefore, we are told that green nod
the seasation of are certainly distinct but
Yet are ot separable, or that it is a0 legitimate
[abstraction to consider the one apart from the ather,
what these provisos are used to assert i, chat
though the two things are distinet yet you not only
can but must treat them as if they were not. Magy


philosophers, therefore, whea admit a dine


16 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


tinction, yet {following the lead of Hegel) Boldly
amert their right, in sore obscure form
Of words, also fo deny it Sth ceo pe
alist that of combined soulas andeyatheain
beled wo eonracery prope joan wherene

‘ro tioan, wherever
‘this may seem coavenient. “Ia this, as in other
matters, Hegel's main service 10 philosophy bax
once in giving «name to and erecting into 4

incipl, a type of fallacy to which experience

Biona piaieteiony cong wid evar of meat
to be addicted. No wonder that be has followers
and admirers.

I have shown then, ao fa, hat when the Tale
asserts the important principle ' Zuse is percipi
mss, if iris 10 be tree, mean by this that: What-
ever ia experienced also mast be experienced. Aud
1 have alsa shown that he may identify with, or
give a9 reason for, this proposition, one which
ust be false, because it is seif-contradictory. ” But
a6 this pons T propore to make a complete bret in
my argument 250 is we have seen,
Sel ef two corms, as datinzt fom one tnetbet
fas ‘grea’ and ‘awees' that whatever has the one
has ‘also the other: it asserts that ‘being’ and
“being experienced’ are saecessarily connected :
that. whatever i ix ale experienced. And this, {
admit, caanot be directly refuted But I believe it
‘to be false; and [ have asserted that anybody who
saw thot ‘44 and were 08 dintinet na
‘green’ and ‘sweet’ would be 0 more ready to
Delieve that whatever ir ix ale experienced, than to
believe that whatever is green is also sweet, 1
have asserted that no one would believe that ‘este
la porcips” if they saw bow diferent esse is fom
(percigts ut this I sbalt not try to prove. I ha
‘amerted that all who do believe that ‘2sse ts fercipé"
identify with ic or take as a reason for if a self


‘THE REFUTATION OF SDEALISM 17


a but this I shall not try

ball ooly try to show that ceri

ropostions which 1 assert Yo be believed, ure flee,

a they are believed, and that without tis bao!
taste is pereipi’ would cot be believed either, I
sat eate without» proot

then, from the sninteresting question ‘te
sal prep? ‘to tho still more uninteresting and
apparently irrelevant question * What is a sensation
oF idea?

‘We all know that the sensation of blue diffore
from that of grees. But itis plain chat if both are
tmusilons they also bare some point a common.
‘What init thar they bave in common?” Aud bow
ln this common clement related to the points in
hich they differ?

thea yt eurping wo ey es te tng Tao
wit at attempting to eay what the thing I 30
Gite "We have then in very, scoation two
dnt terms, (1) ‘tunedoumesn’ in respect of
ue eomalons ae lls nd (0) rotiog

ie, a repet of which one sensation der from
ft will be convenient if f may be allowed
all thu Sete sane te “abjecc" of a seasation :
this also without yet attempting to say what I mean
by the word.

Wo bave thea in every sensation two distinct
13 one which I call consciousness, af

onsciouant


sensation of green, though different lo one


‘oowing, at we sow do, tat the sensation of bloe
includes two diferent elements, namely constious-


18 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


reas and blue, the question arises whether, when
The vomeaton of Busoni, ff the coneciourness
‘which exists, or the blue which exists, or both,
‘And one poiat at least is plain: namely that these
three alternatives are all from one another,
So that if ang one al ws tha, co my Blog exit
is the some thing as to say that ‘Both blot and
consciousness exist’ he makes a enistake and a self-
contradictory mistaice.

‘But another point is also plato, namely, that whea
the sensation exits, the consciousness, at least,
certainly does exist; for when I say that the
seauitions of blue and of green both exist, T
certainly moean that what is common to both and in
‘Virtue of which both are called sensations, exists in
each case. The only alternative left, th
tither both exist or the consciousness exi
1f therefore, any one telle us that the existence of
blue is the same thing as the existence of the
sensation of blue he makes a mistake and a self
contradictory mistake, for be asserts esther that blue


ia the same thing as Blue r with conscious
ness, o that jc is the same thing ax consciovencss
alone.


‘Accordingly to identify either “bive” or any other
of what U have called “objects” of sensation, with the
corresponding sensation is in every case, a self
contradictory error. Tt is to identify a part either
with the whole of which itis a part or else with the
other part ofthe samme whole. If we ure told that
the assertion " Blue exists” is meawingdets unleas we
macan by it that “The sensation of bite exists," we
are tol what is certaialy false and seV-contradictory.
If we ate told tbat the exinence of bive
Inconceveble apart fiom the exitence of the
sensation, the speaker grobably means to convey £9
to, by this ambiguous expression, what ia a olf.
contradictory error. For we can aod must conceive


THE REFUTATION OF (DEALISM 19


the existence of blue as something quite distinct
from the existence of the sensation. We can and
must conceive that blue Et exist and yet the
nensation of blue not exist. For my awn part I ot
oly conceive shia, bor coocelve’ it tobe. true,
Either ore this terrific amertion of
inconceivebilty “measa what ip fale aod_ael
dictory o¢ else it means only that as 6 matter
tin ‘blue never can exist unless the sensation of
‘ists also,
And at this point I need not conceal my opinion
that no philosopher has ever yet in


sticiam are on! by identify

lth, he wnaation Beet tes ane aldo bo
friaesay Decausse what ss experienced iv held to

Gactical withthe esperance of That

Besley,» and Mill commited this error will

Rerhan be gr rece: that modern Idea mae ft
wil, hope sppear more probable later. | Bot that
say opinion in loos, {wil now offer wo pies

ev Gate at guage fer we
imeane of refering to much object ef “Hoe” and
“green” and “sweet,” except by calling them
seheatone i isan obvious violation of language to
call them “things " or “objects” or “terms.
similarly we have no catural means of caing
to such objects as “causality” or “likeness” oF
identi


‘conceptions.
likely that if philosophers had clearly distinguished
in the past betweeo & scasation or idea and what f
ttave called its object, there should have been oo
aeparate name for the later. They bave always
sed the same name for these (mo diferent “things
(| tay call them so}: and bence there & some
probability that they have mipposed these “ things”


Ae


ae THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


sto be ova and iret, bax ove a0 ch see
secondly there is 2 very good reason wi
Sor dead wyvanscedl ab Seiten el
we refer to intoapetion ad ry to dleover mat
the sensation of Blue is, ie ia very easy to

tine we bere blo om only singe Sr Tee
term " blua” is esay to distinguish, But the
other element which I have called “‘consciousoesn *
~that which sensation of blue bas in common wi
seneation of green—is extremely difficale to
‘iat many people fil to dicnguish tax all in
sufficiently shown by the tact that the
woatcrallsts. And, in general. that which make
the sensation of blue a mental fact seems to excx
wei seems, if 1 may use a metaphor, to
trupsparent—we look chrough It and see nothip
but the bloe; we may be convicced that there
somthing ut what is is no philosopher, i think, bas


yet clearly recognised,

But thle was a digresioo. The point 1 bad
established 50 far was that in every sensation or iden
‘we must distioguich two elements, (1) the “ object,”
of that in which one differs from another; and
(3) “consciousness” ar that which all bave io
sommon—that which makes them sensations of
mental facts. This being #0, it followed that when
‘8 senmation or Hea exists, we bave to choose
‘between the alternatives that either object alone, or
onaciousaess alone, ox both, exist; and 1 showed
that of these alternatives, one, namely that the
object ooly exists, is excluded by the fect that what
we mean 10 assert is certainly the existence of a
Mental fact. There remains the question : Do both
exist? Oe does the consciousness alooe? And to
this queation one anewer bas hitherto been gives
‘universally: That both exist.

This aaswer follows from the asalysis hitherto
cocpied of the relation of what 1 have called


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM at


‘object to “tconsciousness” io any sensation or
dee "Is fs held that what Teall the object ls
aerely the “content” of & sensation or idea, Tt is
hed that in each case we can divanguish two
elements and no onl, (°) the face tha there
feeling or experience, and (2) what Is felt oF
12d; the sensation or idea, i i# anid, forma
Prbole, in which we must distinguish —cwo
ble aspects,” “content "and “existence.”
abel Gy to abow that this analysis is false end
for that purpose T roust aak what may seem an
extruordinary question: camely what it meant
taylog that one thing is “cootent™ of another? Tt
ii tot usual to ask this question; the term fused
ai if everybody most understand it. But soce Lam,
ing 1 maintain that” Bue” is aa the content of
Ee Sensation of blue, aed what is more important,
thst, even if it were this analysis would lene out
the most important elemens in the sensation of blue.
it fs neceseary toat [should sry to explalo precisely
wae eihe Tahal deny”
ae then fs meant at one
the verte” seaher Fine of ait
ct out that *bloe” is rightly ead propesly sa
to bepartof the content ofa Niue Fower. “I, shesefor,
Wwe leo amnert that iv in part of the content of the
enaation of blag we asser that it has to the
Dilier pars (any) of shia whole the exe celtion
tblch thea to the otber parts of bloe flawer—and
tre aaser only thin we cannot mean two aasert that
ithas to the zenaation of bive any relation which it
doca not bave to the blue flower. And we have
teen that the sentation of Blue contains at leaut one
other clement beside bloe—naasely,, what T call
“consciousness” which makes it a sensation, 0
far then aa we aasert that bive is the content of the
seniation, we assert that ic has to thie “conscious
teas" the same relation which it bas to the other


to


a2 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


parts of a blue lower: we do assert thin, and we
Assert no more than this. {nto the question what
exactly the relation is between blue and 2 blue
flower in vite of which we call the former part of
its “content” 1 do not propose to enter. It ia
sufficient for my purpose to point out that it is the
geceral relation most comaonly meant when we
alle of a thiog and its qualities ; and that this
relation is such tbat to say the thing exists implics
that the qualities also exist, The coment of the
thing is what we assert to exist, when we assert Jhat
the thing exiscs

When, therefore, blue is said to be part of the
content of the “sensation of blue," the latter is
frei a ieee ls concn ey
thesame way asany other “thing.” The “‘sensation
of blue on this view, differs fom a bive bead or a
ble beard, in exactly the same way in which the
‘two latter differ from one another : the blue bead
differs from the blue beard, in that while che former
contains glass, the laiter contains and the
‘sensation of blue” differs from both in that
instead of glass or hair, i contains consciousness.
The relation of the blue co the conscioumess iz
conceived to be evactly the same as that of the
le oto gla or Bi: es al ere caste
quatily of a thing.

‘Bot [ said just now that the sensation of blue was
‘ualysed into “content” and existence,” and that
Blue was said to be de content of the idea of blue,
‘There is an ambiguity in this and a possible error,
wbich f must note in pasting. ‘Theterm " content *
nay be wsed io two sensex. if we use “content
tt equivalent to what Mr. Bradley calls the “ what "—
if we mean by it the whole of what is said to exist,
when the thing is said to exist, then blue in
certainly not 4s content of the sensation of blue :
art of the content of the sensation is, ia this sense


‘THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 23


ofthe term, that other element which J ba
the “content “Blue,” on the one hand, and mere
Gzintenoe on the ote, it therefore certainly false;
it we have again the | self-contradictory
eotiication of “Dive exsta” with * The senmtion
‘of blue exiet,” But there in another scnse in which
‘bus might sropely be std o be he convent of

-seqaation—namely, the sense in which “ content."

iter, is opposed to, “substance” or “matter.”
For the element “consciousness,”
all seasations, may be and certain}
in some seace their “‘substance,” and by the
“content "of each is only meant that in respect of
which one differs from another. In this sense then
"hlue” might be stid to be the content of the
sensation; » but, in that case, the anelysie into
content * and “existence i, at Jeast, misleading,
‘msst be included "wha

talata” inthe sensation other than blue,

‘We have it, then, as 2 universally received
inion that blue is’ related to the sensation or
‘of blue, as its content, and that this view, if ia
to be true, must mean that blue is part of wha is
said to exist when we say that the sensation exists,
To say that the sensation exists is to say both that
‘Blue exists and thar “consciousness,” whether we
fall it the substance of which blue is the content or
call it another part of the content, exists to0, Any
vensaton oF iden ia “thing” and what 1a
alle in objet i the quality of chi thing, | Such
sabing” is what we think of when we think of a
mou image "Denalirmage in conceived a8 it
‘were related to that of which ic isthe ieage if there
be any each hing) in enact the, same way. othe

Image in a looking-glass is related to that of whic
Iria the reflection} in both cases thre is ident of
content, and the ioage in the looking-glass differs


24 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


from thet in the mind solely in respect of the ict
‘that in the one case the other constituent of the
image i “gluse” acd in the otber case it ia
cousciousnesk If the image is of blue, it is oot
Cotcelved that tha “content” hae any ‘elation to
‘the consciousness but what it has to the glass; it je
conceived merely to be its content. And owing to
‘the fact that sensations and ideas are all considered
to be wholes of this descriptic ings in che mind—
fhe gueation ‘What do we know ? is considered to
bbe identical with the question ; What reason have
we for sopporing that there are thiogs ouuide Ise
mind corrse ‘to these that are inside it?

‘Whar I wish to poict oat is (:) that we have a0
ces fora tne tee re suc hinge
trental Images at sppoing that bse te

‘of the content of the sentation St blue, ad (2)
‘that even if there are mental images, no mental image
‘and no sensation or idea is mersdy w thing of
Kindy vat “bls” even iit is par of the cootent of
the Image or sensation or idea of bive, a always
fle elated to Ten quite axcther way, and that Us
other relation, omitted in the traditional analysis,
the ondy one which makes the sensation of blue a
‘mental fact at all.

“The true aralyals of a sensation or idea is as
follows. The element that is common to them ali,
tnd which [ have called “consciousness,” really
ontcioansn A enain ii rly, a of
‘tnomag’ or_‘being’ aware of" or ‘experiencing’
something. When we know that the sensation af
blue exists, the fact we know is that there cxiste an
awareness of biue. And this awareness is not
mer a © re fave Miler seo it = be, —_
tometting distinc: and wnique, ery diereat from
Blue: it alsa bas @ perfectly distinct and unique
relation to blue, a relation which in not that of thing
(or substance to content, nor of one part of content


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 45


to another part of content. This relation in just
that which we mena in every case by ‘knowing’
tenure ta your mind "ing cr image’ of whach
to have in your mind 2 'thing’ or ‘image’ of whi
‘ue isthe content, To be aware of i sensation
wot ware of a ments! ieage—of @
" of which "blue" and some other element
are constituent parts in the same sense in which
hue and glass are constituents of 2 Sloe bead It
is to be aware of an awareness of bse ; awarencas
‘being used, in both cases, in exactly the same sense.
‘Ti clencat, me have seen, ig cerainy
hy the ‘content’ theory : that theory entiely fails to
express the feet that there is, in the sensation of
Blue, this unique relation between blue and the
other constituent. And what ] contend is that tbls
omission i not mere negligence of expression, but
fs due to the fact that though philosophers have
recognised that something distinct lo meant by
consclousnen, they have never yet had a clear
conception of what that something it. They have
‘bot been able to hold i und die before their minds
and to compare them, in the same way in which
they can compare Blue and green. And this for the
reason I gave above: namely that the moment we
try to fix our attention upon consciousness and to
960 what, distinctly, it is it seems t0 vi it
feos a if we tad before «mere empinee,
Wen We Try to introspect the sensation of lve,
tre canece ithe Bg’ che ocher cement is anit Ie
were diaphanous. Yet it cam be distinguished if we
look attentively ‘and if we koow thas there
is something to look for, My main object in this
been to txy to make the ceader soe
fs; but { fear I ahall have succeeded very ill.
It Being the case, then, that the sensation of blue
Includes in its analysis, beside blue, ocd a unique
element ‘awareness’ and a unigac relation of


26 THE REPUTATION OF IDEALISM


siement tm Bue, Joan sake plain what I meant by
esaning oo two dain: proposition, (3) Gat be

Rhea pel gp meme pro
Sai al (h toa arom nee St seam
would nevertheless aot be the sensstion of blue, if
Son hd only chi relson oe The fiat hype

esis mity now be expressed by sayin

tree er’ ten’ when'the scauabon’ of blse case
there exists a dive awareness: offence may be takea
at the expression, bot yet it expresses just wbat
should be and is vacant by saying that blue is, in
this case, a content of consciousness of experience,
‘Whether or not, when I have the sensation of bloc,


cetainty  T oaly ste co ceason for thioking that it
serBut beter ei or othe poi i
important for introspection daer exabie me to decide
thet sometbiog else fo also crue semely that f am
laware of bloey and by this I'mean, that my aware.
fas bes 2 Sloe & quite didereot and’ disdoct
rani. iia pombe | ade tat my awnrenos
in blue ar wed as being af bho: but what 1am

argo tae is hes ng sto Bie
te ingle and wig acne of wich
aoe faites ur bs dutogcahog Kaowiede of 8
thiog fom the thing lnoway indeed ta iting
pind fom maner And ths rent | may expres
Sylmying that what alld the eed Sh

isin very trah what I origioaly called it

ihe senation’s

Buy fall cia be true, what follows?

Idedliata adrie that some hinge realy exist of
hich they are sot aware’ there are some thingy,
they ‘bold, which are’ not inseparable sapects of
td expciae, ve iby eg pct
of some experience. cher bold that tome
Ghd age ol elich coy are nents ware oo


THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM 27


really exist, evea when they are not aware of the
hold for instance that they are sometimes
aware of other minds, which continue 0 exist even
phen they are oot aware of them, | They arm
theraore, sometines avare of something whlch
inneparable aspect of thir own Sree
They do now some things which ate maf 5 mere
tor content of their what my
me ‘i scosation bas been designed to show i
that whenever [ have a mere tensation or idea, the
fact is that T am then amare of something which ia
equally and in the same sense not an inseparable
aspect of ray experience. The awareness which [
Ihave maintained to be included in sensation is the
‘very same unique fact which constitutes every kind
of knowledge: “blue” ia as much an object, and
as little & mere content, of my experience, when I
expetience it, as the most exalted and independent
real thing of which I] am ever aware. There
is, therefore, no question of how we are to “get
outside the circle of our own ideas and sensations.”
Merely to have a sensation is already t0 dv outside
that ciel It isto know someshing which i a
truly and really moé a part of my experience, as
anything whieh T can ever kaow. i
a Nom think fam not mistaken ures that
1¢ reason why Idealists suppose that everything
Wich seus be an inseparable expect of some
epecienee, fu that they euppose, sere, thin
least, to be faseparable aspects of fArir experience,
And there ix ay soe which they are 30
firealy convinced to be an inseparable aspect of
their experience as what they call the content of
their ideas and sensatioos Uf, therefore, #is turns
out in every case, whether it be also the content
fr not, to be at least sof an ioteparable aspect of
the experience of it, it will be readily admitted that
nothing else which we experience ever is auch an


28 THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


inseparable aspect Bot if we never experience
Anything but what is sof an inseparable aspect of
that experience, how can we infer that anything
swimever, Tet alone weryihing, is am inseparable
anpect of any experience: utterly wofounded
Js the assumption that “esse is perehi appears in
the clearest light.

‘But forther I think it may be seen that if the
object of an [dealist’s sensation were, 28 he sup-
poses, ol the object but merely the content of
hu session, if tha, is to sg, it really were an

wweparable aspect of his experience, each Idealist

never be aware either of bimaclf or of ar


deallae thinks be is aseare
tse, this cannot really be
fown theory, that himself and that other person are
in reality mere contents of an awareness, which i
ware of nothing whatever. All that can be said
ls that there is an awareness in him, with a ceria
conten; Kan sever be tue tat ihre i Be
4 consciousness of anything. And si ia
hoveraware eithor ofthe tae that ho exit or that
realiey ia spiritual. ‘The real foc which he
Peg elas fom oy ork pope
tuality-of reality are contents of wn aware
esa, which is aware of aothing—cerminly aot, then,
of it own content
Aod farther if everything, of which he thinks he
in aveare, is in reality  coatent of bis oma
experience be bas cerainly no reason for holding


THE REPUTATION OF IDEALISM 29


2 be necessarily true; but he caa-
ly infer from anythiog he bolds that it
‘That he himself exias will of coune
from his premlss tbat many things are
contents of Ait expericoce. But since everything,
of which be thinks bimacif aware, ia in reality
merely an inseparable of that awareness;
this premise allows 0 in that any of these
sprees ar om any ober conaconpen, sina
‘except as an i aspect of his awarenesa,
that is, as part of bimself,
ftom fara tha eoumnptonen wich so follow fe
from it are the consequences follow from
the Ideslis’s supposition that the object of an
experience is in reality merely a content or in-
ble aspect of chat experience. If on the
other hand, we clearly recognise the store of that
peculiar relation which I bave called “awarenesa
of ‘anything; we sen that fit is involved
equally in the analysis of somry rom
the merest sensation to the most developed pes-
ception or reflexion, aad tbat f4rr ia in fact the oaly
‘eanentia) clement in an experience~the only thing
that is both common and peculiar to all experiences—
the only thing which gives us reason to call
fact mental i, further, we recognize chat
awareness is and must be io all cases of such a
nature that its object, when we are aware of it
Drecitely what it would be, if we were not aware:
then it becomes plain that the existence of n table
in apace ia elated to my experience of & in pre-
iy


dl the Lge as the oxistor sep Pod a
is rel to rience of that.
parse. rel wy expr ft OF
the one exists, we are aware in ly the same
sense chat the otber existe ; and if it is true that my


yo THE REFUTATION OF IDEALISM


experience can exist, even when I do not happen
to be aware of its existence, we have exactly the
same reason for supposiog that the table can do #0
tha. "When, thercioce, “Berkeley, nipposed. that
the only thing of which } am directly aware is my
‘own sensations and ideas, he supposed what wax
false; and whea Kast supposed that the objectivity
of things in space commuted in the fact that they
were “Vorstellangen” baving to one another
different relations from chose which the same
*Vorstellongen bave to one another in subjective

fale. 1


experience, Be supposed what was equally f
fam as directly aware of the exinace of material
nga in space 23 ‘own sensations; and

T'am aware of with regard to each 1s ensclly the
same—namely that ia one cast the snaterial thing.
and in the other case my sensation docs really
exist. The question requiring to be asked about
fmteril things ip thes nat: What reason ave, re
for supposing that anything exists cirrespon:
fon Wenaons 7 nar? Wis resena hone we
supposing that material things do of exist, since
shew existence has precisely the same.evidence a8
that of our sensations? either exist may be
falee ; but if it is a reason for doubting the existence
of matter, that it is aa faseparable aspect of our
experience, the same reasoning will prove con-
clunvaly that our experenen doe not niet,
tlnee that must also be an inseparable aspect of our
experience of if. The only reasonabé alternative
to the admiasion that matter exists ar mel! as opirit,
inubrolute Septic ax Hkely as ot weshing
‘exists atall. All other suppositions—the Agnostic’,
Se meodiig, al ofoo, dom make oe ec.
as the Ideali it doce—are, if we have
‘no reason for believing in matter, as baseless aa the


THE NATURE AND REALITY OF
OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


Tuanx are vo belie in, wbich almost al) phi
otophers, and almost. inary people are
Almost everyone believes that be hizaeell and what
the direstiy perceives do not constitute the whole of
ality: he believes that something other than
imself and what be directly perceives exits or
ig real. 1 donot mean to t almost everyone
believes that what he directly perceives is ccal: 1
only mean that he does believe that, whether what
hae dizectly perceives is real or not, something other
than it aed other than Rimsclt certainly is 50. And
not only docs each of us thos agree in believing
ot oly, oes ek oun thes age batevng
lly perceives is real: almost everyone alsa
believes that among the real things, other than
himself and wbat he dizectly perceives, are other
persons who have thoughts and perceptions in some
respects similar to bis own. That most people
boliowe cia 1 Cink I ned soualy £7 oo show,
jut since « good eiany philotophers may appear 10
have held’ ews cootadictory of this oot T Wil
bbrieBy point cut my reason for asserting that most
piilovogters even among those (if any} who have
lieved the contradictory of this, have yet held thin
ts well, Almost all philosophers tell us something:
about the nature of Auman knowledge and suman
perception. They tell us that sw perceive 00 and


32‘ OBJECT'S OF PERCEPTION


00; that the nature or origin of owr perceptions is
such and such ; or (ax [ have just been tellog you)
that mea io ave such and such beliefs Tt
tight, indeed, be said that we are not to interpret
uch acguage too aticly’ that, though a. phil
sopher talks about Auman knowledge and one
BRetettions he oly eeans to walk. about bir own,

jut in many caxca a philosopher will eave no doubt
‘upon thls pont by expeiy string that there
faze other perceptions, which differ Ia some respects
from his own sc Tr intage ie fhe cao when
(as isso cormmon 10 2 produces
fMyciorgenic coiderons inte Dr angumens
S-contiderations concerning the mature of the
perceptions of men who existed before and at a
troch lower stage of cultte than biel, Any

josopher, wbo uses ments, belo

Smumes hac fons other than his own have
existed or been real, Aad even those philosophers
who think themselves justified ic the conclusion


that neither their own. tions nor any
too lke thei are real would, E thiak
dio, that thay are eal and


tre certainly mors real than some other things.
‘Almost everyone, thee, does believe that some
Stel dae na Gevely prs, ae Tol? and
ie not perceive, are teal}. a
believing this, he believes thet someshing. other
than hself nd what be ie percive i ra,
But how do we know that anythlog exists except
‘lar owa peroeptions, and what we dizectly perooive ?
How do we know that there are any otber people,
‘who. bave perceptions in some respects slmilar to
oT lace tet these é
Weve that these two questions express

caacly the patuce of the prosem wbich tle my
‘chief abject, ia this paper. c discus. When I say
these word: to you, bey will at once suggest


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 33


cat mind the very quan to which {desires
‘an anewer they wil eopvey to you
Rene mnoalog teh Tamve bole of mind wick
ise the wore You will underwand at once whet
gestion i tan Leah se et for al tn

‘words which Ihave used are highly ambiguous
If yoo Begin to mle ‘what Pda mean by
thom you wil Gnd that there are overs! quire
diferent chings which T might mean. "And there,
Tithine, great Ganges of Sonfesing there diferent
‘meanings with one waotber. it think that piloeo-
Biers, when they have seked this quendonin one
enue, Have offen answered it in quite = diferent
weave; ard yet have supposed Unt the. arever
Sak hey Have, giyen i an anawtr tobe
Tine quetion wt sgially anbed.” Te
Pratap because there i a mbigay this
Eihger_ of confunca, in the words wtih | bave
tod; that I Fave chosen to use them. I with to
point ou a3 cletly as T can, not ony what T do
Sean by the, bat also some things which 1 20 not
feed; and f wish wo make i clear that the questions
trhich Ido ret nean to ark, ere diferent qoestions
irom that which Ido mean to ank

Trl ke tbe second of my eno quonios, sine
thems in‘ the cher 20. sdtitonal ambiguity to
srbich I do not now wish 20 call attecti, "Bly
Sesond querdon was’ How do'we know thee thers


exist aay other ‘wbo have ona in
come respects similar to our own? oes this
Quewtion mean?

‘Now I thick you may have noticed chat when
you make 2 matemcot to another 1 and he


Enrwers “How do you know that that is 207” he
‘very often means to suggest thet you do wef hoow


ie "And yet, Ihe reams to suggest that
do not Anon i be may not for a moment wish to
suggest that you do aot edie it, oo¢ even that you


M4 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


hhave not that degree or kind of conviction, which
[goes beyoud mere belief, and which may be taken
fo be exzentia! to any hich can properly be
galled. knowledge not mean to suggest
for u moment that yoo are saying someching which
‘you do not believe to be true, or even. that you are
‘not thoroughly convinced of ics truth, What he
ona fo agen i hat wa yon Sard wan
‘pot fue, event ‘may not only have
Trliaved ‘it but fl a ia tron He
fruggests that you don't som it, in the sense that
‘Whit you believe of fel sure off aot woe.

Now I point this out, not because. 1 myself mean
to suggest that we doa't kaow the existence of other
persons, but merely in order to show that the word
“know” is sometimes used in a sense in which it in
ot merely equivalect to “believe” or “feel aure
ce” "When the question “How do you éuew that"
fs asked, the questioner does ot merely mean ta
Buk “how do you come to believe that, or to be
covngad of ie?” He somecines, and I think

senerally, means to ask a question with regard 10,
Ke vradl, tod not with regard vo the exten of
‘your belief. And siaslarly when 1 ask the question
"How do we koow tha: other people exist?” 1
do not mean to ask “How do we come to believe
in or be convinced of their existence?” I do not
intend to discuss this question af <4é 1 shall not
ask what suggerts to ua our belief in the exiatence of
ther persons or of an external world; 1 aball not
ask whether we arrive at it by ioference or by
instinct" or in any other manner, which ever hus
‘been or may be suggested: I shall discuss 0
question of any kind whatever with cegard to ion
‘rigin, ac sause, or the way in witich caries, These

rbologieal questions are at what 1 propose to

incu, Whea I ask the question “How do we
know that other people exist?" I do nef mean:


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 3


M How, does our belief in heir enistence
arise?”

Buc if 1 do sot mean this what do 1 oven? 1
have suid that I mean to ask a qoestion wil
Behe ek of that bles Und. de parlor
question which I mean to atic might be expressed
in the words: What reason kzoe we for our belief
in the existence of other persons? But these are
words which themselves need some explanatiog, and
T wil tr to give it.

ns hea london when # ea of “a seo
I mean only a good reason and mot a bad one,
bad reason is. no doubt, « reason, in one sense of
the word: but } mean to use the word “reason”
exclusively in the sense in which it is equivalent to
"good reason.” But what, then, is meant by


good, press
Huficiently sccurately what I mean by it in this
connection, as follows:—A good reason for a belief
faa proposition which is sroe, and which would not
bbe true unless the belief were alao tue. We should,
Tal Groom es nt tom & mn Exons sch
f8 proposition, he has a good reason for his belief;
Sal, when he knows 20 such proposition, we should
ty that he bas no reason for i When ho koows
Buch 1 proponiion, we should say be knows some-
thing whieh is a ceason for thinking hia belief to be
true—something. from which it cod be validly
Inferred, And if, ia answer to the question "How
do you know so and 40?” he ware to state such a
proposition, we should. I think, feel that he had
Answered the questioc which we meant to ask
Suppose, for instance, ia answer co the question
“How do you know that?" he were to say *'T saw
it in the Times." Then, if we believed that he bad
ticen it in the Zimes, and also believed chat it would
‘ot have been in the Zemer, ualess it bad been true,
‘we should admit chat ke bad answered cur question.


36 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


We should no longer doubt that be did dxow what
tbe asserted, we ‘no longer doubt. that his
belief was true But if, on the other hand, we
lieved that he bad cot seen it in the Timas—i

for instance, we bad reason to believe that what he
‘aw waa not the statement which ke made, but some

datement which he mistook for it? or if
believed that the kind of statement in question
tne with regard to which there was no presomption
that, being in the Teme it would be true : in either
of these cases we should, 1 think, fee) chat he had
sat sauwered oar question, We should til doobt
whether what he bad said was true. We should
sill doubt whether he énew what he asserted ; and
fince a man cannot tll you how be Awows a thin
less ne does know that thing, we should thi
that though he might have told us truly how he
tame fo believe it, be had certaialy not told us how
fhe Anew it. But though we shovld thus hold that
ho ad wa tld ye dow bre wat be bad anerved,
and that he had given us no reason for believing it
to be true; we must yet admit that be had giver us
fa reason in a senxe—a ad reason, a reason which
‘was no reafon because it had no tendency to show
that what be believed was true; and we might
also be perfectly convinced that he had given us ze
reason ‘why be believed it—the proposition

ing which be was fnduced lso to believe hi
inal antertion.
toe meetin oer foster


bork tre itself et i also auch tae ft would not be
sue, unless other people existed?” And [
is plain that this question, thas explained, s quite a


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 37


iferem: questa from the psychological question,
Gehich I aid T did age mean to ask—fom tho
‘quent, “ How does our beliel in the exisence of
cher people arise?” My illustration, I hope, as
‘made thie plain For I bave pointed out That we
Bey ghee ld thas a st ban wd os bow
belle of bis arise, and even whae was the reason
which roade him adopt that belief, aod yet may bave
Fed ie una cnr fee bella
propeition which ix both true hsel, and also auc
Hier the truth of bis belief follows from i. And,
fndeed, i is plats that ifany one ever believes what
in fase, he ia believing tomeibing for which there
‘Ro good reason, in the sense which 1 have expieined,
and for which, therefore, he cannct possibly have a
Teason; and yet it plainly does not follow that
i belief did not arise in anyway whatever, cor
even that he bad no reason for tno bad reason,
Tes plain that faloe beliefs do arise in some way oF
other—they have origios and causex? and’ anny
people who held thesn have bad reasons for bobding
Hlem~their belief does arise (by inference or other
vise) from their belict in some other’ proposition,
‘which is nat itself true, or else in not a geod reason
Tor holding that, which they infer from {t of which,
i sae eee wy, nducs them fo einen |
submit, tberefore, that the question, What good
eatoa’ have we for believing in the existense of
‘ther people?" different fromthe question. How
Goer that bali arise?” But whoo { any thin, T
faust noe be misunderstood ; 1 must not be under.
food to afbem that the; eoewer (0 both questions
‘may not, in a sonae, be'the same) fully edit
That thw’ very samme fac, which muggerte 20" on the
bale he erstsee of ther pale, my lo
4 good reason for blir exit
SMP Toaintaia i chat the question whether ie is a
good reason for thtt belie ie w dierent question


a OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


from the question whether it suggests that belief:
Hee aasert thar a cerain tact beth siggests Our
Ueto ech exes of cher pres od te ale
a reason at belie, we are
ascerting two dierent things and not one only.
‘And hesce, when I aster, as { shall assert, chat we
‘have « good reason for our belief in the existence of
‘other persons, | must not be understood also to assert
either that we infer the existence of other persona
from thit good reason, or that oue belief in that good
reason muggeata our belief in the existence of other
persons in any other way. It ia plain, I ebink, that
a man may believe two true propositions, of which
the one would not be teve, unless the other were
true too, without, a any sense whatever, having
arrived at his belief ia the on /rom his belief in th
‘other; and it is plais, at ‘all events, that the
question whether bis belief in the one did arise from
his belief in the otber. is a different question from
the question whether che truth of the one belief
follows from the iruth of the other,

Thope, then, that { have made it a litle clearer
‘what T mean by the question : “What reason have
wwe for believing in the existence of other people?"
and that what F mean by it ia at all events different
from what is meant by the question: “How dock
ur belief ia. the existence of other people arise?”
spit | am sory to any tha Ihave not yt reached

¢ end of my explanations as to what my meaning
is, Tam afraid that the aubject_ may seem very
tedious. I can assure you that 1 have found it
excemively tedious to try to make my meaning
clear to myself. I haye constantly found that I was
confusing one question with another, and that,
where [bad thought 1 had a good reason for some
assertion I din realty no good reason. But 1
may perhaps remind you is question, “How
do we know 20 and so?” “What reason have we


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 9


{ov believing it?“ is one of which philosophy is full
and coe to which the most various answers ave
been given. Philosophy largely consists in giving
reasons; und the question What are good reason
for a particular cooclusion and what are bad, ix 008
‘upon which philosophers bave disagreed as ouch as
‘oa any other question, For one, and th
conclusion different phil have giv


ions. We ere apt, | think, sometimes
to pay too little attention to this fact | When we
Ihave taken, perbaps, no little pains to assure our-
selves that our own reasoning is correct, and
especially when we know that 2 great many other

losophers agree with us, we are apt to assume
that the arguments of those philosophers, whe have
come to 2 coatradictary conclusion, are scarcely
‘worthy of serious consideration. And yet, 1 think,
there is scarcely @ single reasoned conclusion in
philosophy, as 10 which we shall not find that some
Other philoopbes, who ‘bas, so far aa we KuOW,
Destowed equal pains on bis reasoning, and with
equal ability, bas reached a conclusion incompatible
with ours. We aay be satisfied that we are right,
and we may, in fact, be #0; but it is certain thot
‘nth cannot be right: ether our opponent or, we
mouse have mistaken bad reasons for good. And
thin being 10, however satisSied we may be that itis
aot we who have done so 1 think we should at
Yeast draw the conclusion that it is by oo means
eagy t0 avoid mistaking bad reasons for and
that 10 process, however laborious, whi
Teast likely 10 help us in avoiding this should be
evaded. Buc itis at least possible that one source
of error lies in mistaking one kind of reason for
‘agothier—in supposing that, because there is, in one


” OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


‘sense, a reason for 2 given conclusion, there is also
B reaton in another, oc that because there ix in oe
‘sense, no reason for a given conclusion, there is,
therefore, no reason at al. I believe myself tbat
shia i weey frequent source of error: but it in at
least a possible one And where, as di ets


show, there ceraialy le eror on aoe ate or te
‘ther, and reason, t00, to suppose that the error is
‘not easy to detect, I think we should spare no pains


wvestigating any source, from which it is even
ible that the error may arise. For these reasons
think [ am perbaps doing right in trying to explain
clearly as possile not Saly what reasons we have
for believing in an external world, but also in what
senge { take them to be reasons,

1 proceed, then with my explanation, And there
fs one thing, which, (think my iustration hina
shown that I'do mof mean. I have defined a reason
for a belief as a true proposition, wbich would not
be true unless the belief itself—what i believed—

have used, as synonymous
ions: A. reason


truth of the belief fellows from which it comdd be
calidly inferred. “Now these expressions might
auggedt the idea that [ mean to restrict the word
““reagon.” to what, in the atrictest sense, might he
called 4 digicat reason—to propositions from which
the belief fn question fadloms, according to the rules.
of inference accepted by Formal Logie. But I am
not using the words “ follow,” “ validly inferred,” la
thin narow secse ; I do sat mean %0 restrict the.
‘words “reason for 2 belief” to propositions from
which the laws of Formal state thot the
belief could be deduced, The illustration which T
sve is inconsistent with this restricted meanin
sid that the fact that a stacement a in
Times wight be 2 good reason for believing that


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 41


that statement was true. And Tam using the word
"reason * ia the wide and popular sense, in which
it really might be If, for instance, the Timer
tated thet the King was dead, we should throk
that was a good reason for believing that the Ki

twas dead; we should think that the Timer would
‘not have made such « statement ae that unlese the
King really were dead. We should, indeed, not
think that the statement io the Times rendered it
bwolutely cerfain that the King was dead. But it


that sense, the fact of the statement appearing’ in
the Times would render it aac
more Ukely than not—that ing was dead.
‘And I wish it to be understood that I am using the
words “reason for a belief” in wide
rense, When I look for » good

belief in the existence of other peopl


lers their existence probable—only shows

‘yore likely than not that they exist
Provided that the proposition ia question does
render it posstively that they exist, chen, if
it also conforms to the conditions which Iam about
10 mention, I shall call ita “ good reason.’

‘But it is not every proposition which renders it
probable that other ‘exist, which [ sball
consider to be ‘acswer to my question, T
Ihave just explained that my meaning is wide in one
Sieion in sdmiting fone proprmtions which
render u belief merely probable ; but 1 bave now to
ia that it is restricted in two other directions
T do mean ta exclude certain propesitions which do
render that baie ‘thes axe: What
reason have we for believing in che existence
ther people? @ certain aa introduced by
the use of the ploral “we.” If each of several


‘eject any propaition merely on the ground that i
ly ren
i to be


#8 OBJECTS OF PERCKPTION


different persons has a reason for believing that be
himself exists, then it is not merely probable, but
certain, according to the rules of Formal Logic, that,
inva sense, thay “have a reason for believing” that
several people exist ; each bas a reason for believing
that be himself exists ; and, therefore, all of them,
talen together, have reasons for supposing that
several persons exist. If, therefore, 1 were asking
the question: What reason have for believ
in the existence of other 2 in thin sense, it
would follow that if each of us bas a reason for
believing in his own existence, these reasons, taken
together, would be a reason for belicving in the
existence of all of ux Bat I am aot asking the
(question in this sense : itis plain that this is not ita
natural sense, What I do/mean to ask ix; Does
seach single one of ux kaow any proposition, which is
4 reason for believing that others exist? [am
‘using “we.” that ig to Say, in the sense of “each of
na” But again I do mean each of us: 1 am not
merely asking whether some cas man knows a
Proposition which ia a reason for believing that
‘other men exist, Jt would be possible that some
abe man, or some few men, should know wich &
‘proposition, an ‘rest know no auch pro-
Portion, "Butt ato uot asking waether thief the
case, Tam asking whether among propositions of
the kind which (ao we commonly’ suppose) all or
aalmott all men koow, there is any which ia & reason
for supposing that other men exist And in asking
thie question I am not beep the question by
supeoring that all mea do exit My queion
suigh, 1 think, be pot quite sccurtaly as

ere aro certain Kinds of belief which, ax we
commonly suppose, all or almost all men share. 1
describe this kind of belief ax “oor” bells, simply
‘8 an easy way of pointing. out which kind of belief
Fmean, But without assumiog that ail men do share


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION “a


tio aan es cpp aga
Soria hr ha Siri eps.
bs


‘having, lize beliefs
This then, is the fiat restriction which 1 put
mn the meanin in. And it ia,

Wain, rentiton which, in ei ator meaning,
the words suggest. When we ask: What reason
base we for believing cat other people ena? we
naturally understand to be equivalent
to: What rensoa ban each of on for that belle?
And this question again is naturally equivalent ta
the que i itions that @


which (rightly or wrongly) we assume ali mea to
Toler ews re 207 oul aoe bo ru nao
tome other person than that man existed? But
there ia another restriction which, ] think, the words
af tay question seo sogges. if we were
to ask anyone the question : How do you know that
you did see that statement in the 7imes? and he


‘were to answer “Because 1 did see it in the Times
and in the Standard too,” we should not think that
be had given us a reason for she belief that he saw
{cin the Times. We thould not think his answer»
reason, because it asserta the very thiog for which
‘We require w reason. And similarly whea T atk:
Flow do we know that any thing of person exist,
other than ourselves and what we directly perceive?
What reason have we for believing this?) 1 must
‘naturally be understood to mezn : What propos
ether than one which itself asserts or presupposes
the existence of somethiog beyond ourselves and
‘our awn perceptions, is a reason for supposing that
such a thing exists?” And this restriction
¢xclodes an immense number of

Kind which all of us do believe. We ali of us
believe an immense aumber of diferent propositions


4 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


about the existence of things which we do oot
irectly perceive, and many of these propesitions
‘are, i my se0se, good reasons for believing in the
existence of sill other things. The belief in the
existence of a statement in the Times, when we
have not seen that statement, may, as 1 implied, be
12 good reusoa for believing that someone ix dead.
But 10 such proposition can be a good anewer to
my question, becacse it asserts the very kind of
thing for which 1 eequice a reason: it assers the
existence of something other chan myself and what
direct perceive. “When Tam asking | What
rearog hve for bebeving in the exttnce of
anything but ey ‘own, perceptions, and wbat
12 Bkeey perce you wool nr ers
mand me to mean: What reason, other than the
existence of such a thing, bave I for this belief?

Each of ws, then, we commonly asume,telives
same true propositions, which do not themselves
aawert the existence of anything other than himsel,
bis own perceptions, or wit he directly perveives,
Bach of om for inteanee, believes hat te hinwelf

cectain particular perceptions :
tteve ‘propesons ae jreposisooe of the Lind Z
‘ean —proposi
the existence of anything other chan hicnself, bis
own ions, and what ‘hey
are, I think, by no means the only
this kind, which most of us believe: but they are
Propositions of this kiad. But, as 1 say, I am not
prope ioe clove proportion of tog ind All
ieve propositioas of this kind.

tH asaume is that at least one man does believe

some such propositions. And then I ask: Which


‘among those true ‘which one man
balleres are auch that they would probably not be
true, unless some other man existed and had certain
articular perceptions? Which among them are


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION “5


such chat it (in the wide sense, which I have
explained) from their trutb, that it is more Teel
{tuo aoc that some other’ maa hts perceptions?
This the rearing of my queation, so far up t
hhave hitherto explained ic: and I hope this meaning
ls quite clear. tt is ia this sense that I um asking:
‘What reason have we for believing that other
le exist? How do we know that they exist?

his, indeed, is not aif that I mean by chat question:
therg is one other goit_the most important one
which cemains to be explained But this is par? of
what { mean to ask: and belore I go on to explain
what else T mean, [wish frit to stop and enguire
what is the an i
‘Wat is the an
the true propos
commonly assume} each of us believes, and which
do not themselves assert the existence of anything
other than that person himself, his ova perceptions,
‘oe what be directly perceives, are such that they
‘would probably not be true’ unless some other
person existed, who bad perceptions in some re-
Aspects similar to his own?

"Now to this question the answer is very obvious,
Ata very obvious that in this sense we have reasons
for believing in the existence of ether od
also what some of those reasons are. Buz I wish to
fake it quite plain that this is 40: chat in this sense
‘one onas Aas a reason for believing that another has
certain perceptions, All that Iam asking you to
ray, ik you see. that nome of ou sot be

ving ont thote perceptions which you now bare
conteas {, an I read this paper. were perceiving more
or leas black marks on a moore or less white grouod ;
er tat Ton the other band should oot be faving
just those perceptions which I now have, unless
{tome other persone tin myself were Beating the
sounds of my voice. And I am not asking you


“ OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


even 10 grant that this is certin—only that it is
ively probable—more likely than not. Surely
[Sis very obvious that this proposition i true, But
Wt mat gue ca wha weld be the
consequences o ‘any sich propositions
fre trae—propentions which assert that the exist.
tence of cain perceptions in one man are a reason
{or believing io the existence of certain pereepions
in another man—wbich assert that oot man would
‘probably not have had jase those perceptions which
fe), "oes ome he a bd fad
sertain particular perceptions. It is pain, 1 thin
thax noless scene sock  proposiions are" tnt, we
have no ce rasa for Sipping shat Alesader
the Great ever saw an a for supposing
that Sindbed the Seilor saw a Roc; we have oo
more reaton (or supposing thet anybody sew Julisa
Gesae mordered inthe Tous se
than for supponing that somebody saw hi
tp 19 Heaven a ery Gasion Tei
that if we have any reason at all for abpposiog. that
ig al probatiyAlerander the Great is a
lephant, sod that in all probabiity no such person
fr Sindbad the Sailor ever saw a Roc, part of bat
‘otwon contits in the aasumption that some, other
person would probably not have bad Jost’ those
Peroeptions which fe did have, unless Alerander
{ihe Great had seeo an elephant, and vslets Siadbad
the Sailor had ‘cot ea a'Roc,” And mont philoro-
pher, [ think, are willing to admit that we bave
Some’ reason, ia some tenve or other, for such pro-
nile a thes” Tey are ling 2 ad ot
some persocs’ probably “did ace. Ju
Getar murdered fn the Tiawe; tod soe
that some persona, other than those. who stm it,
had and have some reaton for supposing tbat some
cone else probably sxw it. Some sceptical philoso.
phere might, indeed, deny both proposions; and


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 47


to refute their views, 1 admit other arguments are
neded than say which Tahal brag forward inthis
papers, But oer veil (chink, admie
Bot only that facta for which there is, az we my,
good torical evidence, aze_ probably true} ‘Bit
Eto thar whac we call good Lstorical evdence rally
is io some aenve god reason for thinking chem
true. Accordingly tm going to auruane that many
tions of the folowing Kind are true. Pro-
Poskéony, namely, which asvert thet one man would
robably not have cerain perceptions which be dots
fave, unieas some otber san had oestain particular
Ferepton. That sone of you for ane, would
Frobably not be having precsely the percepdons
Shih you are tang oni 1 were Paving he
peteepdon of store or fxs black marks on a mere of
Een white ground. “And in sha seme, I sy, we
certain bere. ressons for cupposng’ that cher
povole base percopons amis, oe some respect, 80
Boeke which we srmctimes bave.

‘Bot when 1 said 1 was going 0 ask the question
What Yeung ave we for eppeiog tat ober
people exist? you will cerainly not fave thought
axe T merely meant to ask he gueston whic I
brave just mawered. Dy words wil have sugyested
to you something much more important then tery
tha When, for instance { sad Gatto the question
‘How do you kaow thet?” the anewer “f-auw it
inthe, Pinus” would be a astistctory snower, you
cay ave felt as 1 fle chat it would cot in al
Sreomstances be regarded as auch. The. person
tho aaked the questo might in some caren arly
Feply: "That is 00 anewer: how co you know cha,
Boome you saw a thing othe Tomasi toreforé
true?” “in other words fe might ask for © ree
for supposing. that the occurrence of x pertcular
featement in the Time was 3 reazon Jor sapposing
Bhat warement cue And thi ia 2 quescon ©


a OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


which we all believe tbat there may be an answer.
We believe that, with some kinds of statements
bd pny er
te example—the

thu the Tier makes them is no reasoa for supposh
them to be true : whereas with regard tn other kin
of statements, which it makes, such a statement, for
inmunce, as that the King was dead tbe fact tbat
{aes them i « reason for evpposing them evs
‘We believe that there are some Kinda of statement,
which it ia very unlikely the Timer would make,
tnless they were true; and ochers which it is not
a al uly tet the, Times ght ake, abough
they were notirue, And we belse that reason
might be given for distingulshing. ia this way
botween the two ciderent Minds of matement:
‘thinking that, in some cases (on poiots, for instances,
hich, as we should say, are not simple questions of
fact) the Tis is ‘whereas in other cases, it
4x though not abeoltey inalie, very unl to
state what is not true

Now it is precisely in this further sense that 1
vwlah to consider: what reasoa have we for believing
that certain particular things, other than ourselves,
ue own perceptions, and whet we directly perceive,
are real fT ave asserted tet 1 do have ceria
perceptions, which it ia very ualikely ave,
‘unless some other person had certain particular
erenslone; cht for imaace if very ullely 1

oul wing precisely those perceptions wl
Tem bow haviog uness someoee elas were heaiog the
sound of my voice And 1 now wish to ask:
‘arson have for enpponing dat chis i ually?

reason ‘am bat a

proposition trac? And I mncanby “baving a resaon™
Precisely wbat I formerly meant, [ mean: What
‘ther proposition do I Koow, which would not be
true, sales my perception ‘were connected with


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION ”


someone elve's perception, in the manaer in which T
asserted them to be connected? Here agais Tam
tasking for a goed reazom; and am not asking a
peycogial queaon with regard to origin, Here


Sain Tam ‘oot asking for fo the
wit sense of Pormal Silat iy asking
fot a proposition which ‘ot be tray
Sse what T aun! were fue Here aga t


tm asking for some of & Kind which
tot Suse es he belvtg Ma wine ot oe
of us that some of is
pereptone are counecied with artcoar per:
tions of other people in. the manver 1 asserted?
Es believin; kar he would not have certain
freepons thas be does “have ules some
ther perso had certain particular pereeptlona?

‘And bere again Cam asking for a, rlaimeT an


anking for some ‘ther than one shich
itvelf asserts = ‘one man has a perception of
toch and such a particsac Lind, it xe probable that


nother coun has © perepoa ot chou af tla er
that other kind

But what kind of reason can be given for
believing a proposition of this sort? For believing
A propodson wich amers thay, ance ove particles
thlog exits, i is that another parcicular
thing also exists? One thing 1 think is plain, aaroel
thet'we cin bave oo good feasoa for belleving sock
Lele Nts eenratinton fee conmonty

eveg. mae ie como
Taieved, fr instonen, that certain so-called fat
Fat Say oslo rere rd

or
ip dares Late ac roman Be ood ng
toles we have ressgn to coppore. that ofjeraa
heh rable thee i certain parslar emp
made by woseware more often made

‘by teen thal by any ccher agency. Usieas certain


so OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


culor characteristics which those arrow-beads

ve were characteristics which belonged at least
more frequently to articles of human manufacture
than eo any articles oot rade by een, it would
aurely be just as Tikely ax cot tbat these arrow-
hheads were wot rade by men—that they were, in
ive nasi thamattagomrstietioe “be pene
wwe reason to aasect onthe gencral-
ination tbat objects of a ceraia kind are generally
made by men, we bare no reason to suppose that
these particular objects, which are of the kind io
fuestion, were made by men, And che same, 20 far
aa can see, is truc uoiversally. If'we ever have
fany reason for asserting thay since one particular
thing exises, another probably exists oc existed oF
ilexist alto, part Of our reason, at least, att
Consist jo reasons for asertiog come generalisation
“for asserting that the exisieace of things of @
particular kind is, more often than not, accompanied
or preceded or followed by the existence of things
‘of Another particular kind, It is, J think, some-
times assumed that ea aternative. to this’ theory
may be found in the theory tbat the existence of
fne kind of thing “intrinsically points ta," or ia
"intrinsically @ sign or symbol Of the eximence of
another thing. {t ia suggested that when a thing
ich thus points to tbe existence of another thing
exins, then it i at least probable that the thing
* pointed to” exists algo, But this theory, T think,
fom na cealalternative. For, io the fist place, when


‘we nay that the existence of one thing A of
Ors points to" the existence of another thing By we
Yer commonly acroly raeen os that whee &
ing like A exists a thing like B geseratiy ex
too. We may, no doubs, mean something else $90;
‘but this we do mena. We sy, for instance, that
certain particular words, which we hear or read are
2 “sign” that somebody bas thought of the


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION = gt


particular things which we call the meaniz
‘those words. But we should certainly besivare vo
admit that the hearing or ceadiog of certain words
could be called a “sign” of the existence of
fertain thoughts, unless it were true that when
those words are heard or read, the thoughts io
‘question generally have existed, If when those
Words were heard or read, the thoughts had

ly not existed, we should say that, in one sense
‘ofthe word at all eveots, the of the words was
‘ot a sign of the existence of the thoughts. ia thin
tense, Therefore, to say that the existence of A
Ne tence of B


points 10"
‘ia a siga of” nay be used in come other sense:
they may, for instance, mean only that the exintense
Of A suggests in some way the Selief that B exists
‘And in each a care we certainly might know that the
eximence of A pointed to the existence of B, with-
out knowing that whea A existed B generally
existed also, Let us suppose, then, that in some
szuch sense A does “point to" the existence of B;
tan this fact give us @ reason for supposing it eved.
able that B existe? Certainly 1 can, promided
[is true that when A dees poiat to the existence of
B, B generally cxinta But aurely i can do 20,
nig oh tls sondidon IC when A pints to the
exintence of nevertheless, does of gene
frit, thes, sorely tbe fact that A points wo the
existence of B can constitute 20 probability that B
does not exist: on the cootrary it will thea be
probable thar even though A’ points 10” the
exltence of B, B does not exist, We have, in fuck,
only substituted the generalisation that A's poonti


posting
to B is general ied. by the existence of
Bor Soe gevcrdsnlon, hot” A cudens g
generally eccompanied by the existence of B. if


$2 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


we are to have reason for asserting that, when
K poms o or iss sign of the exatence of BB


Teis i ‘then, 1 ink, a
reason for the assertion that some particular percep:
fee cee were huvigg or hed nada percopon of &
‘ne elie were having or a ion of
Sind which 1 can rave, we must Gd a reason for

generalisation. And it ie also plain, | think,
that fa many cases of this kind the generalisation
spent coon in an aaerion tht wie one man
certain perception, some other ean
Gretaly tes fad come outer pereeption cf belle
fe assume, for instance, that when we hear of
read certain words, somebody betider ourselves
‘has thought the ‘which constitute, the
meaning of the: 5 aod it in plain, 1 think,
that we have 10 reasoa for this ansumption except
‘one whick is also a reason for the assumption that
‘when certain words are heard or read, somebody
Soy ter, at Tee nce te nau
iy, therefore, at Teast i the enguiry :
What reasons have we for such generalisations te
there? for generalisations which assert e connection
bbetwece the existence of n certala kind of perception
fone man, snd tbat of a certain kind of perception
cr belie ic another can ?

‘And to this question, 1 think, but one answer
can be given. It-we have any reason for auch

jeralisations at all, come reason must be given,
fh one way or anotber, by observatioa—by observa:
son “undead it ibe ide aces io whieh
Includes “experiment.” No philosopher. 1 thi
Itas over failed to assume thst observation doea
ive a reason for some generalisations—for some


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 53


con whic. ert at when one taf
thin ps etn oF bos existed
in e-cerain relation to it, Even those who, Uke
Fins fly thar aeration canoe
for anything, ‘appeal
In suppor: Sf generaleanons Gr thot own,” And
feven thote who Bold that observation can give no
eanoa for way generlisauon about the ceation of
fone man's perceptions to encther', yet Kold that i
fam give reaton for generalisions about the
felation of some. co. others among a mau’ Own
feteenonn. ie in deed, by’ no manne agrend
‘eervation can give a reaton for any general
tation. Nobody knows what reason we bare, if
we have any, (or supposing that it can, Bot that
Een eeyone 1k ahamen gk ter.
fore, mast phil ‘ at if we can
find sey scavon at all for gescraliestions of the Kiad
ja which Tam interested’ a reason for some of them
at all events must be found in observation “And
ps Teepee toma es What season can be and
{a observation lor even a. siagle propodiion ofthe
ilod have described? fora propoakion which assets
that when one man hes one kied of perception,
tnother man generally bas or has had ancther,

‘But, when fe said thar observation gives us &
reason for generalisations, two things may be meant
Delther oftwbich T mean. in the first place, we
poptlarly use “observation” ina aente in. which
dre can be nid to plieree tho perceptions feliogs

hoops of ober people whch, therefore
fegurd to whi

we
fet believing ia Ghee existence But itis universally

reed thers isa see fa which man an
obverve the perceptions, feelings or thoughts of an
‘ther cea. And it is to this eric sense chat

‘een tt.


s& OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


‘Propose to confine the word, I shall use it ina
fcase, in which we can certainly be said to observe
ssothing but ourselves, our own perceptions, thoughts
and feelings, and what we dicectly perceive. And
Bt poze pace, omy be id Ut beers
m ‘another person may give me a reason
believing some generalisation, And it ie cenaicly
the case that for many of the generalisations in
ich we all believe, if we bave a reason in observa~
lon at all, itis not in axy owe observation that we
ave it: part of our reagoa, at all events, lies i
things which ofher people have observed but whi
we ounelves have not observed. Bot in asking
this particular question, I ans not asking for reasons
of this sort. The very question that I am asking
las What reaion hae any one of for supposing
that any other person whatever has ever made any
‘observations? And just as, in the Bret meaning
whieh I gave to this question, it meant: What
thing that any singe an becrves ix such dat it
‘would probably aot have existed, unless some other
man had made 8 particular observation? So now
Tam asking: Which among the things, which ome


single wan chierons, re such that’ they would
probably not have existed, unless it were true that
tome of them generally stood in certain relations
te, observations of some other person? I ara

ing: Which among my oma observations give
‘ne a reason for supposing that some of them are
of a kind which are gesorally preceded or azcom-

ied by observations of other people? Which,
Fer instance, among my own observatious give a
good reason for the generalisation that when T hear
Certain words, somebody else has generally had
certain partiedar thoughts, or that whenever antyone
beara certain words, somebody cloe has generally
‘bad the thoughts which constitute what we call the
mneaning of those words? I am asking: Which


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION $5


among the wast series of observations, which any
one individual cakes during his lifetime, give 2
‘reason fot any generalisation whatever of this
Beds generation which aucrs thet some of
jem are geoerelly preceded by certain thoughts
pereeptoot or fedlage in other persons? T quite
admit that there are some generalisatioas of this
kind for which the observations of some particular
men will nof give a reason. All thar Task is: Is
there even ons generalisation of this kind, for which
the ind of ctnrvatony, wich (48 we commonly

assur aan, or nearly every man does mo
do give a reason? Among observations of the
ind which (as we commonly assume) are common
‘to you and to sie, do your, by themselves, give any
reason for even axe such generalisation? “And do
fob generdimtion? ‘hed i tiny dy which, acon
lization , which, among

these observations, ist which de 20?

‘My question is, then: What reason do my own
skseratios give me, for supposing that ay pe
‘ception whatever, which I have, would probably ot
fccur, unless some other person had a certain kind
of perception? What reason do my own observ.
Ations give me for supposing, for instance, that I
should ‘not be perceiving what I do now perceive,
woless someone were hearing the sound of my
voice? What reason do your own observations
give you for mupposing that you would not be
Perceiving just what you are perceiving, unless 1
‘were perceiving more or less black marks 00 & more
cr leas white ground? ‘The question does, I think,

to bea reasonable one; and most philoso-

era, § think, bave assumed that there is an answer
tot.” Vet it may be said that chere is no answer to
that my own observations give me no reason


‘whatever for an; ‘proposition of this kind,
Tie we corala pips (oven ape from


56 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


thorough scepticn, with whom, ux I bave stid, I am
shot sow aryuing) who have denied that they do.
‘There are certain philosophers who hold that nothing
‘which any single one of un observes or can observe,
ives the slightest reason for supposing tbat any of
Fis“own percegtiocs are iy connected with
ptions in le There are
hilosophers who bold that the only geseralisations
foe which our own observations do give any warrant
fare generalizations concerning the manner in which
‘our Own perceptions, thoughts and feclings do and
probably will succeed one another; and who oon
Bode dat this being so, we have no reaton what-
ver for balling in the exitenon of any caber
pple. And shes pklovophere are 1 think, ight
wing this conclusion from this premies, It
does ot, indeed, follow from their premiss that we
Ihave not a reason in the sense which 1 firs ex.
ined, and in whicb, | insisted, it must be admitted
at we, have a reason. “It dose not follow thar
some of our perceptions arr not such as woul
probably not exist, uoless some other person had
certafa perceptions. But, as I have vrged, when
wo say that we have « reasoo for asserting the
existence of sometbing not percefved, we commonly
mean something more than this. We mean not
‘ooly tbat, since what we perceive does exist, the
voperceived thing probably exists too; we mean
Sosourdoa Deters the parcred sod tea Too
connection between and the oper.
ceived. And holdiag, ex we do, that no retson can
be given for asserting suck @ concection, except
observation, we should say that, if observation gives
ng Teason for assertiog it, wo bave we reason for
faaserting it; and having a reasoa for asserting this
ronection between the perceived and the voper-
telved, we should say that we bave none either for
asserting the even probable existence of the w-


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 57


perceived, ‘This, I think, is what we commonly
nean by sayiag that we Rave no reason to believe
fn the existence of m particular thing which we do
ot peretive, And heace, I think, those philosa-
pphers who bold that our own observations give ut
0 reason whatever for any sation whatever
concerning the connection of any of them with those
of other people, are quite right in concludiog that
wr have fo reaton to atcrt that any other perce
ever did have ticular thought or perception
Swhncver "Thin thet the words of scone! on,
iinderstood in their natural meaning, express pre:
chaste rene seen ese ook,
inelied to-do, that, because we have no reason for
teelieving in the existeace of other people, it is
Gherefore highly doubtful whether they do’ exist
The phlwophes, who, advocate tha “opiien
commonly refute themselves by atsigning the ex:
fatence of other people as part of cheir reason for
believing that itis very doubiful whether any other
people exist. That for which we have no reason
fay, cevertheless, be certainly true. And, indeed,
‘one of the philosophers who bold most clearly and
expressly that we do know not only the existence
of other people but also that of mater objects, alka
‘one of those who deny most emphatically that our
‘own observations can give agy reason for believing
sither in the one or in the other, refer to Thomas
Reid, Reid, indeed, allows himself to use not only
the word " observe.” but even the word “perceive.”
in tha wide sone in wich it night be aud chat we
observe or perceive the thoughts and fe

Sherr and ‘T thiok that the fact chot he oss the
‘words in this seate, han misled him iato thinking
that his view is more id more in ace
cordance with Common Sense than it really is: by
turlog the words in this sense be is able to plead


fd OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


that “bcrration” relly, does give, reaton for
See of oe pees ral
Sense hokis that “observation” (in = narrower
todo ges ramen horvihopr oat
perceive, in the strict sense to which
be am “confing these words, he asserts quite ex-
pliitly thas it gives us co ceason either for believing
Ai'the existence of material objects or for believing,
ia the existence of other minds. Berkeley, he sayy,
Ss pore Ineuseraily tae 8 gts tee
Se he aes ant Hae tat giro
Row thee plisopbers may be righ a bl
on sin ght
th” say pechape, be ce tha th asa
iny own observations give me no reason whatever
fe believing that any otber person ever has or wilt
Beers anything Hike volte wine I peresve,
it 1 think it is desirable we should realise how


paradoxical are the which must be
Eainited i this i true, {tent then be admitted
that the very large part of our knowledge, which we
‘suppate to have some basis in experience, in by no
means based upoa experience, in. the sense, and to
fhe extent, which we suppoe. We do for insane
‘commonly fs some basis in
pris es tees ne ewe ouin eas
we call Germans, wae one set of words wo express
‘ouch the samme meaning which we express by vain
TGterst oc of woe Bo te :
‘correct, we must admit that no

fives Kim any reason whatever for supe

‘when be hears certain words, any one clue at
beard or thought of the same words, or meant
anythiog by them. The view edmina indeed, chat
ido Know that when I hear certain words,
somebody else has generally bed thoughts mors or


less similar to those which 1 im to bave
tend bur i Gents that my own Cheerv


could


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION gg


ever give me the least reason for supposing that
‘this ins0. Tt admits that my own observations may
rive rae reasoa for supposing that sf anyone bax «
ad perception ke mine i some respect he
also have had other perceptions Like othera of ex
tat i denies that they give me any coon fr
supposing that aay one & perception
ion of mite Te ado that my oma
observations may give me reason for supposing.
certain perceptions and thoughts in ome person (sf
they exh) will be flowed. or preceded by ceria
‘other perceptions and thoughts ia that person : but
it denies that they give me any reason whatever for
apy sisilus gencriation concerning the cower.
fon of a certain kind of perception im one person
with a certain kind of oothen Te
idmite that J should not ave certain perceptions
which T do have, unless someone elee had had
Certain other perceptions ; but it denies that my own
observations can give me any reason for saying $0—~
for saying that [ should not bave bad this
perception, unless someone else had had that. No
Shuervmions of mine, it boda, can ever render it
probable that auch a generalisation is teue ; 00
Observation of mine exo ever coofirm or verify such
a generalisation. Il we are to say that any such
{generalisation whatever is based upoa observation,
wwe ean oaly mean, what Reid means, that itis based
60. series of assumptions When I observe thi
particular thing, 1 assume that at particular thing,
wien T do id rina; when obaerve
snot cul 4 io assume that a
Second particular. ching’ whict Ido not obvervq
cas; when I observe « third parila thing, I
again assume that a third particular thing, whic
db not observe, exists. ‘These assumed facts—the
assumed fact that one observation of mine, is
sccompanied by the existence of oe pardeular kind


6 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


of thing, and that another observation of mine is
accompanied by the existence of a different particu
tay kind of ting, wil then give me « reson for

reat fsations concerning the connection
of difereat persepcions of ine wi diferent
external objecis—objects which [ do not perceive.
Bot (it is essintained) nothing bat a mass of auch
amumptions will give me a reason for any such
generilisation.


tray be Micied tay, ddtog 1 the plop
may ie in holding iy the philosopher
of Common Sense departs from Common Senet
Yeast as far in one dircction ag hie opponents had
done in another, But I think that there i some
exeute (or those who hold it: 1 think that, in 008
respect, they are more in the right than those who
o not hold it—than those who bold that my own
observations do give me a reason for believing in
the exinence of other "For those who hold
that my observations do give me a reasca, have, I
believe, universally supposed that the reason Hes in a
part of my observations, in which no auch reason
{to be found. This ix why I kave chosen to ask
the question : What reason do my observations give
me for beleving that any other person bat say
particular dons or beliefs? wish to
on fick among the things which 1 observe
‘wil give auch a reason. For this fs a question to
Which no asawer, that I bare ever seeo, ©
the to becorrect. Those who bave asked it bave, 33
far 08 T know, anawered it either by denying that my
observations give me any reason or by poiating to
4 part of my observations, which, a3 it seems to me,
relly do give none, Thowe who deny ae, cert
to me, right in bolding reason given

thom wht aim ts werooa, “And ihe core


opinion on this point will I think, parly serve to


‘OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION ch


‘explain their denial. They have supposed that if our

‘observations give us any reason at all for azseting the

‘existence of other people, that reason must lie wi

jc has been supposed to lie by those who hold that

they do give a feton, "Aad ten, Goding that thi
tarlgned reaon in no reason, they have assuriod chat

there is no other.

Lam proposing then to ask: Which among th
observations wich Taka and which (06, we
commonly suppose) are similar in kind to thone
which all or almost all men make, will give a reason
foc supposing that te viene of iy of them is

counected with the existence of certain
Cee percetcs bali ier pees? Al
in order co answer thie it is Obvious we
smust first consider two ‘We must coutider,
in the frst place: Of what nature must observations
be, f they are to givea reason for any generalization
asserting that the existecce of one itd of thing is
generally consected with that of another? And we
Frust consider in the second place: What kinds of
things do we observe?
ow to the fst of these questions 1 am not
ing to attempt to give a complete answer. The
fon te ‘concerning the rules of {nductive Login,
hich is the question at iseue, ia an immensely
Gibeok aod iaerieate question” Aad {am nk
going to attempt to say, what kind of observations
se saficit to Jovy & generalisation, Bot it
ively easy to point out that a certain kind
of observations ae to juny generis
tion : and this is all that T propose to do.
to point cut certain conditions, which Serta
musa i vey ae tua & =
without in say way implying that all observations
which do satlaly- these. contitons, mall p
Generalistion, ‘The conditions, [sball mention,
‘dre ones which are certainly mov sufficient to justify


cn OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


1 stink conditions
‘can be just
1 particular Kod of observations do aot satay theae
conditions, we can say with certainty that thoac
Olservations give us my reason for believing in, the
‘existence of other people : , with regard to
Sesto whch 3 aiaty lan, e a only
able to say that they may give a reason.
arf conden, i ae bn tions satisfy,
are to justify a generaliaat
moppore that the generaliston to be
‘asserts that the existence of a kind of object,
we will call ‘ane ly preceded, actors.
panied, o¢ followed existence of a kiad of
Bajos wtiek we'c B.A for ince, gh, ba
the bearing of a certain word by one person,
the thought of that which we eall the meat og of
th word, soother person andthe eneralstion
tobe julied night be that when one person hears
od not apoken by. biewel, somes ele hat
scruy ehesghe of the mating’ of tbat werd
at most T ave observed, i the generalization
that the existence of A is generally preceded by the
texittence of Bis 10 be juatied by my observations
One first point, 1 chink, ia plain I must bave
dabserved both some object, which is io come
Ie A, and which I wil ll, and also com
in some respects like B which I will call 6: I most
have clnerred bah ond, und abs 1 frat have
ri at leant, I rouse
fhave observed. But I do not pretend 10 say ow
like a aad must be 10 A and B; nor do 1 pretend
to say how often I must have observed @ preceding
‘= although it is generally held that I must bave
‘Observed this more than once. These are questions,
heh would have tobe dctnedifwe wee wing
to discover what observations were sufficient 10
jumtify the generalisation that che existence of A ia


2 Let


‘OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 6
generally preceded by that of B, But [ am oal
f opmen 4 ich 7


fg %0 ‘minimum which is necessary
£2 fly this genereliation and therefore 1 a
cocitent to say that we must have observed some.
thing more oc less like B preceding something more
or let tke A, atleast once,

y oberrnoe of 8 erecting’ © ew july the
my observation is to ju
fers, at fhe nites of A i Foal
Preceded ‘visterce of B, it is plain, T thi
Eirioik ep and the « wtih 1 Sbeved mas
have evisted or been real; and that also the existence
of B must really have preceded that of «Tt is

lain that if, when I observed @ and 8, a existed

8 did not, this observation could give me 50
reason to suppose hat on another occasion when A.
existed, B wont exist Or agaio, if, when T
sbeerved P ‘preceding both ff and «existed,
but the existence of 8 did not that of
«, but, on zhe contraty, followed it, his observation
could sertinly give me no reasos to suppose thas,
fn general, the existence of A was, ‘by the
existence of B. Indeed this condition that what ia
observed must have been ree might be said to be
Included in the very meaning of the word “observa
Hoa." We should, in this convection, say that we
had’ not observed f preceding a, unless B and «
‘were both real, and bad really preceded a 1 I
may "I have chvrved that, on one occasion, my
hearing of the word ‘moon’ was followed by my
imagining a luminous silvery disc,” 5 commoaly
tea co aclude in my seateaect the amerion tbat
1 id, on that occasion, really hear the word “moon,”


‘and really did have @ visual icroge of 2 Tuczinous
disc, and that my was really (allowed boy
toy imagination. If it were to me that this


had not really bay admit that I hed
Sot realy steal "Bar tong te oocien


6 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


that, observation is to give reason for a generali-
tiga, what js observed faust be real, may thua be
said t0 be implied in the very word “observation,”
it was necessary for me to mention the condition
‘explicidly. | Te wan necessary, because, as J. shall
presently show, we do and must also use the word
observation "in vense in which the asertion “I
observe A” by 00 meaes includes the assertion “A
exist"—in a sense in which it may be true that
though 1 did observe A. yet A did not exit.
‘But there is also, U think, a third cecessary con-
apt to'be averlooked. It may,
perbaps, be allowed that observation gives some
‘reason for the proposition that hens’ eggs are gener-
ally laid by hens. 1 do not mean to say that any
one man’s observation can give « reason for this
ition . 1 do not assume either that it can or
that it canoot. Nor do T mean ta make any ay-
sumption as to what must be meant by the words
“hens” and “eggs.” if this proposition is to be true.
Lam quite willing to allow ‘momect that if it
is true at all, we must understand by “hens” and
“eggn” objects very wolike that which we direcly
observe, when we see & ben in a yard, or an eg oa
the breakfast-table. I am willing to allow the
possibility that, as some Idealins would say, the
Proposition “Heng lay eggs” is false, unless we
mean by it: A certain kind of collection of sprite
‘or monads sometimes bas a certain intelligible re-
lation to another kind of collection of spirits or
onads, 1am willing tallow tbe, pomibily that,
ta Rel and teme sien would sy, the pr:
ion “ Hens lay egga” is false if we mean by it
Enythiog more then iat: Certin cocBguratons of
favinible material particles sometimes have a certain
temporal relation to another kind of con-
iguzation of invisible material particles Or aga
Tam willing to allow, with certain other phi


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 65


phery, that we must, if it isto be true, interpeet this
proposition aa meaning that certain kinds of sens-
sions have to certain other kinds a relation which
say be expressed by saying that the one kind of
fentatons “lay” che ‘otber kind,” Or again, ax
ther phlloeopar any. the proposition “lent iy
eggr" may possibly mean: Certain sensations of
mine would, under certain conditions, have to certain
ork tenetoon of mip aration sich my be
wr saying ‘one set would “lay”
= ‘other set. But whatever the proposition “Hens’
fare generally laid by hens” may maax, most
fs would, T thok alow that in’ some
tes ‘ocher, thia ‘was true.” And they
would also I think allow that we have some reason
far ic; and that far/ of hia reason at afl events lies
in observation : they would allow that we should
Ihave no reason for it unless certain things bad been
observed, which have been observed, Few, I think,
‘would say that the existence of an egg “intvinsically
inuy” fo that of a bets in sac a ents tha, even

fe we had had no experience of any kind concerning
{rca ha ng soci af ey ed cocering
with animals Tike eas, the mere inspection of au
Sg would jou the asertion: A fen bas probably


*Teavume, then, tat ebjct having al the churn.

{eric whic ben ems have (whatever thove may

ory Sos ee at

baad 1 assume that, if we have any reason for

‘generalization at all, observation gives us some

retnon for it Bat now, lt us oppose thatthe ooly
Observations we had cade were those which we

should commonly describe by saying that we bad

= noe say that any

us of sec brats, steals wast
‘ficient (o justly our generalisation: 1 thik

i plata that they would sot. Boe let us ppone


6 ‘OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


for the moment, that we had observed nothing else
‘hich bore upon the coanection between hens and
¢ and that, if therefore oor generalisation was
justified by any observations at all, it wan justified
these. We are supposing, then, that the ob-
‘secvations which we describe as “seeing hens lay
eggs” give some reason for the generalisation that
that kind are generally aid by hen And

{fihese observations give reaaze for thin, obviously
in a wense they give reasoa for the generalisation
that the existence of such an nerally pre
ceded by that of a hea; and bence also, they give
lup ceason to euppose that if such an egg exists, a
then has probably existed also—that unless a ben
Jud existed, the egg would not have existed. But
the point to which { wish to call attention is that it
is only ina limited sense that they do give reason
for thi They ony give ws reavon to sappone that,
for each egg, there bas existed a hes, which was ut
tome time near the place where the egg in question
then was, and which existed at a time wear to that
at which the egg began to exis. The ony kind of
e0k, whove existence ve us reason to
HEL Seles at me te


spose ae urs of which vac me tine
in and tm it eal
proba in the soatona which are Se’ “lnhgite


Saunterpacts” of these) to an egg. They give ux
te infoetion x al cout te eetence of Some Of
there are any) which never came within a thousand
miles of an egy, o which were dead & thousand
yest ay epg existed That ots, they
ive us reason a particular
cain, there bas ‘cated 9 ben wich wos
some time mat thet ope bat hey give wn ue
reason 10 suppose particular egg exists,
SL a
near that egg. ‘bs reason to suppose
thas, for each egg, there has probably exinted 2 ben


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION CH


which at some, time stood to the egg in question in
that relation which we bave obecreed ts hald be-
tween an egg and a ben, when we observed che bea
laying an egg, But they give uno reason to infer
fom in axheone fos ops ay tba ind of ben

‘which sever stood to the egg In the relation
{a which we have observed thar som bess do wand


to
‘Wa 1 wish to is that this condition in a

universal condition far sound inductions, If the

Observation of 8 preceding a can ever give us am


eaxon at all for si that the existence of
rally of B, it can at most
abe Ho mee meee tha th ete of
ao Ais preceded by that of a
ands to ur be the same relation in which fat


teem chieroad to ttaad toa. Tt canoon give the
hat the exieteate of an
by that of a B, whic
‘observed relation, bat in
tome quite different ove. If we are to have any
reanos to infer from the existence of an A the
existence of such a B, the reason must lie in sorme
different observations. "That this ia 80, ia the case
of hens’ eggs and heas, is, I thiok, obvious: and, if
felt tuner, se mon hou of eat
given for supposing that it ly in one
cary and notin sie
faving thus to point out some
conditions which seem to be necessary, though
Ut uficon, where observation is to give soy
Oy cecal Datcaory quaen’: Wiel ok of
‘second preliminary question: What ki
Hhograe wedtonee!

Ts eee ceees toe much and how Lil, ¥
mean by “observation” or “direct perception,"
will ake as an instance a very common visual
Perception, Most of us are familiar wlth the


68 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


experience which we should describe by saying that
foe iad vos ered book cd's hee Bee
by side upon a ahelf. What exactly can we be said
tp observe or directly perceive when we have much
‘an experlence? We certainly observe one colour,
which we call bive, and a different colour, which we
call’ red; each of these we observe ay having a
particular sice aod shape; and we observe alsa
these two coloured patches as having to one another
the spatial relation which we express by saying they
‘ure side by side. All this we certainly ste or
iret peceive som whatever may have been the
process by which we have come to perceive 30
much, “But whea we say, as in ordinary talk we
hould, that the objects we are books, we
teriniy'meam to ascibe to them propertien, which,
ina sense which we all understand ae not actully
aten by us, at the moment wheo we ore merely
looking at two books on a shelf two yardsof£ And
all nich propertion I mean to exclude at not being
thea observed ox directly perceives by os When
peak of what we observ, when we see two books
on a shelf, I mean to Hit che expression to that
which is actually seem. And, thus understood, the
‘expression does include colours, and the sire and
shape of colours, and spatial relations in three
dimeotions between these patches of colour, but it
{includes nothing eles,

Bat 1 am also oting observation ja & sease in
which we can be said actually to observe a mov
ment. We commonly vty we can sometimes
sae a red billiard ball moving towards a white one
on table. And. here again, I do not mean
ty ladon wha Srey percave or cbaered
all that we mean by saying that the two objects

ved. are. biliard allay ‘ut J-do. mesa to
laclode what (we should say} we actually sen We
sctually sce a raore or less round red patch moving


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 4


towards a more or less round white patch; we see
the mrcich of green between them diminishing in
tise, And this perception is not merely the sane
44 series of perceptious—frst a perception of


ed patch with a geoen suretch of one size between
Kean the white then a perception of red patch
with a grees atretch of « differen between it


and the white; snd 90.00. In order to perceive
movement we must have a different perception from
any one of these or from the sum of them. We
aust octwally see the green stretch
size,

"Now tis undoubtedly dficul, n gome instances
to decide precisely what is perceived in this sense
abd what aot. But I bope 1 have said enough
to show that I am using “perceive” and “observe”
in a sence in which, ona given occasion, it is eas
to decide that seaee things certainly are perct
and other things, as certaisiy, are not perceived,
Tam using it in a sease in which we do perceive
uch a complex object ax a white patch moving
towards a redone on a green fick’; but 1 am not
using it in, any sense in wich we could be said to
‘perceive or “observe” that what we saw movin
‘was abilliard-ball. And io the same way } thin
wwe can distinguish roughly between what, on any
iven occasion, we perceive, ux we say, “by any
fone of the other senses,” und what we do not
perceive by it. We can say with certainty that, on
any given occasion, there are certain kinds of
“eontent” which we are actually hearing, and
other which we are nat actually hearing; though
With regard to some agaia it is difpcult 10 say
‘wbether we are actually bearing them or not. And
tlmilaely we can discnguiah with certainty in some
leaaoees, between what we ar ana given ocean,
actually smelling of feeling. and what we art not
setoally selling or feline


yo —ORJECTS OF PERCEPTION


But now, besides these kinds of “things.”
“objects.” or “contents.” which we perceive, as
we say, “by the senses,” there is also another kind
which we can be said 19 observe. Not only can ]
Observe a red and blue book side by side; I ean alsa
observe myself observing them J can perceive a
red patch moving towards a white, and | can aloo
perceive my perception of this ovement. And
‘what I wish to make as plain as I can in that my
perception of the movement of a coloured patch can
At leant be distioguished from that movement lta
wish to make ft plain that to observe a coloured
patch moving is % observe one thing: aod to
observe myself observing « coloured patch movi
in another. When I observe my own perception o
a movement, I observe something more than when
J merely observe the movement, and something
very diferent from the movement. I may perceive
red and a blue book side by side on 2 sbelf; and
‘at another time I may perceive a red. ball moving
towardsa white. ‘The red asd blue patch, of one
shape, at rest side by side, are different from the
ted, of another shape, moving cowards the whites
and yet, when I say that both are “perceived,” 1
mean by “perceived” ose and the same thing.
‘And since, thus, two different things may both be

ceived, there must also be some difference
Eeween each of them and wa in evant by saying

at it i perceived. Indeed, io precicely the same
fray ia which I may observe ‘a. spatial relation
Between n red patch and a blue (when 1 observe
them * side by aie")! do, when I obuerve my own
Bereezion of then, observe spatial relation

tween it and them. I observe a distance between
say perception and the red and blue books which I
perceive, comparable in magaitude with the breadth
Of height of the bloe book, just as these are
comparable in magninude with one another, And


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION ”


when T my I oberve a disteace. between 1
perception of a red book and that red book itself,
Soinot mean that { cbeecye a distance Between tay
ages af anyother past of wha fel ny body, ad

hy heed in Soesine. Tan ole fa) ‘of my
F ny acta! perception, I'obeerve 1
wresption of & book to be near the book
further from the table, in exactly the same eense in
T observe the book to be near the shelf on
fn'mands and forber from the table, And
iss as, ithe distance between a red patch aad’ a
White 1s to be perceived, the red pach must be
different from the white, £0, if I perceive a certain,
Sisansebeeneen ny perception an the rd, ath
a perception must be different from the red patch
what perceive

TTamlec, thes, that we obverve, oo the one Ind
coloured patches of certain shapes and sires, and
{hele path relations to one another, cogether
al the aher inde of cones” wich we chu
Usually be said to perceive “ wr sensea”
And, on the other hand, we also sometimes observe:
ur Owe percepticos of such “content” aod, our
thoughts, And these two kinds of “content” are
diferent fora one nother: my perception of a ted
patch with gold letters om it, is not itself a ced patch
with gold fates oa Ce when I cheers
ny. pereeption of th patch, 1 obeerye. someth
Ehetoor Row that which | ebnerve when T meray
Perceive the patch. Either of these two kin
Of “content"—either colours, moving or at rest,
‘sounds, amells, and all the rest—or, on the other
hand, ‘my perceptions of these—either of these
two kinds, Gr both, might conceivably, since both
are observed, give grounds for a general
concerning what exists Bur, as f have said, if
observations are to give any grouod for such
generalisation, it must be assumed that what ix


72 “OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


oorved ent or is road girs nt
insisted, when I observe my perception of 2
wth gold letra on i, 1 observe oomesig dl
from what { observed whea I merely observed a red
‘patch with gold letters omit, it follows that to assume
fhe exicence of my perepiion of this red and gold
in sof the sae thing ab f0 sssume the existence of
the red and gol

ta ehatit Thay by asked do 1 on n by thls
property of exintence” or “cea.” which ay, i
‘would seem, belong to every content, w
observe, or ‘may aguin belong to none, oF wiles
thay belong to some and cot to others? What it
thls property which may bung ve ey perepuon of
8 movement sod yt ot bcoog wo the moveneat
peteelved, of which may aguin belong to the mover
iene percelved and ox 12 my perception of i or
‘which may agala belong to both or to asthe?

1 necessary, L ebink, 0 ask this question at
this pois Bocas there are scene posers wh
Thold tbat, in the case of some kinds of “content,”
at all events, to say that they “exist” is to eay that
they are “perceived.” Some bold that to say “A
sina" igo say neither more oor Jest than "As
petvelved”—that the two express
Synonynoa; and others agsin would say she

iste or is real” we may mean mere than

ie poraited” int har cat ot ba ees fe
Now, I have hitherto osed the word “existence”

pretty freely, and i thiok that, when 1 used it, 1
oad hay ery ems Lak el
generally have su to ly what
Bsr S coatgs Sat tink ns a oon clos at
all events, it will not even bave occurred to you to
doubt whether you did understand what I meant by
it Bus if thege philosophers are righ, then if you
ave understood wat I meant by i, ove al slong.
‘been using ic ia a sense, which renders tbe end


“A


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 3


my, last pb sonsense. If these
Pitcnapiks We igh then, when T aur tat
what 4 percelved may yet af exist, [ am really
Aasenng, that what 6 perceived may yet ao be
percelved—-I am contradicting myself. I am, of
course, quite unaware thet I'am doing so. But
these philosophers would say ther you are con-
trading yourvell. or you are not using the word
“exlate Tia its ordinary sence. And either of theso
aleernatives would be fatal to my purpose. If [am
‘ot using the word io its ordinary sense, then T sball

be understood by anyone; and, if Lam contea-
dieting royself, then what I say will not be worth
‘understanding.

‘Now, with one class of these ghilosophers—the
class to which, T think, Berkeley belongs— think T
can ot mye right comparatively ally, Ti
Philosophers [ mean are those who say tbat it
‘only in the ease of one particular class of “contents

(the kind of “content” which Berkeley calls “ideas”)
that to say, "the " content’ A exists” fu to say “A ib
perceived,” and wbo admit that o the case of other
Contents—myself and my perceptions and thoughts,
for example-—to say that ¢here exist or are real, 8 tO
aay of them something different from this. These
Philosophers admit, that is to say, that the word
“exits” he two diferent scoes und tat ln on
‘one of these senses is it synonymous with the
"is perceive” Whee (hey hold) Tey of mich x
content as a red patch with gold letters on it that it
earats” 1 6 coean that it is perceived ; but whea
Teny of cy perpcion of wh a patch that era

jo not mean that my perception is perceived bat
something diferent from this, Now, it woold be
nothing strange that one and the samo word should
‘be used in two different senses; many words are
‘used in crany different senses. But it would, I chink,
be something very strange ladeed, if in the caso of


™ OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


8 word which we constantly to all sorts of
Sire pens oc aead teh oath
Jarge class of object in the one sease and the one


‘senee only and the other large class in the other
seam red the oer vem ou. Unni, tn
case of such ambiguous words, it happens that,
in different contexts, we jt to one and the


same object ia fod senses.” We. sometimes wk
tw aay of a given object that it bas the one
Property, and someiimes we wish 10 sey of the
Jame object that it has the other property ; and
hence we apply the same word to the same obje
at ome cime in One sense, and at another in the other.
I thiak, therefore, that, even if there were these two
different senses of the word “existence,” it would be
very unlikely that we should not commonly, in some
contexts, apply it in the sense, io which (ue is
is does apply to perceptions, * contents”
which are not perceptions fodeed. I eink, it ix
quite plain that we constantly do ask, with regard
to what is not a perceptiog, whether i exist, in
precisely the same sense, io which we ask, with
Fega d to a perception, whether af exists. We ask
in precisely the same sense: Was the Roc a real
‘bid or merely an imaginary one? and did Sindba's
perception of the Roe really exist, or is it a fiction
that he perceived a Roc? f think, therefore, that
‘the sense in whick these philosophers adm that we
do apply the word “existence” 10 sons, Is
‘oe in which we also commonly apply it fo “tcom
tents” other than perceptions. " Bur, oven if this is
rot, the case, I can set myself right with them by
simple explanation. [need merely explaia that
the sense in which T ac proposing «@ enquire
‘wheter a red patch exit is precisely the anve in
whi jit that my perception of a re
Goes exit" And fo 15 seasn fe ie pio at to
suppose that a thiog may exist, which is not


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION B


perceived, or that it may saf exist, although it ix
perceived, is at least not self-contradictory.

‘But there tray be other philosophers who will aay
that, in the ease of a perecption also, to say thar fk
sists or jn real is to say that it is perceived—either
that lone cy, something, re 9 well Ad fo

exe philoso Poiat out that 2
fare admitting that the proposition "This perception
is real” is significant. There is some sense or other
in which we may szy: “Alexander's perception of
aan elephant was real or did exist, but Sindbad's
perception of a Roe was wot real—never did exist”:
the latter proposition Is, in some cense ar other, not
self-contradictory. Asd then I would ask of them :


ready per-
rived, or not? iC they say “No,” thea they are
asserting that to call a perception “real” ig merel


to aay that it was perotived in the sense in wih
Sindbad did perceive a Roe: they are asserting that
10 call it “real” is not to say, in any sense, that it
‘was really perceived : they are assertiag that to call
a perception “real” is to sey that it was perceived,
Jn some sense quite other than chat in which we
‘otdinarily use the word : for we certainly commonly
mean, when we say “A was perceived,” that a per-
‘ception of A waa “real”: we should commonly sty
that Sindbad did wot perceive « Roc—aeaniog that
no auch peroeption ever did exist. I do not think
they do mean this; and, io any case, if they do, T
think. it is plain bat they are wrong. When we
aay tbat a perception is “real,” we certainly do not
mean merely that it ie the object of another per-
Geption, which may itself be quite unreal—purely
lenagincy. 1 asoume, therefore, that when, they
say? To call a perception to say that it

perceived; they mean, what we should oaturally


‘Bh


76 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


acento, acc. ta To eal rn Se cy
ay that fc i (—to say that itis the
Obfect of another on, whieh is alto reed ia
the same sense. they mean this, then what
they say i certainly uetruc. Their deGnition of
iy irular, It cannot be the case tht tbe
sense in which a way be said t0
fed Inca lo which calor i wer tha oe
W alone, but another don is real alto. It


teal" whece A and B are different, sad “real
ted in the same renee as spplied to both, If iti
to be true thar the assertion "A. ix real er, in
any setae, includes the asertion "A ls ready pee.

fred” there mut be another sense of the word
real to which to assert “A in real” ia to anpert
dust than" Ain really petctived "—the wena
sae in wbich we ere aber at the rein
ofA irre.

‘We find, therefore, shat the other class of phil-
‘otophera were atleast right in thin: they wece Fight
fo Slowing that the senae in which we commonly
any’ that Out perceptions exist is one ja which “ex
tnt does not foclude, even ae & part of fx cveaning,
‘ta perecived.”” We find chat there i comman
coed of the word “existence,” in which to any “A
fain” mast’ mean Jest than “Ain readd) per-
ceived” f tince, otherwise, the only pomible. def
tldon of the word “existence * would be a circular
definition. "And I may point out that two other
definitions, which have been sometimes suggested
by pbilosoghers 18 giviog what we commonly sean
by “reality” or “existence” are viiated by. the
siene fault they also are cicclar.” Soc pila.
icy tae someon sogered ht when wel
Uthing “real we mean that cia “aystematicaly
Connetied” Ls some way ‘with other things. Buk


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION ”


swhea we look lato thelr meaning, we End that what
they mean is (what, indeed, is alone plaosible)—~
symematically connected with other reat thingn
Rady gti be the case that we sometimes
we the w fn this sense: but, at least, it
ture be certainly the case, that, if we 0, we alia
tne it in another aad simpler aeaeethe sense In
which it is employed in the proposed definition,
‘And other philosophers bave suggested that what
we mean by “real is—" connected in sonve way
vith a purpong—belping or Naderag o the object
of a pu look into their meaning,
wwe find they meas—connected with
‘And Hence, even, if we do_somecin
“real,” “connected with a real purpose
Toi ole tis a aamely, wich lsene oF
Simpler thas this r which is meant
“real” in the ‘delntion
It is certain, that we do commonty use
the word “existence” in a sense, in which t0 sy
"A exists" is nat to say “A is perceived," or “A
systematically connected with otber real things,” or
"Als purposive.” There is « simpler sense than
any of these—tho sense in which we say that our
‘own perceptions do exist, and that Sindbad's per
ceptions did not exist. But when I say thi, am
by no means denying that what exists, In this
simple sense, may not always ois exist in all the
fers; and tint wint exats in any of thom
fot ai always exist in thin It in quite possi
that what cts a always ete percelved, aod th
what is perceived sen abe coe All thas 1 a
fs chat, ever If this is 60, this croposition is
sigaifcant—is’ cot merely a proposition about the
esa of aword. It is not acl-contredictory to
pene hat some things which exist are cot per:
telved, and that some tkings which are. pereeved


do not exist.


s OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


But, it may be asked: What is this common
simple sense of the word “exists”? For my own
ir seems to me to be vo spe that it cannot
ten oor word expe tose which ate
recogoised. au is ve are
perfec familie with fa meaning: ite the mecning
Imhich you understood me co have throughout this
pape tt began con ik wo
Gat perceive at once what is meant by aaverin
that tion of black ‘marks on a white
gona aod that no such perception as
Eee Cicen moe
familar wi ‘which he one per-
ception is aimed to pomoss, aud the otber to be
‘without. And T think ua {bave said, thas thin
pany isa snp one Buy where it cin
{hich ‘we ordinary. mean, iz what 1 mean’ by
Meainence® or rely.” And Ths propery, wo
have seen, ja certaisly neither identical wit’ nor
indisive of that complex one which we mean by
the words "in perceived"

1 "may: now then at last approach the main
‘qveation of my paper.” Which amoog the “contents
‘which T observe will give me reason 10 suppore thet
my observation of some of thera ie generally pre
Sha or accmpsied ox folone by the execs

certain particular perceptions thoughts ot feelin
{soother person? Ihave’ expinioed that 1
“contents” "which 1 acually obverve my. be
diel nt two, dass on ie ov ba thowe
‘which, aa we commonly say, we perceive “through
the senses": and, on the onber bend. my percepeicnn
‘of these last, my thoughts, and my feclings. ] have
explained that & any of these observed contecta are
toglve reaton fora on about what exists,
thy mont exist. Aad T have explaioed that with
regard to both classes of contents” I am uring the
‘word “exit” in precisely the same sense—a sense,


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 79


in which it is certainly not selfcontradictory to
suppose that what és perceived, does not exist, aad
inthe ie ao petecved, doce, ext; and, in
which, therefore, the assumption that a red pate
wrth fold letters on ic exist iw diferent assamp-
tioa from the assumption that my
fol pu wide geld iene on Tt ceiacs and th
‘assumption that my pereeption of a red patch wi
ges ietiers on it extn fw diferent Senemption
et the aanummption that 2. fo patch with god
lerters on it exist.
‘What, then, that we observe, can give us any


reason for believing that else has cerain
ticular perceptions, ns or feelingy? Te
Fis, Think, been very commonly cesumed that the


oberevation of my own perceptions, thoughts, and
feelings, can. by itll give me such = reason, "And
I propose, thetetore, fo examine this sanuanptioa,
Ifvias | hope to show, it false; it wil then follow,
that If our own observation gives us any feason
‘wintever, for believing in tbe existence of other
Peron ne man ag in enc ot 0 of
Gar owe ‘pereeptioes, ‘and. feelings bat
tio oF some, & last, arccag thet other ian of
tha, wbice say now, for de sake of rein, cl,
“sense-contenta™; we must assume that some of
them exists fo. precnely the same sense in which we
tsaurme that our perceptions, thoughs and feelings
xt

“The theory which 1 propose to examine ia, then,
the following. ‘My observation of my owe thoughts,
feelings, and. perceptions may, it ausermn give mo
some reason fo suppote that another person har
thoughts, feeiogn, sad perceptions simife to tome
afrmne Lex rant scodigly hat oy arn
thoughta, feelings, and perceptions Jo exit bat
Ghat none of the, “sense-contenta” which I. also
observe, do sa. Where among my perceptions am


to OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


1 to ook for ay which might sonceivab
Lfeasoa (or appntog the xintncr ef ike por
eu aaular to my own? Ie ix obvious where
mintiook I bave ‘wich | call pereep-
thes of ates prophet an hae
al ‘w other peceeptions
of my ow ete aso observe that certain
byrcenais lker percertoas hoop or
other gts, oF fel
nine.) tay, for jnsance, obmerve that eae
perceive my hand pddenty itch old of my
U particlar way, was pre
pebticular kiod mf peregpcn wm ay. pl
Shserve this offer enough opal the gene
sos ta he reg of ate mi
of my body Is geu that partial
By SP eae And i ths way I ens paps
have feason for quite a number ef generalisations
‘eer tha: plan ds of peraton of
ay one oy ceded by omer
parts keds of petapions thooghta or edings
‘ay own.
Bix T tuay also, no doubs, ave the perception,
ich al of ancther pesgons band
hold of his foo, io x manner simiar to thet
SPSL tare prestcl av as nee cased
of my owa foot And my perception of another
pero’, bend catching ‘od of fia foot ay ne
Houbtedly "bo aiollar in many respects U0 may
perentign of mg awa han ching ho my own
fe Be all not observe oy a
of rin reesing my perception of
cts lo ie eli tev obeerod
fing. mY perception of my hand catching
Tor Si foe ‘Will ty generalisation, then, give me
reac, 2 wane tit caves my pet
ccpion of bis aad clcing bold of his &
preceded by a similar feeling of pain, not in mse but


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION a


in him? We undoubtedly do assume that when 1
ive another person's body making movements
fimlar to those which I have obverved my owa
body making, this perception e a
precaled by’ some feeling or peiteption of his
similar to that which I have observed 10 precede my
of similar movements in my own body.
fe do asauene this; and it is precively the kind of
generalisation, whict, 1 have insisted, must be ad-
i je. But my present question ie: Will
as T have described give an
any auch generalisation true ?
8 they will not give the slightest
ing so. In the Gist place, all the
perceptions which I call perceptions of another
'a, body differ very considerably from any of
thote which I call tions of my own. But T
ty wlling % wake this objowion Tam ot
pficriog any theory as to what degree of Hkeness
in neficiont t0 justly on: aod therefore
Twill aliow that the ‘of Tkesess may be
Thiol gute fal othe proposed rence Ths
think, quite fatal to the proposed inference. This
ahjecion is thatthe iefereace ia question saily
sea not sty the third condion | which
suggested abore as wherever any
ertraliiton a to be jetted by observation
4 willing (o allow that my observations of the fact
that my perception of a certain movement in my
‘own body is preceded by a certain feeling of pain,
wal jostty the generalisation that my perception
Of any such movement, whether in my own body
or in that of another’ person, is gen re
Soaal "by oshaiar tllig of Sin holt
allow, therefore, that when 1 perceive a certain
‘movement in another's body, it é probable that the
feeling of pain exists, though I do not perceive it.
‘Bur, if it ts probable that such a feeling of pain ex-


& OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


ints, uch a fooling must stand én the sams relation
1 ‘my perception of the movement in another
W's body, in mbich a einular feeling of pao baa
Extn observed by me to wand to my perception af
Such ¢ mavereat In ey ovo body. That 10 say
the only kind of feeling of paio, which ray ot
vations’ do justify we a ieleriag, it (as Y adat
they mey) they justify ce in foferring any st all, is
a feeling of pain of sty ome. They cannot possibly
Susy the bein i existence of ay such fing
‘crept one which stands to cay perception in the
faize relation fa which wy fellage do stand to oy
rceptions—one, that is to say, which ie cay own,
Tiheve no more reaton (o believe that che feeling of
gals ‘which probably precedes, my peresption of
Movement in anothe! persons Goby ‘can be
feeling of anather person, thas, in my former
‘ample, I had reason to ‘dha the ben, whase
existence probabl that of a given egg,
could be. a hen, which had never been near the egg
fn question The two cases are exactly snalogoun
T abserve a Feeling of pain of my oum preceding @
eteeption af my em. T observe the two, that is to
fay, sanilog t owe anche i tho reson
(whatever they may be) in which any perception
tring sands to any other thought perception or
fecling of mine, and. which are, at all eveats
ferent from any relation in which a perception or
feeling of another person can stand to one of rine
ever perceive we perception as
eaaling ‘a any otber eaatBa. Kn aay cuss, there
fore, where I do observe something like the per-
ception, but do oot observe the feeling, ! can oaly
be fed (7 nein nergy ing
‘in inferring an eek oon.
Ve Sie TEE ie ee
my ows fecliogs or thoughts can gi
ie the alighteet cemon for sopposing’a coanection


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 83


Betwsen any of them acd any feeling, perception,
of thowgh ie seater eon, The sigument
fecly general, since aif my perceptions, feelings
End thoughts do bave to one another those
relations in virtue of which I call them mine; and
‘mbich, wheat talk of a perception, feeling or
Bhoughe au being another person's, I'mean tomy
that has mat gt to any of mine, ca, therefor,
ely from obeervaion of ts clas of data never
Ural the dighten soxsonforbel in tos exvenee
of a feeling, perception, o thought which docs ot
ttand in these relations to ove of mine—wbich
tbat is to say, the perception or thought,
setts spose ich wk ce reco,
‘we. adopt the hy = wo recom:
mend-~if we assume che existence of that other
flags of data which I have called "-zense-contents?"
n this hypothesis, that which I perceive, when I
perceive a movement of cay own body, i ras} that,
‘which I perceive when I perceive a movement of
‘another's body is rea/ alsa." I can now observe cot
merely the relation between my peruatlion of
movement of my body aad my own feelings, but
ako 2 relation between 2 real movement of my
body and my own feelings, “And there ix 00 reavoa
why T dhould "noe be juntiied in inferring that
faother person's felings stand su the same relation
to the feal moveunents of bis body, in ‘wbich T
Observe mp own feelings to stand to similar real
per chve ie nner ich may sil be
ut chere i another argument which may ail
surged by those wko bold that my own pereeptions
Deegh, and fering by shemacees, may be
Steed on jel n alt a ths crtatsnn of eet
persons. It may be said: “Our observation of
Ser ove pecans may be een ero
‘oxherpeczons exist
Fee bypeitele is coe whe berka” The


& — ORJECTS OF PERCEPTION


fusamption, that other persone ave hr
im feelings and perceptions enables us to
predict that they will have others and that our own
zptions will be modited accordingly : it enables
We to predict future ‘of our own ; and we
find that these predictions are constantly verified.
‘We observe that we do have the peroeptions, which
the hypothesis.leads us to expect we should have,
Jn abort, our perceptions occur just us they would
do, if the hypothesis were true; our perceptions
bekave as s/ ober persons had the perceptions,
thoughts and feelings which we suppose them to
fave, Surly. ten, they ena he tnt of ce
wesis—they give some reason to it
a a
ig, which { bave, fn opponent. to
Ladmit to be true. I'sdmit that the fact that
anbypothesis works may give some reason to suppose
ie aru admit that my peroeptions over just as
they would do, # other people perceptions
ao aera
zesumption enables me to make predictions af 10
future perceptions ‘own, aod that T observe
thene feedcbons to come tne I adove all tla
But [ admit it only in » sease in which iti
conflicts with the position which I am maintaining.
‘The words which T have put into the mouth of
uppoted ‘opponent, may, in fact, mean three
Giferent thinga, which itt worth’ while. to. die
inguieh, In two of those mesciggs, which I shall
admit to be true and which are what make them
‘teem plausible, they do cot deny what 1 assert
Only fo the third sense are they an objection to
‘my position : and in that sense they are false.

“One of the meanings whist Ladat to be wwe ja
as follows >—1 have not only admitted but fasieted
that some of my perceptions are just such as would
occur if acotber person bad ‘certain particular


OBJECTS OF FERCEPTION —85


feelings: I bave insiated that 2 should not bare
fist thowe perceptions which I'do have. unless soene
Otis "person tad ceria clings and perceptions
‘which { tuppoee hia to have. Kad I adonit ferther
That the fact tet { have ove of the pereepions ta
‘qoextion—foriantance, Uist of emather person's band
atching bold of hie foot—thie fack fgpfher with
the tn arpon tae, abou ox have tik
erception, unless some other person fek pals, wi
fatify the. saterion that another persoa hes elt
pale.” In this sense, adn, the fact that} pereaive
What I do perceive wil give me reason to suppose
tha apotheke pin.” And om the
thee hand, {Also admit that the fact that 1 have
thin perception, together with the true. assumption
that when T have ie another person has felt pain,
may help to justly the aeeumption that the
toni qeston a one wiih shuld nt have
unless another t pain—it helps to
justly che generation that cerxin of xy per
ceptions we fost what would occar, if anotber
person had felt paic. In general terms, that in to
Say, T admit that the occurrence of 'B, together with
tha’ assumption that Bis just the sort of thing
which woud occur if A existed, will justify the
mertion that A exists io that particular inelance,
‘And {also admit thatthe occurrence of B, lager
ih he samp hat A cis bt parte
Imsance, may help to juely the assumption that
B is just the sort of tilog which would exist fA
existed. In other words? "When it is said that
the olmervation of B's exivence confirms or veries
Bhs assumption tar A eis, cher of two Sings
ray be meant. Tt may be meant that, samumin
tobe the sor: of thing which would exist If A
tasted, the abservation of B confirns the assim
tion that A exists ix 1h fartialer mstaaee. Or,
fa the other bang, it may be meant thal, amuming


16 ORJECTS OF PERCEPTION


‘Ag oxo in this pariuarintance, the aberration
may confir on, thet, B is just
the not tog whi weld ens, WA ended,
Bither the one or the other of these two things ix, T
think, what is generally assumed, when it iv a
gunel she win we dp obeeree combo ot vestir
the assumption that there exists some
Blag wick we dart observe And 1 on Leming
that both these assuorptions are trae.
‘But neither of them conficts in any way with the
ition { am maictainiog. What I am mainiainin
Ei that co observation of cay own perceptions,
ttself, can conirm the fisation chat any one of
them is just what would occur if another person had
‘8 paricular feeling, 1 admit this generalisation to
be true; and I admit that my observation of my
om perceptions and feciogy may give me res 2
suppose that ¥f another as cern
Gate or focinga he wil weo have ‘erala thers,
Whae't Seay that they ive toe the slightest
feagon to supgene that the eximence of any wach
or petceprion in another hes any conecetion
wr he ence of sy percepson of my am
to su ‘of my own Is the
sort of d ng ahh Yecult occur  auother perv
Kad a particular feeling. What therefore, my
‘oppocent must affirm ia that the observation of m
rception of my owa withoxd the assumption (which
Reed makes) that ia {hat pariolar inetance any
feeling oe of: persoa, of any kled
srhatver, has preceded i may give me rexeon to
suppote that that perception of my own is of w kin
Beh is cer me KS kind of
Hag i sother penon T think, a
But there is yet a third thiog which may be meant,
and mbich 1 am wing to adait may be tre, It
may be said: “I believe many generalisations of


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION ty


the following kind. | eliove that when 1 hace «
perception A, some erally bad
Pay thie frente te
ing XC is generally followed, in the same person,
that of the {eating ¥ i and T believe also that
Then anccer person bat the feng; 1 generally
bbave the perception B, I believe all thin” And it
must, I think, be admitted that we do believe
teveralitations of this kind, and generalisations in
Which there are not merely wo. ttepa
‘A and B, bot & great number of stepe.
then,” it’ may be said “my bel
{generalisation causes me, when I observe my pt
xption A, to expect that I shall have the perception
B; and such expectations, I observe, are constantly
tiged" And this alin I hink most be adpined
tobe nue. “But, finally,” may be said, “beliefs
produce ex; ‘which are constantly
Toalsed are gencaly tra And beace the fac hat
theae belies of ine aboot the connection offelings
4a other persons with percepsios of my own do lead
40 expectations which are realised, gives me reason
to suppose that these generalisations are true and
‘hence that other persons do have particular kiads of
feelings.” And { am willing 20 admit that this also
latroa Tam willing to admit that true predictions
20, a2 2 rule only be nd by true belie,
‘The generatisation that this is so, i, indeed, one
which cao oaly be justified by the observations of
belief which are, io some way, iodependentl
proved to be true; and hence, if it isto be justi
hou emuming the exinence, of anything ber
‘my own perceptions, thoughts, and feelings, it
tan any be juried by my observation teat bella
with regard to the manner in which (Asse succeed
one another Tad to true predictions.
‘Whether the o ‘of such beliefs alone could
give sufficient reason for i, ia, 1 thick, doubtful; but


ea OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


I am willing to admit that it may be so. One thing,
however, is I think, quite plain : namely, that thit
everson “Beli wich led wo cue predicione
fe general tre cagot be ru, aloe 0
‘of the “‘contents" which I observe, beside my own
Bereeptons, thoughts, and elings, do exis, That
to my, io ping canon for eupposing the exit
coce of other people, this generalisation also give
reason for the very theory which } am advocating,
namely, that some of those data which I have called
‘Hsense-contents ” do exist. It does this, because it
Taquite certain that beliefs in generalisetions about
the existence of sense-contents cax (and do) coo-
sean, lad to, tus gredicions, The bei that
when I have observed a fre of a certain sive fa my
grate, something similar to what { have observed
‘will continue to exist for a certain time, cao, and
constantly does, leed to the true prediction that,
when [ come Back to my room in ball an hour's
Piriag"We'make precios oo sock proud T
wniag, We mal on sock grounds,
‘think, every day and all And Fence un-
fen alah thes ofa Teas sus Te
2 fire burning dos exist. are true, we certaial
have no reason to. suppose that “beliefs whi
ead 40 tre. predictions are. generally tre, “And
thence on this bypothesis afso it remains true:
that unlewe some of ube commen which I cbearve
ian mY OWN perceptions, thoughts, an
fealings, do exc, { cannce bave the slgheerr reson
for supposing that the exinence of certain. percep.
tHoas of my own is generally connected with that of
certain perceptions, thoughts, or feelings in any
Stade therfore cht, cles some of the
observed data which I have called sease-coateata do
exist, my own observations cannot give me the
‘lightest reasoa for believing that anybody else has


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION a9


ever bad any prticular tion, thought, or
‘And, Paving arrived 30 far loweds. ao

‘answer to my frat question ; How do we know that
‘any other persons exist? I may now point out that
precisely the mame answer must be given 10 my
parte Kan of hay exe, Dthee ta ournelncy
thing exist, Scher than ouralvey,

Gur perceprions, thougiin and feelings, and what
we directly perceive? ‘There is » view concerning
what exists, which deserves, I think, much more
Tespect than it generaly receives fom phdceopers
powadays. The view I mean is che view that
ee ‘objects, such as they are concrived by
Puyecal scones; do realy exit Tet hed by sock
Persons (and Reid is thea) chat we de koow
Bf the existence not only of other persons, but aleo
of the mavements of mau in apace, le it bela
that we do know, with considerable bs ion, what
kinds of moverens of matter generaly precede ty
pm, wen | have spr perception, Tt

is held, for instance, that eive a red and
blue book side. by side on « shelf at a ceria
distance from me, there have existed, between two.
material objects, which may be called books, and
‘nother Kind of material object which may be
salad "my eye cerain. waver "motions Of «
thateral onediams that there. have existed 10
different sets of waves, of which the one is connected
twth iny perception of red ead the otber with my
ation of blue ; and that the relative heights and

ina ofthe two diferent acta of waves and the
teludive velocity of their movements are very
exactly known,” itis beld thae some men have. &
‘vart amount of very procise information about the
xinence of objects of this kind; and 1 think the
view thot this ia s0 deserves a great deal of respect,
Bur what (wish now to point out is that m0 ones
pbservation of his own perceptions, thoughts and


go OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


ings, cas, by itself, give him the slightest reason
for believing in the existence of any such material
objects All the arguments by which I have cried
to show thet this kind of observation slone can give
‘mano reasca tober nh eines ey Ein
ption or in person, apply,
‘at least equa! force, to show that ican give me
‘to reason to believe in the existence of any kind of
material object On the other hand, if we are to
tudmit the principle that “Beliefs which lead to true
prodictions, are ge ‘uc,” this principle
Jive ox at least as much reason to believe in 1
Existence of certain kinds of material objects ax to
believe in the existence of other persons ; sioce one
Of ‘the most remarkable facts about beliefs In dhe
aisvenes of soch objec lp that they do so often
ead to true pred ‘But it must be remem
bered that we can bave no reason for believing this
principle itself, usless our own perceptions, thoughts
aand feelings re nat the only kind of observed
‘“cantent "which really does exist: we can have no
reason for it, unless some such things ax what,
perceive, when 1 see a red end blue book side by
Ade, do really exist,
rem, therefore, that if my own obser.
vations do give me any reason whatever for beli
in the existence either of any perception in any
other pera or of any material object it mast be
true that not only my own perceptions, thoughts
and feelings, but slso some of the other kinds of
things which I directly perceive—coloors, sounds,
ete —o really exist: it must be true that some
objects of this kind anit or are reaé in precisely the
srume sicngle sense in which my perceptions of them
exist of are real. Ts there then any reason to think.
that this is not true? Is there any reason to think,
for instance, that noxe of the colours which I perceive
‘aa occupying areas of certain shapes and sizes really


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION ”


aise in the areas which to occupy?
Fs fe = quaton welch T witked wo daca
length, because { think that ic is one in which there
‘are’ real difficulties. But I have given oo much
apace to other questions, that [ can only deal with it


very briefly here.
“Some philosophers are very fond of exerting thet
colour cannot exist except when it in percsived ;
itmigh pomaly be thought that when TsuRgest
"Feat,


a
that colours do really exist, ] am sugges
they do exist when they are aot perceed. I with,
therefore, briefly to point out that tbe question
ether ¢nything does exist, when tis not perceived,


in one whit


1 have not ‘and sball not attempt
to argue in


is paper. T have, indeed, tried to
show that since exists” does not mate “is
perceived,” ix is, at Teast, conceivable shat thiogs
should exist, when they are sot perceived. But I
have admitted that itis quite possible none de 30 :
lec may be the case that a thing existe it fs
‘ati at the same time perceived, for anything that T
tiave suid or stall sy to che contrary. “I think,
{ndeed, that, if such as colours do exist, my
observation’ of their behaviour will justify me in
concluding that they also exist when [ myself am,
at least, not aware of perceiving them: but since |
Ihave not attempted to determine what kinds of
‘bscrvation ere auffcient to jostify a generalisation,
T do not pretend to say whether this is 20 or not:
td il ley do 1 pretend 0, ay whether, they
exist when 7 do not perceive them, we are justi

{In supposing that someone else must be perceiving
‘them. | The question whether anything exists, whea
{t is n0t perceived, and, if so, what things, seems to
ime to be oce which can only be settled by obser-
vyation; and thus, I conceive, observation night
Justify us in concluding thet certain kinds of things—
‘pains, for example, do wot exist, when they are not


2 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


recived and that other kinds of things—colours,

example, do exist, when they are oot perceived,
‘The only wey, in which, so far as T am aware the
theory I'am advocating does conflict with ordinary
Wdeclitic conciuious, “a that it doce suggest that
things, which are sot “spiritual,” do somatimas
‘eaint, us really and a3 truly, a3 things which are,

‘The theory, therefore, that nothing exists, exce
wheo it is perceived. is no objection (even if it
tue) to the ition that colours do exist,
‘What objections are there to this supposition? Ali
serious objections to it are, I think of one type.
‘They all cest vpos the assumption that, if a certais
kkind of thing exists at a certain time in a certain
place, cerraia other kinds of things cannot exist at
the same time in the same place. ‘They are all, hat
ito say, of the same type as Berkeley's argument :
that, though tbe same body of water may @fjear to
be simultaneously botb hot and cold (if one of the
Iranda we plunge into it is warm and the other cold),
yet the heat and the cold cannot both really be in
the same body at the same time. And it is worth
oticing that anyone who uses this argument must
admit chat he understands what is meant by "really
existing in a given place," and that he means by it
something other than “ being perceived as in a given
place.” For the argument itself admits that both
the heat atd the cold are really percemed as being in
the ume pce, and ebat chre is no, dficuly, fa
05 at they are 50; wherean it urger that
spp, ag er ro: when ram ht
really exist. it,

Now there i one obvious defect in this type, of

mens, jigned to prove that no scnsible

Guilty exists at ny place where itis perceived at
being—a defect, which Berkeley himself 2dmits in
bis “Principles.” though he omits wo notice it where
hhe repeats the argument io his “Hylas.”  Evea if


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 93


we assume that the heat and the cold cannot Seth
‘cust fo the same place (and I admit chat fa this
tang, the ‘cootrary aarumption does acean repugnant
to Common Sent). ie does not follow that neither
inshore, “That ews herp of anne
cover, if we grant it initial amumption, will only
ie wt ro coneine tat ame seri gan
which we gereeve as being in'a certain place ata
eran time, do not exiat in that place at that time.
‘And this conclusion, Tam tacined wo think, i tue,
Ine cate, a nance, of the wcled images”
which we pereeive in a looking glass, we city Ve
Teadily adieit that the colours tod shapes which we
Beri do merit the lace whee ty
qo be—namely at various distances behind the glans
Bae yes fo far Tc cx, re no reno
aver for suppering Oot, expe the
Seaumption thet our Sbservatons give us eesvon to
that her sensible qualities ao exist in those
positions behind the glass; and the sssomption tat
Shore these ether renible qualities do exit, thowe
which we see in the glass do nef exist? thowld,
Therefore, admit ther some somible qualities which
iwe percsive aa being ia certain places do mot exist
Ih thove places, while stl retaining my belief that
Others dot And ferdaprtbis explanation is the ane
should atao’be ithe cane of sensible
which appear to be ata Rreat distance from


pa)
ae Whe, for tmtance, (as we say), "we soe the
moon," had we poresive (if the moon be full) is a
round bright silver disc, of a small size, at a place
‘very distant from ux Does that silver disc exist at
that place? | With whet tions does the
asrumption that it doer “condi Only, 60 far aa I
can em ith he spore chat he lee in
juestion ceccupied by a body such as
Sees Cake ts eupgoee cat ‘moon
prolly ia—a spherical body immensely larger then


94 OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION


objects, in comparison with whlch the silver dise
which ‘we perceive is soull; er alse with the
seaport the san fn semi Je cal
occupied by some ‘cur atmosphere, or some
tf the modant whic sence supposes 20 Cast
the voppanion tote ceo quently
1 supposition that tt ‘is question ise
cocopied by what we tight se, i the moon were
nearer to ux by many thousands of miles Unless
‘we suppose that some other object & in the place, in
which the silver dise appears to be, and chat this
obit i of» Mind nab cue: ovr the sone
place which is 0 a silver dise, we bave n0
Fitts toauppons ths the sive die dla met telly
“at inthe ple where it sppearato be, "And in
is cane, we wwe reason for
toes and WA therelore conclude hat te Aver
disc, which we perceive, does not exist in any real


Parr, therefore, of these objections to our theory
may, T think, be met by admiting that some of tbe
senuible qualities which we perceive do noc exist at
the places where they appear to exist, though other
do, But there is, 1 think, another class of cases, Ja
which we may be justified in denying that two
things which (it is asserted) cannot occupy the same
apace, ceally cannot. I will take an instance which
4s, think, typical When we look at a drop of
blood with the caked eye, we perceive a small red
spot, uniformly red all over. But when (as we say)
Wwe Took at the asm object under a microscope of a
gras power, Tam iforned that ve sn 8 much
larger similar shape, indeed, but sp
ea aan iy at
Gifferent positions ic & yellowish field. And if we
Tee ago look a the same objec though. +
icoscope of niuch higher power stil, we migl
perceive yer = third diffrent arraggemeat of


OBJECTS OF PERCEPTION 3


rolours, Ss there any fatal objection to suppoal:
that all (Aree appearances —the oniform red spot 166
yellowish Geld with reddish spots in it, and the third,
Upatever that tay be—do all really occupy the
hune real spatial area? I cannot wee that there le
‘We are familiar with the idea that a given
tee rey conwsic part which are fotiafle fo us
And hence, [ think it is quite conceivable that parts
of a given area may be ready occupied by ons
toloan while the wholg Js vastly Socupled
facother, And this, 1 think, ie what we actually
bet aie maar ease: tet eros, we cate:
eve tht oe aca wih appar fob Sued
‘gyants tp be ptled fy soutien, Aad aca we
appenre te be of Andy unl we
Eline tbat the area, ia both casea, really is tho
fame, we cho coraily have no reas 1 deny that
tek" colour does realy oscipy the area witch ft
imppears to occupy. tis tas &
ce theog reroos I think that tbe dificlia ia
the, may of supposing that some of the exaaltle
gualiles which we ‘Stang fo cosa
laces, rally exis in the places in which we perceive
them to be, are not ir LU bave indeed not
ope justice to these es; but then, neither
have { dooe justice to what is to be said on the
other side, Ac all events, I think laio that we
hhave no reason to assert, ia any case whatever, that
a pected cordon at realy aii tbe pe
trbere i in pereived as beng, nls wo aanome tat
Tha vey se pce realy toca by somaig
‘by some di


t sensible qualities oF
bby material objects cuch as physical science euppowea
twerist. But what reason can we give for such aa
‘sgumption? 1 bave tried to show that our own
observations can give us none, malets we axume
that some of the sensible qualities, which we observe
ns occupying certain places, do really exist in those


96 OBJECTS OF FERCEPTION


places. And, if this is 20, then
neither be who believes (with
of other minds and of matter also, sor he who
believes in the existence of other minds and denien
that of mater, can bave, in bis own chvervations,
tbe slightest reason either for his assertion or for his
denial’: we must admit that he can have no reason
foe elther assertion or denial, except one which
consists in the assumption of the existence or non-
eaistence of something which ke does nol observe—
omething, therefore, of the very same kind as that
for which be gives it es a reason. I em very
vonwilling to suppose that this is the case: I am
very uawilling to suppose that he who believes that
Sindbad the Seilor really saw what the “Arabian
Nights” represent him a5 sécing, as jest as good
season (so far as bis own observation goes) for
believing this as he who denies it bas for denying
Sul this may be the case. We must, perhaps, be
sontent co assume 26 cértain that for which our
observation gives no reason: to assume such pro-
positions as that Sindbad did sot see a Roc, and
that you a hear my voice. But if it is said that
these things are certain; then it also appears to me
to be certain that the colours which 1 pereeive do
sist (me of then) where I perceive them. The
‘more I look at objects round me, the more I am
unable to revit the conviction that what I oe dose
exit, as truly and as really, as my perception of it
‘The couvialon is overwbekaing.

‘This being, then, the scate af the case, I think t
aay a least plead that we have grounds for wospenge
‘of fodgment as to whether what I see does of really
else; grounds, t00, for renewed enquiry, more
‘careful than such enquiry has sometimes beeD io the
ast,


WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM”


Mr object ia this paper is to discuss some of the
things which Prof. William James says about truth
{n the recent book, to which be baa given the above
mame.* In Lecture VI he professes to give an
Account of w theory, which he calls "the pragmatist
theory of teuth ;” and he professes to give x briefer
feliinny account of the same theory io Lecture
1, Moreover, ia Lecture VII, he goes on to make
some further remarks about truth, In all these
ShGb there ce very obviow objecting ghd ey
ich there are very ions: and my
iain object to point out, a, clearly and ingly 0
‘what seem to me to be the principal objections

to somo of these statements.
three different things
‘anxious (0 assert about


Our trae idess, be seems to say,
'wore,” in the sense that they are
(or can be “veriied,” or are “useful.”

(Il) In the second place, be seems to object to
tho view that truth is something “static” of jromut-
able.” He is anxious to assert that truths are in
some sense “mutable.”

(UI) fi the third place, be saserts that “10 aa

‘Prugmeton> A Hi News for some OU Wort of Thshing =
peel ie oa Paley. “By Wits Jom” Up,
anand Oe


g8 WILLIAM SAMES’ “PRAGMATISM”


tunascertainable extent our truths are man-made
esa” (p. 243)

Pei oa be" ders wnder each of thee three

heads there are, I think, serious objections; and 1


now t point out what seem to me to be the
(principal ones, uoder each head separately.
o
Professor James is plainly anxious to assert
mg between truth and“ verification”
"And that there ix some connect


Devween thes € will admit That many of
ue true ideas are, verihed ; that many of them can
bbe verified; and that mary’ of them are useful, fs, 1
take i quite indisguuble. But Professor James
ager plainly to wit to ener something more thas
hie And one more thing ich he wie to ouet
‘think, pretty plan, He soggesta tthe begin
flog of Lecture VI, that be i going to tell Us in
what sense it is chat our true ideas “agree with
reality.” ‘Truth, be says, certainly means tbeit
reement with reality ; the only question is as to
vundersta rds


what we are t0 the wor
seat” and “reality” ia this proposition. And
first briefly considers the theory, thet the sense in
which our true idexs agree with reality, Is that they
"eopy " some reality. And he affirms that some of
four true ideas really do do this. But be rejects the
theory, a5 ¢ theory of what truth means, on tbe
ind that they do not aé/do sa. Plainly, there-
fece, he implica that no theary of what truth meant
‘be correct, unless it tells us of some
which beloogs to al! our true ideas without exception.
Buc his om theory is theory of what cub means
Appaceny. , be wishes to assert that not
aly many but a our true ideas are or ean be
ie thar adfof them are vec “And ii
ink, pretty plain is one of tt
‘which Be wishes to assert. =


WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 99,


Apparently, therefore, Professor James wishes to
ausert that aif our true ideas are or cau be veriied
that aif are useful. And certaialy this #9 not a
truism Hke the proposition that many of them ars
so. Even if this were all that he meant, it would
be worth discussing. But even this, J
al.” ‘The very fret proposition in
eases bis theory is the following.
Eetays (p. 20:) "are thote that we can
validate, corroborate and verify. False ideas are
those that we cannot" And what does this mean?
Lot us, for brevity’s sake, substitute the word
verify alone for the foor words which Professor
james uses, as be himself subsequently seems to do.
fe asserts, then, that trve ideas are those wikick we
tan very. And plainly be does, ot mean by ths
merely that some of the ideas which we can verify
are true, while plenty of others, which we can verify,
not true. The plain meaning of his words

ifthe ideas which we can verily are true, No
ire them who did not mean this. Ap.


q
one woeld ae z

ly, therefore, Profestor Jarnes means to assert
Sotmercly that we exe very all oor true ean, but
‘alo that ali the ideas, which we can verify, aca true.
‘And 1s too, wich willy or oasfloesn, He seams


to" mean ‘not aierely that all our true Weas are
teeful; bor that all those which are useful are trac,
‘This would follow, for one thing, from the fact that
the seems to use the words “ verication of“ veriGe
ability” and "useluloess” as if they came to the
fame’ ching. But, in this cave too, he avert fein
ers tae. ae gy meg Te
roc" he says (p. 222) “ia only the expedient in
woof iig™ The tug" de expedient
wt im off expedient thinkiog is true. Or aguin:
Wha fase is tne" 20 long as ‘p telee s
proftable 10 oor lives” (p. 95) That i to my,
Sao hdow wich Br protue  our lean ad


100 WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM"


te 1 tn, These wands cry havea aa
enough meaning. Apparectly, therefore, Profesor
James eneans oo ansert not merely that all true ideas
Efetusef, but also tbat all wel dees are eroe
Professor James’ words, then, do at least at
that be wishes to assert all four of the following
Propoaiions. He wishes to asscr, fr would seem—~


{1) That we can verify all thove of our ideas,
which are true.
(4) That al those among our ideas, which we can
verily, are truc.
3) That all our true ideas are use
4} That all those of our ideas, wich are;useful,
‘are true.


These four propositions are what I propose fist ta
coosider, He Goce mean to avert them, er lease
Very likely ke wihes to aseexe something more
even than there. He does, in fat, suggest that he
means io asvery in addition, that these properties of
Sverifablly® aad "usllty” are che only properties

ide that of being properly called * trae") which

jocg to all our trve ideas and to none but trae
dens” But this obviously cannot be true, unless all
there fout proposities sre trae. And therelore we
toey as well consider them fee

Firat then, can we verify all our true ideas?

1 wish only 10 point out the plainest and cront
obvious reasons why T thiak tit doubuful whether
wean

"We are very often in doubt as to whether we did
or did not doa cera thing inthe past. We cay
fave the idea that we did, and also the iden that we
did not; and we may wish to find avt which idea in
the trie one. "Very often. indeed, 1 may believe
ery strongly, that 1 did do a cerain the
Somebody else, who has equally good reason 10
iknow, may believe equally strongiy that T did noe


‘WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” ror


For instance, I may have writen a letter, and may
believe that T used certain words in it. But my
sprrespondent may bebave that I id not. Can we
Iways verily either of these ideas? "Certain
fomelimes we can The lewer oxy be produced,
‘tod prove that I did use the words in question
‘And I shall theo bave veriGed my iden Or it may
hat 1 id wot ute them. | And ibe we sah
ave verified my correspondent's idea. But, su
pore he lester bas been Gestroyed; suppose there
0 copy of it, nor any trustworthy record of what
‘was said in it; suppose there is no other

es


Wo what I said in te, beside myself and
Spondene? “Can we then always verily whi

Hleas in the true one? {dink fe ls very doubafil
‘whether we can nearly always. Cersainly we my
Dien ty to discover ay posible means of verio-
tation, and be quite for a. time atleast,
discover any. Soch cases in which we are unable,
for a tine st leas, to verily cher of two contra:
ltory ideas, vetur very commonly indest. Let ar
take £0. even swore tivial inctaoce than the lat
Bad whist players often do not notice at all carefully
bleh ce rave among the lower card in X
Gui At the end of'a band they cannot. be certain
‘whether they kad or had not tbe seven of damonda,
fr the five of spades And, after the cards have
fbeeo aufed, a dite will sometimes arise a4 to
whether a particlar player Yad the seven of dla.
tmonds or noe. His partner may think at he ad,
and be himself may tiak chet he bad oot, Both
Imay be uscertais, and the meaory of bot, oa auch
a 'poiny, may be well knows to be untrustworthy.
‘Add, eoreover, nether ofthe otber players may Ye
able to remember any better. fs t always possible
to ‘verily which of these ideas ls che true one?
Either the’ player did or did oot bave the seven of
Qimonda. This much le certain One person


toa WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM “


thinks that he did, and another thinks he did nots
and both, #0 noon as che question is raised, bave be
fore theit minds both of these ideas the iden that
be did and the idea that he did not This also ia
fertaln And its cetaa that one or other of these
tio Ideas Ist. "Hut ean they always verily either
of them? Sometimes, a0 doubt, trey can, even
ther the cards have been anufied. There may
bave been a fifth person present, overlooking the
play, whore meciocy ie pricey tuwtworthy,” and
‘whose word may be taken as setiling’ the’ point,
Gr the players may themnelves be able, by recalling
other incdeata of play, to arrive at puch a. ceralany
3 may be mld to verly the ove hypothesis or the
ther.” But very often neither of these two things
fell ocenr. “And, in auch ‘a case, it it alwaye
possible to verily the tue dea? Pechapa theoret
ally, it may be sill pouible. Theoretically, 1 mu
Pit, the fet shat Se slayer, and not any of he
Ether three, bad the card do hit hand, may ha
toade some didereace to the card, which might be
Alscovered. by some. posible method of acrentiGe
investigation” Perhapt some such ierence. may
remain even afer the ame card has been repeatedly
tied in many subsequent gormen. But suppose the
samo question arises again, week afier the original
ume war played. Did you. or did you nok, lat
Sfeek have the seven of dmonde in what pardcular
ft The quem bap ot heen aed in the
ameantine ; and cow, pechapa, the origieal pl
ards as been destroyed.” is it ati possible &0
verify either idea? Theoretically, I suppose, t may
te weil ponsible | Bue even this, I thiak is very
sabe Aod suey tpn at, hominy mod
practically speaking, & wil often have become quite
Iioposable to verify ether idea. In all probabil
tt naver wil ‘be poutbie for any man’ to wenily
whether Thad the card or not on this pareular


WILLIAM JAMES' « PRAGMATISM” 103


eecasion, No doubt we are here speaking of an
tine. "But ese hypotete om coosertag the

ie. But the ‘am considering ix

ein that we oever kave a tre dear which
a gt Bok rant ate co my, whieh we canst
verily after the idea has occurred. | And with regard
to this hypothesis, it seems to me quite plaio that
ry often sudeed wee have two ideas, one or other of
which ia certainly true: and yet that, in all proba-
biliy, it & no longer posable and never wil be
pousible for any man to verify either.

Tt seems to me, then, that we very often have
true ideas which we cannot verify; tre ideas,
which, in all probability, oo man ever will be able
0 verify. And, so far, I have given only com-
paratively trivial instances, But it is plain that, in
the same sense, historians are very frequently occu-
pled with true ideas, which ic is doubtfal whether
they can verify. Oce historian thinks that a certain
event took place, and another that it did not; and
both may admit that they cannot verify their idea.
‘Subsequent historians may, no doubt, sometioes be
able to verify one or the other. New evidence may
be discovered or men may learn to make a better
use of ‘a existence. But is it
certain that ‘eéways happen? Is it certain
thar avery question, about which historians bave
doubted, will some day be able to be settled by
Verification of one or the other bypothesia? Surely
the probably ie that io che, cm of an immense
umber of events, wit to which we should
like to know whether they of not, it never
will be possible for any man to veriy either the one
byposhess or the other. Yet t may be eetin that
elther the events in question did bappea or did not,
Here, therefore, again, we have a large numbor of
Sdeas-—cases where many men doubt whether x
‘thing did happen or did not, and bave therefore the


oq WILLIAM JAMES' “PRAGMATISM”


idea both of its having of tant
having appened—with 0 which it is certain
‘that baif of then are truc, but where it scema highly
oubifl whether any single one of them will ever
be able tobe verifed, No doube fe & jost posible
‘that men will some day be able to verify every ons
of them, But surely it is very doubtlul whether
they wil, And the, theory” agaist which 1 am
‘protesting is the positive assertion that we can verily
all our true ideas—chat some one some day certainly
will be able to very ‘one of them, This
theory, I urge, bas all probabity agains i

fod 20 far 1 have been dealiog oly with ideas
with regard to what happened in the
seam to me to be the cases wbich offer the most
numerous and most certain exceptions so the rule
that we can verify our true ideas. With regant to
articular past event iter in their ov lives or in
howe of cher peopl, men very frequent)


rich shi}
man wil ever ease vee And ya a}


certain that a great many of these ideas are true,
cau toa Feat may! casn'we hove bl the
dea that the event did happen and also the ea
that it did not, when it is certain that one or other
of these ideas is true. And these ideas with regard
tm pat eves wally themoaves be elie! for

17 purpose. If, as seems certain, there are. many
tote iene wich regard to the pas, whic ti highly
improbable that rae es ‘be able to verify,
then, obvioady, nothing in a true dex
ic ia, I chink, cereinly vot only in the case. of ideas,
with regard to the past, that it is doubeful whether
we can verify all the trie ideas we bave. In the
case of many generalisations dealing not only with

at but with the Future, tis, T think, obviout
doubt wbetber we ssl Cree beable to very ah


WILLIAM JAMES’ "PRAGMATISM ” 105


those which are true here, pechap, in
Povo gle Peg ogi yory pte)
30 great. ‘But is ic quite certain, chat in all cases
where scieotific mea have considered hypotheses,
fone or other of which must be crue, either will ever
be verified? It seems to be obviourly doubtful
Take, for instance, the question whether our actual
ce in Euclidean or not. This is a case where the
[ternative bax been considered; and where it i
certain that, whatever be meant by “our actual
space.” it either is Euclidean or is not. It has been
held, too, that the bypothesis that itis aot Euclidean
might, conceivably, be verified by observations
But it is doubefuf ‘whether it ever will be. And


we


ther hypothesis

fash tp amert poskively that we shaban we
certainly can verify the true bypotheses. There,
Ubelieve, ever 90 many ‘cases, wivere alter-
tative hypotheses, one or other of which must be
true, have occurred to mea of ecience, and where

yet it in very doubtol whether either ever will be
Yerifed: “Or sake, agaio, such ideas as che ides
that there ina God, or the idea chat we are immectal.
Many mea have had not only contradictory ideas,
‘but contradictory beliefs, about these matters And
hhere we have cases where ic is
these ideas have not actually been verified.
deems to me doubtful whetber they have, been,
‘And there is a view, which seems to me to deserve
Tape, cng these eatery we caver aba be
able to verify the true bypothesis.
frien Cnt ib vl fo looove?
that it is true. I thiok i ia quite
tall some day be able to verily either the belief
that we are immortal or the belief thar we are aot,
But it seems to me doubtful whether we shall. And
{or thia reasoa alone T should refuse to assent to the


106 WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM


positive assertion that we certainly can verify all
‘ar trae ideas

‘When, therefore, Professor James tells us that
“Troe ideas are those that we can assimilate,
validate, corroborate and verify. False ideas are
howe that we cannor,” there seems to be & serious
objection to part of what these words imply. They
imply that go idea of ours is true, unless we can
verify it, ‘They imply, therefore, that whenever a
an wondera whether or not he had the sevea of
diamonds In the thicd band at whist last night
relther of these ideas is true unless he can verify
it But it seems cermin thet io this, and an
fmmence number of similar cases, one or other
of the two ideas is true. she did have
the card in bis hand or be did not. If anything in
a fact, this is one. Either, therefore, Professor
James’ words imply the desial of this obvious fact, ot
the he iplice tht in of suck caoce we can vriy
ove or otber of the two ideas. But to this the
objection is that, in any obvious sense of the words, it
sett very dou whether we can. Or the cea.

it seems extreme! thatina:

fea ofa cs tattas erer ell ae
verily either of tbe two ideas. ‘There is, therefore,
1 serious objection to what Professor James’ words
imply. Whether be bismself really means to ansert
theae things which his words imply 1 do not koow.
Perhaps he would admit tbat, in thin sense, we
probably cannot verify nearly all our teue ideas.
All that I have wished to cake plain is that there
la, atleast, an objection to what he says, wbetber to
what he means o not. ‘There is ample reason why
‘we should refuse asseot to the statement that none
Of gar Kes se tan, excat tone wk we an
verity.

But to another part of what be implles by the
‘words quoted above, there is, t think, no serious


WILLIAM JAMES’ " PRAGMATISM” x07


objection. ‘There ia reason to object to the state-
scat that we can verify all our true ideas: but to
the statement that all ideas, which we can
Hele, vali, corsbrmn sed repo tam
see 20 serious Here, T chink, we
right say simply that all ideas which we can verify
Are tru To thin. which i the ancond of che fout
propositions, wi inguished above (p. 35) a
eye ee
in, 1 think, no serious objection, if we understan
the word "verfy™ in is proper and natural ngs
‘We may, no doubt, sometimes aay that we bave
verified an idea or ‘an bypothesis, when we buve
ly gbingd, evidence which proves It 12 bs
frotabls and does nor prove tt be corain. And,
‘we use the word in this loose sense for incomplete
verification, it fa obviously the case that we may
verify an idea which is not trve. But it eeems
scarcely, necessary 10 poiat this out. And where


we really can a0, idea of ao
hypo the idea which we
ean verily is always ‘very meaning of the


fy” in to find evidence which does really
‘rove aa idea to be true; and where an idea can be
realy prove tobe eit of cure always tre,

in iv all T wish to say about Professor James’
ropositions, namely >—

(0) Thas o Wea of our are tue, except shots

(2) That all those Ideas, which we can verify, are.

true,

‘The Grst seems to me extremely doubtful—ia
fast, almon certainly untrue; the second on the
other band, ‘cerainly true, in its ovost obvious
meaning. And J shall say no more about them.
‘The fact fs, I doubt whether either of them
expresses anything which Profeseor James is realy


308 WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM”


‘anxicos to assert. I have mectioned them, only
imply them and


because bis words doy im far


1c ia this maia view we
We bave to consider the


(3) ‘That all our true ideas are useful

(4) ‘That all ideas, which are useful, ae true.

First then: is it the ease that all our true ideas
are useful? Is it the case that none of our Kens
‘are true, except those which are useful?

1 wish to introduce my discussion of this question
bby quoting a passage in which "Prteror Jansen
seems to me co say isputably
true. Towards the end of tacks
the view that truths “have an unconditional claim
to be recognised.” And in the course of his attack


the flowin os ‘

“Mutt 1" be says, “coomanily be repeatiog the
teu ‘e0ice tho sre four” because of ie ternal
aim on recognition? or is it sometimes irrelevant?
Must my thoughts: dwell ‘and day on my
‘pertonal sins and blecnishes, truly have
them ?—or may I sink acd ignore them in order to
Des dese scl ah sad on a mats of och
we iy an B

"It ia quite evident” he goes on, “that our
obligation to acknowledge truth, #0 far from being


WILLIAM JAMES' « PRAGMATISM” 109


unconditional, is tremendously conditional. Truth
with a big 7, aad ia che singular, clsims abstractly
to be eed, of course but bearmpecr cigar io
ieee comme ey sce,
in is expedient (pp. ayras2).

Professor James says in this passage seems
to me so indisputably truc as fully to justify the
vigour of his fanguags. It is as clear as anythir
can be that it wo not be useful for mane
ee ee pr atm lt oy eh
testis aoe
‘occupied with the ides that twice two are four. It
is clear, that is, that, if there are times at which a
particular truc idea is useful, there certainly are

fog wih 8 roo el, be
‘nor quite all, ur erve idese. Te is plainly true
ret ape oe
coceasions on which their occurrence is useful are
ee oe i neces a at
ot be useful are many more. regard to most
Feri e oc
Sees et tel mace
irrelevant, aad bad better vemeia latent” On

Tt is, then, quite clear that almost any particular
‘true idea aad not be useful at all times and that
the times at which it would mof be useful, ure many
‘more than the times at which it would. And what
we have to consider is whether, in just this sense in
which it is so clear that most true ideas would wat
‘be useful at most times, it is nevertheless true that
all our true ideas are uselul. Is this so? Are all
‘our true ideas useful?

‘Professor James, we see, has just told us that
there are ever so many occasions upon which a
shay Ec Sa anor el
‘useful—when, on the contrary, it would
in the way. And this seems co be


110 WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM”


clear. But is not something elee almost equally
clear? Ia it cot almost equally clear thet cases,
uch 08 he says wold not be useful, do sometimes
‘ectually bappea? Is it aot clear that we do actually
fometiner have true ideas at times when they ae
‘i0¢ useful, bot are positively fo the way? Tt soem.
to me to be perfectly clear that thie docs sometimes
‘vecur; sad not sometimes oly, but very commonly,
‘The cases ia whick true ideas occur at times when
they are useful, are, far mors somerous;
bu, if we look at men ia general, the cases in which
fut ideas sur, at times when they are aot usu
do surely make up positively a ve number.
Is ie not the case thar men 0 sonics dwell on
thelr faults and blemishes, when it is wot ueeful for
them to do 30? when they would such better be
thinking of something else? ‘Tx it not the case chat
hey are often usable to get their minds away from
a Soe ie when i ofl fe: chem dll on
#2 Still more f. does it not happen that
Ghey wane their time in acquiring piccrs of infor-
asin ‘which eno une a them hough perhape
very ureful to other is seems to me
to be undeniable—just as undeniable as what Pro-
fessor James himself has said; and, If this lo 10,
then, in one sense of the words, It ia plainly not rue
‘hat all, or nearly all, our trve ideas are useful Zw
ne sense of the words. Fe

‘avae4 on one day, and then bave it again the
mmext } may certainly, io

Ihave on ooe day one idea, and the idea
the next onolder. [have bad two ideas that 242
‘==4, and not one only. Or if two different pernons
both think that T have fauls, tbere have been two
Sdeas of this truth and not one only. Aad ia asking
whether aif our true ideas are useful, we sright
ean 10 ask whether fofh of these ideas’ were useful
apd ot merely whether ove of them was, Jo this


§
x
z
z
Fi
g


WILLIAM JAMES' “PRAGMATISM “ irr


sense, then, it is plainly not true that aif our true
dear are useful. Ye is not true, that is, chat every
true idea is useful, whenever tf eccwrs.

In one sense, then, it is plainly not true that all
our true ideas are useful. But there atill remains

Cecily legitimate sense in which i¢ might be true,
Ie might be macant, that is, not thet every oscmrrence
of a true idea is useful, but that every true idea ta
useful on at least one of the occasions when it
eccurs. But is this, fo fact, the case? Tt secms to
‘me almost as plain that it is not, as that the other
wax not. We bave seen that true ideas are not by
any means always useful on cvery occasion whea
they occur; though most that do occar many times
over and to masy different people are, no doubt,
‘useful on some of these occasions. But there seems
to be an immense number of true ideas, which oocur
‘but once and to one person, and never again either
to him or to anyone else | may, for instence, idiy
count the number of dots on the back of a card, and
arrive at a true idea of their umber; acd yet,
perhaps, I may never think of their number again,
tor anybody ele ever know it We ae allt wes
to me, constantly noticing trivial details,
Sra aera marae
‘aguio, and which nobody else ever guta And ia it
ite cerain that ll shone tom enn ar af? Te
seems to me perfectly clear, on the contrary, that
many of them are not Jost as it is clear that
‘many men goroeticres waste their time in acqul
information which is useful to others but not 10
them, surely it is clear that they sometimes waste
their time Ia acquiring information, which is oseful
to nobody at all, because nobody else ever acquires
it [do not say that it is never useful idly to count
the number of dats on the back of a card. Plainly
it is sometimes useful to be idle, and one idle em-
ployment may often be as good as aaother, But


112 WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM”


surly it ia true that men sometimes do these things
when their time would have been better employed
Gtherwise? Surely they sometimes get icto the
habit of attending to trivial truths, which it is as

gt a disadvantage that they should attend to ax
Six they’ should sonsaccly be thinking of thee
‘own thoughts and blemishes? I cannot sce an
way to deny that this is 0; and therefore
cannot see my Way to assert positively that all our
tur ideas are useful, eveo 30 much ns on one
occasion It seema to me that there are many true
ideas which oceur but once, and which are not use
fal whea they do occur.» And if this be so, then it
is plainly not true that i/ our true ideas are useful
In any sense at al.

These seem 0 me to be the most obvious
objections to the assertion that all our true ideas aro
tuseful. Je i clear, we saw to begin witb, that true
ldeas, which are sometimes wsehil, enoudd not be
‘woeful at all times. And it seemed almout equally
lear that they do sometimes cevor at times when
they are not useful Our true ideas, therefore are
‘ot useful at every tite when they actually occur,
‘But in just this sense in which itis 90 clear that troe
ee ich are someines ll cerca soe
times oceur ac ‘are ot, it seems pretty.
plain that true ideas, which occur but once, are,
some of them, not useful, fan idea which is


‘2 dime wheo it is irrelevant and in the way? It
seems hardly possible to doubt that this does some-
times happea. But, if this be so, then it i9 not true
that all our true ideas are useful even so much a4
fon one ccxisioa. It is not rue that none of our
ideas are true, except those which are useful.

Bot now, what are we to may of the converse


WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 113


‘proposition—the proposition that all those among.
our Ideas, which are useful, are true? That we
never kave & useful lea, which is not true?

W confess the matter seems to me equally clear
here, The assertion should mean that every idea,
‘whlch fs at any time sell, is true ; that no idea,
which is not trac, is ever usefal, “And it aces
hrardly possible to doube that this assertion is false.
Jt i im the first place, commonly held that it is
tomeiimes, right positively destine another
erent war fr asanee i held htt oe
army is justified in trying to give the enemy a false
eax co where it will be at given time.” Such a
false idea is sometimes givea, and it seems to me
quite clear that It is sometimes oseful, In such a
‘ase, no doubt, it may be said that the false idea ia
‘useful to the party who have given i, but not usefal
to those who actually believe in it And the

uestion whether it ie useful oo the whole ill
pend upon te question which side i is desiable
shoold wh. But it seems to me unquestionable
fh th lo esl oat uel on the whole
yf instance, the case of a party of savages,

‘who with to make a night attack and massacre a
party of Europeans but are deceived as to the
feign in bic he Eoropeane are encamped. I

‘sorely plain that such a false idea Is sometimes

vaeful oo the whole But quite apart from the
yeeation whether deception la ever juntifable, it
Dries ceeetares
at roduc i ul
tod wete gor merely on the whole, but to te
‘pervon who hax it as well. A man often thioke
that bis watch ia right, when, in féct, iis slow, and
Thin false ides may cause im to mise his train,
Add eauch cas douby, ie Ge denis
forall cisadv: parc
Series tla wii he wold have aogbr bat


114 WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM”


for his fale idea may be destroyed in a railway
accident, of something may suddenly occur ab
home, which renders it much more useful that be
should be there, than it would bave beeo for him
to catch his train. Do such cases never occur ?
Aad is not dhe false idea sometimes vteful i some
of them? It seems to me perfectly clear that it ix
sometsmas useful for tan to think his watch is
right when itis wrong. And such instances would
bbe mufficient to show that it is not the case that
every idea of oure, which is ever useful, is a true
fides. . But let us take cases, not, like these, of a0
idea, which occurs but a few times or to ooc man,
bue of ideas which bave occurred ta many men at
many times. It seems co me very difficult to be
sure that the belief in en eternal hell has not been
often useful to many men, and yet it amy be
doubted whether this idea is true. And 50, t00,
with the belief ia a lige after death, or the
belief in the existence of a God : itis 1 think, very
Aiffcult to be aure that these beliefs bave aot bees,
and are not stil, often useful, and yet it may be
doubted whether they are true. ‘These beliefs, of
course, are matters of controversy. Some men
believe that they aze both usefol and true: and
‘others, again, that they are neither, And I do
‘hot think we ‘are justiGed in giving them as certain
instances of beliefs, which ere not true, but, never-
theless, have often beea useful, But there in a


view that these beliefs, oot true, have,
nevertheless, been often A; and this view
eems to me to deverve expecially since,
as we have seen, some which are not true,


cerainy are somatines cal | Aro we fied Is
assert that it is false? Is it

Serir ile talc lac ve oft bo ca
to wasy men, may not, nevertheless, be untrue?
Te it perfectly certain that belief, which are not


‘WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 115


true, bave not often been useful to many men?
‘The certainty may at least be doubted, ay
case i¢ seems certain chat some beliefs, which ore
Rot true, are, nevertheless, sometiones usefol
For these reasons, it seems to me almost cerrain
that bord the assertions which [ bave been con-
sidering are falve. It is alcost certainly false that
all our true ideas are useful, and almost certainly
false that all our usefol ideas ore true But ] have
oly urged what scem to me to be the moat obvious
Objections to these two statements; 1 bave not
‘ried to sustain these objections ‘by elaborate
Arguovents and 1 have omitied claborate argument,
partly because of a reason which I now with 10
sate, The fact is 1 am not at all sure that
Professor James would aot himself admit that both
these statements are falee. [think it is quite
possible be wold admit that they are, and would
fay that he never meant either to assert or to imply
the contrary. He complains that some of the critics
of Pragmation are unviling to read any but the
ailliest of possible macanings into the statements of
Pragomtisn ‘he would say that this
is the case bere." } certainly bope that be would,
T certainly hope he would say that these statements,
to which 1 have objected, are silly. For it docs
‘text to me intensely silly to say that we can verify
all our true ideas; iotensely silly to say that every
fone of our true ideas is at some time vseful;
Sotensely ailly to say that every idea which in ever
useful is true 1 bope Professor James would
admit all these things 10 be ailly, for i€ be nd
other Pragmatists would admit even an ouch a
this, I think a good deal would be gained. But
it by n0 means follows that because a philosopher
jew 10 be silly, when it i definitely
ut before bim, be has not hieself been constantly
ding and implying that very view, He may


116 WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM"


quite sincerely protest that he never tes either
Bed oe implied ic and yer be may all the te have
Teer ot ly implying it Bat hang vagy
Perhaps, but really” "Aman amy ature un guise
Sincerely that he iz not angry : he may really think,
that be te not and yet we ony be able 10 ju
quite certainly from what be says that be really
Gngry. He may assure us quite sincerely tbat he
fever meant waytbing to our dicredit by what he
Sdechat he wan not thinking of anything in the
Teast diverediable to us, and yet it may be plain
from bis words that he was actually condemaing ua
very severely. And so with a philosopher. “He
ey Prmens,sute angry, wep view pt


thin fa other words than his own, that be
fever either meant oF implied any such thing, and
Yet it say be possible to judge, from what he says,
That this very view, wrapped up in other words, wad
fot only held by him bus was preciacly what made
Bik tg ate im tbe tenn
important ‘may quite offen imply a
ved’ thing which, at ime, he denies
Galera ie were possible for a philosopher ‘to do
thin, there would be very Title inconsistency in

hy, and surely everyone will admit that
Jehar' philosophers are very often inconsistent
‘And 20 in this caae, even if Professor James woukd
aay that he never meant to imply the things 10
trbich Thave been yst in the case of two
‘Of these things T cannot help Uniaking that be doos
‘Seruly imply thee cay more, that be i frequeodh
Senally vaguely thinking of them, od ‘Gat ha

Tpuerest,


WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM” 117


vaguely, thinking ei ing oF of any
which “implies Ke; be may simply bave expreseed
himself unfortunately. But in the case of the two
views that all our be ideas are useful, and all our
tuseful ideas crus, I do oot thick this ix #0 with
Profestor James. 1 think that his thoughts seem
lteresting to hie and others, largely because be te
thinking, not merely of words, but of things which
mnply these two views, in the very form in which I
Ihave objected to them. And 1 wish now to give
ome reasons for thinking this

Professor James certaioly wishes to masert that
there issome connection berween truth and utility.
‘And the connection which 1 have suggested that
‘has vaguely before his mind is this: that every tue
idea is, at rome time or other, useful, and converse!
tbat every idea, which is ever useful iy true. Al
T have unged that there are obvious objections to
both thas views Bur now, supposing Profemor
James does not mean to assert either of these. wo
things, what else can he mean 10 asvere? What
glee can he mean, thar would account for the
interest and Importance he seems to attach to, his
amertion of connection between truth and utility ?
Let us consider the alternatives

‘And, first of all, he might mean that mest of our
true ideas are useful, and must of our useful ideas
true, He might mean that most of our true ideas
are waeful at some time or other ; and even that
‘most of them are useful, wheoever they actually
occur, And he might mean, moreover, that if we
consider the whole range of fdeas, which are tsefal
to us, we aball find that by far the greater sumber
(of them are true ones ; that true ideas are far more
‘often useful to us, than those which are not true,
‘And all this, I think, may be readily adasitted to be
teu, Tf this were all chat be meant, # do oot think


118 WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM "


‘that anyone would be anxious to di ic But
tsi conceivable thatthe af hat be enn? Te
iver yh pla
to insist upon this admitted commonplace? 1a it
‘conceivable that he should have been offering us
this, and cothiog more, ax a theory of what truth
means, and & ‘theory worth making « fuss about,
fand beiog proud of? it seems to me quite incon-
ceivable is this should have been off chat he
meant, He most have had something more than
moe
as showing that he does mean to assert Bat a
pe enreres
‘assert a qualification, which must now be noticed.
“The true,” he says, “is only the expedient in the
vray of our thinking” "(pe 232) But he immediately
* Expedieat in the run, and on the
wide, ‘of course; for what meets expediently all
Sees
farther experiences equally satisfactorily.” Here,
therehore os, bave Cape
Se roe
Rg re ep
mean ? At soa ©: Hint am, lens ict
See
in to say, it may occur once, and be expedient then ;
‘and again, and be expedient then ; and s0 0a, over
‘A considerable period. But (Professor James seems
to prophesy) if it is not true, there will come a time,
rien it wll cease to be cxpalinns, 1 ie acucs
Sage ee setae eat
fat in WW eo ee coma’s. Se when
‘will (for once at least) fail to be useful, and will
‘he means) never be useful again. This
ae Gate dy ha
mee rem riokite Sek
‘which is not true, may for some time be repeatedly


‘WILLIAM JAMES’ " PRAGMATISM” 119


expedient, there will st last come a time when i
‘eccurreact will, perhaps, neory be expedient agaio,
certainly will for a Gime, not be generally expedient.
‘And this 2 view which, t seems f0 mie, may possibly
‘be trus. It ix certaicly possible that a time may
come, in the far future, when ideas, which are. not
true, will hardly ever, if ever, be expedient. And
this i all thae Professor James scems bere positively
to mean. He seems to mean that, if you take time
suangh, false ideas will some day cease to be ex.
gall Aed i very nse ee
in not teue; since it 32 it to prophesy
fn to what may happen in the far feture, am
sure { hope thac this veil come cue. But
jn the meantime (Professor fames seems to admit)
ian hie ar not. ay, fo a ndiely
‘de, again and again be expedient. init
conceivable that a theory, which admits this, is afd
that be has meant to assert? Ls it conceivable that
sph erat Bim i Bis theory of tut, ig merely
the belief that, some day or other, false wdeas wil
cease to bo expedient? "In the long run of
course,” be says, as it this were what he had meant


: ‘que plain that this i
fot all at he has meant. ‘This may be one thing
‘which he ie sanious to amert, but it vertinly doce
Bot xan he whole of tis intra ia Bathory of
truth.

‘Acd, in fact chere i quite 4 differeat theory
sbich he seer plainly 0 have fo bie ind in other
Places. When Profesor James ays, "in the long
Fano som be tp tha Hoa whic ae

Gent ooly for a short run, are very often tot

trie. Bat in Mat be 2 ecinge he aset the
ite of this. He saye clsewbere that 2

BER true a0 omg ar to televe i is profitable
mp oar lives” (p75) ‘That is to may. vill
be true, 39 ag as is url, even if 6 wot useful


sto WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM”


in he ong vat Thee onl qa a Silat
and, strictly speaking, it implies that aa
dea, ‘which is usefol even om one cccarion, will be
‘rue, "But perhaps this ia only a verbal implication.
H think very likely that here Professor Jamen was
only thinking of ideas, which can be suid 40 Aone a
rx, though oaly a coraparatively short one—of ideas,
that is, which are expedient, not merely 0 one
aceon, byt for some tine” That i 20 ey
theory which be now suggests, is that ideas, which
‘occur again and again, perhaps to one man only,
perhaps to several different people, over some space
Of tioe are, if they are expedient oo most occasions
within thet space of time. cue. This is a view
which he ig, T ‘anzious to assert: and
if it were true, i would, 1 think, be important
‘Aad ic is difficult to find instances which show, with
(certainty, that it is false. 1 believe that it i false ;
‘but is is diffieutt to prove it, because, in the case of
‘ome ideas it is 30 diffcult to be cercain that they
ever were useftl, and in the case of othem 50
iffcult to be certain that they are aot trun, A
helief such ax I spoke of before—the belief in
sternal bell—is an instance. § thiak this belief has
been, for a long time, useful, and chat yet ic is false.
‘But it i, perhaps, arguable that it never has been
‘uaeful ; and many people on the other hand, would
sill assert that it is true. It cannot, therefore,
pethaps, frirly be used us an instance of a belief,
which is certainly not true, and yet bas for nome
eg yr oe

left, which are expedient for some time, are
tvs, be trie or false; can it be all that Professor
James mears to amert? Can it constitute the
‘whole of what interests him in his theory of
truth?

T do.aot think it ean, T thlak it is plain that he
thas in his mind something eiore than any of these


WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 131


ahernatives, or than all of chem taken together.
‘Aad | think 20 par for te following reason. He
Moat dotenpwider oe ideas fom those Wick arg
wou n tree ee which are
fot true; t0 tell ux that le to say, not merely of
soone property which belongs to-all our tue ideas;
tor yet merely of some progerty, which belonge to
one, but tive ideas; but of some property which
tatiafics Both these ‘requirements at once--which
tock belongs to all our cue ldean, and ale be.
longs to noue but true cons. Trah, he ma to
Degl with ears se green of on ten wih
ity: and he adds "as falsy their leagreement.”
‘Rod he explains chac hein going to tell ur what
propery is tats rpeant by these word “agre.
ient with reality. ir, in the next parse
athich T quoted "Troe idoan” he saye ade those
that we can ausimiate, valtate, corroborate and
Bet be alao adds, "False ideas are Give
Age amen, Ann, oT hak cold
possibly speak fo this way, aot in hia
Bre intention of telling va war peozeny which
‘ditingwshes eve ‘dean from tore which are not
trve, And whieh, therefore, not only Belongs to all
{Beas which are true, but also to note that are not.
‘And ‘that be baa’ this ides” in bis head, and
thinks that the property of being" wefal” "or
‘ peying "is such & propery, is again clealy shown
bpalater passage. "Our account of uth,” be saya
{B atf) “in an account of truths in the plural, of
Drocesee of leading, realised su redus and havi
Eis quality in common, that they pay.” Only this
‘qualicy i commoal” If this be aq the quality mast
Sbvioualy be one, which is mot shared By any Hess
twhich are aot trac for, ftroe ideas bave any Quali
in common at all, they roust have at least oor m
‘quality, which is not shared by those which are met
Shue. Plainly, therefore, Profenor James is ic-


xa2 WILLIAM JAMES’ « PRAGMATISM"


teoding to tell us of a property which belongs both
to aif true ideas and ony to true ideas, And chia


re he my the of “oaping” Bat now

oppose that he means by “paying,” not

paying one wea” bt ye er

native be suggests, 38 ong, ran” oF
sen


ing for some.

seyeel cat these were propanica whl Telonged
Ba to all tre ides ond ele Co none but tre eae?
"They may, pechapm, bo ‘which belong to


mons bus ‘true ones, 1 doubt, as I have atid,
whether he later dows; but sili is iffiut 10
rove the opposite. But even if we grant
they belong to wows dwt tue ones, surely it is only
too abvious that they do sat fall the other requi
ment—that they do nat belong to nearly all tru
goes Can anyone suppose that aif our true ideas
pay ““in the long ran” cr repeatedly foe some
time? Surely itis plain that an enormous number do
‘not for the simple reason that 2n enormous, number
‘of them Aave ae raw af all, either long or short, but
‘occur but once, and never recuc. f believe truly
that a certrin book is on 2 particular shelf about
tars pm on December atst, 1907; and this true
belief serves me well and helps me to find it But
the belief that that book is there at that particular
time occurs to no one else, and never again to me.
Surely there are thousods of useful true
‘which, ike thin are umefl bur once, and never occur
again and it would, therefore, be, preposterous to
that every tic idea ia usefid “in tbe long run”
repeatedly for some time If, therefore, we
apposed Profewor James to mean that “paying io
long so” oF “paring repenedly over 4 cot,
period” were properties which belonged
to all tue ideas and to none but tue ones, ‘we
thoukd be supposing bim to mean something still
more monstrous tban if we suppose him to mena


8g


ie


‘WILLIAM JAMES' “PRAGMATISM” 125
thet “paying at least once” was ouch a.


‘0 guen up then :

T think there is no doubt that Professor
interest in “the coin gel ar
largely dem the Geet Gn tele‘ot what
distinguishes trve ideas from. those which are not
true. And he thinks the diminction ix chat trae
ideas “pay.” and false once The most
natural leterpretation of this view is: That every
true idea. pays at least once; and that every idea,

ich pays at least once, is true. These were the
erraitione | considered ret, and 1 gave, envone
hinkiag that dat are falke. But Professor
anes apes cewbers sha wha be by
* paying " is “paying in rs
ituekn psp Gu tha al dear whieh “pay ft
the long run" are crue; but ic is certainly fale that
all our true ideas “pay ia the long run.* if by this
‘be meant anytbiog more than “‘pay at least ace.”
he mannered that what be meant by paying
ng for some time.” And here, again,
yey _very doubtful) that
Al eas which pay for eome tine are tue Hit
false that all ove true ideas pay for 20m
et ‘by this be meant anything more than that
7 inte the spent and
is) chink, i and most obvious
objection to Professor James’ “instrumental” view
of truth—the view that truth is what “works”
“pays” is “useful.” He seems certainly to have
in his mind the idea that this theory tells us what
distinguishes true ideas from false ones, and to be
oterested in it maicly for this reason. He hes
vaguely in his miod that he has cold us of some
rty hick belongs to all true ideas and to nope
Bite onens and Shar this propery tbat of
“paying.” And the objection ix chat, whatever


124 WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM"


wwe understand by “ cher,“ paying at
(rac once "poping ong ng
for tome ting” ees certs San nove of he
ies will satinfy dof requirements. Ax re-
feeds the ft, tat of paying atleast once” ft
segane alot cern that i atin anther: i in
either true chat all our true ideas “poy wt
ce” not yt tht every iden which pays at lene
cnc, ig trom On she contre, any tue Hens
never pay at maay which are not
ine, fa7,0 a least one occasion, And a8
fre cher, paying in the long nun" and
Tes ex ona tek? epte dee bog
poce but true ideas {and even this scoms very
dub), they cern ceter of then aeaty the
they rexjuirement—avither of them. belong to aif
Gur Gus ideas, "For fa order that etboe of them
may belong to an idea, that idea must pay st Jeast
once; and, as we have seeo, many true ideas do
‘pot pay even once, and cannot, therefore, pay either
in the long rue oF for some time. And, moreover,
many te ideas, which do pay on one occasion,
'p pay on one occasion and one ony.
hod I Professor Jame does nt sex to eatert
any of these things, what is there left for him to
mean? There i left in the Srat place, the theory
that most of our true ideas da gay ; aod that mast
Of te ides which pay are toe. This tem to me


tions tell us of ro at all which belonge to
all true ideas, and to none but true ones; and,
moreover, it seems impossible that he should bave
been a0 anxious to assert this generally admitted
gommonplace. What a very different complex


WILLIAM JAMES" “PRAGMATISM” 125


‘but this, while admitting openly that mvaay true ideas
“Bad Welds tis covsmoopiace, ee ony
id, Besides this there i only Ie
for bike to mean ‘two one-sided and. dovbitil
assertions to the effect that certain ea belong
‘to none but true ideax ‘There is the assertion that
1 ides whieh pay in the long rn aro tug, aad
the assertion that all ideas which pay for some con-
siderable time are true And ax to the firt, it may
‘be true; but it may also be doubted, and Profesor
Jamea gives us no ceason at all for thinking that it
is true, Assuming that religious ideas have been
‘uefa in the past ist quite, certain that they tn
ot permanent soviet, be eel even though
they are false? in short, even thou;
are not true, they neverielees wil be vas, not
only for 2 time, but in che long run? And as for
the assertion that all ideas, which pay for a con-
siderable time, exe trun this is obviously more
Soabiful still. Whether certain religious ideas will
for will not be useful in the Joag’ron, it seems
diffcule to doubt thet many of them ‘have been
‘useful for a considerable time. And why should
‘we be told dogmatically that all of these are uc?
‘This, it seems to me, ia by far the most interesting
amertion, which tle for Professor James to malt
-whea we have eejected the theory that the property
‘Of belng esefel Deiongs to off trveKdenn a wel cx
to mone but true ones. But he bas given no reason
for wang He sone, tn. Get, co base
merely upoc the general untenable ‘theory, tt
Utlny beloage to aif ewe ican, and to cote bat
true ones ; that this is what truth means.

‘These, thea, seem to me the pltinest and most
‘obviour objections to what Professor Jomes soya
about the connection between truch and utility,
‘And there are only two farther points, fa what be
saya under this head, chat I wish to notice,


196 WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM”


cel heft plac. we hare biherto been cone
aly whether io wun asa stir of expitcal
{si thar all cur trve ideas ere cael, and howe
‘which are not true, never. Professor James seema,
at least, to mean that, as 3 matter of féct, tia is 30}
ted Ihave ony urged hitherso thie 6 mater of
Sas, %% in not 80, But a we have seen, be also
ames something mere than tise ao seers
ths property of wtley lo the onby one w
trlonge to all cur tye eas. Aod this further
amsertion cannot possibly be true, if, as  bave
unped, there are many tr eas which do oot
is propery: tri an | have urged, man
[cas which do pons, are nevertblon not tus,
‘Tharbjections already considered ara, then, saffclane
to overthrow this further assertion also. [f there
fre any (eve ideas, which are aot useful, or if any,
fright mcrae not te Eonrpanter
Tan willy i the which toe ideas
have (aeoaion, Tee ‘be some fs
obs Rey, EE Ee
fdeas ; and 2 correct ‘as co wiiat property it
is that does belong to ali toe ideas, and to none
Wet te oney, avail 40 seek: "The empirical
objections, blbero given, ore then sufficient objec
tions to this further assertion also; but they are
‘not the oly objections to it There is another
‘and still more serious objection to the assertion that.
cy te uy oer wb trees tv
To vexmmca, "For toe aesertion does tot aerely
imply that, as a matter of fact, all our trve ideas
tal sons Bot tree Kans are unefl It doun Inde,
imply this; and therefore the fact that theme ees
i con oe ro est 1 te
ue He ao implies vxnehing core, IC
were the omdy which all true ideas iad 2
common, it follow sot merely that all true
Ideas are useful, but also that any idea, which was


‘WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM” 127


useful, wonld be true no motier wet sther propertiss
it seight have or might fail fo have. There can, 1
think: be eo doubt iat Profeeor Jones dows
quently spe as if chs were the case j and there
ndependent and stil moe teious objection to
{hia imptiation. "Even te were toe (at Is not)
that all our true ideas and none but true ideas are,
fs a carter of fst cacti we should stil bave &
strong reason to object to the statement that ay
fides, which was useful, woud be true. For it implies
that if auch an idea as mine, that Professor [ames
gaista, and has ceraia thoughts, were useful, this
‘dea would be true, sorw of n0 such person as’ Pro-
Famuor james ever did exist. It implies that, if the
idea that T had the seven of diamoads in cy hand
a cards lat night, weve useful, this idea would be
true, even if, in fact, | did not have that card in
tay hand. Ad we can, 1 think eee quite pienly
tha chia in not the case. With regard to” some
Wind of iden, at all eventa—ideu, with regard to
the existence of other people, or with regard to
snces of our owe—it seems quite plain that
they Nowe bom, onlay agro with
in some, ocher seure than that which Pro-
Faso Jaren declares to be the oly one in which
eas mat agree with it Even if my idea
that Professor faties exists were 0"
fealiyte tie Sense dae owtog coi Phaucled
ther realities, better than 1 ave done with-
ut it, it would, { think, plainly not be true, unless
Professor James really did exist—unless Ae were &
reality. And this, I thick, is one of the two ciost
erious objections to what he seema to hold about
the connection of truth with utility. He seems to
bold Sha ony ides, which was wef, owl be sue
lier what eller properties dt might [ail o howe,
rons fb egerd fo some ideas at ll events it
‘they cancot be true, select they


ya WILLIAM JAMES’ « PRAGMATISM”


Ihave the property that what they believe to exist,
really does or did exist. Beliefs in the existence of
ther people might be veful fo me, even if 1 alone
existed bot, nevertheless, io auch a case, they
Rad dee eal sect: ole, le what
‘And there is oaly one other polnt, in what Pro:
jk fe ny sp gin Do
mental” view of truth, upon which { wish to
remark, We havo seen that he seems sometimes
to hold that beliefs are true, s0 dong as they are
‘profitable to cur Lives.” And this implicn, aa we
Ive seen, the doubeful proposition than any belief
which ie urefal for some length of time, fe tue.
But this ice all hat It izes Te asp implion
that beliefs are true ondy wo long ts they are profit-
able. Nor does Professor james appear to mean
by this that they sccwr, only so long as they are
table. He seems to hold, on the contrary, that
if, which are profitable for some time, do some
tUmes fioally cccur at a time when they are not
profitable. He implies, therefore, that a belief,
whlch occurs at several diferent times, may be true
at some of the times at which it occurs, and
vwatrue at others, I think there is no doube that
thia view ts what he i» sometimes thinking of, And
this, we see, constitutes a quite oew view as to the
connection between truth and utility—a view quite
different from any tbat we have hitherto considered.
This view asses. not that every troe idea. is useful
ft nome time, or in the long ron, or for a. consider.
able period; but than the trad of en idea nm
come , a8 ite tity comes and goes ft
‘anit thacone and the same idea sometimes ocsurs
at times when it is useful, aod sometimes at times
when it is not ; but it maintaing that this same idea
ia trie, at those times when itis useful and aot trie,
ft those when it a cot. And the fact tbat Profeasor
James seems to auggest this view, constiutes, 1


‘WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 129


think, a second most serious objection to what he
says aboot the connection of truth and utlity. Te
seems so vious the: uals is & property which
comes and goes—which belongs to a given idea at
fe tine, a8 dow not beloog fo it at another, haz
fanyooe who mays that the true is the useful narurally
seems not to be overlooking this obvious fact, but


to be ding that truth is a property which
tomes and goes i the come way, “It a

[ thiok, chet the “instrumeneal " view of truth i
connected with the view that truth is ‘* mutable.”
Profesor James does, 1 think, imply that truth is
mutable in just this sense—oamely, that one aod
the sume idea may be true at some of th times at
which it occurs, and not rue at othera, and this ix
the view which I have next to consider.


ayy

Profemor ,femee svar te bol generally,
that “truth” is mutable. Aod by this he seems
sometimes to mean that an idea which, when it
‘occurs at one time, is tcue, may, when it occurs at
another time, oot be tue. He seems to hold that
fone and the aime idea may be true xt oor time and
faluc at another. That it, may be, for I do not
suppose be means that all ideas do actually undergo
this change from true to false Many true ideas
teem to occur but once, and, if wo, they. ot least,
will not actually be troe at one time and false at
ftaother, though, even with regard to these, perhaps
Professor James means to maintain that they might
be false at another time, if they were to occur at it
But I am not sure that he even means to maintain
‘his with regurd to 6d! our true ideas. Perhaps he
does not mean to say, with regard to aif of them,
even that they cas change from truc to false, He
speaks, generally, indeed, as if truth were mutable
‘but ia one ‘he seems to insist that there
certain ‘char of trie ideas, nove of which are


1ge WILLIAM JAMES' “PRAGMATISM”


mutable in this respect “Relations among purely
mental ideas,” be {p. 209), “form another

fere where true and false beliefs obsain, and here
the beliefs are absolute or uacondiconal. When
they aro troe they bear the mame either of defi
tions or of principles. It is either a principle oF &
deficition that 1 and 1 make 2, that 9 and 1 make

‘and 30 00; that white difers less from grey than
does from ‘black ; that when the cause 0
tet the elec: alto commences. Such proporiona
‘hold ofall possible ‘ones, of all conceivable * whites,’
‘gry sed ‘cnnea! The objects bere ae ment
abject. Their relations are perceptually obvious
fat a glance, and no sense-vecihcation is necessary.
Moreover, once true, always true, of those same
mental objects. Truth bere bas an ‘eternal’
character, If you can ficd a conerete thing any-
Wea hen poor prinspias wil eveiaogy ply

cz” then your princi everlastingly 3
soit” Profetsor James does seem here to bold that
there are true idas, which ence troe, arc always
true. Perhaps, then, he does not bold that a// true
Ideas are mutable. Perhaps he does not even bold
tbat all true ideas, exzept ideas of chis kind, are 20,
Bot he does seem to hold at least that samy of our
‘true ideas are mutable. And even this proposition
‘deems to me to be disputable It seems to me
that there ita aomse in which it Is the case with
avery true idea tha, if once true, it is always true
‘That in to say, that every ides, which is true once,
would be troe at any other time at which it were 13
‘occur; and that every ides which does occur more
has once, if true once, é true at every time at
hich it does occur. There seems to me, I my, $0
Bes sense in which this is sa And this seerny to
me to be the sense in which it is most commonly
and most naturally maintained that ell trutht are
“immutable” Professor James seems to mean to


WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 131
deny it, even in this sense. He scems to me
oly speak as if there were me sate in
truths are immutable, "And T only wish
Sivigw ofecton we eck lenguoge

‘mont obvious © guage,

‘Au, int of aly there 1s one doctrine, which be
seemo to connect with this of his tbat “"trutha are
mutable,” with regard to which I fully agree with
him. He seems very anxious to insist tbat ceality
is mutable: that ic does change, and thet it is not
Irrational to hope that in the furore it will be
different from aod much better than it is now, Aad
this seems tome to be quite undeniable. Trecems 10
sme quite certain that I dobaveideasat one tie which
did not bave at anotber; thet change, therefore, dom
really occur. Tt seems to me quite certain that in
the foture many things wil be different frome what
they are now; and i sce no reason to think that
they may not be much better. There is much
misery in the word now; and I think it is quite

ible that some day there will really be much
= ‘his view that ready fe mutable, that fate
jo change, that some thinge have properties at one
time which they do act have af other umes secens
to me certainly true. And 20 far, therefore, ex
‘Professor James merely means to assert this obvious
fact, 1 have no objection to his view. — Some
Bhilwophers I chink, have rely implied the dena
&f hia fac.” A tone who deny tbe reality of tive
doses mot ply eat noting cealy change or
can change—that, in fact, reality is wholly
fomutable’ And’ so far as Professor James i
merely protesting against this view, { should,
therefore, agree with hi

Bat 1 think ic is quite plain that he does not mean
smerely this, when he says that truth is mutable. No
‘one would choose this way of expressing himself If
‘be merely meant to say thet some things ore


132 WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM”


motable. ‘Truth, Professor James has told un, is @
yy of certain of our ideas. And those of our
Gicis which are use or ale, are ceraaly only
‘ofthe Universe. Other things fa the Universe
Siged in ope of Ws ppeny. Aad ow leat
in resy is property. And our
thenscives do tndoubesdly chtnge in some repost,
A given idea exists in ry mind at one moment and
does not exist im it at another. At one moment it
Js in my mind and not in somebody else's, and at
another in somebody else's and not in mine, I
sometimes think of the truth that twice two are four
when 1 am in oe mood, and sometimes wh
im another. 1 sometimes think of ic i
with one set of ideas end sometimes in connect
veh another set dcan then, are. conantly
changing in some respects. They come 4
Sadar ene cme they stand ia 2 given celatioa eo
other things or ideas, to which at another time they
do oot stand ia that seaton. In this sens, any
jven idea, may certainly bave a property at
Eine which i has aor got at anothet ine.” All
seas obvious; and all this cannot be admitted,
without admitting that realty is mutable—that
some things change. Bat obviously it does not scem
tw follow from this that there is no respect io. which
Adeas are immutable. It does not soem to follow


that property. And yet
that this deer bappen seems to be part of what is

ing that truth ie mutable, Ploy,
therefore, to say this is to say something quite
Ying that some things are mutable


WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 135


‘open to consider whether truth is
‘what [ want now to consider. Is it
the case that an idea which exists at one time, and is
trve then, ever exists at any other time, without
Tslg true? "Te i the case tht aay ‘den ever
2 from true to ‘thas the property
Sg ce rae ate Ee
tand that it bas aod this property, but that of
false instead, on some other cecasion whea it
{n order to answer this question clearly, i
think, necessary to make sti another
Tt does certainly seem to be teue, 2x a sexu, that a
given idea ray be true on one occasion and fulse on
nother. We constantly apeak ax if there were
cases, in which a gives thing was true on one
occasion and false on another; and 1 think it
cannot be denied that, when we so epeak, we are
often expressing ina proper and legitimate
manner someting which ws undeoiably true. [tis
true now, | might say, thar Tam in this room ; bat
to-rmorrom this will not be true. It iy true now that
‘mea are often very miserable; but perhape in some
fitre state of soctety thin wil aot be true. These
are peclectly natural forms of expressioa, and what
shey express is something which certainly may be
true. And yet what they do apparently assert is
that something or othes, which is true at one me,
vill oot, or perhaps will not, be trae at another. We
constantly use such expressions, which imply that
‘what is true at one time is act true at another ; and
it in certainly legitiosate to use thee, And bence, 1
thlok, we must admit that, a trve that
w thing cay be true st one time which is aot true at
another; in that sense, namely, in which we uae
‘these expressions. | And it is, I think, also plain that
these thiogs, which may be true af oce time and
false at ascther, may, ox ¢ sense, be ideas We
tnight even say: The idea that I am in this room, is


134 WILLIAM JAMES “PRAGMATISM”


true sow ; bat tomorow it wil ot bese Wo
TBight say this without eny strain. on Tanguage. In
anf cedinary book-—inded. in any  pilosophical
bole, where the subject we are at preseat discist-
watts d: ¥ nih aetna” Anl'ne
expressions do, 1 coca And we
should. pase them, without any’ objection. We
thould ¢ once understand what they meant, and
treat. them as perlocly natueal. expressions of
things undeniably’ true. ” We must, thea, 1
tudont tha, fe @ sew, an idea may be ue
time, and fale st another. The question
wit Hees he wate eich hem
Derfetly legate expressions wand? >

Tt weeew to me that ia all these case, 40 far a0 we
ace oat mer aking of fac, bt ro en, tt
the " idea” which we truly say to be true atone Ue
and false at another, is merely the idea of a zentmco
that ig of certaia words. And we do undoubeedly
tall words “true” “~The words "1 am ata oeeting
of the Aristotelian Society” wre true if} use them
ory but IT ute the time words form hey
‘would not be true, The words “George ill
King of England” ‘were true in. too, but they are
not trae now, That isto way, a given ect of worde
‘may undoubtedly be true at one time, and false at
another and since we may have ideas of words at
troll a of other thiogy we cay. io thin senee, say
Be same of certain cfour “idesa” We may aa
that nome of cur ideaa” (namely those of words)
te true at one tine and not true at anotber.

"But init conceivable that Professor Jammen merely
‘meant to amert that the same. mords ace sometimes
tra one ine sod ao racer? Ca ie be

means ‘tut is mul
So woe thnk cal hasly besos Novaon
think, in definicdy the imutability of
truth; could say hat trae ideas were mutable, and


WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM” 135


yet mean (although he id not say 0) that chis
Formica 1 ideas of words. Prov
fessor James must, 1 think, have been sometimes
thinking tbat other ideas, and not merely ideas of
‘words, Uo sometimes change from true to falbe.
‘And this is the proposition which 1 am concerned to
dispute. It seems to me that if we mean by an
‘dea, not merely the idea of certain words, but the
kind of idea which words express, itis very doubtfal
whether ouch an idea ever changes from true to
false—whether any such idea in ever true at one
lHme and false at another.

‘And plainly, in the fist place, che mere fact that
the same act of words, as io the instances 1 bave
given, really are true at one time and false at
nother, does, not afford aay presumption that
anything which they stand for is true at ove time
fand falae at another. For the same words. may
Obviously be used in different senses at different
timed ; and hence though the same words, which
Formerly exprested a truth, may cease to exprent
‘one, that may be because they now expresy a

iforent idea, and not because the idea which they
formerly expressed has ceased to be trus. And
thas instances such, as 1 bave given, the, worde

change their measing according to the time at
Sphich they are uttered or thougst of i T think,
side IL ecco ce
room," these words certainly express (amoog of
things) the idea hat my being in thie room it
contemporary with my present use of the w
nd if 1 were to ue the tame words focorrom,
they woud express the idea that my being in thi
room to-morrow, was contemporary with the se
ef them fe. And since my use of them then
‘would not be the same fact as cry use of them 00%,
they would certainly then express a diferent idea
from that which they express now. And in genecal,


136 WILLIAM JAMES' “PRAGMATISM”


whenever we use the tense in its primary
sente, it eceoss to me plain that we do mean some-
thing diferent by it each time we we it. We
always mean (amoag other things) to express the
idea that a given evest is contemporary with Our
actual use of it; and since our actual use of it on
one cccetion is elways a different fact from our
actual use of if oc another, we express by ita
different idea each time we use it And similarly
with the, past and (ore tenvet, | f anybody hed
aid in 1807 “ Napoleon is dead,” be would certainly
have meant by these words something different
feorm what | mean by them when | use tbem now,
He woukl bave meant thar Napoleon's dexth
eecurred at a time previous to Air use of those
words; und this would not bave been true But in
thin fact there is nothiog to show that if he dad
meant by them what I mean now, bis idea would
ot have been as true then as mine

a0, if T aay “It will rain to-morrow,
hhave a different meaning to-day from what they
would have if } used them to-morrow. What we
arcan by “to-morrow” is obviously a different day,
hea we use the word on one day, from what we
mean by it when we use it on another. | But in
there is nothing to show that if the idea, which 1
wom wean by “It will rin to-morrow,” tre to
‘gecur again to-morrow, it woukd not be true then, if
i ia true now. All this is surely very obvious
Bat, if we take account of it and if we concentrate
‘our attention not on the words but oa what is meant
by them, i it so certain that what we mean by them
‘on any one occasion ever changes from true to false?
Af chee wer O10 Se CoE Ui
game idea which I now express by the words “Iam
in this room,” is it certain thet this idea would oot
bbe an true thea as it ia now? Jt i perhaps true
that the miele of what I mean by such a phrase a3


WILLIAM JAMES’ «PRAGMATISM” 137


thia never does recur. But part of it does, and
thas @ part which is true Part of what I mean ie
certainly ideatical with part of what I should aean
fe-morrom by saying “1 war in that room last
sight” And thiz part would be as true then, as it
le now. And i there oxy part, which, if it were to
recur at any time, would nat then be true, thaugh
itis true now? in the case of all ideas or parts of
Ideas, which ever do actually recur, can we find a
single instanceof one, which i ps
Gf the times when ie occurs, and yet not true at
another? “1 cannot think of any. such instance.
‘And on the otber hand this very proposition that
any idea (other than mere words) which i true
once, would be tue at any time, seems to me 10
he one of those scuths of which Professor James
cen as having an “eternal,” “absolute.”
“onconditional " character—as being “ perceptually
obvious at a glance” and oeeding “no sense-
verifcation.” Just as we know that, if a particular
soloar fre ‘nore frm black than from grey
ar one time, the same colour wovld differ more from
black tha from grey at any sime, 40, it seems to
me, we can see that, if a particular idea is true at
‘one time, the same idea would be true at any time,
It seetos to me, then, that if we mean by an i
‘not more words, but the kind of idea which words
express, any idea, which ia true at ope time when
occurs, wonld be true at any time whe
cra nod that thi iso, eventhough
hick refers to facts which are mutable.


My bei

in this room is a fact which is now, but whi

certainly has not been at every time and will not be
"And the words


at every tite, “Tam in this room,"
though they express a truth now, would not have
essed one if I bad used them yesterday, and
al not if 1 oso. them tomorrow Bat we
sonsider the idea which these words som exprese—


ay¢ WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM”


‘namely, the idea of the connection of my being in
‘bis coom with this particular time—it seams tome
ovident that anybody who had thought of that
onection at any time in the past, would have bees
thiokiog truly, aod that who were to think
of h u any ime in the frre would be ibnking
truly. ‘This seems to me to be the sense In whi

truths ara immutable—in which no idea can change
feom true to false. And I thisk Professor Jame
means to deay of truths ily, if not ‘of all
gush, that they are immutable even in this sengs.
Uf he does not mean this there seems nothing left
ao en hese car wie we
mptable, except (t) that some facts are routable, an

(2) that the same words may be true at one ‘time
fund false at another. Acd it ecems to une impossible
that he could speak as be does, if he meant sothing
more than these two things J believe, therefore,
that be is really thinking that ideas which bave
beea once true (ideas, and not merely words) da
sometimes afterwards become falee: that the very


But he certainly gives ao iastance which shows
that this does ever occur. And bow far does
‘be meas his princi him? Does he hold
that this idea thac juli was murdered in
the Senate-House, gh true pow, may, at some
foture time cease to be true, if it should be more
fretiabh to the lives of future geoerations to believe
that be died in hia bed? Thiogs hike this are what
his words seem to imply ; and, even if he does bold
‘that truths like this are sof mutable, be never tries
to tell us to what kinds of truths be would limit
mutability, nor how they differ from such as this,


a
Finally, there remains the view that “to an
wnaxcertaicable extent our troths are man-made


‘WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM” 339


products" And the only point 1 want to mcke
is ie noticeable that all the tstances which Pro-
{fessor James gives of the ways in which, according 10
bles, “our eruth” are “made” are instances of ways
In which our bvAsfi come into existence. In many
of these ways, it would seem, false beliefs sometimes
come into existence as well as true ones} and 1 take
it Professor James does not always wish to deny thin
Falue beliefs, { think he would say, are just as much
‘man-made products” as trve ones: ii ia suficent
for his purpose if trze beliefs do come into existence
inthe ways he mentiogs, And the only point which
seems to be illustrated by all these instances, ¢ that
in ll of them the erisece of» tn bel dome
jn some way or other upon the previous
existence of something in some man's mind. ‘They
‘all of them cases in which we may truly say'*
‘This man would not have hed just that belief, had
ot some maa previously had such and such exper
‘ences, or imerests, oF purposes. In some cases
fre Teatances of ways in which the existence of &


James reems also anxious to illustrate the point that
‘oe man'e beliefs often depecd upon the previous
experiences or intereats or volitions of ether men,
Aud, as { say, the only point which seems to be
definitely uscraved in all caves in that the existence
cof n true beliet does depend, fx some may or other,
‘upon something which has previously existed fa
‘some men's mind, Almost any kind of dependence,
ft would see, is suficient to lustrate Professor
Jarnes’ point. és .

‘And a3 regards this thesis that almost all
our beliefs, true as well as false, depend, in some
‘way oc other, upon wat bas previously been in


440 WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM”


some buman isd, i wil, T think, be readily
admitted. It is a commonplace, whieb, 20 far as
‘would deny. if thin is all chat


“man-made,” it must { think, be admitted that almost
all if not quite all, really are man-made. And this is
all that Professor James’ instances sccm to me, io
fact, to show.

But is this all that Professor James means, when
be says that owr éraéas are muti-made? Is it con-
ceivable that be ooly means. to insist upon thix
‘undeniable, and generally admitted, commonplace ?
Is seems 10 me quite plain thar this i not all that be
means, 1 thiak he cerainly means to suggert that,
from the fact that we “make” our true beliefs,
something ese follows. | And I think it ie not hard
to aec one thing more which he does mean. I thiok
he certainly means to suggest that we cot only
uke our true beliefs, but also that we made them
fra, Atleast as much as this is certainly caturally
suggested by his words. No one would persistently
may that we make owr tracks, unless be meant, at
Feast, not merely that we make our true beliefs, but
also thet we make them true—ualess be meant not
merely that the existence of our true beliefs, but
also that their éravh, depended upon human coa-
ditions, This, it seems to me, is one consequence
which Professor James means us to draw from the
commonplace that the erisdence of oor true belicfa
depends upon human cooditioos. But does tt
consequence, in fact, follow from that commonplace ?
From the fact that we esake our teve belief, does it
follow that we make thems true?


7a one sunie, ucdoubiediy, even this does follow.
It-we say (as we may say) thot no belief can be true,
tanlese it exists, chen it ‘thas, in a seage, the


truth of @ belief mux always depend upon any
conditions upon which ics exismuse dependn “IE


WILLIAM JAMES’ "PRAGMATISM" 141


therefore, the occurrence of 2 belief depesds upoo
thuman conditions, 30, too, must its truth. If the
belief had sever existed, it would never have been
true; and therefore its truth must, in a sense, depend
ehh is sthtnce depend open en,” ENG
ia wbich its exatence ‘opoa them. The ia
hve Bat itis tec ae? is ei al

t would be suggested to us by telling ut Gal we
‘maka out belief trae? 2

Tels cary to ace that it in not 1 may bave the
belief that K wil aie tomorrow. And T may bare
"pede" muysol have. this bell It may be the
care that T should not have bod it, but for pect
‘Arties in my past experiences, in my interests and
toy woliions Ie may be the care tine T shoul
not Bave had it, bur frm deliberate attempt to con
sider the questi ad isbete fe seal rate ce net. ue
taay easily happen. Aad certainly thin partis
belef of tine would not have beca true, uslers it
exitted, Its truth, therefore, depends, in a senen,
pon any condaioar upoa’ which tix existenct
Sependa” Aad this beliet may be true. fe will be
true, if le does rain to-morrow, But, fa spite of all
these reasons, would anyooe think of saying thas,
Part a ieeeen ne ta
anyone sy that any band af aif roa
ir true? Plaily a0 one woud. We ebould sap
that [had a band in making it crue, if and only if
Thad a hand in mabing ¢he rain fall. In every
causa ich we bles othe gustence of enh
pest or fre we shuld say tae we fad bape
Saks the beef eu, and oul if ye had beled to
‘cause the existence of the fact which, in that belief,
Spe believed id exist o would exit’ Surely tints
plain. I may believe that the sun will rise to-
Biottow, And [may have had a hand in “making”
this belief; certainly it often. 1d for its existence
‘upon whe bas been fy in my miod And


14a WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM’


ifthe sua does rise, my belief will bave been true.
Tbave, therefore, bad a hand in making a true
tics iy making whe betty aa) Coral ne
hand in making # fra inly 0
ae would, No oce would say that anythiog had
contributed 10 make this belief true, except those
sadidone (obatever they may be) which eontbeted
‘to making the aun setuslly rise,

St ts plaio, theo, that by “making a belief true,”
we mean something quite didlerent from what
Professor James means by “‘making™ that belief.
Gondiions whic bave 2 hand in making 4 given
‘tue belief, may (it appears) bave no hand at all in
smakiog it true; and reditecs whic eve © mand
‘in mating it true may have oo baed ofall in, maki
it,” Centzioly this is bow we use the words. We
should never say that we had made a belief true,
merely because we had made the belief. But now,
which of these two things docs Professor James
mean? Does he mean meraly the accepted comman-
place that we make our true beliefs, ip the sense
har almost all of them depend for their existence
‘on what has been previously in rome haman mind ?
(Or does be mean also that we make them trne—that
‘ruth also depeads on what bas been previously
fn some homan mind ?

cant help thinking tbat he as the Inter, aod
‘not anly the former in his tind. But, then, what
does thie involve? IF hie instances’ of “truth.
making" are to be to the purpane, it

ean that, wheoever { have a band in causing
tne of my owa belie I almaye hare to that extent
a hand in making it true. therefore, I have
fa hand in actually making the sun rise, the wind
blow, and the rain fall, whenever I cause my belinta
im these things, Nay, more, it should mean that,
whenever { "make" « true belief ebout the pas, f
must bave had a becd ic making this true And if


WILLIAM JAMES’ “PRAGMATISM” 143


0, then certainly 1 must have bad a hand in causing
‘the French Revolution, in causing my father’s bir,
in king Professor James write thia book
Corny ime thas some man ox other mo
ve in causing ‘every event, in w
any man ever traly belicved, That it was we who
moade the planets revolve round the sun, who made the
‘Alps rise, and the Soor of the Pacific sisk—all these
things, and others like them, seem to be involved.
‘And it is these consequences which seem to me 10
justify a doubt whether, in fact “our truths are to
‘an onarcertuinable extent man-made." That some
ff our truthe are man-made—indeed, « great many—
1 fully admit. We certainly do make sorse of our
true, | The Secretary probably bad a belief
that I should write this paper, and I have mate hie
belief true by writing it. Men ceraainly have the
Wer to alter the world to a certain extent ; a9, 40
ss they do thin, they certainly “make rue", any
beliefs, which are beliefs in the occurrence of these
alterations, But [ caa see no reason for supposit
that they “make true” nesriy all those
beliefs which are true “And certainly the only
reagon which Professor James seems to give for
believing this—aamely, that the existence of almost
all their beet depends oa thest—seems to be 20
reason for it at all For unquestionably « man
does not “make true nearly every belief whose
ssistens depends on him ; and if 30, the question
‘which of their beliefs and how many, men do
‘make true” mnt be settled by quite other coo-
rations.


In conclusion, [ wish to sum up what seema to
me to be the most important points ebout this
“ peagmatist theory of truth,” as Professor James
represents it, Tt seenos to me that, in what he says


344 WILLIAM JAMES: « PRAGMATISM”


about it, be has in his mind some things which are
true und otbers which are false;-and I wish to
tobe tn and the pincpal oneo whch [take to
to be true, and # ‘ones w! o
be "The true ones seem to me to be these —


‘That most of our true beliefs are useful to we;
aod that most of the beliefs that are useful to us are


oe
“That the world reslly does change, in. some
sepa ate ce ea Sieben nt
znd woul exit at others: ard that neace the wodd
fsey bo better at ome future bene than ti sow er
fag beea inthe pac
“That the very axe words may be tre at ons
time and fleg at ancther—thatthcy may expres) &
truth a one ioe anda flchood at easter
beef uve Ss well a fase doen depend pon
wee well nd upon
previous events ‘nour cectal ‘netryy that we
Rhould never have had the particular telefs we Go
bare, hat ot our previous seatal istry Been sch
mie
Toe eth adn ely he exes of
some of cor mus Thee we
20 rake some alterations Yo the world, and
that hence we do help to “mate tron” all thove of
beliefs" which are beliefs in the existence of


To all of these propositions J have no objection
to offer. And sAey amt mets be genera


tdmined commouphees, A, cermin, caw of


loeophers do, i ‘the desial of ev
Sc er center hers who deny
the reality of time, Acd I think that part of
Professor James’ object is to protest agaiost the


‘views of these AML of these pro-


WILLIAM JAMES’ “ PRAGMATISM" 145


positions do constitute a protest against such views :
find ao far they might be all that Professor James
meant to assert, Hut 1 do not think that anyone,
fu reading through what he says cond got the
Impression that these things, and nothing more,
‘were what he kad in bis micd. What gives colour
‘nd interest to what he mays, seems to be obvious}

pomething quis diferecr.” And, lf we uy 10 fod
‘ut what exactly the chief things are whick give his
discussion its colour and interest, it seems to me we
say dicaguish that what he' has in bis mid
‘wrapped up in more or less ambiguous

a tie hice rope, pour wtlea Yee
Grled to urge what seem tome the most obvious
objections —


‘That utilty isa propery which diacinguiahea tnxe
beliefs rom those which are not true; that, there-
fore, adf true beliefs are useful, and ai beliefs, which
‘are usell, are true—by “utility” being sometimes
ieant." trilty on at least one gocasion,” sometimes
‘“tlity in the long, run,” sometimes’ “utility for
some length of time.”
‘oeliefs which are usefil for some length
of time are true,
‘That utility is the only property whi


Luseful to me to believe in Professor James
this belief mondd be truc, even if be didn’t exiat;
and thot ¢/i¢ were oot useful to re to believe this,
the belief woadd be false, even if he did.

‘That che beliefs, which we express by words, and
‘not merely the words themselves, may be trve at 008
ime and raf true at another; and that this is a
sgeaera] rule, though perhaps ‘there may be some


‘That whenever the exitence of a belief depende


146 WILLIAM JAMES' “PRAGMATISM *


to some extent on ut, then also the érath of that
belief depends to some extent on us; ia the sense
in which this implies, that, when the existence of my
Delief chat a shower will fll ‘upoa me, thes,
if this belief ja true, { nuet have bad a hind a
inking the shower fall: that, therefore, men must
hhave had a hand in making to exist almost every
fact which they ever believe to exist.


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


1m both of bis two books on the Human Under-
standing, Hume had, 1 think, one main general


object. He tells us tbat it was his object. 10
izcover “the extent and force of human under-
sanding.” to give us “an exact analysis of im


wens and capacity.” And we may, I think,
Exprese what he meat by this inthe following way.
He plainly held (as we all do) that some msn
‘sometimes entertain opinions which they cannot
know to be true. “Aad he wished to point
cout what characteristics are possessed by those of
our opinions which we com know to be true, with
a view of peravading us that any opinion which
does not possess any of these characteristic ig of a
kind which we camxot know to be #0. He thus
ties to lay down certain lta fo the effect that the

nitions whick we can, aay of us, koow to
Thee ot cern dette Kinda ein th
tense, I think, tbat be tries to define the limita of
‘human understanding.

‘With this object he, frst of a, divides all the
propositions, which we can even a0 much a1 coa-
ceive, into two classes. They are all, he says,
tither proponitions about “relations of ideas of

‘matters “By propositions
3s of ideas” he means such
ions as that twice two wre four, of that

iffers from white; nnd it ix, 1 think,

to eee, though by no means easy to define, whit


af HUMES PHILOSOPHY


lod of propositions itis that he means to include in
the ion They ar, be sayy, te only Ld of
propositions to which we can have
Ninmuitive” or “demonstrative” certainty. But
the vast majority of the propositions in weich we
believe and which ioterest us most, belong to che
other division : they are propasiti
of fn" And these gate he
classes. So far ax his words go, this later division
fs between “matters of fect, beyond the present
testimony of out senses, oF the records ‘of out
memory,” on the one hand, and matters of fact for
which we Aaoe the evideace of cur memory or
senses, 00 tbe other. But it is, I think, quite plain
that these words do not represent quite accurat
the division which he really means to make. He
Blaloly intends to reckon along with facts for which
‘we have the evidence of our sexses all facts for which
we have the evidence of dirst obssrostion— auch
facts, for instance, as thove which T obverve when I
‘observe that 1am angry or afraid, and which
cannot be strictly sald to be apprehended by my
senses. The division, then, which he cealy inten
to oaks Se (es pat gute sty) ino the
two ol 1}, propositions which amert some
matter of fact which T am (ia the strictest se
iag at the moment, oc wbich I bave 90
fn the past and sow remember; and (3
tions which assert any cmatter of fact whi
‘am not now observing and never have observed,
(or, if 1 have, have quite
"We kave, then, the three 1) propositions
whiok anoert “relations of ideas"; (2) propositions
‘which asmert “‘matiecs of fact” for which we have
the evidence of direct observation or personal


+ (3) propositions which assert “‘matiers of
weet ee SEN Se hve se Gis evlieas "Aad
aa regards propositions of the frst two classes,


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 149


Hume does not seem to doubt our capacity for
Anorledee | edo ot dou hat we eo Know
‘tama (Grough, of course, noe ai) proporitions
lations of ideas” to be troe: be never doubts
fo mane, that we cow at ie twa are
Focal sere aio tnt ac of
‘ruth of ad propoaitioas which
seco matter of fact which we our
the atictest sense, directly observing,
fr mbich ‘we bave ao observed and now remember,
Hie" does, Indeed, In coe place, a out
‘whether oor memory 1s ev v0 be inphekly troned,
Bot he generally eacames that it adams caa. It lt
smith regard to propoations of the third clase that be
i 'chiely anxious to determine which of them (if
Any) we can know to be rue and. which oot, fo
tbat tases can any man know any atter of fact
Sbich be Risse bus not directly observed? Tein
Hume's views on this tenon wich form, 1 thok,
the iinet of bi 7.

He all, by way of anawer to it,
ante, Wiki may Wink, beeapeesed woolen
A ma, he np can ev now ny manera
which he has not biowelf observed, unless be eat
Know that irs connected by “the relation of cause
and effec,” with some fact which he Aas observed
‘Aad no tea cua ever know thal any two facts ane
connected by hn retin, exept by te ep af Ba

etperemca. In other words, if
Toe EA, which [ buve aot myeelfobeerred,
experience must give me some foundation
30 beck that A it connected with some
fies 8, which Thave ceerved.” And the only Rnd
experience which can give me sny found-
Serkan tele. Hoke Eoaks ws


follows: 1 must, he yp have found /ee rN
“onstantly coojoined™ in the past with facts fhe
Bi Thin whot he says) bor we maxon ft,


150 ‘HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


hie words too strictly. 11 may, for instance,
Enow die Ais proabty fact, even where the
conjanctoa of fcr ike with faca Eke B baa not
foce quity Constant, Or instead of observing facts
ike A'conjoined with facts like B, 1 may have ob-
terved a whole series of conpuntions™fortaeanoe,
between A and C, C and D, D and E, aod E and
Brand such a series, however long, will do quite a
‘wallto ctablish a causal connectiQa between A and
B, as if | had dicectly observed conjunctions be-
tween A and B themselves. Such modifications ap.
Huge wo T tink, eras alow Buy
ving for them is principle im { think, goite
tlear, cam, he holds never know any fast what:
Sher which Mave oot ‘ayeelf observed, unless 1
hi observed similar facts in the past and have
observed that they were conjoined” (drecly ot
{ndirecly) wich fae” erilay to tome fact whieh
do now observe or remember. In this sense, be
holds, aif our knowledge of facts, beyond the reach
of owe own observation, is founded on experience,
‘This & Home's primary principle. But what
wonsequences does: he think will follow from it, ax
to the kind of facts, beyond our own observation,
which we can know? We muy, I think, dist ‘ish
ee didfereot views a8 to its consequahees,
wich be suggests ia deren pars of his werk
+ In the first where be is specially ony
in cplining primary penile cra
teewe to eeppoes thee al propeaions oft
‘which we assure most uaiversally in everyday life,
may be founded on experience in the sense requited.
He supposes that we bave this foundation Io ex.
rience for such belicfs us that ‘‘a stone will fall, or
re burn”; that Julius Cesar was murdered; that
He sco ew ooo, taal men re tial
Hs speaks ry iy gaye did not merely render
fa probable, but actually proved them 15


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 158


be true, The “arguments from experience” in
BSE Tie wren fie geet’
for doubt or opposition.” "The only kinds of belief,
oleh he deGotely mentions ey we founded ot
peperienn, ore perstitions” on the one

EER and coruin reltoun cal ponophial betel
on the other, He seems to suppose that a few (@
very few) religious beliefs may, perhaps, be founded
fom experience. But as regards moat of the specific
doctrines of Christianity, for example, he seems to
be clear that they are cot to founded The belief
Jn miracles is not founded on experieace ; nor is the
philosophical belie that every event ix cansed by
the direct volition of the Deity. In shor, it would
‘seem, that in this doctrine that our knowledge of
unobserved facts is confined to such as are “founded


eater
See dae aat amerted in books “of divisty or
Tehool metaphysica” because such assertions have
10 fouadation ia experience.

"This, [ thiok, wan cleatly one of Hume's views,
He meant to fix the limits of our knowledge a
oi which wal te on religious proportions
tad pret many pilrophial oes, a incepable of

bring Known; but which would sactade al the other
nit of propankions, stich ae ox, volver

‘commonsense, ax capable of bein
Biota Aud be uhogghe te of as omits
fact beyond the reach of our personal observation
fare concerned, this point coincided with that at
trbich the possibiley of “foundation on experience"
enc,


158 HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


But, if we turn to another part of his work, we
find a very different view . In 8 quite
dintioct section of both his books, be investigates
the belief which we entertain concerning the
existence of “extecval objects” And he distin.
usher ope difrens hinds of belle which may by
boll ca, ie bec, = Alo at all mankind, ‘und
ers themselves, greatest

Geirives™ belege, be sayn that “ihe very thioge
they feel and sce” ary external objects, in the sense
that they continue to exist, even when we cease to
feel or see them. Philosophers, on the other hand,
Ihave been led to cejeet thie opinion and to suppare
(when they reflect) that what we actually perceive
the sendes never exlats except when we perceive

i but that there are other external objects, which
do exist independently of us, and which eausr us to
perce tint we do perceive Hume inveniguies
‘of these opinions, ot great length in’ the
‘Freatis, xsd wouch more briefly in the Enguiry,
‘and comes to the conclusion, in both books, that
‘nsither of them can be ‘founded on experience,”
fp the sense he bas defined. "Au regards the frst of


nj
wwe do perceive, which ex Aypotheri, wo cannot bave
done, i never do dirsetly observe any


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 153


Hume, therefore, concludes, in this part of his
‘work, that wo cannot kaow of the existence of an
“external object” whatever. though in
Daly ef a spt the pencil by whch BE
iy of mataraad obj rine ‘
ities to prove that we cancat know these most, T
think, prove equally well chat we canst know any
“external object " whatever—not even the existence
of any eer tuman mind His engument ns We
‘annot directly observe any object whatever, exc
such exist only when’ we observe, them;
‘cannot, therefore, observe any "constant ‘Cone
junctions” except between objects of this kiod : and
ce we can have oo foundation in experience for
any proposition which asserts the existence of any
‘ether kind of object, and cannot, therefore, know
tany auch proposition to be trae. And this argument
rust plainly apply to all the (celings, thoughts and
[perceptions of other rea just as auch as to material
Objecta. I ean never kaow that any perception of
ine, oF anything which 1 do observe, mest have
‘been caused by any other man, because T enn never
directly observe a “constant coojunction " between
any other roan's thoughts o¢ feelings or intentions
i directly observe : 1 cannot,


beside myself ever exited The view, therefore,
which Hume a in chia part of bis work,
flatly cootradicts the view which be at Sret seemed
to hold, He cow says we camax know that » stone
vwill fa, that Gre will burs, or the sun will rae
tomorrow. Allttat I can polly know, sesoning


to bis preseot principles, is “ee
Gal, shall feel the fire tara, aball see the son rise
‘tomorrow. I cannot even keow that any other
toon wil sc these thegs: for 1 cannot know that
any other men exist. For the same reason,


ii


184 HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


know that Julius Casar was murdered, or that all
men are imortal, For” these are propositions
merting “external” facts—facts which don't exist
aly at the moment when I observe them; and,
‘cording to his present doctrine, 1 cannot possibly
know any such propotition ta be true. No man, in
short can know any proposition about “matters of
fact to be teue, except such ax merely assert some-
thing about Ais ows states of mind, past, present or
fuure—about these or about what Ae Aimtelf bas
directly observed, is observing, or will observe,
Here, therefore, we have a very dilferent view
suggested, as to the limits of buman knowledge.
‘Ast even this i aot all." ‘There is yet third view,
inconsistent with both of these, which Hume
3 in somme parts of his work.
far as we have yet seen, be has not ia any
‘way contradicted his original supposition that
an know some matters of fact, which we have never
‘ourselves observed. In the second theory, which I
ave just stated, fe does not call in question the
view that [ can know all such matters of fact as I
Know to be causally connected with facts which I
ave observed, nor the view chat I can koow some
Gaeta to be thos causally connected, All that be
has done is to question whether 1 can know any
‘ziernal fact to be causally connected with anything
which 1 observe; he would still allow that 1 may
glee tna cht en os of 2 a
ast states, w we ny are ly
connected ‘with those which I cow observe or
remeonber ; and that 1 may know therefore, ia some
anes, wha {shall experience inthe fore, or have
experienced in the past but bave now forgotten.
‘But to some parts of his work ke does sccm to
(question whether any mac can know even as auoch
as this: he seems to question whether we can ever
‘know any fact whatever to be causally connected.


‘HUME’S PHILOSOPHY 155


with any other fact. For, after laying it down, as
‘we saw above, that we cannot know any fact. A, to
bbe causally connected with another, B, unless we
hhave expetienced in the past a coeatant conjunction
‘between facts like A and facts like B, he goes on
to ask what foundation we have for the conclusion
thar A and B are causally connected, even when we
dave in the past experienced a constant conjunction
Seon tue He potas oo dentin: be erties
‘Ahas been constantly conjoined with B in the past,
i doea not follow that it ever will be s0 again. It
does not follow, therefore, that the two really are
ausilly connected io Uhe sense that, when the one
‘the other séaays will occur alka. And he

for this and other reasons, that ao
‘argument’ can assure us that, beceuse they bave
been “canmantly ‘conjoined ic the past therefore
they really are causally connected, What, then, he
asks, is the foundation for such an inferenoe ?
Customs, be conclodes, is the only foundation. It is
nothing bat custom which induces us to believe that,
‘because two facts have been constantly conjoined
fon many occasions, therefore they will be 20 00 all
sccasions. We have, therefore, oo better foundation
than custom for any conclusion whatever as to facts
which we have not observed. And can we be said


observed, never says that we can't,
bbeen constantly interpreted as if the conclusion that
‘we can’t really know any one fact to be causally
connected with any other, did follow from this
doctrine of his And chere fs think ceranly
such excuse for this interpretation in the tone in
which he speaks, He does seem to suggest that a
Relief which is mersty founded on antom, can
scarcely be oe which we deow to be true. ‘And,
indeed, be owes himself tbat, when he considers


156 HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


tat this i our only foundation for any such belief
be in sometimes tetapted to doubt whether we do
know any fact whatever, except those which we
directly observe. He does, therefore, at least
sugren the, view chat every man, owledge a
confined to thore facts, which he in direct!

‘obeerving at the moment, ot which he has observ

in the pant, and oow remembers
‘We see, then, that Hume suggests, at least,
hres entirely different views as to the consequences
Of bis original doctrine. His original doctrine wa
tha, an regards matters of fact beyond the] reach of
‘our owa actual observation, the knowledge of each
of us is strictly limited to thove for which we have
‘basis in our own experience. "And bis Srat vi
4a tothe consequences of this doctrine was that i
OW us t0 be incapable of knowing a

religious and : tions, which
by no mean denis cur apaiy towing the at
miajority of faces beyond our own observation, whi
we all common that we know, His
other band, i that i cts of at
ity of our knowing the vast majority
ce he inglica that we cantor bard
prperience for asserting any external
ver—any fact, that ia, except facia to
Fatog Wo our owe nccal pant end Aare Searvations,
‘And his third view is more sceptical stil, since it
‘tuggests thot we cannot really know any fact whst-
ver, beyond the reach of our present observation
oF iemory, even where we Aaw a basin in ex-
perlence for sach a fact: it suggests that experience
fannot ever let us Asow that any r¥o things are
‘eussally connected, and therefore that it cannot
ig oF Are of any fcr based on this r-


‘What are we to think of these three views, and


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 157


of be origzal doc from which Hume sen 19
fair tek
‘As regards the last two views, it may peshape be.
thought that they ere too sbeird to dascrve any
terioum consideration. Te lo tn fact, abward t0
tuest that Ido not know any external facta what
‘ever; that I do not know, for instance, even that
there are any mea bevide myself. And Fume
Heel, might seem, dows not werously expect of
trah uc to ange these rlewn He pole ot eich
regard to all such excessively sceptical opi
‘we cannot continue to believe them for long together
wibet, at leant, we cannot, for long togetier, veld
ieler shige fay Ineostest pean, The
4 Te pl
Bhat uo gan lows ofthe exiience of cy cones
man or Of any material object ; but at other times be
wwill inevitably believe, as we all do, that be doce
know of the ace of this man and of that, and
even of this and chat material object. ‘There can,
‘therefore, be no question, of making all our belie
Conant wit su views au this of oeverbelcw
taythlag that isinconsiscent with them, And it may,
therefore, pow useless to diacoss them. But in fact,
it by a0 smeans follows that, because we are not able
to adhere conaiatently toa given view, therefore that
View ia fale ; nor does ke follow that we may not
rely believe I, whenever wo are philceopbling


the ‘the moment it
Seven fore we coy be freed to Emcratin


ty hey
Uther times.” Even Hume, (think, Goer sincerely
‘wht persuade us that we cannot know of the
ccxinence of external materal objects —tbat i fs
f philesopklc truth, which we oozit, if we can, 29
fotg as we are philosophising, to believe. Muay


158 HUME’S PHILOSOPHY


people, ‘think, are oar tems in bord
‘momeats, to believe 8 a
Hoos ti efi ie, wor wile cio femder


setously what argomests can
tech vides’ le itngrh nile w comer whether

are views which we ought to hold ax philo-

ical opinions, even if t be quite certain that we
ial never be ele to. make the views which we
entertain at otber times consistent with them, And
eis the more word wails, because the querioa
ow we can prove or disprove such extreme Views
‘aa these, has a bearing oc the question how we
ran, in any case whatever, prove or disprove that
Te & rely dows at we soppme crcves to


fiat anguments, then, are here fer of agnost
the exzeme view that no can cam koow any ex:
tereal fact whatever; and the still more extreme
view that no man can koow any catter of (act
‘whatever, except those which he is directly observing
4 the moment, or has observed in the past and now
remembers?
Ts may be pointed out, in the first place, that, If
views are true, then at least po man can
pomibly know them to be so. What these views
Aasert f that T canaot know any external fact what-
ter It flows therefore, tba cance know that
are any other meo, beside mysel, and that
they we ike’ me ith respere Rey pheno
‘tbo asserts postivey that other ones equal me
Timelf ave incapable of kooming say exe
i that very ateron Tinsel, net
1 ng i be ‘Roow 2 great couny farts
‘knowledge of other men. No one, chere-
irae ‘be entitled to assert positively that buman
nowledge i Tite io this way, since, in essing
it positively, be is implying that bis own knowledge
la not 90 limited. Te cannot be proper, even in our


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 159
Bilowopbic moments to take up sch an attioude an


No one, therefore an know geil that men
in general, are inca extern:
EE sir alioophs we cacnat tne remains
potuible that the view should be a truc one. Nay,
fare, t romaine poasble that man should no
capable of knowing any exter
¥ there are any other mca whow:
facultiea are only similar to his own, they also must
be incapable of knowing any. ‘The angument just
wed obrnuly dows ot spp again wich» postion
4s this. Te only applies against the position
tien in general post afEncy ae inameil of knowing


Sint [oer eh pays ped
ia oe Se


ay, oF sgunat the pon th

oak fo the one case, and then
Meche ce) tindar io Whe poibopher's th
‘ertainly would be in it. 1 20 not contradict my:
by egg Positively thet 7 know no external
facts, do contradict myself if ¥ maiatain
that | a any one among other me, and that 20
man kuows any facts. So far, then, as
Hume merely maintsins tbat As is incapable of
owing any external fats, and that there moy be

wen like bi in this the angument just

tel nce val agar We poe an ay
conclusive arguments be foond agai

pets eat cnt el 0 pea mn


=


ecortain sense, be quite i of di So
much must be granted to feck in-
Del to bold "Avy wld crgescor whch can
EX Erougte apie W oust be Se name oc

principis: it mast beg the question at issue,
row i the seep prove fo tino thet he docs
fenow any extoral facts? Ho ean oaly do it by
bringing forward some instance of an external fact,


tbo HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


which be does koow; and, in assuming that he does
Know tis oe. be is of ecu, | Teguing te question,
is therefore quite im Say one to,
in con atic stone of the term, tba be Soct eng
any external facts, 1 Prove that Ido, by
asstoming that in some ference, { aecally
do knoe one. That ia 2 my, the sailed proot
smo amape the ray ing which 1 pretend
ges wwe do know external
Bee in i ine "ci a tt doko em
the sceptic can, fect internal con-
aistency, deny that be does koow any. But it ean,
Tink, be shown that be bas no reason for denying
it And in particular ic may, T think, be easily seen
that the arguments which Hume uses in favoor of
sia pela tars ng sono re
fo begia with, bis arguments, io both causes,
depend won the two og assumptions (1) cat
‘WE cannot know any fact, which we have sot ob.
seeved, unless we know it to be causally connected
‘with come fact which we have observed, and (2}
that we bave no reasoe for assuming any causal
gonnection, except where we bave experienced some
instances of conjunction between the two facts
eonnected. And both of these astumptions may, of
course, be denied. It is just ax easy 40 deny thems,
nto deoy that Ido koow any exteraal faci ‘And,
3 hear two asuumptions it rally lead e the
sencuslon that 1 cannot know soy. ft woul 1
think, be proper to deoy them: we might faicly
ipo tn et ey ldo Ty shan ew
tonne iproving tars But is ac 1 tick i
o not lead to it
arcsec bet of dh Home's moat mceptical
eo (the argement mbich be meal soggessh
argument suggests that, since our oly ramon
‘be caumally connected is
SESE OS Dead coom consandy conjoced te


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 164


Eat ami since does uot Solow Grom the fact
are ‘eet omcy, tin
Ty alooys wil be so, eera ne canaat
that they always will be so, and bence cannot
‘that they are causally connected But ob-
‘the conclusion does not follow. We must,
roth preity ro hee tak
ings ‘no rater bow
fan i fee oct wc oll tat they tears
eanjoined. ‘But it by So means follows from this
eligi: ‘not émow thet, as a matter of fact,
ses two thingy are onjoied ecu often,
joined, We may
te darw many teen ebb So oe ical ae
From auythiog else which we koow. © An
this case, we may 2xom that cwo things are comally
connec aku tia does nt Bplay ‘alow
rom our past experience, noc yet fiom Anyi
else that we know. “Ang, 23 for the contention thst
‘our belief in cautal connections ts merely based oo
Caiiom, we tay, indeed, aden that cuttom would
fnot be a sufficient vessom for concluding the belief
to be true, But the mere fact {if it be a fact) that
the belief is only caused by custom, is also oo
feufécioot reseon for concloding that we can not
know it 10 be tree. Costom muay produce bellals,
which we do know to be tue even though it be
Admitted that it does noe asceszarily produce thems,
‘Aad s for Hume's argument to prove that we
can never know any external object to be exam
reese wi ota cheer,
think, ol
this, he hag, ashe recognises,
Beak of to tein, “He Bef
diaprove what be welgar”theory—the
hat we cod Know che very things witch we
tes oF feel to be external : that is to say,


‘ean know, that these very things exist at times when,


aggTyeee


x62 HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


TS Sigumenas tre Obvculy nese” Bot we
nia are ol ive. But wo
seed ‘t say co consider them, beonuse in order
that we cannot know any exteroal objects,
en lao co daprove wat he cals he plonopis
the theory that we cen ‘oow “so

Sheree sant by ene ec
ies ‘theory fal hi poof et we ats
© 1 we can
‘ot kiow any external also fails; and 1 think
Wn fs easy 10 see that his doce fi Tt
amounts “merely to thi t we cannot, ef
%, ever observe these supposed external
pects, and therefore cannot observe them to be
constantly conjoined with any objects which we do
haere, But what follows from cis? His own
about the knowiedge of causal connection is
not thet ig order to know A to be the cause of B,
we must have observed A itself to be conjoined
but coly that we must bave observed
A to be constantly conjoined with
cblects fie B. And what isto prevent aa exitroal
‘object from being dike some object which we have


formerly observed? T have frequently
observed 0 fact dike A to be conjoined with a fact
kilx B: aod suppose I now observe B, on an,


eran when Ido oot dere anything Uke A
There is no reasoo, on Hume's prina

should not conclude that A does hae on te
‘occasion, even though { do uot observe it; apd that
i el, ak exon objet lof
sours, die fom any object which I have. eer
observed, in respect of the simple fact that it is mas
observed by me, whereas they were There la,
therefore, this one respect ie which it must be untihe
‘anything which I have ever observed But Hume
has never said anything to show tbat onlikeness in
this single respect is sufficient to invalidate the


HUME's PHILOSOPHY 163


quite well be ke objects which
T have cbserved in all ‘ser respec and’ this
of Hheoeas may, according 60 his principl
tbat quite subfclent to juuilly us ta conoding
fexistecee, “In shor, Shen Hume argued that we
‘cannot poasibly learn by ae of the existence
of any extertal cbjecty be ia] Chink, pai
Committing the fallacy of supposing that, Leeann
Se comet ar bythe, have ever =y
‘object which actually is “external,” therefore we
‘Sin never hove observed any objets de an extereal
SE iat aay emer tare nero oes
em it all respects except the single be
these have been observed whereas the others have
aie And even slew deges of iene an te
would ote Guic sucient
Yo juaify an ioltceace of canal connection,
fume does not, therefore, bring forward any
arguments at all sufficient to prove either that he
cannot know any one object to be causally connected
‘with any other or thot he cannot know any external
Bes, Rod Indeed Ti lan ink no ee
ve. argumese advanced to
fave of theme prin Te wold sivas be
as easy oo deey the argument as 0 de
ter do know external facta We. muy, theredore,
each one of us, safely conclude that we do know
trternal facta and, ifwe do, nen there is no reasoe
‘why we sould not alo Know that ether men do
The wane, There x 20 reason why we should 256
in thls respece, make ocr piloogphical opinions
aoe with what we necessarily believe at other
ie, There ty T should not com-
ast thet ze some exteroal
fac, although [ canact prove the estertion except
by sioply aumuming thet I'do. Tam, in fact, an
certain of this am of anything ; and as reasonably
certain of it, But just as I am certain that I do


164 HUME'S PHILOSOPHY


fenow some external facts 29 T am aloo certala that
there are others which 1 do not know. And the
ation remaine: Does the lice Betwoen the two
Hit wbere Hurme says it alla? Ie it true that the
only exieroal facts 1 know are facts for which I ave
st'busis lo my own experience? And that { cantor
Slerradon asl iewary, excep those BE
ows r except
wh Theva sbeis?

"This, it seems to me, fs the most serious question
hich “Hume raises. “And ic shoud be obvorved
hat bis own attitude towards :
from bin attitude toward the ce
setae jit cn coniering "Thee snpeal
Views he did not expect or wish unto accept, encept
ia philowphie momenta. He. declares” that we
taahot, in ordinary le, avoid believing things which
are inconsistent with them ; and, in so declarag, he,
of coures, implies Incidentally that they are false:
ince be implies that he Dizgel has great deal of
imnowledge f2 fo what we can and cannot belive fo
crdiaery' Hie, But, an regards the view thet out
Knowledge of mater of fact beyood our ows
observation Is entirely conlined 10 such a8 ane
fainded oo experience, be never suggests that itis

ble that all our beliefs should be consistent

this view, sad be does sccm to. think ft
Emincally dentable wat ‘they ‘should be. He
fledarea that any eccerton with regard. 10 such
imatters, which fs oot founded 0 experience, can be
facing but “opbiszy and Mhasion™ ; and chat all
books hich are composed of such assertions should
be “committed to the flames” He seems, there-
fore, to think that here we really have a teat
which we may determine what we ahoold or shoul
Bot believe, on all occasions: any view on nich
tatters, for which we have oo foundation ia
expetionce, ss view which we cannot know to be


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 365


even probably true, and which we should neser
‘fwe can help it Is there any justification
for thd strong view
Tc is, of course, abstractly possible that we do
really know, withont the belp of experience, somo
maners of fact, which we never have observed.
Jost aa we kaow matters. of fact, which we have
DDbacrved, without the need of any further evidenos,
tnd just ‘as we know, for instance, that a+2=4,
without the need of any proof, it {a possible tbat we
may Kom, drctly and immediately, without, che
‘need of an in experience, some facts w}
tre never have observed” ‘This ix certainly pomsible,
fm the same sense in which itis possible that T do not
really know any external fact: no conclasive disproof
can be brought aginst either position We must
make assumptions as to what facts we do knaw and
do not know, before we cen proceed to discuss
whether oc not all of the former are based on
eaperience; and sone of these assumptions can, in


the Tast resort, be ively proved. We mas
offer one of them in ‘another but it wi
always be possible to the ose which we offer


i prook, | But ‘there are, in fact, outs el of
ings which we universally assume that we do know
for Os aot know, jut as we assume that we do know
ome extemal facts; and if among all the this
hich we know as certainly as this, there
turn out to be none for which we have no basis in
experience, Hume's view would { think, be as fully
proved alts capable of being. The question is:
it be proved in this sease? Among all the
facto beyond oar own observation, which we koow
‘most certainly, are there any which are certainly not
based upon experience? For my part 1 confeam
Trcannot feel cersain what is the righ answer to this
‘question : I cannot tell whether Hume was tight of
‘wrong. But if be wax wroog—if there are any


166 HUME’S PHILOSOPHY


rmattern of fact, beyood our own observation, which
e,haom frei, ad whch pet we Lae ocy
ind immediately, without in experience,
dre are | thing, faced with an emfoentl interesting
problem, Fort ia { think, as certain a9 anythi
can be tat there are some Kinds of facts with regs
$0 which Hume was right—dhat there are some
El of fics which wetcaowot know witout the
ridene of experience, could not know, for
fnstance, without some such evidence, such a
thet jellus Cosar'was mardered, "For such 0 fat
T most, in the fret instance, have the evidenoe of
other persons; and if Iam to know that thie
ridence is umtworhy, 1 must have rome grouid
rience itto beso, There are,
therclore, some inks of fats which we cannot
know witout the evidence of experience and
observation. And if ic is to be maintained that
there are others, which we can Know without aay
such evidence, i ought to be pointed out exactly
what kind of facts these are, and in what respects
differ feor those which we cannot
cut the hep of experience Hume. given i
jer division of the kinds of propositions wl
we'can know to be tron ‘Toere are, ist of all,
tome, propositions which assert “relations of
Sdean "| there are, "secoadly, ions which
aumert, matters of fact" whick we ogreelves are
ually abuerving, or have observed nd, cow
; and there are, thirdly, ion
which asert " maters of face” -woich we, bave
Dover actually observed, but for believing ia which
‘we have some foundation in our past observations,
Ai i | think craig hat soe propositions
‘we know 06 as we know anything,
do belong to cach of these cree classes. I koom,
foc instance, that twice two are four; I know by
direct observation that Iam now seeing these words,


HUME'S PHILOSOPHY 167


that [am writiog, and by suecnory that thin after-
fooe U saw St. Peat and I know also that fullue
icrenperence or is bebet though T dot meat
la experience for tie belie, 1 id not
sists the ure.” De sey of thwe propoaons,
hick we know as certainly as we koow 1
Tel Wks, aut belong to ether of these thee classes?
Me we adda fourth clo consisting of proportions
which resemble the two lex, in respect of the fact
that they do assert “eters of fect” but which
Alifer feet them, fa that we know them ocither by
direct observation nor by memory, not yet as 6
Fenult ‘of previout obstcvations’ There, may,
[prtene, bene a fur dees bus if there
-u itiok eminent enable, cet sould te
pointed cut exactly wat propostions they are whic
Ire do know in tha way: ane tin, oo far as 1hn0w,
baa never yet been done, at ail cleady, by any
ilonopber,


THE STATUS OF SBNSE-DATA


‘Tren term “‘sense-data” jn ambiguoos; and chere-
fore I think I hod better begin by trying to explain
what the class of entities is whose status 1 propove
to discuss

‘There are several different classes, of mental
eveat, all of which, owing tw their intriasle
tetemblance to one another in certain respects, may,
in a wide sense, be called “sensory experiences,”
although only some among them would usually be
called “sensations.” ‘There are (1) those events,
appeing in our tins wale we are awake, which
cansist in che experiencing of coe of thove enti
which are usually called “images,” in the aarrowert
sense of the tnrm. | Bveryloty distinguishes these
‘events from sensations proper; and yet 7
nits that “images” “intrescaly resemble the
fntities which are experienced in sensations propet
Snaowe very important respect. ‘There are (2) We
sensory experiences we bave ia dreama, some of
which would certainly be said to be experiences of
iroages, while others might be suid to be seatations,
‘There are (3) hallucinations, amd certain classes
of ssory sensory There are (4)
Kevieg of sheriaagen® bet wich peyccogis

aving of images,” but which psychologists
ow cay ought rather to be called “‘aiter-sensations."
‘And there ‘are, finally, (5) that clase of sensory
experiences, which are’immensely commoner than
‘any of the above, and which may be called seasations
proper, if we ogtce to use this term in such a way
‘at fo exclude experiences of my ret four ports.


THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA ity


Every event, of any one of these five classes,
comiaa in the fact that an entity, of some
Kod or thes, & eperinged. |The ny which i

‘of many diferent kinds; #
‘may, for jostance, be a patch of colour, o¢ a sound,
Or a’ umell, oF a taste, etc j or it may be an Image
of & patch of colour, an image of a sound, wn Image
of m nmnell, an image of a taste, etc. But, what.
‘ever be ita nature, the entity which t experienced
fat ll ena be dntogued fom the fc ot
ON ie cons in being experienced nee
saying that it is "we jean that it bap
a rehtion ofa coin Med to shin ce, We
‘ean, therefore, speak not experiences of theae
Eve kinds, bus also of the’ estes which ore ar
Perionrd in experiences inds ; and
fntity which is experienced ee euch an experience
ig never dental with the experience which con
in its being experienced. But we can
Soh ocly of it cables ich are eapeeooes
experiences of this Lind but also of the sort
entities which are experienced ia experiences of thia
kkind ; and these two classes may again be different.
For a patch of colour, even if tt were not actually
experienced, would be a0 entity of the same sor? a
some wich are experienced in experieoces of thia
kind: and there is no contradiction in supposing
that there are patches of colour, which yet are pot
nperenced; since by calling thing w patch of
colour we merely make statement about ita in.
trinale quality, and in no way assert that it bax to
anything eae any of the relations wbich cy be
‘meant by mying that it is experienced In speaking,
Gerelare, of the sort of atten which "are. ex!
perienced in experiences of the five kinds T bove
mentioned, we do not asceasarily confine oursclvea
to those which actually ars experienced fo. some
auch experience: we leave it an open question


170 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


whether the two classes are identical or not. And
the claas of entitles, whose stazus 2 wish to discus
‘consists ly of all those, whether experienced
(0 not, which are of the some sort ax those which Bre
in experiences of these five kinds.
‘intend co call this class of entities the class of
semsiblar; 00 that the question Tum to discuss can
be caprewed in the form: What tthe attun of
sensible? Ad cost be remenbered the ages
aiter-images are just as much sensible” in
my sense of the term, a8 the entities which are
experienced in sensations proper ; and 0, tog, are
any patches of colour, or sounds, or smelly etc, (if
such there be), which are not experienced at all
Tn speaking of sensibles as the sort of entities
which are experienced in sensory experiences T
seem to imp that all the entice which are ox:
fommon characteristic other thea that which
consists in their being so experienced. And I
cannot help thinking that this is the case, in spite
Of the fact that it is difficult to see what fotrinsic
character can be shared in common by entities «0
different from one another as are patches of
‘colour, sounds, smells, tastes, etc. For, so far as |
‘an see, some non-sensory experiences may be ex-
‘actly similar to sensory ones in all intrinsic rex
crap et what be experienced in them is dierent
in kind from what is experienced in any senvory ex-
patance: che ration meant by saying that in them.
fcething # e=priened may be exactly the sume in
bend, and’ wo may the expericat. And, if this be 60, it
seems to compel unto adic thatthe dstinton, be,
‘tween vensory aad non-sensory experiences is derived
Bom that betweeo senaibles and noovsenaies and
0¢ vice versd. Iam icclined, therefore, to thine that
all sensibles, ia spite of the great differences between
‘them, have some common intrinsic property, which we


THE STATUS OF SENSEDATA 71


recognise, but which is umanalysable ; and that, when
‘we call an experience sensory, what we cwean 9 nat
cooly tbat in it something” is experienced in a
particular way, but also that this something has
this unanalysable property. If this. be 99, the
Ultimate definition of “sensibles ” would be mere
cates which ave thi uranalpasbie


property. je
{t seems to me that the term “‘sense-data” in
often used, and may be correctly used, simply ap
synonym for “ seasibles”; and everybody, 1 chink,
‘would expect me, io discussing the matut of sense:
ata, to discuss, among other things, the question

ther there are any sensibles which ere not
give.” tis rue that the etymology of the term
“ wenwe-data "ages that nothing abou be called
2 aense-datum, but what a given; 20 that to talke
of a congiven sense-datum would be a contradiction
la terms, But, of course, etymology ix no safe
{Buide either as to the actual or the correct se of
ferma; and it seems to me that the term “sense-
ata” is often, and quite properly, used merely for
‘Me sort of eatities thas are gives io sense, and oot
in any way limited to those which are actually
given Bur though 1 chiok I might thus have
fred “sento-data”. quite comectly 3


misled by etymologies, so many, fn fact are
ta” is sometimes
Uimited in yet another way, viz, to the sort of
sensibles which are experienced in sensations proper’;
40 thet ja thia sense “images” would eat be “sease-
data." For both these reasons, 1 think it is
bags better to drop the tem “‘sense-data*
altogether, and to speak oaly of “ seosibles ”
discossion of the status of seasibles will be
divided into two parts T shell Erst consider how,


171 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


tm cenain regpecta, they are related to oor mind
and then I shall consider how, in certain respects,
they are related to physical objects.
i)
¢) We can, I think, distinguish pretty clearly
a Gu ono Ried of een Wek slut of a
the kinds I bave mentioned, do undoubtedly some-
times bave to our minds,
T'do now sce certain blackish marks on a whitish
‘and I hear certaio sounds which I attribute
4o the ticking of my clock. In both casas J have
to certain sensibles—certain blackish marks, In the
‘ge case, and certain sounds, in the other—a kind of
relation with which we are all perfectly familiar, and,
mbich may be expreased, fo the one case, by saying
that I actually sae the roars, and ia the other, by say-
ing thas I actually sear the sounds, It veems to une
im evi hth rolaton the marks 98 |
express by sayin ‘ee ther, is not differeat
{nvkind {ors the relation to. the sounds which T
express by saying that 1 Acar them. “*Socing”
acd “bearing,” when thus used as memes for a
relation which we may have to sensibles, are not
ames for different relations, but merely express
the fact that, in the one case, the kiod of sensible
‘to wbich I have a certain kind of relation 1s a patch,
in the other case, the kind of seaaible
‘the same kind of relation isa sound,
And similarly when. U say that | feel warm or smell
‘a tmell these dierent verba do not express the
fact that T bave a differeat Kind of relation to the
seaaibles concerned, but only that | have the some
lod of relation to a diderect kind of sensible, Even
when I call up visual image of a sensible [ saw
yesterday, oF aa auditory image of a sound I heard
TIay J eto tose images exaciy the same
of relation which I have to the patches of


‘THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 173


colour T now see and which I had yesterday to
‘those { saw then.

‘But this kind of relation, which I sometimes bave
to rensibies of all sons of different kinda, images
well ax cers, ia evidently quite diferent jo Kind
Molen nc ong at ths Back ake T may
sensibies. a thin Black
fare sway sy head cr ose oy eyen and ten 2
longer actually ue the mark I mw just now. 1 may,
indeed, have (I myself actually do have at th
moment) a visual smags of the mark before my
saiod:: and to this ieage I do now bare exactly tho
samo kind of relation which T hed just now to the
mark itself, But the is not identical with
the mark of which it fs an ‘and to the mark
‘taelf i i quite certain that [ Fave sof now got the
tame kind of relation ax I bad jast cow, when I was
actually seeing it, And yet [ certainly may wow
ave tint sar, Rac! = nd of retin, wach
ay be expressed by saying that I am thinking
ficremalberng 2 Teak nee wae juopmints
about d diel the very sensible which 1d ace
just now and am no Joager seeing : as, for instance,
that I did then sce ic and that i was diflecent from
the Image of it which I am now seeing. It ix
therefore, quite certain that there ls most Im
portant diference between the relation I have to «
fensible when { am actually seeing or hearing. is
land agy relation (for there may be several) whi
may have to the same seosible when I am only
thiakiog of or remembering it And I want 10
‘express this diferecee by using a particular term
(or the former relation. 1 shall express thin re-
lation, which t certainly do have to a seosible when
Vactually ace or hear ft, sod most certainly do not
have to it, when I coly think of or remember it, by
saying that there is ia my mind a direct appre
fension of iT have expresely chosen this term


174 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA
Decause, so far 28.1 know, it bas oot been used


ve been
ity. People sometimes, 2a dau

camer forthe Kind of elation
you caa aever be sure,
‘eatisy is said to be “given” or presented *
Oe perceived” that what is meant le simply aod
‘solely that it bas to someone tbat relation which
fenekiies do undocbeedly have to me whea T
otwally see or hear them, and which they do mot
tere to me when I only think of or remember
ca

T have used the rather awkward expresion
“There is in my mind a direct apprehension of
this black marke because i want to insist that


seem to me to


‘THE STATUS OF SENSEDATA 173


relation which unites all those acts of direct appre-
hhension which are mine, and which is what we
mean to say that they bave to one avother when
we aay they are al} mine, really does consist in
the fact that one and the sme entity is mat
directly apprebends In eack of them : ia which case
this entity could properly be called "mq" and it
would be true (0 say that. when I sor this black
math 7 directly it, But itis also quite
bl (ood this Seem to me to be the view wl


commonest amor ris that the entit
Bate ginal a tee ag dt
apprehension which are mine, is oer


it in every different act; and that wit
‘meno by calling all these different acts mine is
cither merely that they have some kind of relation
to one anather oc that they all have a common


relation to some other entity, exiernal two them,
which may or vot be something which
deserves 19 be “me” Qa any such view,


‘what J assect to be true of this black mark, whea 1
{ay that itis seen by me, would not be sinoply that
ie in directly 3 ‘by ee, but something
more complex in which, besides direce ion,
dome other quite different relation was also iavaled.
T shal be amertig ft (1) ht be Black mak
is being dizectly apprehended by tomething, and (2)
ther act of ives apprebenfon ha oS
elie, exteroal to ie, a quite different relation, whi
fn what eoakes it an act of mins. T do not know
Tow to decide between these views, and that is why
T wished to explain that the fusdamental relatioa
stich i sal dee apprehension, iy ne
‘which quite possibly never ween, me
‘aay sensible. But, once this has been explained, 1
AM oa harm can rea om wing the expreton
iectly apprehend A as a synonym for “
dicect apprehension of A occurs in my mind” And


176 THE STATUs OF SENSE-DATA
fn future 1 shall so speak, because it ix much more


exaveniest.

‘The only ether pot, which seems to me to need
explanation, in make ic quite clear what
the relation I call “direct apprehension” is, con-
corns its relation to affextion; and as to this 1 muse
confeas I don't feel clear. In every case whore it is
quite clear to me that I am directly apprebendiog a
given entity, it seems also clear to rme thar 1 am,
ory am snadig pad Ht oouma we me

that what I moan by “direct apprehension”
may be simply identical with what is meant
“attention,” in one of the senses In which that
can be used. ‘That it can, at moat, oaly be
‘with one of the relations meant by attention acems
to me clear, becuuse { certainly can be sald to
asad, i ome snes other, 2 eno, which T
tum ot spprekending: I may, for instance,
Dink, with attention, of sensi, ble
yemterday, and em certaicly not seeing now. It
et ake ts as
biog and yet am nat directly e
oes contrition wens: sod this tact. eoce
rfficient to justify the use of the special term
ck poco Bot beter to may that I
am direc apprehending given thing and yo am
not attending to i ia any degree at all, i of ix not
SConteaditton in erm, {sds 1 don't fee dear

However thet may ‘be, one relation, in which
seotibles of all sorts do sometimes stand to our
aiods, fs the relation constituted by the fact that
we direcly apprehend them: or, to. speak more
‘accurately, by the fact that events which consist in
thelr being "directly aro se our
suinds, in the sense ia which to sey that an event in
our minds means merely that it is a mental act of
eurs—tbat it bas to our other mental acts that
elation (whatever it may be) which we mean by


‘THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 157


saying that they are all mental acts of tha same
individual And it is clear that to say of a sensible
that itis directly ‘by me, in ta say of it
something quit from what 1 say of a
‘mental act of mine, whea { say that this mental acti
fn oy mind: for voting is more cerain than that
aan act of direct 4; ‘or belief may be in my
blak widaut beep oct dre ‘spprebeaded by
me. "If thereform by sayiog that @ sensible Is
ime ae re ar, we onan merely tht
ly appreben ‘us, Wwe must recognise chat
we are, here using the phrases “in our minds” or
“ours” ja quite a different sense from that ia which
ture them when we talk of our mental acta bein
in our ainda” or“ oura” And. wiy I say this
because I think that these two relatioas are very
tobe eatin. When forlatanos, we say ofa given
ora or when
its sometimes meant, 1
ih mur a Ie is direcly apprehended, but
at tla in roy mind Yo. the neone in
=a ntl © ble, thin act of beet
‘i
Bus {2) i seems to me to be commonly held chet
Giber than that of beg ewlyepprebended by
er a appreber ‘ur
or that of being ‘of by us. This seems to
gu rb oben has eee aad
of ore “oub-
aun: ba


‘that, whe

wate rea ently i imodlatly eel
is subjective modification,

erly ey “and since

PEE tab view ‘wact to explain that 1
‘No reason whatever for chinking thet seasibles

ever are experienced by us in any other sense thaa
of being dirextly, tye


17) THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


‘Two kinds of argument, T thick, are sometioes
‘used to show tbat they are,
(a) It is a familiar fact that, when, for instance,
‘we are in a room with o ticking’ clock, we may seem
fuddealy to become aware of the ticks, whereas, 90
far ot we can el, we bal previouly not beard
them at all And it may be that in, theee
ceases, since the same kind of stimulus was acting on
‘our ears all the time, we must have experienced the
same kind of sensible sounds, although we did not
direc apprehend them.

jut T think most psychologists are now agreed
that this argument is quite worthless. There secm


to me to be two alternatives to the oon
lution drawn. It may, 1 think, possibly be the
case that we did di the ticks all the
time, but that we cannot remember that


wwe did, because the degree of attention (if
Tis which we beard hem wan ao sna Cour
ordinary life we sbould say that we did not attend
to shem a all Bot what tisk, is ech core

is that, ‘same stimulus was acting
0 ur ear fled to produce any mental effet
whatever, because our autection was otherwise


(5) It is said that worsetimes when we suddenly
become aware, say, of the eighth stroke of « striking
Glock, we can reevinder earflratrouen, although wt
teem to ourselves of to have directly’ apprebended
them. I cannot way that J bave ever noticed this ex:
paca impels, bo | bare 0 doubt set ito
onal seem to a
Since we can rerember tho caer sroken'we moat
hhave experienced them, though we did not directly

dhead them,

jut bere again, the does not seem to
we at all conclusive. I say, again, chat itis
posible that wo did direcly apprehend them, but


THE STATUS OF SENSEDATA 179


aly with a very slight degree of attention (if any)
Bente ea rouse age te thee
Be reason why we shoud aot be abe fo remeaiber
A thing, which we never experienced at

1h do not keow what acher arguments cat, be
tused to show tbat we sometimes anperionce sensibles
fa a sense quite other than that of directly appee-
ending them. But { do not ksow how to show
that we do not ; and since people whose judgment
T respect, seem to hold that we do, 1 sink it in
‘worth while to say something aa to what this sense
of experience” can be, in case it does occur.

1 have said thar sometimes when peole sy that
given entity is " experienced” they scem to tmean
hat fr belongs to some iolvidual, nthe tense ia
which my acts of belief tome. To say that
veniibles, were experi ‘me io this sense
‘would, therefore, be to say that they sometimes
hhave to my acts of belief and acts of direct appec-
hhension the same relation which these have 10 ont
‘nother—the relation which constitates them seine.
But that sensibles ever Mave this kind of relation
10 my mental acts, isa thing which I cannot believe,
hase who bold that they are ever experienced at
all, in sorae sense other than that of being directly
apprehended aay bold Thing, thay, wbenever

ey are directly spprebended by us, they also, at
the sate time, Bave to us this oct relation aa well
‘Aad i seems (0 me ‘dear that when I do
‘lrectly apprehesd a sensible, it does sof have 10
tue te same relation which my direct apprehension
of i


If dherefore, sensibles are ever experienced by us
at all, Io any seave other than that of being dircosly
npprehended by um we mutT thik, bald tha they
age ao in an entirely new sease, quite different
from that in which to be experienced moans to be
rectly apprehended, and from that In whick to be


ito THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


experienced means to occur in some individual's
mind. And I can ooly say that I see no reason
to thick that they ever are experienced in any auch
‘senso, If they are, the fact that they are so 1s
‘pronumably open to the inspectioo of us all but T
came diegse coy mach fre as comming Ut
myself, os T can distioguigh the fact chat they are

oy of ving tat they are nef expensed a

owing ‘are of experie

nome such sense; and somebody will be
ible to point it out to we T do not wish to assume,
therefore, that there i ao such sense ; and hence,
though T am laine to tsk that We ow see
in which they are experi that of being
icectly apprehended f shall in what folowy use


the phrase “experienced” 10 mean sither directly
apprehended or having to something thls supposed
heron rlaoe, i toch 2 relation here be


(3) We may now, therefore, raise the question :
Do seasibles ever exist at times when they are not
rienced at ll?
‘To this question ic is usual t0 give a negative
answer, and two different 4 fevéri reasons may be
ie fe wat sb be mena by B
is wbat meant ‘s
dict thet tbe em of scans w gorse Tha
should mean, whatever else it may ‘mean, at least
this: that to suppose a sensible to exist and yet nat
to be experienced in selfcontradictory. And thla
at kat seems to me to be clearly false. Anything
‘whlch waa @ patch of colour woukl be a sensible;
that there are patches of colour


and to
i ‘ot beis is clearly elf.
pact be rrgie


, bower

ietpoy however be, ae and ein he
second argument to suppote &

to be-a seanble and yaf not experienced i oot well


contradictory, yet we cao clearly oes that nothing


‘THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 1a


can have the one property without having the
ther, “And I do not see toy way to deny Git we
nay be able to know, a frier’ that such a connection
okis between two such properties. In the
case, however, I cannot sce that it does bold, and
therefore, 30 far a3 @ priory reasons go, } conclude
that there fs no reasoo why seosibles should not
ceria at times wheo they are aot experienced,
Te amy, however, be asked : Is there any reason
to suppose that they ever do? And the reason,
‘weighs with me rast, is one which applies,
T think, to'a cercain clans of sensibles onfy ; a clasn
hich wl ty define by ssying hat i consis
‘of those which woadd (under certain conditions
hich aeualy be ex; din «sensation


proper, i havi certain
Econttuon, exited unler tore condisons ia


rion tn which oo wuch body dace actualy exit
think it in very probable that this definition does
snot define at all accurately the kind of vensibles 1
‘mean ; but J think that what the definition ai
will become clearer when { proceed 10 give
-easans for supposing That senles, of ond to be
eGoed in some auch way. do exit unexperienced,
‘The reason fo simply tay, in. Hume's phrase, I
have "a strong propeatity' to believe” that,
the visual sensibles which I direcly apprebend in
ooking at this paper, sill exist unchanged when 1
merely alter the position of my body by turning
away ty head or closing my eyes. hat the
Physica conditions outside my body remain un-
Eee mpm mney pe Pe ale
sense that I should sex sensibles like what | sew
the momest before, of only my head were otill in
the position it was at chat moment or my eyes
tndlased. Bat if-in auch a. cate, there is reason
to thick thar sensbles mbich T should see, ifthe
position of sny body were altered, exist in spite of


st THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA
the fact that I do cot experience them, there is, I
think, an equal reasoa to suppose it in other cases,
‘We must, for fostance, suppose that the sensibles
which [ should sce sow, iff were at the other end
of the rooms, oF IC T were looking under the table,
cexiae at this moment, though they are ot belog
wed. And similarly we munt oppose that
‘the sensibles which you would
the positioa in which ( am now,
moment, in spite of the fact that they may be more
tr less different from those which 1 see, owing to
the different constitution of our bodies.” All
implies of course, that a vast aumber of sensi
poreneed a a Basle hii tha oulp wk
jenced at all. it implies this only wit
Pogard to senaibies of strictly li
sscnaibles which would be experienced in « sensation
» if a body, having a certain constitution, were
‘in @ position in which it is not under the given
phypial sondtons, It does ‘aot, for instsoe
imply that any Amazes, of which it may be troe that I
hol have them, uoder present physical conditions
1¢ position ‘body were altered,
tow ; oor docs it imply that sensibles which wld


a a
ie org epee nem pope
ze


332


Dave a stron to bellove that senables of
Uy ot elect fesse auch wey 2a xt


‘unexperienced, is a0} reason for supposing
dha hey scuoliy do! The bohe? my. of tare,
fori tet Oy ec praesent
<ectaic test by w can. iat
fren reasorale balleX "And | canoer belp nt
that there may be a class of sensibles, capable


THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 133


deGinition in some such way,, which there really ia
reason to think exist
But, if Tam not


an empitical
argument which, thougt, even if it were sound, ix
‘ould bave go tendency waiver to how that at
wens ft unexperienced, would, if it wore
sound, show that this very class of sensibles, to
swbich’ alone my argument for unexperienced
enisrence applies, certainly do not 20 exiet, Thi
seems to me, is che most weighty
san be uatd upon the subject: and
10. give my reasons for thinking that it is fallacious,
1¢ argument is one which asserts that there Is
abundant empirical evidence in favour of the view
‘that the existence of the sensibles which we ex-
perigoce at any time, always depends upon the
condition of our nervous aystem : so that, even where
4t also depends upon external physical condicioos,
cao eaely sy (hat senate which we, shold
hhave experienced, if only our nervous system had
‘een in a diferent condition certainly do not exit
awben itis not i that condition, And the fallacy
this argument seems to me to lie in the fact that it
tones kt oe expetance und ie fag ta oe
sensibles wibich ve experience and the foct that me
ie ha
or ways depends upon
condition of our nervous system ; that, ancoeding as
the condition of the nervous, sytem, changes,
diffrent uensibles are experienced, ever. where o
sondiiong are the se,” But obviouly the fact that
oor ‘a given sensi
futile af car siren panes dete act Sealy
show that the “gies th ele experi
always also 90 ‘The fact that Tran now
cqnperiencing this Black mark is certainly a differeat
{fact from the fact that this black mark now exists. And
hence the evidence which does tend to show thay


184 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


se certaia tbat this partioular
tea to auch reason,

i that chose who suppose that it docs
be indueaced by an assumption, for
‘also, 20 far ax T can see, there is 0 reason,


blind man, if he occopied exactly the postion which
T, who am rot colour-blied, now oocepy, exist bow,
jt as much ap those which now see. And ie
tay hgh Hats peta Be anion
‘which be would sem and which would certainly. be
ery different (rom thowe which i wee, are nevertbele


3
3i


E


‘THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 185


exprienood, 1 have ooly to say (0) that 1 hin

there is cenaialy no relma) whatever” Bor
aseertig that we de, aod (3) at 9 ink

'& certain amount of weight ought to
ord ihe ft ts
aemibles do; and a0)

‘ats which may be brought forward 10
Shor that, ‘whether Some! seals exist "unex-
jenced or not, #Aiv kind cerminly do not, are, 90
Ext Tear sca whalynccodatee


ay
1 now pass to the question how seosibles are
related to physical ‘And here [ want to may,
to begin with, that [ feel extremely pusaled about the
ie tle Bad 8 cave dificult to dis-


ak ‘one another the diferent con.
ti wile vuyat wo be dtinguitbed’ and all

do is to raise, more or less vaguely, certain
weno cao bow certain partiondar sensibles ace
felted to certain faricdar physical objera, and to


ive the rezone mich seem to oe to have most
ns in one
ot ies Shor tat fen boy
ith, 1 do not know bow * physical
‘to be deficed, and I shall aot try to
shall, instead, consider certaio pro.
abet plycal hed nd sch 1
Etome thet | Exow i be true And the queson
I ll eg ow shee propntions ae to
bbe interpreted —ie what tessa they are true; ix coa-
sidering which, we shall at the same time consider
how they are related to certain sensibles
T am looking at two coins, one of which Is 6
halterown, the other a Gorin ‘Both are ping’
the ground; and they are situated obliquely to


106 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


my line of sight, x0 chat the vimal sensibles which
I directly apprehend ia looking at them are visibly
aliptical and noe even approximately cir-*-"
Moreover, the halfcrown is so much farther from
Ge thea the fora th sy vinal seattle Io vebhy
emailer than that of the Goria.

taut 1 ie peopeacat to be

ae . ont be sue
tnd uo one, } chia Blaney mea hat we con koow
auch lions to be tus ‘though, a8 we shall
bee, cxremely diferent views may Per
‘what they mesa. at ondary


ces hth toca fa ay Gees eppreoonoe
ooo eoao eins
Sloan props, aod are St ether halaatoon or
tere experiences of "images"; (0) thar theo
des of te eoies are mately sioslae,
ip ot cee oe oS ie
Qa ie'clos haw apotier da and so
Boog I dant woo; (2 tat the appr ae of
fcrowa Terger than °
Be ee eae ee
ua) sensible of the upper side of the Aovin
{@) that bot coins continue to exis, even when T
form avy ny head or duty eyes bue in mying
{Ri Udo oot of cour, road to any that there
‘sbciucely ne change in them 1 daresay there aust
be sme change, and 1 do act koow bow to deine
‘whet fo mean. But we can, T tink,


eat hl: ving that propositions () (0), ad)
i proposition " fa)
ceased to be tous Se


Now all thee propositions are, I think, spical
propositions of the sore which we call propositions
‘about physical objects; and the ewo coins themuelves


‘THE STATUS OF SENSEDATA 187


‘are physical objects, if saything is. My question
soy i asad semis are these peoponiiona tre?
‘And in cocsidering this question, there are, I
think’ two pracigioe which "we say lay down’ op
serait begin with though they do oe carry ot


wre i) ba tx wig of the cola,

Reel ae 2 ick T Leet sppredned ta
sensible which thy

That his a 40 might be though, to

Eo aby from each of the two facta which 1

have called (6) and (¢) ; but Lam not quite sure

that it does follow fron either of these or Troe botb

together: for it seems to me just possible that tbe

two sensibles coer, Soup al Gc m7
a


‘and cig tat Tough the seaside of the hal
row is aller than that of te Grin i my ovale
a er i Physical at what
Pini t doen Sollbw foc & the fet that ancther
enon may be sciog the upper sie ofthe ena a
fcacty the sue game ia bic, Lam seeing iy tnd
yee then ie be ceil, difcretrom mn
rom this it follows absolutely that the upper a
of the coin cannot be identical with Goth sensibles,
since they are not Wentical with one another. And
though it does not follow absolutely that it may not
be identical with one of the two, yet it does, follow
that we can get a case in whict h is oot identical
with ming ard T ceed only assunse that the case 1
am taking Is such a case.
‘From this it follows that we must distinguish thot
sense of the word “see” in which wo can be said to
"yee" a physical object, from that seaxe of the word
in which "eee" means merely to dicectly apprebend
wt visual seosible. Ina proposition of the form
“ieee Av where A is's\came or description of
seme physical object, though, if this proposition


181 THE STATUS OF SENSEDATA


Fe to be true, there must be some vinual seasible,
B, which I am directly apprebeoding, yet the
ion “I see A” is certainly aot always, and
ip cever, identical in meaning with the
don"t irecly apprehend B.” “in sanertng
Tae A” we are asserting oot ooly that we
Girectly apprehend some sensible but also s0cie-
thingie about ibis enitle—it may ‘be only
‘some proposition of the form, “and this sensible


bas certain other ies." of it may be some
propaition ofthe and J Anow this sensible
1a uve certain otber properties” Indeed we have
aot caly 30. dist ‘that sense of the word


“perceive” in which it is equivalent to * dis
gies bo Se
(to perceive a physical object ; we bave
te distinguish atleast two dierent senses in which
we can be sid to perceive objects
Bisse ‘ech Gm not ec sel eal = ea
Aporebend" For i obvious cht, hough
usd be said to be now secing the Salf-crvtem,
there is a narrower, and more proper, sense, in
which 1 can only be said to use one side of it—nol
Ita lower side of its inside, and not therefore the

‘whole half-crown.
riaciple, which we can lay down. to
start with is (8) that my knowledge of all the five
based, {9 the last resort,
on expe of ‘mine coniatng, im the, dict
sgpracosin of senables and in the perception of
aa between directly apprehended sensiblen
Tt Js Assed on these, in at least this veowe, thet T
boul ever haye Koowa any ofthese propositions
‘ever directly appreheoded any sensibles
feeived aay relations between them.
hat, in view of these two principles, can be
the sense in which my five tions are true ?
(G) Te eeems to me that the only Awe


‘THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 189


Seer ite
Sediate rather Tuy ao own: Fea, tat
11 hem exares ony 0 Rnd of Ss Jo
ould naturally saying chat,
tondidons were fullled, 1 or some other person,
vhoudd directly sored certain other seneiblen,
For instance the only fra thing that can be meant
by saying, that Treaty se cont any be wom wach
EY shacil doeedy apmreseod ties seaien
ways, 1a other seca
ip bt ones, which "1 should cot diecly
asa there movements,
iPibese presone visual experi of eine were
sper. balcincoas or experiences of
in, the ooly teve thing that can be meaat
toying that the upper eile ofthe coins are
spprosimaely cesar may be some much thing st
ar me ekg straight at them, I abould
yapeeheod sensibles And simi
terpretation of (¢) may be some #
Bea ee Tene to te the coing over, of
‘break them up, I sdomld bare certain sensations, of
‘ort 1 ean imagine very well; of (d) that if 1 were
fat an equal distance from the helfcrown and the
foci, the sensible, I abould thea see corespondiag
to the balf-crown would be Diggers ht oe
tothe flora, wheres fe now scaler of)
whea my cyes were closed,
thn, fee Sn omc, Gry ee
PT is obvious, indeed, that if any inerpeetation om
thee Hee # the ol interpretation of our five
none of those which I ave vaguely


ee eee
chine “Seaeeokeiet
‘reason that, in them, the conditions under which [
should experience certain other seosibles are them.


onives expressed in terms Of pyre! objects, and Bok


ago THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


In terma of semsibles and oar experience of them,
‘The conditions are exprested in auch terms as “if |

body,” “if l were to look straight
"ET were 10 turn the coins over,”
te; and all these are obviously propositions, which
smog Ebemgelves agnin be interpreted tn. tem of
scosibles, if our original five proposidone need to be
fo. Ita obviou, therefore, hat any site
interpretation of our five propositions, on these
Hines, would be immensely complicated; and 1
‘cannot come anywhere ea: to stating exactly what it
‘would be. But it seems to me possible that some


such interpretation could be found, and that itis the


‘eve one.
Er pret recommentation of tia view semis
to me t0 be that it enables us to see, more deary
than any other view can, how our knowledge of
ines in the way tr whi. proce
‘seasibles, in the way in which prin
aaperts it t0 be. If, whea [ know that the
‘are round, all that I know is some such thing aa
that if, after experiencing the sensibles 1 do now

experience, I were to experience still others, I
‘sbould Gnally experience ‘a third set, we can

imderstanc, a2 clearly as we can understand bow
any knowledge can be obaied ty induction a ll
how such a knowledge could be based on our
prtvions sxpeieoce of evcallen, and bow ti coal!

verted by our ‘experience.

On eho other hand, apart from the diiuy of
seuualy ving any no these nen,
‘which will meet the requirements, the great ob:
Jection 0 it seems to me to be chix Tt fs obvious
‘that, on thia view, though we sball still be allowed
9 aay that the coins astited before I caw them, ace
sirenler etc, all these i Chey are tobe
trig, whl have to be in a Fickwicklan
sense, When I know that the colts existed before


THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 1gr


1 sam them, what I kow will not be that anythi
srbacaver existed a cht Cine, inthe sense ia which
those elliptical patches of colour exist now. AW/that
know will be simply that, since the elliptical patchoa
‘exlat cow, it is teue, thet, (f certaln unrealised coa-
ditions bad been realised, Tabould bavs had cartain
enaationa that [ have not had; or, #f certsin com-
ditions, which may or may not be realised inthe future,
were 10 be so, I shondd have certain experiences.
Something Hike hia wil actualy be the oly re thing
fiat cao Be meant by sying tht the cone
fipatal Cas tat is tte at ties eel
that it at a given time
‘always consist merely i saying of some, senable,
nf that i existed at the time ic question, but some.
ing quite different and immensely complicated.
hae, though, wheo I Know that the ooias
exist, what I kaow will be mezely some proposition
ghost hese eviews Tam, Srey aver:


eel ay Pe ate pen cia chews a
juvalent to asserting the same ching’ of the
‘bot only to asserting of them something

ilee different.
‘The fact thet these assertions that the enins ena
ae roan. £5 will, 00 i
‘utrageously
oust te great objection to it” Bot i seme
tos Docu bere o'eooy popes fo bole
ee, because I have a “ strong propensity to .
‘at, when | know that the coins existed before
‘aw thea, hal I know ix that something existed
that time, Tropes flewster rei gr ch those


el shes OW of course, this
ee eens
when I believe thet [ mow hare, in my body, blood
apd nerves and brain, woibet I believe is only true, if


192 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


does wot assert, io the proper sense of the word
existence,” the resent existence of anything what-
‘ever, other than senaibles which I direct l
bu ‘oly maker assertions ao to the ‘ond of ex:
ences a doctor mould have, if be dissected me.
1 canpot feel at all sure that my belief, thet,
ben I know of the existence of thee
things (ua tik 2 Lew Rowln, of cre
preseot, exi Go c sense) of thiogs
ssher than a0 semis hick | or any one else
am now directly a 1s a mere prejudice,
Mad thercare 1 SGDE e weth li collet
what, if it is not, chese things, of whose existence I
know, cao be,
(2) Ie is certain that if, when I know that that
(crown existed before'I saw it, T am knowing
that something existed at that time in otber than &
Pickwickian sense, I only know this something by
deena: ood is seome preny clear that the
fotion by which T know it is as éhe thing which
‘bas & certain connection with this seasible which


ey
people bave said, thas by “thar balfcrotm "I meat
Gil hieg mich cowed my expect of this
necaible * because events which ‘bappen between
the balf-erown and oxy eyes, and events in my eyes,


‘and optic nerves, and braing are just as much cowses
‘of my experiences as the balf-crowa ices, Bur it
be the chat


‘But what soct of thing can this “source” be?


THE STATUS OF SENSEDATA 193


One kindof view, which I think is very commonly
bel rth is sooneting“spiitaa!” © to nature,
or something whose astere t ettery waknowa 6
tau “And those who bold his view are aprto add,
that itis ot really “crealan” in tay seure at all?
porn the “souree’ of my taiteroms expercace i=
thy sense at al, “Biggec™ chan thax of my forin
capereuce. Bet if is aldidon were sctioanly
tant 1 would, of coummm,amoune £0 Saying that
propositions (2) and (a) are oot tru, in any setae at
ETPitad T'do not chnk tut those, who make 1
teolly mean to vay thin I think that wet chey
tuead is only that the aly seats in which those
“fourcea” are circular, aod one bigger than ‘the
othe, is one in wich to say this merely amount to
saying thatthe senailen which they sould vauve ux
to experience, under eeraia conditions, maid be
Crear, and one bigger then the other’ “Tn other
‘words, in order to give a true interpretation to the

penitioan chat che coins are cleslar aad. one
Eigger tine the other, Sey spat re ain

them in toe same Kent of vay fa which view
ft) Interpreted them; ‘aad the “only” dieronce
fies view and view (1), 9 Sat, whereas
(da taid that you munt give & PickwicKan ince:
pretation Soh Co the aasetion thatthe eine erty,
Sad to the asetion that hey ace cirador, they may
that you met aot give it 0 the Toner’ wsertion,
ed ate a ty
2 thir view cy objection is only that any reason
thare may be for slog that the "sources" exist da
ies the 5 ret sme acm 8
our” te


also a reason for saying that they are
a
rong 2 propensity (0 7
Seale, ina simple and nataral sen
exit in soch a.sense: and ] nor
reason for believing


194 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


Inmay be suggested, next, that these “sources,”
Pd tele ocelapetoerpag tingornll
or something ow eature uttedy ualenown, coosist
aimply of sensibles, of a kind which I have
previously tied to define; namely of all those
Feouibles which aoybody would under the actual
physical conditions, experience ic sextationr proper
Of which the balferown and the fiorin were the
vores fn bodes were 8 oy of te potions
relativay tp those cain, in which they woald
sensations from them at all. We face that
feccma forsidle that all these sensiblea do really
exist eels ‘are aot experienced, and
that some people, ‘events, seem to bave a
strong, fy balieve that they dar ADd Ia
Throw of the viow that some such ge collection
of senibies st the upper aide of the bal-crown, i=

7 fact that we do seem to bave a strong


to believe that any particular senaible,
ae ‘we directly agpeosnd Th Tooking at the
poo prepied and of our direct
Horehesog of which be Soper
ier the place in which the upper side
that some sense right be given to
wn the same place ay”
that ‘sconbles of all sorta
izes, and of all sorts of different
Be sans plato mde wee dam soa © 000 to be
possible" Bue the objection to this view seems to
‘me to be the same as to the last; namely that if the
‘upper side of the halGerown were identical with
buch a calection of senate chen th only sense ln


fel Gi Reed yas ee


THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA 195


positions, the only alternative ] can think of that
remains, is one which is identical, so far as.
T can see, with Locke's view. Ww which
asserts that the balf-crown and the florin really did
Shy Ceivare npprocintedy scar Copa into
ly are apy in in the

tateril score); tat, therefore, they Are not com:
of senaibles which J or others should directly
mporehend under other conditions ; and th


in) noe hae which, Ua cow
hhending ate in the place in which the coins are.” Te
holds therefore, tat the, cine do realy, ramble
some seasibles, in “primary” quali
Wich these have, that they really are found and
‘ove larger than the other, in much the same tense
in which some sensibles sre round and some larger
than others. But it holds also that no senal
which we ever do directly apprehend or should
Gireetly apprehend, if at a given time we were in
‘other postions, arc farts of those coins; and that,
Therefore, there is ta reason to suppose that any
puts of the coins have ay of the “
unten"—color ets —which any ofthe serail

On hia view, iis plain, here is nothing, op
vent fom lng Wha as sugges i (9),
all sorts of unexperienced seosibles do exist. We
‘are only prevented from holding that, if they do,
those which have the same source all exist ia tbe
sama place x8 thee Youre And the natural view
to take us to the status of sensibles. generally,
relatively to physical objects, wotld be that none of
them, whether experienced or os, were ever In the
same place as any physical object, ‘That none
therefore, exist “anywhere” in physical apace;
while, at the same time, we can also say, ax argued
EI (a), that none exist in the ci


196 THE STATUS OF SENSE-DATA


the sense that some are directly apprehended by
some minds. And the only thing that would need
to be added, is that ome and aoe ony, ane
the physical objects which are their source, in respect
he aoe es
‘To this view 1 ean se no objection excep the
serions one that it is 1 antwer the
wuestions: How can I ever come to know that
senaibles have a “source” at all? And how
do | know that these “sources” are circular? It
‘would seem that, if 1 do know these things at all,
T must know semedialely, in the case of some
seasibles, both that they bave a source and what the
shape of this source i. And to this it may be
cbjected that this in a kind of thing which 1
certainly cannot know immediately. The argument
jn favour of an interpretation of type (1) sceme to
ime to rest wholly on the assumption that there are
cooly certain Kinds of facts which 1 can know
immediately; and hence that if ] believe I know a
fact, which ia not of this kind aod which alo,
‘anoot bave learot immediately, my belief must
Goere prejudice. Bet I do fot know bow ie can
tbe shown that an amertion of the form: Facta of
certain kinds are the only ones you can know
tmnmediately ; is iteeif not a prejudice. 1 do
think, therefore, char the fact that, if ibis last view
‘were tnu, we should have to edit that we koow
Invmelialy facts of «kind, which many people
think we cumet know lavmedianly is « conclusive
twit


‘THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


Tne fourth chapoer of Mr.
‘and Reality is « chapter beaded “Space and Time,
fand he begins the chapter as follows:—

‘The object of this cbapter ia far from being an
attempt to discuss fally the aature of space oF of
fine, Ut il como haelf ith wang our aia
justifeation for regacding them as appearances, Tt
twill explaio why we deny that, sw. the character
ich tay exhib” they ‘her have oe Belo to


Here, twill be seen, Mr, Bradley sates tha, in
bis opinion, Time, im s certain character, neither has
nner belongs to reality; this is the conclusion he
‘wishes to maintain, And to say that Time Aas not
reality would seem to be plainly equivalent to
‘saying that Time as sof real" However, if anybody
should doubt whether the two phrases are menat 10
be equivalent, the doubt may be easily set at reat

12 reference to the concluding words of the aame
capoutc apron Teme he “ke

ession: “Time,” he says, “li
space, bes most evidently proved net fo ben
10 be = contradictory * (p43) Mr
Bradley doce, then, say here, In vo any words,
that ‘Time of But there is one otber
difference between this statement at the end of the
chapter, and the statement at the begianing of it,


* Appearance end Rrsty (2nd eds}, p35. Th Seafcn emi.


198 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


which we must not forget to notice, In the state-
‘ment at the beginsiog be carefully qualities the
aaseriion “Tine neither has nor belongs to reality"
by saying "Time, im the character which & exhibits,
atither has nor belongs to ceality,” whereas ia the
final statement this qualification is not faserted
bere he says simply Time is not real.” TI
qualification, which ia inserted in the one place a
cated in the otber, might, of course, be meant 10
imply that, In some oar sharacer—some chavacet
which it does sof exbibit—Time dar reality and
oea belong to it. And [ shall presently bave
‘something to say about this distinction between
Time io one character and Time io another, be-
cause it might be thought thas this distinction is the
explanation of the iy as to Mr. Bradl
meaning, which Tam going to point out,
However, so far it is clear that Mr. Bradiey holds
that te some sense, at all events, the whole peopo-
aiden “Time is not real” can be truly asserted.
And, now, J wast to quote « pasage in which be
‘ays’ things which, at first sight, seem dificuls to
reconaite with this view. This sew pasage is a
pamage in which be is not talking of Time in
particnlar, but of “appearances” io general, But,
fs me bare oven, be dort 1 ard Hine one
among appearances, there is 00
tat ‘what be here ecares to be true of all ap-
pearances is meant to be troe of Tice, among t
reat, This new ‘ean lows =
eas te presen” he says “me ny keep a fat
upon appearances exist That is
absolutely certain, and to deny it is nonsense. And
‘whatever exists must briong #9 readily. This ix alao
quite certain, acd its denial once more is. self


contradictory. Our ‘no doubt, may be
S'begently show, and their neuire to an unikoows


* OM de me sve


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 199


extent may be something which, as i i, is nof true
of reality. That is one thing, and it is quite au-
‘ther thing to speak as if these facts had 0 actual
exineace, ar as if chere could be anything but
reality to which they might belong, And J must
entre to gapeat chat uch 0 idea would be theee
nonense, What E reason, most
fedobltably fw; a0d here tw. 00 poutblity of soa
Joriag its being away from it”

‘That ia the passage which seems to me to raise &
difficulty aa to bis creaning when contrasted with
the former passage, And the reason why it seems
tome to raise one is this In the former pasmge
Mr. Bradley declared most emphatically that Time
in not real; he said: “Time has mast svidently
Proved aot to be real” Whereas io this one be
Seems to declare ‘emphatically that Time
does exist, 206 i. ‘bis language bere again is
‘aa strong as possible He says it is abeer nousenst
Sean Se bang og relogs“Ieiooea terry ant

‘tat belong to t hooks, therefore, as i
fe means to Sake a incon betwee bel
real" on the one hand, and “existing,” “being o
fact.” and ‘“being” on’ the other band—aa if be
icant to aay that a thing may exist, and be, and be
‘a fact, and yet at be real. And { thiok there #3,
at all events, some superficial difficulty in, under-
sanding thin daintion, We ight catnaly ching
that to may “Tie exists, is a fact, aod is,” is

vivalent to aaying that it is real. What more, we
telgbr ask, cana emo who says that Time a cea
pean to maintain about it than that it exist is
fact, and is? AM thee most would cean by
taying that time is real tr would seecn, be
expressed by saying “There is auch a thiog as
Time.” Aad it might, therefore, xppear from this
anew pastegs as if Mr. filly agreed with the
view that’ moat people express by saying


00 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


“Ting i real"—as if he did vot at all, mean to
gontradict anything that most people believe a
‘Piney Wnotlben wine wt wt to woke of is
former assection that, nevertheless, Time is mot real?
He evidently thioks that, in asserting this, he is
averting something which is wot mere sonsens
tnd he seen would oo have choten he may
expressing whar he means, unless be bud supposed
thet wat bi bare amerig about Tine 0.
‘compatible with what people ofter mean when tt
say Time is ral ek, we have asen tht
inks thee what he is asserting 19 not incompat
srith the asnertions that Time ia and in fac, and
exist, He most, therefore, think tbat when people
say “Time is real” they’ often, at least, “mean
something. mers than ‘hat there tr such.
ps Tine, something ‘which
dened withost All the same,
in, I think, a real difscuhy in seeing that they ever
4 mean anything moore, asd, xf they do, what more
{ef that they can mean,

‘The two expreasions “There i such a thing as
60 and 20” and “So and so i real” are certainly
sometimes and quite naturally used ag equivalents,
even if they are not always so used. And Mr,
Bradley's own. la lcpin that ‘his Ts a
Fee, a8 we have see, f5 the age, he seema
to Ldensybeloging > sea "with ei a

‘conclusion whick he expresses in one
eying that Time does noe beloog 10 realty he
‘expreases in another by saying. that it is not real;
mhiereas ia the secoad passage he seems to idemtiy
the, mesciog of the same phrase “belooging ©


reality ” with existing he says that whatever existe
ius belong to rely, aod ne econtas
dicory to deny this" But if both being cal en
teratig are ‘atic to

el em they at be Heasaf oh ons


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 201


‘And, indeed, ia another passage in the Appendix to
the ‘2nd Bdition (p. 555) we find Mr.


actually usieg the folowing words : Anything,” be
mya, “that ia any seose &, qualifes the absolute
redlity and a0 is real” Moreover, as we have seen,


hhe declares it to be tonsense to deny that Time
he must, therefore, allow that, ov a seme,
events, ie i nonsense to deny’ that Time io real
And yet this denial ic the very one be bas made.
‘Mr. Bradley, therefore, does seem himself to allow
that the word “‘real” may, sometimes at all events,
bbe properly used as equivalent to the words “exisiy”
ta act "in” And yer his two suertions cannot
beh be tue, unless Sere i sme ge x
swbole proposition “Tine is real” is wat equivalent
to and cannot be inferred from “Time is,” or “Time
sia oe a Tiare sifeets 2? han Ste

it seems, thea, prey at Mr. Bradley
‘must be holding that the statement “Time is real
Is in ome sense, sof equir to “Time exists";
‘hough be admis tha in aneder cenee, it im And

will only quote one other passage
make this plain,

“If” be says later oo
unreal, ] admit thet our
but, one other side, it will as that eee
‘cannot be mere appearance, wage in tl
finite subject, we are told, fe a matter of direot
‘experience; it is a fact, and hence it cannot be
expained ‘away. And so much of course is jnduble-
able, “Change is x fact and, further, his fact, as
amma rececalewih the Abc, "And
‘we could not in acy way perctive how the fact can
De werral, we should L admit, i


02 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


clement into a wider harmony. And wi
‘appual t0 fact 2 once becomes worthless,

“eis mere superstition to suppose that sn.
to experience can prove reality. That 1 6nd some-

ing i it If, shows
‘hat thia something ests, and it cannot show mons
Any deliverance of consciousneas—whether original
Or acquired—is but a deliverance of consciourneas.
Je ia in no casa an oracle and a revelation which we
hhave to accept. Stiga fact, Te other facta, to be
dealt with ; acd there is n0 presumption anywhere


that any fae is eter than ee

Here Mr. Bradley seems plainly to imply that to
be “real” is something mors and other than tp be &
fact or to exist. This is the distinction which i
thnk he menor som ond which ohn the

‘explanation puzzling Ianguage, an

i the discnction which I ant going. presently
discuss. But 1 want first to say something as co
that other distinction which 1 sald might be up-
posed to be the explanation of the whole dificulty—
the distinction implied by the qualifcation “Time,
fin the character which if exhibits” ; the suggestion
that, when we talk of "Time," we ‘may cometimes
meaa Time in one character, sometimes io another,
und that what is true of ic in the one character may
nok be tre of fm the othe. Ik might I think, bs
‘that this is the explanation of the wi
BES. ‘aed {want briefly to point out why T
‘thlok it esanot be the only explanation,

Sige vor badly ead cy, cho icy which
requires ex; m : Mr. Bradley says, “It
ls abeer nonsense to say Time is not real” But
this thing which he says it is sheer nonsense to say
fa the very thing which he bimsell had formerly
mid, He bad said, “'Time bas moat evide

‘uot to be real." Now, Mr. Bradley certai
‘nO mean so say that this proposition of


thin, che


‘THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 203


own is sheer nonsense; and rote says, i wordy,
that it i sheer nonsense. This is the difficulty.
What's the expiaation? Quite obviowly, the
explanation can only take one possible form. Mr.
Bradley muse be holding that the words “Time is
teal tay have two dierent anit. "In one e088
denial of them is sheer nonsease ; io the other
verse tf being sheer nonsense, denial of
them fn, scoordiag to him, evidently true. Now,
‘what are these two different senses, between whi
the difference ia so enormous? It is here that the
(wo different explanatic i
‘The frst an
(though 1
soli) iis, Semi be ad: “Toe whale
usiness is. perfect ‘to explain. When Mr.
Bradley says that Time is aot real what he means
is that Time, am the character eich if exhibs, is
ot real. Whereas, when be says, Timse does
5a a fact, and is, and that ic is nonsense to deny this,
‘what he means is that Time docs exist, in some
other character—soce charester other than that
BiGt Cis” He doe ee mean fo mao any
distinction, such a3 you between 180
meanings of the word “real be. one of thon
mace ean fo Veni in “i eh and
other meaning something very different
thin, "The only disdnction ‘he meana to make la
ininon berwesa, fe meanings of « Tima’ o of
the whole gntence ‘Tine i real!” He diinguises
between the meaning of this sentence, whea it
rmeens Time Jo the character which i bibs
‘which meati sare, se
ted ity meaning ‘whee. it "Tine in smut
ther character, real: and this teaalng, be says,
Is evideotly true. ‘This is the complete
of your suppored puzsle, which is i fact,
‘very easy to solve”


405 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


This, I think, aight be offered as an explanation
of Mr’ Bradley Weaning, And ie roost be ad-
fitted that it ewvedd furnish a complete explanation
Of the particular puzzle T have just stated, it would
ompletly abncive Mr. Brudley fom the charge of
Incoosseney ; und would show that wbere be ap,
pam to TChirsdis bina? chee Ue weaty of

fme, the contradiction is verbal only and not real.
‘We might, indeed, object to this distinction between
ironed ist saying winch he nt pe tesa

‘that anything ‘not got the charme-
Gr which Tage exhibits, but oul some eer
character, ought not to be called Time at all. We
are, indeed, perfectly familiar with the conception
that one und the same thing, may ‘af ow time
powess a character which it docs sof possess at
‘another, so chat what is true of it et one time may
not be trie of it at another. We are, that 1s,
Sooniiar with the idea of a thing changing fia charac-
tor, Bat Tine isel a2 a whole obviou'y cannot
change its character in this senee Mr, Bradley
cannot mean to say chat s the character
srhich it exhibita "and in which tis unreal fone


id pomcanen some omher characten ia whch
{tt real, t some ather time And hence we might
aay it fa ceetainly wrong to as if Time iteclt
vould jus two characters; since

jing can have two incompatible characters,
tnlean it bas them af diferent fines, And thin
‘an objection which dose seem to apply to Mr.
Bradley's doctrine in any case, since he does in any
case seem to imply this distinction between Time in
‘pae, character aad Time in another, whether this
distinction is the of our par
ticular purle or not. Yer this objection would not


Bradley's words; it would not necessarily be an


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 105


Imply sha Time, in sone character other than that
which ic exhibits, may be fully real, be may ooly
mean that something completely different from
Time, but which does ia some sense to.
i, is fully real; and if he does mean this, our
objection would only amount to an objection to bis
giviog the name of “Time” to thi supped
siemens; ve sight my, and I think
justly, that itis misleading to speak counter.
part of Time as if ic were Time itself io some other
Character; but this would go n0 way at al to show
that there may a0 really be such a counterpart. of
Time which é real, while Time itself Is unreal
‘We might ask, too, what thi
of Time is like, or (to pat
‘what the precise cbaracter isi
And I thick Mc. Bradley would admit that be
‘cannot tell us, But this, you see, would also be no
bjectioa to bis acnal doctrine’ Fle might quite
low, aod be right in saying, tha thre i and
must be a real cosnlerpart of Time, completely
dierent in, character ftom Time, ax we know it
even though he has not the least idea what this
‘counterpart is like.

‘We tush therefore, admit chat thls proposed
explanatioa ‘of our ‘would be a com
explanation of it. Tt would completely vindicate
Me. Bradley from the charge of incootisteacy, and
would give us, a8 bis 1 doctrine t0 which
swe have hitherto found no objection except verbal


ones.
‘But, nevertheless, I think it ig a wrong ox-
don, and I want to explala why. If we were

$0 suppose that this distinction between Time in
‘ove character and Time in another were the onl
Mr. Bradley meane to rely, we sbould


‘pose bln to affirm most emphatically that Time,


106 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


the character which it exbibity, neither is real, nor
cra, (it sor ix We shovld bave to
sruppose bim to be using all these four expressions
alwnys aa atrict equivalents, and to mean that it is
ia Its other character that Time either exints,

a fact, or la. “And if be did mean this, there
‘would, of course, be no doubt whatever that be does
‘mean to cootradict the comson view with regard to
Time ; sloce, of course, what most people mean by
Time” Is what he chooses to call “Time in the
choracer, which ic exbibia” Yes bis aogangs,
even ia the ‘quoted, seems 10 me to
{eeiease tbat he doce not mean thin T tioke on
the contrary, he means to affirm emphatically that
Time even in the character which it exbibits, does
exist, & a fact, and indubitably és, though it is wat
teal i that character. Tn the second , for
instance, where be ‘so emphatically that ap-
eres ge Sr fe indabinbly oy

talking of appearances, in ti

charecter which they exhibii—or, as be there pute
jg their nature, a7 1 &—he does, I think, mean that
pparanecs even in this cbgracir, ar fact ex
‘are, though, in this character, they are not
“true of reality.” And, so again in the thicd
where he says, i a fact, and this

fac, mck le not reconcile withthe Abecute;
language is surely quite loexcusale,voleu he
‘menos iat Change, as such— change, ip the charac.
tar which it exhibits—chaoge, ot if 35, it 0 fact:
Os ee ‘Gini thereon Se hi :

i not we have to

mamume thet Mr. Bradley means to moke a dit
ttaction oo€ merely between Time, in one charncter,
fand ‘Time in another, but also between “real” in
one sense, and “real” ia another. His meaning te
nat xo slgle a8 it woukd be, if he were, merely
‘making distinction between Time in one character


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 107


and Time i. another, and ie is not, after all, at all
Plain whether he means to contradict whist ordinary
people hold about Time or sot He doss not mean
fo assert that Time, as such, seither is ceal, sor
tity mar is 2 fk, mor ins bat, on the contrery,
that ‘Time, even ay sacd, does exist, da fact, aod
fi; but, wevertbelean, ts nor real This, a lenau i
‘what I'am going to assume him to mean. And on
Ghis assumption, we are brought face to face
the question ax to the meaning of the word “real”
and als9 ax to the meaning of these otber words
wenit* Ni fart" and “Mr Beadley soem
ie reer ear
Pe a 00

phrusea. We are, however, now supposing that he
also holds that in another sense they are not equiva-
Ten, but that “real” means sometbing more than
the others, so that it is St 0 maintain
that Time is not * t doer exist, is a
fact, and is. In holding’ ‘hi ce be wipe
and wharf want to dots to explain, ay clearly as,
ean, what sort of a mistake 1 Bla tobe waking,
metre i giieey way
take. 1 muy, perhaps, song io
tine Betty nt mace hiv
Tht tay degree the sures ‘of the ditacdoa be
seems to draw between “reality” and “‘existence*
To mainealn that ee
object. My main
een
mitted by Mr, Bradley or not and that it ia x
mistake ; because it seems to oe that itis a mistake
which i¢ is very easy to make, and very Important
ta avoid. Tam, of course, not concerned at all to
discuss the question whether Time # real or not,
four only to discuss the question what sort of things
ad ere ty On Rs ce ore ae


208 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


Af those thin, ere true It could still be truc thax
‘Time either exists, or is, or is a fact.
ei a ay wah
in part at least, what Mr. Bradley means when be
that it is unreal I thiok that part at least of
be means is just what he to me just,
whet sayens oe road oes ‘be said chat io]
Teese rnd mae fe sd 7
understand to be meant, if he
But I can conceive that, when
Spirent aye
al eT seh tbe elm
means any such thing at all They may say that
Seas eet a cnkay Se
a te cecal ay
ti CBr cme eee ce
= : cosa an
a rae Tate sre” Paget ti same speed
‘sense may coms te to his: ing | am prepared ta
admic, 1 do thick it is that paré of what,
Mr. Bewdiy sesering may be something which
Healy, merge ecg
fo che aime way, and I wil admit, cherelore: Cat ie
Eis cee coy gut lotic Severs
marely what other people would mean by this
phrase, but something else as aw What, how-
ever, I eanaot help thinking is that, even if he
means something more, be dots mean what ordinary
people would mean as mei/: that what they would
‘mean is at least a fart of bie meaning. And ifeven
this is disputed, if is is maintained that be is usi
words exc ‘in some special sense, I own
‘how to ‘the question If any-
does take ‘view thet, when he mya
‘Time {a unceal,” absolutely all that be means ie
i jo oo incompatible with
what moat would mean saying “Time is
teal,” Ido not know how to show that this view is


&
i


I
‘i
t
:


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 109


- tenn only say char if this had been all
TED'E, seein, fedaco ble ua: he woul hang
xpreased bis view in the form "Tin

‘The aely further argument T shall bring ia favour
of my view that he Gore mean wbat he ought to
‘mean will tke the form of an answer to one possible

en whch wight brags. When
T have explained what be by sing
that "rine is awa wil be gece dear Shae ie
in someching which is in fact incompatible with the
truth of the propositions that Time 2, or exits, of
re Ject_Auv itmigh be ange that the Get that
tin thus incompatible is a stcong argument against
the view that Ms, hs ena vit be
fonghd to coean, since, if be bad ment it, he could
hail avg fee to zeevive chat what be meast
cos content ih tone ropnions, eters
a we bave seen, not perotive
Uae a anew to that agurent, which comets
in giving an ex thin
cot cat bod be end cane tt


Uedeakh ie dacoverig whet sort of ti they
ould mean by i Ofcourse, Time, wih a an
Seema to be a highly abacact kid of eaiy, and to
Uline ay what an Se wean by nf of an
entity of that ort that it is unreal does seem to
‘offer difficulties, But if you try to translate the
‘proportion into the concrete, and 10 ask what it
Newplas, theee is, 1 thiak, very little doubt as to the
tore of ihing i Maplin The moment you try todo
this, end thiok whist it really comes to, you at once
Pephe ticking of © womber of diferent Aaa of
propositions all of which plaisly must be untrue, i
°


a


210 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


‘Time is uneeal If Time is unreal, then plainly
nothing ever happens before or after anything else
nothing is ever simultaneous with anything
fa never true that anything és past; ever true that
saything wil happen inthe fare; sever eve that
oe at
ig io somata nat
itions (and you could easil to jis
sree (end ou eed wey a ee
saying that Time is waren, Ard tis cea, alo
s


ind is implied is equivaleat 10 sa)
there are no facts of certain ding kinds—
20 facts which consis i one event Foppentng before
another; none wbich const in an event bei, past
& haat sod woe. The bmp, shat
un is ie case of a large
suber of det properties which are auch that,
If they did belong to anything, what they belonged
to mould be facts baviog some common character-
futle, which we, might express by calling therm
jpn e eropricn a in, qoeton din
tut, belong, co -Ttimplies that the property
of being a fact which consists in one event following
nether belongs to mothig thar eet of being '&
evect belongs to 0 00,
Irby ic fplles ha all thoee diferent apecial proper
tice belong to nothing is, 1 chink we may say,
beenuse what t maant a that the gener
which I bare called that of being a." cemporal fact”


‘THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY arr


to the special properties "being red,” “being blue,”
ete, chat they also belong to nothing. We may,
a Ae creat
vans Is simply “The property of being a temporal
fact belongs 10 aothing,” or, 10 express this in the
‘way in which it would be expressed ia ordinary life,
"Phere are no temporal faci.” And this beiag #0,
wo have explained the usage of “unreal,” where it
4s predicated of Time with a capital T, by reference
toa much more common and. perfectly. familiar
tumage of the term. The use of “is unreal” in the
phrase “Time is unceal” bas been defined by
reference 10 ita use in the phrase "Temporal facta
are unreal” And its use ia this phrase is, 50 far as
1 can see; exactly the same as in bosts of phrases
yt which we ace peony familar; i i
the commonest and by far the most important we
(of the term “unreal” ” The use is that in which we
fuse it whea we say, “Unicom are uoreal,”
““Grifing are unreal,” “Chioweros are unreal” and
0.00, It is the unage ic which unreal is equivalent
to “imaginary”; and in wbich to say “* Goicoms
are unreal” means the same as “There are 20
unicorns” ox Unicorns do aac” a jt the
wame way the “Tera are
Snreal® into which we have translated “Time ip
means the same as There are 00 tecaporal
“Temporal facts do not exist," or “Tempo-

lind then Gna what Mr. Bs onght
think, then, é to
‘Se dotnet by


mann by “Tice is unreal” ca db
reference to one 3 word “real”
Mayes Spee ee pe
fone ‘aciong the conceptions for which the term
aly" oy wc An! tie gril cn,
ception seems to me %0 the commonest
and moat in of those for the term
doea stand, Twang, therefore, before going on, to


ata. THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


‘dwell a little upon ite nature; although I daresay
‘that all Cy <a to sy i perfectly familiar ond
ie a a ae ype ni
Parchache parecer cele
x :
rf are ‘he 9a point I want to insist on can
be brought out in this way. I have just vald that
we bave pointed out one particular one, and that
the most Important, among the conceptions for
which the term “reality” may stand ; aod that is an
excusable way of saying what we buve done. But
Een ag sink, be Pore trntagll pod shat we
fr, Tink fe cae i
Peete eae ee re
open rae
fit ia such that the terms “real” and “unreal”
cannot, when used in thin way, be propely sid co
cen rch ln wy, opel al
in tee mesa. We have said That what
“Llons are real” means is that some particular
preety or otber—! will say, for the sake of
the property of being « lion, though that is
Ker esr veg ty, sh tt
acy ce et ey sve
pa lt ‘another way, tbat x eoception of being
a Gon is a conception wi to Sr
fh there. are Cringe which fad under
oe J ce dy what Pe ae ere aoe
Te Teo a
Fuses snare
ie apo usage stand for any conceptions at all,
‘The only conceptions which occur in the proposition
« Loos ‘are real” set, 20 aes i ition, ws ite
‘aerate
tii of Ccbogiag wo efouibing’ and perosty
obviously “real “ ‘ieee ot stend Sor either Of these:
In the case of the Best that is obvious; ‘but it is


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 213
worthwhile poitiog out that it is alo tue of the


‘ig real” did stand for “belongs t9 some-
ina th propnkion "Liew ae ial” eouid


themoclves: ver which
Golo to somathing ; and quite obvious thas what
Wwe mean to asaerc iz not any tuch nonsense an this,
“Real.” therefore, does not, in this proposition,
anand for the cosception of “belonging to some
thing ;" nee yet, quite plainly, does ft stand for the
conception of “being lion.” And hence, since
thege re the nly two coneraions which do ceca
inthe proposition, we may, sink, cay that rea
is usage, does not stand for any 17 fonception at
AIL "To say ther ie id would be to imply that ie
stood for some property of which we are amerting
that everything witich baa the peoperty of “being =
ion" adso has this other But we are not,
in fact, asverting any such ticg. We ere not
userting of any walled reality” that it
belongs to lions, an to person Lio
mammalian” we are asserting of the
"being @ mammal" that i belongs to
two propositions Lions are real ad *


reality of Sag ee
Scie eee ores ete
Sera oy rot ene
Spa Paty, Th ot
Sraason Gudecee
Poo Ly


214 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


bly he alco means something else as well
Ber if, i is qute clear, T thinks tbat wbar he
treans f ioconsistent with its being true that Tie
exins or that there is such a thing as Time, To
ay that Time exists or that there is such a thing, 4x
fp mer: at Jas, that there are some temporal


facta: It may assert more then this, but it does
amert thin at least And this,
sacl wins died when
tunreal, “Time is unreal” juat meat poral
fats are uarea” or “tere are no temporal faci or


“Temporal fucs do, not exist”, And just ths la
also what is mesat by “Time does not exist” or
“There is no such thing as Time” The
fact, noching else for these expressions to
What, thecfore Me, Bradley ought to mean
{fccording to ee) doce sean by © Time un
sin fact inconnlsten wich what be ought tom

“Time exi Tie in And yet

aly he does net think 20. isitpnil
Yo explain why be aboold have aed vo peresive the
nconsisten


it i face can be explained 39 follows,
we been noticed that, io the pasages T
= ion ies be leer jn ‘one place, tbat 10
hat appearances exe in. ox merely fle bt
fory, nd in aaother appeals to the
foe tat Stay ucllecenees of cede
at ‘deliverance of consciousness” ia, auppare of
‘ia contention that what sx fact need, ceverthelene,
Tings does, 1 tak give ealour tothe gggetnn
things think, give to the suggestion
Chas the reason why he. thinks chat what Ip woreal
et exis, and be a fact and be, Is the following.
onioubtadly the case tas, tren, temporal
Hs ure mateo, hay. tere ov to. each dig
can and do think of hem, just as itis undou!
tthe case that, though unicorns are unreal, we can


‘THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 215


and do imagine them. In other words, “ temporal
facts" aad “unicorns” are both quite certainly
“deliverances of consciousness," atleast, i ihe


ena that i ‘ol thougint” being
ohject of thought [7 ere, in a wide sense,
eee” ale, and 1 canaot felp thinking

that Mr. Bradley supposes ‘that, meray becauee
ey use so they matt et et 36 "Hoe?
fmngine be would ask) “can a thing ‘xppeat’ OF
even ‘be thought of" unless it ix there to appear
Sad be shout of? Toray uate appearee
dag of and that yer there is no such thing, in

fy seitconiadicory. A thing camot bute 2
Froperd. une bia sce 90 hats Be nade Sch
Yeleord and engra fact d hae be propery of
being thought of there certainly must be auch
HE Wikies Tul ofc ucton ‘wha Tan
thinking of is eerily ‘not sothiog: tie were
rothing. then, woea I thiok of a grifio, T should
tio be thinking of nothing, and there would be 00
diference between thioking of a grifia and thinking
of a usioors. But there certainly is a diference:
fd what can the difference be exozpt that in the
tne case what I am thinking of i a uricora, and ia
the other a grifin? And if the unicorn {x what I
dam thinking’ of, then there certainly must be a
‘woleorm, in apt of the fact that unicorns are unreal,
Tn other words, though ia one sense of the words
there certaily are 0 unicoras—that senae, camel,
ia which to aster that there are would be equivalent
ta auserting that unicorns ace ceal—yet there mast
bbe some otber sense in which there ara auch thingy
oon if there were not, we could nor think of


woke eg foe fe
Ce s
Sra auc there are other passages in Appasranss


416 THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


end Reality—particolarly what he says about Err
srrbich Wook to me a0 Ube cetaoly was golly of
ie 1 uppene it will be quite obvious to everyonn

There that te is a fallacy ; that the fact that we can
think of unicorns js cot sufficient to prove that, In
any sense ata there are any unicorns. Yet, Lam
not sure that I ‘coow what is the mistake
Involved in Shaking a eile and Tam
ang, therefore, to wy 0 pt se clearly of can,
‘what } think it i io the hope that somebody may
Be able, f Tam wrong, to correct me.

‘The main mistake. 1 suppose, is the mistake of
thinking that the proposition “* Unicorns are thought
‘f" is a proposition of the same forms as “Lions ate
hunted"; oF the proposition "I am thinking of
Hts papas “haber ze
the proposition “ Unicorns are objects
thou tame form 95 “Li y
Brae chose” "OF he ween
SS tees pen ir se tr
‘ot be true unless there were lions—at least one.
‘Each of them does, in fact, assert both with regard
to a certain. property—wbich we will call that of
“being a Gon *—that there are things which
it an also with regard to another diet of being
Nonted—that some of the things which posseas the
format poms this property toa, But ts shows

to common emne that the seme is

‘means true of tl a in eae

of the tact toe the pramated extention
po trace of the 1k i perfectly
sobvioun that i€T aay “Tam thinkiag of a unicora,

Tam not saying both that there is a unlcom and
thot I'am thinking of it, wtbough, if 1 say “1 ac
Ihunting a Hoe,” Yam saying both that there toa
Yoo, and that Jam beating it In the former cave
Ham ao amcring atthe, wo
 unieorn and Wty os ook


‘THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 217


belong to one and the same thing: whereas, in the
Ticritoe Ta aarcng that is ewe progenies of
being a lion ard of being hunted by me


tp ove and the same It ts quite clear that
there is ix fact, this between the two
tions; although 0 trace of it in


fe verbal ‘expression. And why we sbould we
the same form of verbal expression ta convey such
Sifeent meanings is more thac 1 can say. Tt
Seems to me very curious that language, in thin, as
in the other fastance which we have just considered
of Ligos are real aod “Lion Han,”
would bave grown up
designed to mislead
Koow why it should fave.
there is no doubt that ia ever 90 many instances it
han Moreover, exactly what i meant by aayis
#7 am chinking of a wnicorn” is not
clear 10 me. F chink we can assert at feast i
ander tht hia, proposition, abould be. cre, ie a
necessary (1) that } should be conceiving. with
to a certain property, the hypothesis that
there In something which possesses it, and (2) that
the property in question should be such that, if
id possess it there would be a unicorn,
‘Atthough ‘this fe plainly coe, f does not give Ux
conspletely what is mean by the atatemont, Tam
thinking of a unicorn”; and I do not koow what
the cries meaning i Tes ceranly wa thet
‘am coacelving with regard to the property
“beings unicorn” that there ig something which
pomesses it; since I may be thinking of « Unicorn,
‘without ever having conceived the property of
“belog a unicorn” af all. Whatever it does mean,
the point which concerns us is that it is cortalaly
nnof necessary for Its truth, that the: of being
unicorn should, io fact. belong to. anything what-
ever, of, therefore, that chere should io any sense


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY


Biting o Me Beedle bthat of suppacng at
ting to Mr. supposing that,
a soma sense, 1 roust ieoply this later,

This, then, is what I ieagine to be at least one


feiss oe That "We as Cink of Time
suust imply There such thing
sand Sally, infers (correctly) from thi
false premiss tbat there must be some
proposion “There i soch a thing
‘Tire " which is consistent with ** Time le var
Te follows, then, that if Mr. Bradley means what
fought mean doch by “Time ix unreal” ond by
“rie ins" be io contradicting hima when
combines these two propositions. ‘al
T feel convinced that be dovs roean what he
to mean by the former. But 1 fee) a good
Meche tS whether a the sana’ be 0 Sonadiing
hhimeelf, because it does seem to me doubt
whether he means wbat be ought to mean by the
Inter. The ind of th whic 1 iagio say be
happening to bim when he insists 20 strougly that
Tie er, is 4 fac, ad i that properly
speaking, he is not aitacking to these phrases any
ieaning oacreer—ect therfore, ha obich they
Tt seems to te very possible that
00 arooghycooriecol binedl‘et abe dat
ion that there must be some sease in which,
if Pthink of a unicorn, there rest br a uaicorn, that
‘wherever he knows the former proposition olds, he
allows himself to use the Jatter forme of words,
without attaching: aoy to the, What he
is really anserting so emphatically may, I think, be


THE CONCEPTION OF REALITY 319


‘ot anything which his words stand Sor, but sinply
(hia verbal proposition that there mus be sow sense
in which they are true.


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


[wast to raise gome childishly simple questions as
to what we are doing wen me make Judgment of
certain kind, which we all do in fact exceedingly
commonly make The kind of judgments 1 mean
a Cie which we make when, with, regard to
fomething which me are secig, we au
Things an Thar i a inka able.
Seth 2 dont et te Se wih
to somet ‘we are feeling’ wid
Gor banda, we josge such things as “This is
cle" * Thin is 8 Thi is w coin” eter


Te bs scarcely pombe, 1 think, to, ex the
frequency with which we make such
these, nor yet the certainty with whic
to make vast numbers of them. Any
‘aot blind, can, at almost any moment of his waking
Hie, except when he is io the dark. make a ln
suumber of judgments of the Grst kind, with the

mtn carey. oc ‘0 Jook about bin,

¢ Is indoors, to judge with regard to varios
thlage whlch he ia sesig. uch (ings us * That ja
window,” “That is a chals”” “This is a book”;
(9, i€ be Is_out-of-doors, such ‘things as “That is a
Shame risa corer” Pa aan ot

That ia x stone,” “That in a tree,” “That is @
cloud" And all fue, who are oot bind, doin fact
constantly make such judgments, even if as a rule,
‘we only make them as parts of more complicated


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 2a:


jndgrcota, What J aaa is that when we make
idgmeots as * Hllot that ck has stopped,*

Tai ba fs crit te ha C08
{maa 12 foreigner,” j

the ag Lied with which I om conceroed are, 80

an go


tn tually juiging im fat 1
lok: dedi jolge
actual the ahs oe maa in
‘contains the two ments * That
Sie tteg and “Ti tree erhope
esis which we ak ‘of the sing wean ar, ae,
in ths way, only parts of more complica
secs tio oe lenow since: ee woes ee
wake Gent comity cman. hal areas
ake i Aad even 8
Bind wan oe i eh oa tm 27
frequenty, make of the second kind
pees about things which he is feeling with bls
Sn ee he heen we oles ot
moment of our waiiog life, whether we are in the
ark or not have only to feel certain. parts of our
tn beso of cates, Sn ode take, wich
a cevisinty, such judgments aa "This i
Sore tha its corr i? Aad
set we only to fel ia ey pockets to judge,
wvth royerd to objects which 1 meet wi theta,
raph ng at Th fo coin” “The po
"This ie
{a of tha kid would, I think, cooamonly,
tly, be talzen so be judgments, the truth of
‘hich lavoives the extremal igs ot
flcal objecta. {FU am right in judg i
Brtn‘tntaceel ie folgwe Oke thes oe nat one
fketand fn the Universe; and if there i ap inke
stand la the Univers, it follows that there is in it
Ar east one material thiog or physical object. The


az SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


may, of course, be disputed, Berkeley, if I under-
atand bia rightly, was clearly of opinion that there
‘war no inconsistency in maintaining that there were
fa the Universe thousands of intatonds and trees
fand stones and stars, and that yet there was ia it
no such thing as emaiter. And pechaps the defini.
thon of matter, which be adopted, was such that
there really was na iaconsiatency in maintaining thia
Perhaps, similacly, other philosopbers have somne-
Himes adopted defnkions of | the, expresins
‘material things” and “physical object,” whic
were such Aha al de secs of this Kind that
‘we make might quite true, without its
Fiasco oe Ar tie Ue any tater
things whatever. Pechaps, even, there ma
toms jovtibeation for adopting defcitioan of those
terms which would yield the surprising reault that
‘we may, with perfect coasistency, maintain that the
‘Mork! We fll of inerals and vegetables and animals,
Of all sorte of different kinds, and that yet there is
sot to be found in it a single material thing. I do
snot know whether thece is or is not asy utility in
tualag the tenas.“‘araterial thing” or“ physical
bert” im much a seas as hia.“ whesher there
is or not, I cannot help thinking that chere is amy
faites Ee eg cas Emote ere
‘sease in which from the proposition that there are
in the Universe such things a inkstands o¢ 61

for clouds, it strictly follows that there are in. it at
east 28 any coaterial tings, and ia whlch, tbere-
foro, we can not coasistently maintain the existence
of inkstands,
what of material things, The kinds of judgment


t
i
t
e
2


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION #23


‘Aci ie sect to moe that we are cerainly utlog the
teem “material thing” in a correct and teeful way,
if we express this imporant common property
hich ther ave, by eying tha of, ach OF he
The anme fan truly be ssid ts was sad of the judg
tient “That fe aa inkatacd ": dba, jst a from
Qroposition "There ie an fokstand it follows that
Glere is at least ove. qatecal thing, to from the
proposition ‘There is a tablecloth fellows that
hore is at least one material ching; and similarly
in all the other casen, "We can cerainly se the
fexprestion “Things rach az lnkatands, tablecloth,
fogers, clouds, sar vic.” to mean things such an
thive in a certain very fesporant respects which we
fil onderstand, though we may not be able to defing
ft. Aad the terra “material thing” cereal is and
tia be ceerectly used to ean simply things such
heen io Gal repecviaiver ie maybe.
Some tern is certuinly required to meet mere)
‘thioge such as these in that imporiant respect; aad,
0 far an T can see. there is on term which can
Sacally oved. In, this sense except the term
‘rpaterdl things” ‘and ‘ee equivalects, | Thus
understood, the term. "material thing” certainly
foes stand for an important notion which requires
enue.


234 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


such judgmecte as these, certain reasons for doubting
how couch iz aecessery are, { think, brought out
ziuch more clearly, aad if we approach the questioa
in any other way. Macy philosophers have told wx
‘very great deal as to what they muppose 10 be
involved in the exatence of material things ; and
atleast, among them seem to have tieant by
material things” such thinge as inkstende, Gngern
and clouds. ut T'ean thisk of only one type of
iow ar to the comtiution of material things which
Te such that it in tolerably clear what anrwer thoee
io hold woul give in angle gucnton
‘What is it that 1 am judgiog, when I judge, as 1
now do, that thet i an fokestand? The type. of
eT nme ett oii eo Hr EL
Taggers, when be expla what he means by a4
thet Mecerr a a Perctancat Passbiity of Scoaarion,
tad also the view o views which Me. Ruzsll sem
in bia "Our Kaowledge ofthe: Exteroal
Worth acem to belong. in the cave of views of
this dod, it i f thick, folerbly clear what anewer
thoee who hold them would give to a/ che quertioan
Tune to raise about judgments of the kind 1 have
decribed, Bus it docs not seem to me at all certain
iat aay view of this type (a true; and. cermlah
fnaay philosophers bave freld and do bold that
‘ews of thin type are flee. “But in the case of
hove who do held them to be false, Ido not know,
invany single care, what answer would be given 00
iy goto which T waat wraie Tale can
iowophers, Sot accept. any view of
Ser ges cee rt ce ow ce
i clear what answer he would give 10 al my
jeetiona some have made it clear what answer
oy would give to some of them; but many, I think,
have not even matle it clear what soswer they would
ve to any. Perbops there is some simple and
SRiitactory aswer, which has excoped me, that euch


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 225


philosophers could give to all my questions; but T
fanoot help thinking that assumptions as to the
‘aatuce of etaterial thiogs have too often been made,
‘without its even occurring to those who made them
to aak, what, i they were true, we could be jodging
‘when we make suck judgments ax these; and that,
if this quostioa bad been asked, it would have become
evident that those assumptions were far leas certain
than they appeared to be:


for calling’ all dgenenta of the Kind 1 mean "judg
ments of perception.” All of them are, of coores,
jodgunence about thiogs which we are at the moment
Serer ites whith ae are acing oF feeling A our
hands and all of them are, 26 doubt, also dazed
sopow something which we perceive aboat the thing
Rosrion Bat the met fact tat» judgments
och about thing whied fam pereciviag, am
biased upon something which 1 perceive about thet
sig doe vt sco be a sucirt Soe fe
it a judgment of perception; and I donot
now thar there is any other renson than this far
Calling ad jadgrents of the kind I mean judgments
of perception, I do not want therefore: ase
thst aff of them are so.” But it seems to me quite
ihe perm uber f hen ae a io
logittnace sense. This judgment, whicl
Kom meno the eon that ial ta dode oes
to me quite plisly to be pee,
{a the imple seme that I make it becaure 1 do,
fn fact oe trat that 2 a door, and asvere init 00
fore han what Uwe; ad wha ae, of cote


246 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


the ju tin question is a judgment of perce}
Ft pelea ieee ofthe kind T
‘meag are, quite plainly j of perception in


this scan, They are tal for the emmple reason
that some of there are mataken. cma, for ietance,
judge, with regard to an asiraal which [ace at 6
istoe Sue Eine sheep, whe ia fect icra pig
‘Aad bere exy judgment fe ceraaly not doe 00 the
thax thar I S62 It to be a abeep? slace T cannot
orice» hing to bes Shep, olen sone
fe therefore, nal judgment of perception inthis
Sak Ani materd Met viae’ acts eee
in cron, h may ooe always be = judgmets of pe
tlom for the reason tut, whezeut 1 only see the
thing ie question, the Kind of thing which 1 judge ft
toe ie Gf mch'a Satu tat iin impon fr
ay o0e, by aight alone, © aything
eriat kad” Hew to daw Ure ine beoween
jidgments of this ‘Kind, which are jodgments of
eteeson and how which are oot donot bom,
bat lato say, | do not know what conditions mux
be fied: io order that I may be toly said to be
(Perceving, by aight or toech, wach Unloge a thas
fiat tn © door, this ia x Eager, and not
Infereing them.” Some people ty no doubt thin
that {ci very unphilosophica) ia me to eay that we
fer can ‘pefceive auch things an abese’ But it
Seer to me that we do, ia ordionry lie, constantly
tall af teeing exch hiagh, and that, when we do 6,
Tiakeg Sy sdasks abot oh ea eerfotig
wy face auppost
femetbing to occur which never does ia (act oocar
‘The truth seein to te to be that we are cing the
term. “perceive” in a way which lu bath pestedly
peepee hp ents
stanly does cox, tone phi ve
Se repel et Kir bc entoa ug be
term and have not been able to dele it Tam not,


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 237


therefore, afraid to say that I do now peresive that
that ig a dooe, and that thar is « finger. Only, of
course, whe I say that { do, I do oot meat to
fuser that pars of hae I *perive,” when, 1


“perceive” these things, may not
wEic i oa laporeet ase fs kngwe to oe et
y inference. Jk would be ver aah #0 ansert that


‘perception,” in this sense of the word, entirely
eludes inference. All that seems to me certain
in that there ia an important and useful sense af
Steer ee me re
Sore era can
which is involved in my it seption that
{hat i a door, i 90 ber 19 the tut of te smsertion
Seance eae
then, of the kind of judgments with which I propose
to desl seem to me to be, in an important and legit
mate sense, judgments of pereeption; although 1
am oot repared to define, any further than I

See aes
Fregtes ‘questions which 1 shall raise apply just as
much to those of them which are not Solgioen of
perception a3 t0 those which ere, it ie ot course,
‘also true that they apply just as much to those
Greet means wht ae
Sap Ehpaece slice

iis

nhs iy oeraamneetet
tcorartlecd), Wert’ treo. aban it would bs quis
Aemponaible that any of them Should be judgments of

puaaael hie
fave deniod that we ever do in face koow auch
‘things as these, and others cot only that we ever
ercoce Garena
if, in fact, L never do know such = thing, or if it ix
ever true, it will of course, follow that 1 never
perceive such a ching; since I certainly cannot, in thin


‘228 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


cnac, perceive anything whatever, unless both
‘now ft and it is toe. But it seems to me x
‘afficient refotation of such views a3 thete, simply
fo point to cases in which we do know such thing
This, afer all, you know, realy is a finger: there is
sno doubt about it: T know it, and yoo all know it.
‘And 1 thick we may safely challenge any philoso.
her to being forward any argument in favour either
‘we do not know it, or of the
Rot true, which does oot at
ome pois reat upon some, pes
beyond comperisa, lesa certain than is the propos
ton which ici designed to attack. The qheatons
whether we do ever know such things as these, and
‘whether there are any material things, seem to me,
therefore, to be questions which there is no need to
take seriously : they are questions which it is quite
easy to answer, with certainty, in the affirmative,
‘Wat does, I think, need to be taken seriously, and
‘what is really dubious, is oct the question, whether
this is « Goger, or whether [ know that itis, but the
uestion what, e


certain respects, ] am knowing,
‘when I know that icin And this is the question &
which 1 will now address

‘To begin with there % one thing which seems toa
me to be very certain indeed about such judgments,
tis unfortunately a thing which I do not know how
properly to express. seem to me, to be
‘Objections to every way of expressing it which [ ean
think of But I hope { may be able to oaks my
meaning clear, in spite of tbe inadequacy of mm
expression. The thing I mean is a thing whi
iaay tp vome people seem 4 obviove a8 to a
dearcely worth saying. ‘cannot ink
that it ways clearly recognised, and eves
that eame philosophers to judge from whut they may,
might perhaps dispute it It seems to me to be
ax amumption which i slently made in many


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 219


ime to be very certain indeed But
all events worth while to try to make the
explicit, in case it sould be disputed,


i really
{is not true, thea the other questions to which T ab


on, and which seem to me really dubioot and
ifBeui do not, 1 Uaiok, ace wt sll

will try to express this furdamental aasoraption,
ich seems v> me so very certain, by sayiog it is
the assumption that, in all cases iz which { mnke @
judgment of this sore I have no difficulty whatever
dn picking out a thing, which ix, quite phialy, in a
setie nvvhich nothing cae. fhe thing about
bic I om vigment and that yet
though this thing is 442 thing about which 5 amt
jodging, Iam, quite certainly, sot, in general,
JeuGng wih repued  f that Wik a thing of that
Kind fer which'the tenn, which ecoms 6 express
the predicate of my ju ‘mmc Thos
when | jodge, a3 now, that That is ao inkstand, f
have 20 ‘Eificulty whatever in picking out, from
whut, if you like, you ean call my total eld of
presentation at the moment, an object, which 31
Undoubeedly, in a sense in which nothing else Ja, the
‘object about which Tam making this: judgment;
fand yer it secme to me quite certain thag of thst
‘object T am not judging that
‘Aad similarly when’ { Judge, with regard to some.
thing wbich 1 am feeliog Et ixy pocket, * This lab
coin?” 'T have no didicalty in picking out, from my
field of presentation, an. ‘which ix undoubeedly
ide, hie wth which sy Spent iy concer
and yet 1 am certaialy not judging with regard ta
{hia Sbject that tina whole ouee E any that ays,
wer, oaks sucha judgrens arene | a ick ov the
‘one, among the objects to me ot the time,
Shout mbich Tam making it; but I bave only said
that #e presrad I'am not judging with regard to this


‘a whole inkstaod,


ago SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


object that it isa thing of the kind, for which the
fem hich seems to expe the oredite of sy
ft, i a mame. ave Hin
SOS piastbn i poy, meee aoe ek
‘eases, in which it does zot, i it


ht, seem quite
go cerain that T am aot doing thin afin the two
instances I have just given.

Jodge with to something, which


in a soap bubble.” or * Thi
or ever when I judge
i 3t seem quite so plain, that } may not
‘gard to the very objet prescoed
to ae, that it ix itelf, a whole soap-bubbie, a whole
Of water, or a whole spot of ink, as it always

Jn in the cae of ne 8 ora coi, that re
the presente: if am judging,
to be a whole inkstand, or a whole coin, ‘fhe sort
of reason why } say this will, of course, be obvious
fyany one, and itis obviously of a childish order.
But { cannot say that it seems to me quite obvious
that in such a case 1 am not judging of the
resented object that it is a whole drop of water,
‘ay fa whieh doe sem tobe bviou thn 1

am not judging of éaur object that it fa au,
fntatand. Phat is why Kn eset to saying tat,
i sehen I judge “That is « noandsa” f
ing with regard to the presented object,
about which my judgment is that 1/ is a thing ofehe
kkind in question. As much as this seems to are to
bbe 0 thing which any child can see, Nobody will
, for a momest, that when he judges such

logy a The insane or" Thbig area! belt
ing, with regard to the prescoted object sbout
WME La jagetor pany tat his coca oe
(or a whole tree: be can, at most, suppose that he is
Judging it to be a part of the surface of a sofa or a
part of the surface of a tree. And certaialy in the
‘case of most judgments of this kind which we mate,


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 23:
whether in the case of all or oot, this is plainly the


cate: we are not j with regard to the
ted object about which our judgment plainly
Oar itis a thing ofthe Kind, for which ce te
which appears to express our
Judgment, in a name. And that this should be true
‘af mast judgments of this kind, whether ofall or not,
Ie quite sdhcent for my purpane
"his much, then, seem tD me to be very certaia
fndeed. "But | will ry to make clearer exactly what
Timean by it, by meationing’ « ground on which f
laagine is might pethaga be dpsed.
he object of which | bave spoken as the object,
about which, in each particular case, such a judg-
ment ar this always is a. jedgment, is, of course,
always an object of the kind which some philoso.
phers would call a sensation, and others would call
4, ense:datum, | Whether all philosophers, when
they talle of sensations, mean to include among
‘them auch objects as these, | do not know. Some,
rho have given & great, deal of attention to the
subject, and for whom J have a great respect, tall
(of sensations in such a way, that T cannot be sure
‘what they are talking about at all or whether there
are such things. Bot many, J think, undoubtedly
do mean to include such subjects as these. No
doubs, ia general, whea they call them sensations,
they mean to attribute to them properties, which
{t seems to me extremely doubtful whether they
postess. And perhaps even those who call them
ftemse-data, may, io part, be attributing to them
properties which it may be doobefl whether they
porseas If we want to define a sensation or a
fsense-datum, in a roanner which will leave it not
to doube what sort of things we are talking of,
and that there are auch things, I do not koow thet
‘we can do it better than by saying that sense-dasx
Ate the sort of things, aboat which such judgments


432 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


4 these always seem to be made—ihe sort of things
‘which scem to be the real or vitimate subjects of all
‘toch judgments Such a way of dedning how the
term “sense-datum'” is used, may oot seem very
satisfactory: but I am inclined eo ebiok it may be
fas satisfactory a8 any which can be found. And it
‘is cemainly cakulated to obviate some misunder-

i ch may arise; since everybody can
bat the thing ia which } am describing
ing about which he is making bis judgment,
‘when be judges “That is an inkstand,” and thar
there is sich a thing, even if he does not agree dhut
this description applies to i.

T ean, in fact, imagine that some of those who
‘would call this Ibiog 2 sensation would deny that
amy judgment is aboad ic wt all. Tt would vometimes
be spoken of as the sensation which mediates my

tion of this inkstand io this instance. And

‘can imagine that some of those who would so
peak of it might be inclined 10 say that when I

“This in an inkatand,” my jodgment is about
this inkstand which I perceive, and oot, in aay
‘sence at a, about the sensation which mediates my
peceeption of i, They my perhaps imagine that
the sensation mediates my perception of the ink.
stand only in the sense that it, brings the inkstand
Ddefare my mind ia such e way that, once it is before
say mind, T can miake a judgment about it, which is
sat a judgment about the mediating sessation at
i; aod that sb ie one Ta

expres "This is an ink-

tiand.” ‘Such a view, if is held. seems to me to
te gui certny Gale, and is what T have lotended
to deny. And perhaps 1 can pet most clearly the
reason why it seems fo me false, by eayiog that, if
(which may be doubted} there is anything which i=
is nkatand that thing is certainly oot given to
me independently of this secse-datum, ia such x


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 233


sense that I can possibly make 2 yment about
irwhich is nat ajedgmest about this sease datum.
Tam not, of course, denying thet 1. do perceive this
inkstand, and that my jeden is, id a sense, a
yment about it. things scem to me
Be reaeks Sica an Tan, oy mae
‘of judguect Wala, ta ascuber ane,
mont bout this sense-detom which mediate aty
perception of the ieksiand. "Those who, ay Gat
this sensedatum does mesiate my peroption Af Oe
Inkstand, would, of course, samt that ty percep
tn of the lakatand a, n'a sense, Sopewdeat o
the sense-datum ; that it is dependent is in
the mere statement that it is mediated by But
is might be maintained that it is dependent on it
aly fa the sense ia which, when the idea of one
‘hject is called up in my mind, through association,
by the idea of another, che idea which is called up
if dependent co the idea which cals t wp What
I wish to irae age seems fo me —
quite certainly toe, ie ‘perception of thie
Elstod to dependent on thi SomeSietam, by
uite diflerent and far more intimate sense than
thin, It ir depeodent on ie in the sense that, if
thee epting ei th Inthe it
fog thet Rings T an Kaomiog'® ony an
Bing wich manda. a catain teion co hte
veneedatumn "When the idea of oe objec lt
Called up in try mad by the idea of anothet, 1 do
‘not keow the second object ondy as the thing which
fas 4 cerain relation to the frst: on the cootrary,
Lean make a judgment about the second abject
which is aot a judgment about the Grst.. And
adhe anf rset hich
DPresested to me siewhanevedy, T'do not kaow the
One oad as a ching which basa certain relation t0
the other, But in the case of this sense-datum and
thi inkstand the case seema 10 me to be plainly


44 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


yuite different. If there be a thing which ia this
kstand at ali, ic is cercainly omdy known to ore as
tha thing which sands in 2 certain relation to this
sense-datum. {t is not given to me, in the sense
io. which this sense-datum is given, If there be
auch a thing at all, it ia quite certainly only known
te we by descriptica, in the sense in which Mr.
Rasll wees Uhet phrase; end the, description, by
‘which i is koowo is that of being te thiog whit
mands to this semse-datum in a certain relation.
‘That ia to say, when I make such a judgment ax
“This inkatand i


a
if there be such a thing af all, oly an the
‘thing which stands to this sense-datum in a certain
relaboo ; and hence my jedgment, though in one
teense it’ may be said to be a judgment aboot the
fokstand, is quite certainly also, in another sense, 2
judgment about this sense-datum. This seems to
oe 40 clear, that I wonder how anyone can deny
it; and perhaps nobody would.” But I cannat help
ing that it is not clear to everybody; partly
berause, #0 far 2s {can make out, nobody before
‘Mr. Russell had pointed ovt the exireme difference
there is between a judgment about a thiog known
ots desc the india whe, aban
¢ judgment, and a jodgment about a thing ot
known to bim only io this way ; and partly because
0 many people soem still utterly 10 have failed to
saderntand what the dnintion is whieh he ex
presses in this way. I will try to make the point
rent me or eee ett
vecing two coins, lying side by side, and am not
perceiving them in any other way except by sight.


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 235


It will be plain to y. 1 sbink, that, when 1
identify the one as “This one” and’ the other ax
“That one,” 1 identify them only by reference 10
the twa visual ‘objects, which correspond
feapectivay tothe coe and to the ater, | Buc what
fray ot think, be reais, is that the, seme
bT’ ideatify them by reference to the core
ponding secse-data, is one which involves that
very judgment which [ make about the o
judgment about the sense-datum which corresponds
‘to K, and every judgment I make about the other,
a jrdgment about the sense-datum which corre:
be uavqens ae
er, which is not & nt about the
corresponding sense-darom. But if the two coin
swore given to mein the sense in which the two
sense Gata are, this would certainly nat be the case.
T can identify and distinguish the two sense-dsta
sirectly, this a5 this one, and that a3 that one: I do
Rot need to identify either as the thing which hax
this relation to this other thing. But T certainly
cannot thes dicectly identity tho two coins, I have
not foor things presented to me (1) ¢hi sense
atu, (2) shat sone datum, (3) hss coin, and (4)
that coin, but two only—thi sense-datum and 1
venue dati,» Whes, therfore, I judge” Ths ina
pin," my judgment is certainly a judgment about
the Goe seneuum, and when I judge " And iat
tae a coin” its cerily w jo mak tn
other, Only, in soy language right
teem vo imply, Lam ceranly oe jing einer of
the one sente-datam that it is a whole cotn, nor yet
of the other that it ix one,

This, thea, seems to me fundamentally certain
‘about judgments of this kind. Whenever we make
such @ judgment we can easily pick out an object
(whether we call ita sensation oF a sense-datum, o
foot), which i, in an easily intelligibie sense, the


136 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


which is the real or ultimate subject of our
niger; tod ye in any cen a all evi
‘what we are judging wit t0 this object is
certainly not that it is an object of the kiod, for
which the term which appears to express the predi-
ate of our judgment is a name.

‘But if this be 20, what is ic that { am judging, ia
all ouch cates, about the prevented object, which is
the real or oltimate subject of ery judgment? It is
at this point that we came to questions which acom
to me 10 be really uncertain and difficolt to answer.

To begin with, thers is onc answer which is
‘naturally suggested by the reason I bave given for


taying thet, in this ie obviong that 1
um ack judging, is presented object,
er vibat eee, Jere!


way, quite obvious that, in making such a judgmeat
wip na spsbobble or Vhs 2 dep of
matey) may at bef ging. of the abject about
hich my jodgment ig, that that very object really is
@ soap-bubble or a drop of water. The reasou I
we fs thet ‘it is quite obvious that [ do not take
is presented object to be @ twhole inkstand : that,
‘at most, I only taie it to be pact of the surface of
a2 inkstand. And this reason naturally suggests
fat the tre anawer our gosion fo erat
what Iam judging of the presented object 1s jaxt
Baris inn part of be worfac of a0 inkstand. ‘thie
rent level frca tee eageeane toatl on Sepia
level from tbat 1am judging
ierreally to be ao inkstsod It is oot cbldpnly
obvious that Tam not judging it to be pare of the
lturface of an inkstand, asitis that I am oot judging
{t to be an inkstand—a whole one.

On this view, wheo [ say such things as “That
(yan inkatand,” “That is a door," “This is a coin,”
fees expreseias ‘would bes loose we
of maying “That is part of che wctce of on


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 237


stand,” “That is part of the surface of a door,”
WTR spat of the eriace of coi.” And there
‘would, 1 chit ‘ating worpiing in
‘Wan at ga = pando $5
At at first sight, appears to nam
hag whereas Tvappenr t0 be awering of given
thiog thar it ix of a certain kind, 1 am not really
dssering ofthe thing ia question that it ln of that
ind ll would be susceptible of an eany ex.
tion, And. this view were true,
by old offer an excellent uaration of the
difference between 2 thing known only by description
fand a thing ot 60 knows, and would show how
entirely fee from mystery that distinction is. Ou
this view, when I judge “ That inkstand ie @ good
dig one” [shall in effect be judging: “There is
one aad only one inkstand of which zis is part of
the surface, and the inkstand of which this is true is
a good big one.” It would be quite clear that the
part of the surface of the inkstand was givea to me
o.a sease in which the whole was not, just as it is
in fact clear that { do now “sce” this part of the
surface of this inkstard, in a sease in which 3 do
wot “see” the whole; and that my judgment,
Sof in ak len bh che ke flan
jut one particular part af its surface,
‘dont them in two entirely different sentes,
jit view Sone, sis 8 se gh
think, very matural to suppose to be true. But
tiefore giving the reasons, why, nevertheleon it
patti y doubt 1 think iit
jesirable to try to explain more precisely what
se als mor, ely ae


seat cathe proposition that te ane datum rally
Sra some seune or other, a "part of this tak
stand, and that what 1 am jodging with regard to


38 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


owing that this can possibly be
‘am judging. when once they understand
io which I am bere vaing the word

in vense ix, T am quite unable co
pe I may be able to make oy
ing igstances of

"of other


2 partof that tree; in which thiz finger of mine i=
anouwy = pest of ary Rew sed soy bee 6 vet
is ig a sense in which every part of
tied mite comical
‘sense in which a material thir
fat be mid 10 hive para The view which T wish
> discs is the view that Tam judging Chia
Presented object to be a part of an inkstand, in this
Sense. Ad the nature of the view can perhaps be
ie cot more coury. by mendoning’ ona
1 corel! which would follow from it I
ar ofcourse, at tia moment, seeing many parts of
th urace oi hanod Det p
bacept one, are, io fact, themaclves par of that
ne." That one la the one of which we shoud
Satay speak» "he pare of the aurtace that T
Ai now secog” or ax “240 part of the sarlace of
his Tnkarand” There in oly oe part of te
warface of this iskstand, which thus contain, as
‘all the other pacts that Iam now ecciag,


aii ‘ae 1am judging this prevented
dec to bo part of the sree oan latent


SOME }UDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 139


all in the gente 1 mean, it mould fl
ted object must,
Ehorand te toe (an extn


is part, which contains alt the other parts


which Tans seeing; eince there io plainly oo other
Fae with which coold pony be “dense

ha isto say, farm telly judging of
presented object thet itis part of the surfane of an
Tnistand, in the sense } mean, it must be the case
that everything which is true of what [ should call
‘dbia part of the surface of this inkatand” ia, fo
fact, true of this presented object.

Thin view, therefore, thar what we arc judging
of the ukimate subject of our judgment, when we
Judge "This is a so-and-so” ia, in general, merely
tat the subject in quenon in. fry of @ thing of
the kind ic question, can, I think, be most ch
stincassed, by asking whether, in this case, thi
resented object can. ceally be identical with this
par of the curface of this ickstand. Tf it can't, then
‘most certaicly 1 am not judging of it that it is a

tofu sartace ofan Yoksiand ak al For wy
Judgment, whatever it ia, ia true. And yet, if chia
presented object is not identical with this part of the
surface of this inkatand, it cerainly is not a part of
aan inkstand at all; since there is no other
either of thie inkstand or of any other, with which
{teauld porsibly be supposed to be identical.

Can we, then, hold thet this sense-datoma really
baie te ee
Jokstan at everything which is true of
one is true of the other?

‘An eaormous number of very familiar arguments
hhave been used by various philosophers, which, if
they were sound, would show that we cam not.
Some of these arguments seem to me to be quite
dearly not sound “al, for instance, which ceat cher
‘oa the assumption that this sense-datom can only


240 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


exist 40 lang as it is perceived, or on the assumption
that it can only exist s0 long’as it is perceived éy
she Of ote t suspect tht they eey bave sae
force, though Iam quite unable to soe that the
have any, “Such, fog sans, ae al sme wich
‘assume either that this sease-datura is
oo focing of tion ia « senso whch lachder te
assertion that it is dependent oo my mind in the
same sense ia which my tion of it
Abvloaty iso oc a i cut dependent on
in the sense in waick my perception of i
Sleek wie’ Ba Sane Oe oe ue
force. 1 will, however, confine myself
to trying to state one, which seems to me to have
as much as any. Je will be found that this one
involves an aarumplon, which does seem 19 to
force, but which yet seems to me to
Sedat “Sotaras I'knon’all good engurnene
at the view that this cense-datum really ta
ptical with this gers tomats of the iokatand,
do involve this sare and have no more
force than it bas. But io this, of course, I may be
‘wrong. ate wit ei pt ot
an argument, which is obviously quite independent
of i, and which yet bas force.

‘The argument I mean iovolves considerations
which are exceedingly familia, so familiar that 1 am
afraid every one may be sick of bearing them
‘ded Bes aoe of eat, sme to me

ia pat ate, rei, io 6 way
srbict wil distoguish i clearly ‘arguements
Teciuig the fine anil conderaiten, bt
which do no¢ seem to me to be equally cogent [
‘want, therefore, to try to pot it with a degree of
which will prevent imelevant objections

made to it—objecticas which would, |
think, be relevant against some of these other
arguments, but are not, I think, relevant against it,


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 241


The fact is that we all, exceedingly commosly,
when, at each of two times, separaced by « lonj
for shorter interval, we sex a part of the surface of &
‘material thing, in' the senae in which Tam now
seeing this part of the surface of

when at one time we soe such a surface and at
another perceive one by touch, make, on the second
Gecanion the jugment © 7aispart of a malay ty


the same the surface of the same thing, ax
that which {war seting (or perceiving by toc)
jst now.” How commonly we all do this can


carcely be exaggerated. I’ look at this inkstand,
and then [ look again, and on the second occasion I
Jardge "This part of the surface of this inkstand ia
‘he bame as, oF at least contains & part which is the
tame ao 4 part of, the part of ics surface which T
‘was secing just now.” Or I look at this finger and
then T touch it, and 1 jedge, on the second occasion,
"This part of the ‘of this Singer is the same
fs one of those T was seciog just vow.” We all
thua sonstancly identify a part of a surface of a
material thing which ‘we are perotiving at oot
time, with pare which we sere perceiving at
nother.

‘Now, when we do this—when we judge “This ja
the same part of the same thing as { was seeing o
touching just now,” we, of course, do not mean to
exclude the possibility that the part in question may
have changed during the interval; that it iy really
different, an the second occasion, cither ia shape o
fiz of quality, or in all three, from what it was on
the first. That is to eay, the sease of samerese
which we ace here coocerned with is one which
early does not exclude
prepared to assert, 00 ‘grounds,
fares, tbat the surface ia question certainly mutt
hhave changed. But .
difference in one respect, between two kinds of soch

°


242 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


only tat id larger than
ba chet ite percep
Bee ofa ind oer da Pry
diage in the proce
Incheon Sirota shape from whi
tras et the begioding, but is fersegehy 0; may,
Forlnwance, Ue a percoptbly Beier ohipes than ti
twas to start with, ‘Or, If watch 2 person Blabing.
Hay judge at ¢ceraio wage Ut cern grr
the nirace of his face not cay is different in colour
from what it was, whea 1 saw it before be begen to
baa, bot is pereplibly 20—percepliy redct In
‘enormous numbers of cams we do thes judge of @
sarc sen ate given tne dat ashes ore
reat 19 ize cin shape, or ia colour, from what
(Sir vien'we caw i bcire But ccs a at
feast equally cvenerous ia which, though we might,
fon general groonds be prepared to assert that it
sus ave coged i tl pers we should oot
be prepared tovenert that Se had in any respect
sthatever, changed pereeibiy. “OF tha part of this
sata oft land romance, Va cerainly
bot prepared to avert that it is now 4
dierent ia acy respect from what it was when 1
few i just now. And similar cases are 20 womerooe
that I need not give further instances, "We can,
therefore. divide cases in which we judge, of « part
ofa eusiice which we are seeing, “This tthe sume
fart ofthe surface of the same inazeral thing as the
Shs |dge "br 1 in pecapuy, dfcent oe
Bor it is perceptibly diferent
hat was then,” axl canes fa which, even though
Wye might auert “Tt smut be diferent” we are


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 143
cxrtainly 20t prepared to assert that it ip perzephibly


‘But now let us consider the cases in which we are
‘not prepared to essert that the surface in question
ag changed perceptibly. The strange act, from
which the argument 1 mean is drawn, is that,
very lege ober of cock casey W tore a if it
‘were womistakably true chat the presented object,
About which we are making our jedgment when we
talk of “Tie surface” at the later time, s percep:
bly different, from chat about which we are nak
fewhen we ik of the surfece 1 sew just now. If
an the later time, J am ata sufficiently greater
diatance: fron, the areees 2 the aphpod wea
corresponds to it atthe time seers to be pares
timaller, than the one. which ‘corresponded 10. tt
pete uns = eee, at it eo eden
oblique angle, the later preseated object often veeeat
fo be pererpuily diferent in shape-a perceptbiy
flatter ellipa, for inatance. 5f Tam lodking at it
wrth blue spectacies on, when formerly 1 bed none,
the later presented object seems to be pereeptibly
different in colour from the earlier one. If I am
perociving’ it by tout alone, wherean formeriy I
fran peceeiving {by sight alone. che later presented
Sbest tems to be Bereeuily diferest rom. the
earlier, in respect of the fact chat it is not coloured
‘et all, whereas the earlier was, and that, on the
other hand, it has certain tactual qualities, which
fhe carer bad oot got. All tls goeme to be au

in as it can be, and yet it makes absolutely no

erence wo the fat tat of the sera io gueton
‘we are aof prepared to judge that it is percepeibly
different from what it was. Sometimes, of course,
ttbere there soemt to be no doubr that the lager
resented object is perceptibly different from the
Earliee, we may cot notice that it is 2. But even
srhere we do notice the epperent difrence, we do


44 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


sil} continue to judge of the surface in question:

Tis surfee ie aot 0 fara I ean ell with certain
ception, in ‘any way different from what it
eT eek croaked nfs mages 1am
10 assert that it bas pecaptby,

rea thereon, o be wets ey

the surface seen at the luter time abould be identical
with the object presented then, and the surface seen
a he atl denial with the object presented

theo, for the simple reason that, whereas with regand
tothe ki Sea ees
in any way meee ferent from that
Sit regard to the Tater
evthat it percep.
by ~ om te et nt
they are perepthly dierent simpy wares me in

the face, It seems, in short, that wher bh
case, I judge: ~ This sarface is oot, 60
tell perceptibly diferent from che'one 1 saw just
bow," {cannot possibly be judging of the presested
abject “ Tats 1s not, so far as f cas tell, perceptibly
iderent from that object which was presented 10
‘me just now.” for the simple reason that I cam tell,
as certainly, almost, a6 I can tell anything, that it

rceptiby diferent ‘

That ix the argument, as well as I can pet it, for
snyiog, tht this presented object is nal ental
with this part of the surface of this ioksta
Tie tharlore, when Tasge "Tile tart of the
torfice of an iokwtand” T sm sot jodgiog of thio

presented object, which nevertheless is the ultimate
ubject of my fedamen ha of is pact ofthe surface
of an inka ae thie argument does seem to
ig to be a very ‘one.
jut nevertheless it does cot seem to me to be
‘dae seotcaley Fremas Kcuse oo ae toi
‘Thich, though i seems to me to bave great
does not seem to me quite cermin. The assumption


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 245


1 mean ihe amumption cut. in sch cape aa the
1 have spokea of, the later preseated cbject really
is perceptibly different from the earlier. This
asumption bas, if I am not mistaken, seemed to
faany philosophers to be quite unquestionable; they
have never even thought of questioning it; and
own that it used to be's0 with me. And I am still
pot sure thar I may not be talking sheer nonsense
In suggesting that it can be questioned. But, if [
am, Tam no longer able to see that Iam. What
now seems 10 me to be possible ia that the sense-
datum which co is to a tree, which | am
secing, when 1 am a mile of, may not ceally be
perceived to é¢ smaller than the one, which corres:
ond to the same tree, shen I see it from a distance
of only a bundeed yards, bur that it is only perceived
to ser mailer atthe nase-datum whic cores
ponds to a penay, which 1 am seeing obliquely,
Zor rally perceived toe different im shape fom
that which ‘corres ‘to the penny, when I was
straight in front of it, but is only perceived to seem
Sifferent—that all that is perceived is that he one
seems elliptical end the other circular; that the
dente-datum presented to me when I have the blue
spectacles of is not perceived to be different in
colour from the one presented to me wheo | bave
not, but only ta sero 40; and finally that the sense
datum presented whea 1 touch this finger is not
pereived to de diferent io any way trom shat
Presented to me when J see it, but only to seem wo
that I do not perceive the one to be coloured and
the other not 19 be so, but only that the one seam
coloured end the other not. Ifsuck a view ix to be
be, we shall have, of course, to maintain that
¢ kind of experience which [ have expressed by
saying one seems different from the other—" ssemr
circular,” " seems blue,” "seems coloured,” and 80 02
‘involves an uitimate, sot further analysable, kind


446 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


of logical relation, not to be identified either
‘with that involved in being “*perceived” 10 be 80
fas. ot with that involved in, being * judged
tp be so and 30; since a preseated object migbt, ix
his sense, stone to be eliptical, seem to be blue, ete.
when it is either perceived to be so, nor judged
to beso, But there seems to me to be no reason
mby there should not be suck an ultimate relation,
‘Tho great objection to such a view stems to me 19
bbe the dificulty of believing that I don't actually
perceive this sense-datum to d¢ red, for instance,
fand that otber to de elliptical; that I only perceive,
in many cases, that it omy tof eaooot, however,
‘pow persuade my: it is quite dear that
petecve it to de And, if 1 don then i gem
ly possible that object really
identical wih this part uf the surlace ofthis inkatand
since, when I judge, as in the cases su that
the surface in question is nef, s0 far as can tell,
tly different from what it wa, I might really
Be judging of the ero scose-data chat they tec were
ok so far as I can tell, perceptibly dikereat, the
‘only diflerence between the two that & perceptible,
being that the one seams to be of a certain size, sha
Gr colour, and the other t0 be of a diferent and fae
compatible size, shape or colour. Of course, ia
thote cases, a8 in that of the balloon being blown up,
srbore 1 pareve tha the eurtace bes changed,
«4g: in size, it would have to be admitted that {' do
ive of the two sense-data not merely that the
nem different ia size, but that they are x0, But
think it would be possible to roaiotain that the sense
in which, in these cases, [ “perceive them to br
ifferent, ia a different one from that in which, both
jn these and in the others, ] perceive them to seme


Possibly in making this suggestion that sease-
dat a” cer whe oat Tiilaopbets he


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 147


uasumed unbesitatingly that they are perceived to
be_ different, are only perceived to sm
dierent, Iam, 2 I said, talking sbeer nonsenge,
though 7 cannot at ths moment see that I am,
‘possibly, even ‘suggestion itself is not
Scans even fr. he ay be oer Ga)
jections to the view ‘peeseated object
really {5 identical with this part of the surface of
this inkstand, But what sceam to me coriin is
ted Ey sot ena wih to fart
sented object i cerataly wat identical with this
OF the ‘nifuce of thn ioknand. “And tines Reis
Aoubsfal whether it is noe nonsense, and
doubsfal whether it is truq it must, I think, be
admitted to be highly doubtful whether the two are
Adee, oY ny are ot rac cn =
am jodging wi ‘to.this presented object,
sehen, 1 jadge This is an inkatand” is cercily
seat that ie Ve itself part of the eurftce of an ink
mand; and beace, ‘ic is work while to inquire
farther, whos if Tam not judging this, I caw be
judging with regard to it.
nd bere, T think, the fit aataral suggestion to
sake ia that just aa, when ] talk of “this inkstand,"
what I seem really to mean in “the inkstand of
which this is part Of the surface,” 30 thot the ink-
mand Is only known to me by description as the
inlestand of which this material surface is part of
the surface, so again when 1 talk of “this material
sorfc" what [relly mean i hs material sane
to whi (presented object) bas a certain
hile wr tha Cy mata oy in i cum, oa
mown ‘to me by description a8’ the surface whi
tas & coral reason te thr presesed object If
polbeiediong tyrclrpegn te opty
presented object, when I jodge “This i part of the
surface of an inkstand,” would be not that it is itaelf
much @ part, but that se thing which stands to it


248 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


fin a certain relation is auch a part: in short, what
should be judgiag with regard to xf, would be
There's ove’ thing and one only which stands to
his in this relation, and the thing which doea wo


fpart of the aurfice of an inkstand.
Bat if we are to adopt the view thar somethlag
of this vort la what we are judging, there occurs at


‘once the pressing question: “What on earth ran
the relation be with regard to which we ere judging,
Hac one and. ooly one thog.wacde in tor thes
resented object?” Aad this is 2 question to which,
Sat Sold (ou tty 30) toa te premene ofee
(as mm that this presented o
fo tem Sie cho part ofthe parce of he
inkstand, and also that there really something of
‘which i¢ could be truly predicated that i in Chia
art of the surface of this inkatand (that ix to may,
‘ho reject all views of the Mill-Russell type), bave
given an 2 clear answer. It docs not
seem to have occurred to them thet it requires an
anawer, chiefly, I think, because it has nat occurred
to them to ask what we can be judging when we
make judgeents of this sort ‘There are only two
scoma fist om chink, which igh be
“ey pi lowoplcr, woo take the view that the
resented objects about which we make these jug,
ments are sensations of our and some eves
do not are in the habit of talking of "és causes”
of these objects as if we koew, fn th
thar i had one and only one cause ;
them seen to think that this part of the surface of
this iskatand could be correctly described an ths
cause of this presented object Tt


Sherefore, the lew that what am judging in tia
case might ia abject bas one
and oaly one cause, and thet cause is part of the
surface of an inkstand” Jt scems to me quite


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 249


obvious that tAés view, at all events, is utterly uo-
fable. I Ga cor believe fora morent, nor does
fay one, and eal therefore do et Joa, hat
is presented object bas only one caune:” I belle
tbat tan c wisde wie of diferent causes T So
In fact, believe that this part of the surface of this
Inkatand in owe among the causes of my perce]
of this presented object: that seem love tobe &
very well established scientific proposition. And
Tein ‘prepared to admit that there may be good
reasons for thinking that it ia one among the causes
Of this presented object iteelf, though [ cannot
tuypelf see that these are any.” But tat it is the
ony came of thin prearsed objees T certaialy Wo


rela toc that i might be planibly held has it


‘alone causes this presented object te that
pertinier wey. Bat 20y tach dcfnitoa would, $0
for as I can tee, be vectamrly very complicated
ea ugair Cysts oy cou sely a ek
rout be igh wwe could truly say
What we ste jucgiog in thew cases is Thi
Presented objet iss one and only one catae, of thi
tpecil si de ot inh #0 deny that
forme such view may, oe

The only other on I can sake i that
there may be some ultimate, not further definable
relation, which we might for instance, call the
Celution of" belog a manifestation of” wl (bat we
might conceivably be judging: “ There is one and

fy one thing of which tix presented object in @
manifestation, aad fas thing fs part of the surface
ofan inkstand” And here agate, ic seers to ae
jut posi that chis may be aire acount of what
‘we are judging; only 1 cannot find the slightest


ago SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION
sign tbe 1 am in feet aware of any auch


Pomibly other suggestions could be m:
what the relation in with regard to which it could
usibly supposed that im all cases, where we

make these judgments we are ia fact judging of the
[Preseoted object © There is one and aly one thing
‘which stands to this object in this relation.” But it
seems ta me at least very doubtful whether there is
any such relation ac all; whether, therefore, our
Jodgiment really is ofthis form, ead whether therefore,
‘this part of the surface of this inkstand really in known
to me by description as te thing which stands ina
cereain relation to this presented object. But if it
Wa and en, vo canaot taka the How tat what
‘am judging ia that this preseated object isef/is a
of dhe surface of an inkstand, there would seer


soe I.
a Views of thia type, if 3 understand them


htly, are distinguished from those which I bave
elo considered, by the fact that, according to
them, there ia nothing whatever in the Universe of
which it could truly be thot itis this

of the surface of this inkstand, or indeed that it is #
[part of the rucface of an inkstand, or an inkstand, at
all. They hold, in short, that though there
plenty of material things in the Universe, there ix
aching in of which could ely, be amt that
his a material thi when I assert
‘This ean inkstand,” my amertion in trus and i
uch that it follows from it thet there isin the
Universe at leant “one inkstand, and, therefore, at
Teast one material thing, yet it does not follow rom it
that there is anything which is a material thing.
When 1 judge “This is an iokstand,” 1 am judging


this object to possess @ certain property,
we wack shat ifteet are thiogs wtlee pres


SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION 251


that property, there are inkstands.and material thi
bur which i such that aoching which te
{elf a material hing; a0 that im jodgiag tha there
fare material things, we are. really always judging of
dane alley propery, which i 200 tht of being &
material thing, that there are things which posteas
a Te ncema to mo quite possible, of course, that
feroe view of this type ia/tye toe one edond,
Teepe ay be Ward, yon ke oh
shove in, Favour of the. propoliton that same
eh view muit be tus. Cerny one of my main
‘objects in writing it was to put as plainly aa (can
frome grave diftulioe winch seem to me co sand
in che way of any other view; ia the hope that
some of those, ect all views of the Mill-
Russel ype tay explain leary which of the
alrertives [bare suggested they would adopt. or
whether, perhaps, some other which has not occurred
to me "Tt does not seem to me to be always
wiiiclently realived how difficult it is to find any
‘answer to my question “What are we judging in
these cace?""to. which there are not ¥ery
5 objections, unless we adopt an answer of the
i Rael pe. Thar ta wer of is wpe
the ime on am aot yee in aie of Se
objections by any menss convinced, "he tr fe
Tam completly pursed te to what the trae answer
can be. At the present oioment, I am rather
Inlet avout view iat what Leong

ofthis presented object i that Fee tell a att
the surface of an inkstand—that, cherefore, it really
a identical with chie part of the surface of this
inkstand, in spite of the fact that this involves the
view thnk where, Biber, have sive ppd
elf to be perceiving of twa preserted ebjers
Eat they really were didereat, I was, in fac, Oaly
Frere at ey ema ins, Bae at
have said, it seems to me quite possible that this


452 SOME JUDGMENTS OF PERCEPTION


‘view ia ax 1 bave hitherto supposed, sbeer nonsense ;
Sipschos Wr is ce det dak pemaend tiles ©
chjectons 40 the view preseated ject
Be pan ofthe nutes of ths lore


‘THE CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC
VALUE


Mr main objec: in this paper is to try to define
mare precisely the most important question, which,
to far an {can en, is really at isave when it is
disputed. 10 any predicate ‘of value,
whether it is or is oot a." * prodicate
‘There are three chief cases io which this controversy
jn apt to ari It arises, frat, with regard to the
conceptions of and ‘wrong,’ and. the
mato te to cs secondly, wk egurd
to be done ft arises, secondly, wit

foregord ander sme ge of howe words
Im which the conceptions for which they stand are
certainly quite disticct from the conceptions uf
‘right aad“ wrong,” but in which nevertheless it
ie tadesable chat ihies bs to deal wik them,
‘Aad it arises lasly, with regard to certain sesthetie
couceptions, week “ir ™beacelul” and. ugly” oF
good” and "bad" in the seose in which theye
words are applied to works of art, and in which,
therefore, the question what is good and bad is &
‘Question not for ethicn but for satberics.

1a all three cases there are people who maintain
that the predicates in joo are
fant easly Sehned 'T Ten noe ee.
fairly casi 3a 208 ing 10
msenpe » pechetly ascerans dullakion of tha snap
ia quesdoa; but, as the term “subjective” is 30
desperately ambiguous, 1 bad better try 10 indicate


454 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


shy the sense [am thioking of Take the
ron * beautifal” for “heres a sense
2am cemtrae, wack, Sat
beautiful” stands for a subjective predicate, means,
roughly, that any wonemene of tbe form Thi it
fat” rerely expressea a. poyct

avetio to the fect shee some particle indivEval
¢ class of individvals either actually has, or woul:
under certain circumstances, have, x certain kind o
mental attitude towards the thing in question. And
sh moan by * having a meta atde” tower
f thing, can be best explained by saying tbat to
desie 4 thing is wo bave ane Sind of mental attuade
towards it, 1 be pleased with it is to have another,
to will itis tg bave another ; and in short that to have
any kind of fecling or ciation towards itis 10
havea certain mental atitude towards it—a different
one in cack case. Thus anyone who holds that
when we say that a thing is beautiful, what we meow
i merely that we ourselves or some particular class
‘of people actually do, or would under certain
‘irevmetances, have, or permanently bave, a certain
feeling towards the thing in question, is taking a
“gubjective” view of beauty.

‘Bor in all three cases there are also a good many
people who hold that the predicates in question are
fot in this sense “subjective”; and I think that
those who bold this are apt (0 speak aa if the view
whlch they wih to tavain fr opposition to it
consieted. simply und solely in bolding its contra-
Gictory—in holding, that is, that the predicates in
oenion ee “objective” where, “objective” simply
means the same ax "not subjective” But in fact
think this i bardly ever really the case, Io the
case of goodness and beauty, what suck people aro
really anxious to maintain is by no meaus merely
tbat these, conceptions are, “objective,” But that
besides being “objective,” they are also, ina sense


say that


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 255


which I shall try to explain, “lotticsic” kinds of
valus Tt is this conviction—the conviction that
oon and ean are ifn nds of vlog
which is, Lehi ‘Mrongest ground of their
objection wo any aubjenive view. And indeed,
en. tey spe of the “abjecivty of cheve
sonceptiony, what they. have io wind i 1 allen
‘conception wt Fright to
leh bjecitey ance i ncedes or an cena
‘part this other characteristic which I propose to call
‘that of being an “iatriasic” kind of valve.
‘The seth in § believe, that, though om he
that a particular kin: fue is
” tc does follow that it must be “ objective,"
the converse implication by no means holde, but on
the contrary it i perfectyeaty to conceive theories
of 4g. “goodness,” according to witich good
Swoull, in the strictest sense, be “objective!” and yet
‘would not be “intrinsic” There is, therefore, &
‘very important difference between the conception of
“objectivity,” and that which I will call internality:”
but yet, if am not mistaken, when people talk
about the “objectivity” of any kind of valoc, they
Alost always conse the (wo, owing to. the fect
that moxt of those who deny the “internality” of
iven hind of value, also assert its “ subjectivis
How great the diference ix nd tat 8 fact
those who maintaic the “ objectivity " of goodness
do, a3 4 rule, mean by this not mere “object
Ereugh out by Sonsdeog an neaac of 3 how,
f out by cor an instance of a ¢
brotiog wo which gocdeses would be objective tat
‘reokd be atau
‘Let us suppose it to be beld, for instance, that
quis meant by sing that one type of human
‘being A is “better* than acother type B, is merely
‘hat the course of evolution tends to increase the
‘oumbers of type A and to decrease those of type


356 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


B, Such a view has, in fact, been often eaggested,
even if it bas not been held inthis exact for It


vvioualy “better, interpreratios
ng, in no senee a “subjective” conception
conception of belongiog 10 a type whi ‘a
bbe favoured by the struggle for existence more than
another ia as “objective aa any conception can be.
But ye if 1 ac fot mistaken, all hose who objet
toa subjective view of *goodnen,” and insist upon ite
bjecivity,” would object just at atrocgly vo this
Jnterpretation of is meaning as to any “ subjective”
interpretation Obviously, therefore, what they
tise gonloesn "obj soe theyre bee
x iness is “objective,” since they are here
objecting to a ‘which is “objective ;” but
womething else. And this something else ix, 1
Shin eraaly jst that it ie ftrioie" a
haeactor which ix just as incompatible with this
objective evolutionary interprevation ay with any
and every subjective intecpretatios. For if you
aay that 10 call ype A" better” than type B means
merely that it is more favoured in the struggle
existence, it follows that the being “better” i a
predicate which docs mat merciy om the
Eatrintic nature of A aad B raspactioely. On the
contrary, although bere and now A may be more
favoured than’, ie is obvious tbat under other
creumeranes_ oe wich difereot natural lwo he
ame type B might be more favoured than
Tat the fery came type which, under con ct of
reumstances, is better than B, would, under another
tet, be wore. | Here, then, we hav @ cae where
‘aa’ laterpretation of “goodness,” w! er
it “objective.” is incompatible with its being “‘in-
winsic” Abd it ix just this same fact—the fact
Hat, on any “subjective” interpretation, the very


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 257


same kind of thing which, under some circumstance,
in better than another, would, under others, be worse

ich constitutes, £0 far al cun tee, the fu
meatal objection to all subjective" feterpretatior
Obricetly, therefor, to expres hi, objection by
saying that goodness is “objective” is very i
om eet ain geodon mig gute wal i
jective” and yet ot possess the very characteristic
Which itis mainly wished to assert that it bas.

Jn the case, therefore, of ethical and ssthetic
goodness,” { think that what thove who comend
for the “objectivity” of these conceptions really
wish 00 contend far ts sot mere “objectivity ” a al
boat principally and essentially that they are tnt
kinds of value. But in the case of “right” and
“wrong” and “duty,” the same cannot be said,
because many of those who object {0 the view that
these conceptions are " subjective,” nevertheless do
hot hold thar they are "intnaaic” We cannot,
therfore sty that what these who contend forthe
objectivity” of si ‘wrong really mean is
aloe chliy tht tee songs a ia
bat we can, I thnks say that what they do mean
in centainly” not “objectivity” in this case any more
than the acher; ioce here, just a8 sere, f would
he possible to find certain views, which are in
every sense “objective,” so which they would object
just au strongly a3 to any subjective view. And
though what is meast by “ objectivity” in this case,
ia not that “ight” and “wrong” are dhemseocs
“ineriosi,” what is, { think, meant bere 100 iv that
they have a fixed relation to a kind of value which


ght and wrong that kind and degree of fixity and
Tentaly etka they actaly sot ok w prions,
and whichis whet people are thinking of when they
talk of thele “objectivity.” Here, too, therefore,


258 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


to talk of the characteristic mesnt as “ objectivity”
eerie a


Sieg ugh i § curator which oa
atible with wn ™ subjectivity,” it in also
Frcorpatite, for the eame reaece, with meny kinds


shard
For shane remone } think chat what cho, whe
contend for the “objectivity ” of certain kinds of
Salue oF for the “objectivity” of judgments. of
commonly have in mind is not reall
jJectivity ” at all, but encher that the kinds of value in
‘question are themselves intrinsic.” or else thar they
bave a fixed relavon to some kind that is so. The
h to lay
value,” but that of
‘they confuse the twa.
‘And I Unvok this is the ease to a considerable extent
aot only withthe defender of soalled “byexivny.*
bbut also with its oppocents. Many of those who
hhold strongly (as many do} that ai/ kinds of value
are “subjective” certainly object to the so-called
objective” view, not so much because it is
objective, an because i's pot xatseratistte or pontevstie
<a characteristic which does naturally follow feom
the contention that value is “‘imtrinsiq” but does
‘not fallow from the mere contention that
objective.” To a view which is at the same time
both “naturalistic” or “*positvietic” and also “obs
jective,” auch as the Evolutiouary view which I
Iaketched just now, they do not feel at all the same
kind or degree of objection as to any so-called "abe
jective” view. With regard to so-called " objective”
views they are apt to fel not only that they are false,
bbut thet they involve a particularly poisonous kind of
falsehood—the erecting into a “metaphysical” ent
of what is really suseepoble of a simple natralinie
explanation. They feel that to hold auch a view ia
not merely to make a mistake, but to make @ super


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 259


sitious mistake. They feel the same kind of con-
tempt for those who hold it, which we
feel towards those whom we regard
superstitious, and which is felt by certain persons
for what they call “metaphysics.” Obviously,
thercors, wha wy seal obj sot ily
the view that these predicates are “objective,” but
something else—: ‘which does not at all
follow trom the contendon tat they are obec

t they


but whieh does follow from the costention i


are * inti

In dispotes, therefore, as to whether porticular
kkinds of value are or are not “subjective, k
‘hat he, ae wich i realy et tobe, poring
tox always by onesie, aod oien by bot, i aot
really the issue between “subjective * and “no
subjective,” but between “intnnsic” and “non-
inst” And not ony is thin fro be the mare
important issue; (think it really i so, For t
difereace that muse be made 0 our view of the
Universe, according as we hold that some kinds of
value are “intrinsic” or that pone are, is much
greater than any which follows from a mere difference
Of opinion as to whether some are ‘*non-subjective,”
oral wihout exception “subjective To bold that

inds of value are “intrinsic ” entails the re-
cognition of @ kind of predicate extremely different
from any we should otherwise have to recognise and
perhaps unique; whereas it is ia aay case certain
that there are “objective” predicates ap well an
subjective”

But now what is this Winternalty” of which 1
have been speaking? What is meant by saying
with regard toa kind of vafue that i¢ is “intrinsic 7"
To pares conbly what & meso is 1 think
simple enough ; and everybody will recognise 1t at
jones, a2 8 noton which 1s constantly in people's
hheads; bot { want to dwell upon it at some leogtb,


360 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


because { know of no place where it is express
txpuived and’ defined’ and "because, though i
aeema plz and fundamental, the task of
defining i preciely ie by no means exsy and
Javolves some difficulties whick I mast confess that
T do not know how to solve

U have already given incidentally the main idea
in speaking of that evolutionary interpretation of
“goodness.” according ta which, an T said,

‘would be “objective” bot would not be
T there used a9 equivalent to the assertion
"better on. that
the assertion that the question whether one type of
boeing A was better than another B would not
depend solely ow the retrinsic natures of A and B,
‘but on circumstances acd the laws of nature. And
J thick that this phrase will in fact suggest to
everybody just what 1 do mean by “intrinsic”
value We can, in fact, set op the following
definition, 7s say that o hind of vaiue i
‘frénsic” means that the question whether a
hang passesies 1, and tu what dagrae e possesses t,
opands solely on the intrinsic mature of the thing
fn question,

ut though this definition does, I chink, convey
exacily what 1 rear, {want to dwell upon fx
meaning, partly becaute the conception of * differing
{in intrinsic catare’ which 1 beheve to be of funda:
mental importance, is Hable to be confused with
‘other conceptions, aod partly because the definition
fovolves notions, which [ do not know bow to
define exactly.

‘When I say, with regard to any particular kind
of value, that the question whether and in what
degree anything possesses it depend solely on the
falrinste mature of the thing én question, | mrean
to my two diferent things at the same tine [
mean to say (1) thet it 38 sepiossible for what i


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 261


strictly ona and the same thing to possess that kind
of ulus atone tine, or in one set of reomataners
and sof to possess it at another; and equally ém-
possible for in 20 possess it in one degree at one
‘time, or in one set of circumstances, and to possess
it in a different degree at another, or in a different
set This, I think, in obviously’ part of what.
naturally wonveyed by aaying that the quem
hether and in what degree a thing possessea the
kkind of value in question always depends solely 00
the imwinsie narure of the thing, For ie and y
hhave different intrinsic natures, it follows chat =
cannot be quite stricily one and the same thing.
9; and hence if e and y can have a different io-
‘rinsic value, only where their iatrinsie natures are
different, i follows that one and the same thing
‘must always have the same intriasic value, This
then, is part of what is meaot ; and about this part
A think I need say no sore, except to call attention
to the fact that it involves a conception, which ag:
We shall vec is also javolved in the other pert, and
which involves the same difficulty in both cases—I
‘mean, the conception which is expressed by the
word ible.’ (2) The second part of what ia
meant is that if a given thing possesses any kind of
Intrinsic value in a certain degree, then not only
oust that same thing posecss #t, under all circum
mances, in the same degree, but alto woy-
thing exactly fake it, raust, under all circumstances,

sess it in exactly the same degree. Or to put
{k in the corresponthng negative form: It is am
fosnble tas of two exactly stavlar things one should
‘possess it and the other not, or that one, sould
possess it ia cae degree, aod the other in different


T think this second ition also is naturally
conveyed by saying chat the Kind of value in
question depends solely on the intrinsic nature of


62 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


what 2 it, For we should naturally say of
two. wings which were ‘ahke ly.
ir oplte of their being fu, thet they pontersed Ue
sane intzinsie nature. But it is important to call
‘attention expreaaly to the face that what I me
the expression ‘having « diferent intrinsic nature’
alent to "not exactly alike’ because here
real risk of confusion between this con-
tone. This comes about as
the phrase
“having equivalent
to the hace ‘intrinsically ferent’ or having
ifferent intrinsic properies’ But if we do. mi
this identification, there is 2 risk of confusion,
For its obviow that there ia ses, in which,
‘when things are exactly like. they must be'intrins®
cally diferent’ and have different incrinsic properties,
Fuchs of cloor way Ge coms ta iapte ot
patches of colour may alike, in spite o
The thet that each poseeses a sovticent whch the
other does sot possess, provided only that their two
consiituents sre exactly alike. And yet, in a
certain sense, it is obvious that the fact Uhat each has
constituent, which the other has not got. dock
onstitute ua intrinsic difference between them, and
Implies that each bas an intrinsic property which the
other has not got. And even where the two thing
are simple the mere fact that they are wamericalty
Gifferent does in a tense constitute an intrinsic
difference becween ther. and each will have at least
ane intrinsic property which the other bus not got
namely that of being identical with jtele 1 is
phrases. “inteiasicall


obvious therefore that the


ifort’ and ‘baviog dierent iar


toot tonply that ey wre aot “et py ba only,


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 263


are mumerically difterent. Or they may
jense in which two things can be said
0 be intrinsically diferent, and to have different
intrinsic properties ony when they are sot exacily
alike. Its, therefore, extremely important to insist
that when Tsay: ‘Two things can differ in intrmni
‘value, only when they have. intrinsic natures,
Cam using the expression ‘having different intrin
tatares’ the ater sense and not the fore
Jn a sense in which the mere fact that two things
are two, or differ numerically, does nef smply that
they have different intringic natures, but in which
they can be said to have diferent intrinsic narures,
endy where, besides differing numerically, they are
alsa nat exactly alike,
But as soon as this is explained, another risk of
confunon arises owing to the fact that when
fe contrast mere mumerical difference with a
ind of intrinsic diflerence, which is mot mierel
‘numerical, they are apt to identify the lat
quahtstroe difference. It might, therefore,
Shought that by ‘difference in’ intenic nature’ 1
mean ‘difference in quality” But this identification
of difference in quality with difference an mtrinsic
nature would also bea ouistake, It iy true that
‘what is commonly meant by diference of quality,
the strict sense, always is a difference of intrlsic
faature* two things cansot difer in quality without
idering in intrinsic nature ; and thet fact is one of
the mest imporant facts about qualitative difer-
ence. But the converse is by no means also true:
although two things casnot difer in quality without
differing in intrinsic nature, they can differ
intriosie aature without difering «2 4
other words, difference ia quality is on!
Of aifcrence ip incase mature. Th
follows from the fact that, as T
vusing the phrase ‘different in intrinsic natoro” as


266 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


possesses F to possess G will be merely: Thin
sich possess F never do in fact posts


f¢ understood “impossible "in this sense, the
ition for the “ioteraality” of a kind of value,
srbich Ihave stated by saying that if aKiad eo wala
ito be winsiic™ eset be. ifend fe
ings to. possess it in dificrent degrees, sf they are
exactly like one another, will amount merely to
tayiog that no two things whch are exactly like
fone another ever do, in fact, possess it in different
degrees. It follows, that,
meant, this condition would be satisfied, if only ie
fwere true (as for all { know it may be) th
case ofall things which ny partic
of intrinsic value, there 10 be nothing else
inthe Universe taactly Hite any one of thes Tor
Af this were 80, it would, of course, follow thit no
two things which ae, cxacly able did in fact
¢ kind of value in question in diffrent
es, for the simple reason that everything
which possesed it a al would be unique 0 the
‘tense that there was nothing else exactly like it, If
thin were all that were meant, therefore, we could
prove any particular kind of value to satisly chis
condition, by merely proving that there never bas
in fact and never will be anything exactly bike any
‘one of the things which xl out assertion
that it satisfied this condition would merely be an
empirical generalisation. Moreover if this were ail
that was meant it would obviously be by no means
cercain that purely subjective predicates could not
Satay the condition in question; since i would be
tatished by any subjective predicate of which it
‘happened tobe truc that everything which possessed
i was, in fact, unique—that there was notbiog
exactly ike igs and fo all know, there may be
many subjective predicates of which this is trve,
The, therefore, scarecly necessary to say that 1 am


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 167


ft osing “impossible” in this sense. When 1 say
ia dof van bo Sie wt byt
condition that it must be smpessile for two things
exactly alike to possess it in different degre
do aot mean by. this condition anything which a
kkind of value could be proved to satisfy, by the mere
empirical fact that there was nothing else exactly
Hike any of tbe things which possessed it It a of
easential part of my meaning that ‘we
at be ube 0 uy not merely that no two eratly
similar things do fx fact possess it in different
dees Gate if rca toon we maser
iything exactly similar to a thing which does
it, even though, in fact, chere has not and
‘any such thing. that thing would bave
portessed or would possess the kind of value in
oem inexact the same degres, tin emencal
to this meaning of “impossibility” chat it shoul
entitle us to assert what wonld have been the case,
nder conditions which never kave been and never
will be realised ; and it seems obvious that no mere
empirlal generalmation can enti ut do this
Wut (2) to say thar 1am not using ‘ neceasity*
in this frst sense, is by no sans sufficient to
explain what I'do mean.” For it certainly seems ay
‘causal laws (though this is disputed) do entitle us
to make assertions of the very kind that mere
empirical generalisations do not entitle us to make.
In virtue of s causal law we do seem to be entitled
to assert such things as that, if a given thing


had had a property or were to have a property’
which it didn't have or won't have, bave
had or mend have some other property G. And it


might, therefore, be thougit, that the a of
‘necessity’ and ‘impossibility’ J am talking of fe
the ied coal notes’ abd Sngoosbigs It
is, therefore, important to insist that I do sof mean
this kind either. If this were all { meant, it would


368 CONCEPTION OP INTRINSIC VALUE


saguin be by no means obvious, tha purely sub-
fecive poedeatca wnight nor satly gur second
Sonation “Te may, focinstance, for ail 1 know. be
true thar there are casa laws which insure hat fn
the cane of everything tat fy “eautfuly anything
fiactly Tike any of these. things, would iy tie
Univeron, exces « paricuar ‘Kind of feeling in
oly bon i were pestd ina pari
fand it that were 40, we should have a sub:
Five predicate which std he condion tag
then x given thing possesen that precieate, i i
ible "(inthe chosal ence) that any exacly
heg should aoe alo pees at Te Kiod
ofneensy am ang of Wot shears mere
tama necsesity einen “When f say hut if given
‘hing postewees in cortsia ‘of totsiasle Salo,
anything preciecly silat to it would necesrly
fate prpsessed that valee io execty the same
degres {rseas that it aenid have dove so, even if
had existed ix a Univeree tn which, the causal
iaws were quite Gierest from what they are in this
tne. "T moan, i shor, that Jo amps for any
Geriar thing 00 porsess © didereot value,
Ei procely ouch esase Se that in which tty T
Chink, generally admitted that itis met ro
that ‘cabea! laws shoul have been eiferent om


what they are—a tense of impossibility, therefore,
Thich ceraialy does aoe depend merely on taual


‘That there is such a sense of necessity—a sense
which entitles us to say that what hae F agndd have
G, even if causal laws were quite diflerent from
what they are—is, I think, quite cleac from such
lostances ag the following. ae you take a

ular patch of colour, which is yellow. We ca,
ik, say with certainty that any patch exactly
like that one, wuld be yellow, even if it exised io
a Universe in which causal laws were quite different


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 269


from what they are in this one. We cen say thet
any tuch patch must be yellow, quite unconditionally,
whatever’ the circumstances, and whatever the
ehusal laws. "And itis in_ a sense similar to this, in
spect of the fact that it is neither empirical nor
enusal, that T mean the ‘must’ to be understood,
when 1 say that if» bond of valve is to be *intsinsey
then. supposing a given thing possesses it in a
certain degree, anything exacily like that thing
renst possess it it exactly the same degree, To
Way, of ‘beauty’ or “goodsess’ that they are
trinsic’ is only, therelore, to say that this thing
hich is obviously tue of 'yeltowness’ and “ Blueness”
and ‘redness’ is true of them. And ifwe give this
sense to ‘must’ in out definition, then J think it is
Sbvious that to say of giver kind of value tha
i inconsistent with its being ‘subjective.’
For there is, I think, pretty clearly no subjective
predicate of which we can say thus unconditionally,
that, of a given thing possesses it, then ar
exazty like that thing. would, under any circu
‘ances, and under any cacsal laws, also possess
Fer intance, wharves ind of feeling you take, it
is plainly not true that supposing { have that feelin
towards a given thieg A, ther 7 should cesar
nde any cramocaers have that el tom towards
anything” precisely similar to A: for the simple
reason that a thing precisely similer to A
exiee la a Univers in whieh t did not exist oa
And similar ta not ssue of any fing whstves,
that if somebody bas Cat feeling towards a given
then, ia any Universe, in which a thing
reel simor to A existed, somdy woold have
fat feeling towards k.— Nor Soally is fe even tras,
that if ir fr true of « given thing A. than, undet
factual causal laws, any one to whom A were
presented in a certain way would have a certain
feeling towards it, then the same hypothetical


370 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE
predicate would, in any Universe, belong to any>
Tilng pesielyabmdlar so Aran every cage’ scene
to be possible that there might be a Univerte, in
ich the causal laws were such that the proposition
would not be tue.

Tt is, then, because in my definition of * Intrinsic!
value the ‘must’ is to be understood in this un:
condiviooal sense, that 1 thick that, the proposition
that a kind of value is ‘intriosic’ is inconsistent
with its being subjective. But it should be
ebserved that fa holding that there i this incon
sitency, 1 am contradicting a dactrine which seems
fo be held by many phi There are, 08
you probably know. some philosophers who
Serongly on a doctrine which they express by saying
that n0 relatioas are purely exieral. And 50 far
asl can make out one thing which they mean by
this ia just that, wi ‘z bas any relation what-
ever which 7 has not got, 2 and ¢ caxnot be exacily
like: That any diference we relanon necessary
fntails a diference i iiriosic nature. There i, L
think, no doubt that when these philosophers say
this, they mean by their ‘cannot’ and ‘ necessarily"
fan unconditional “cannot and ‘must.’ And hence it
follows they are holdmg that, o for instance, « thing
A pleases me oow, then any other thing, B, precisely
similar to A, must, under any circumstances, and
inany Universe, please me also: since, if B did
‘ot please me, it would xo possess « relation which
A. does possess, and therefore, by their priacipl,
‘ondd not be precisely similar to A—menst differ from,
fin intsinsie nature. But ic seems to me to bo
obvious that this principle is folse. If it were true,
it would follow that [ can know a priors such things
az that no patch of colour which % seen by you and
Ig not seen by me is ever exactly hke any patch
ich in sean by me avd ip ot seen by You or
that no patch of colvur which is surrounded by a


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 271


red ring is ever exactly like one which is not 10
‘Wot it is surely obvious, that, whether
theae things are true or not they are things which f
ancot Koow « ries. I is simply of event
Priori that 0 patch of colour which i¢ seen by A
‘and not by B is ever exactly like one which in seca.
by B and not by A, and tht oo patch of olour
which is surrounded ‘by a red ring is ever exactly
like one which is not. » And this illustration serves
to briag out very well both what is meant by saying
of such a predicate as *beautifel’ that it is
trinsic” and why, if it is, ic cannot be subjective,
‘What ia meane is just that if A is beautiful and B
6 not. you could know 9 prior: that A and B are


ine, oF that of being 2 thiag which would ers
such a fecling un any spectator, you cannot tefl
priori that 3 thing A which did possess such
‘predicare and a thing B which did nor, could not be
‘exactly alike


Tt seems to me, therefore, quite certain, in spite
of the dogma that aa relatusos are purely external,
that there are many predicates, such for insiance as
most (if not all) subyective predicates or the ob-
jective onc of bemg surrounded by a red ring,
which da nat depend solely on the jatriesie mature
cof what possesses them : or, in other words, of
which itis not true that if x possesses them and y
does not, x and y must differ in intrinsic mature,
Bot what precisely i meant by chis uncom:
‘must, T ust confess T duet keow. The obvious
thing to suggest is that it is the lozical ‘must’
‘which certainly is unconditional in just this sense :
the kind of necessity, which we astert to hold, far
fostance, when we say that whatever ik aright:
angled thangle max! be a trangle, or that whatever
is yellow meat be ether yellow or blue. But I must


27% CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


aay I cannot see that all unconditional necessity is
Of this wature. 1 do not sec how it can be deduced
from any logics! law that, if2 given patch of colour
bbe yellow, then any patch which were exactly like
the first would be yeliow too. And similarly in our
cane of ‘Intrinsic® value, though I think itis true that
beauty, for instance, is “intrinsic.” 1 do not see haw
ft can be deduced from any logical law, that if A ix
Deautiful, anything that were sxactly like A would
‘be beautiful too, in exactly the eame deyree.
‘Moreover, though 1 do bebuve that both "*yele
low” (in the sense in which it applica to sense-
@ata) and “beautifel" are predicates which, in this
tmneonditiooal sense, depend only on the ints
tatere of mbat possesses them, Were seems 10. me
to be an extremely important difference between
them which constitutes a further difficulty in the way
of getting Jear as to what this unconditional
is The diference [mean ix
one which 1 am inclined to express by saying
that though both yellowness and beauty are
predicates which depend only on the intrinsic
Dature of what possesses them, yet while yellow
reas is isself an twirinsic predicate, brandy is not.
Indeed it seems to me to be onc of the most
important truths about predicates of value. that
hough many of them ars intrinsi Kinds of value
in the sense I have defined, yet mone of them
sare intrinsic properties in the sense in which such
properties as “yellow " or the property of “being a
state of pleasure” or “being a rtate of things which
contains a balance of pleasure” are intrinsic
propertiea Ie is obvious, for instance, that if we
feeito reject aif gatsralitc theories of value, we
must noc only reject those theories, axcerding to
tmhich no kind of value would be intringe, but must
iso reject auch theories as those which assert,
for iaxtance, that to say that a stare of mind fs good


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 373


isto tay that it is a state of being pleased; or thet
to say that a seate of things is good i to say that it
conteinn @ balince of plessure over pain. There
wre, in. short, two. caticely. diferent types of
naturalistic theory, the difference between which
tay be lus the difference between the
tumertion, “A is good” means "Ais pleaant” and
the assertion "A ix good” maaxs “A is a state of
pleasure.” Theories of the former type imply that

yeas is of an intrinsic kind of value, whereas:


of the latoer type i ally’ empbati-
me SEriomy aul pesto
‘being a state of pleasure,” or “containing &
balance of pleasure.” ere proticnes Uke “ yellow"
in respect of the fact that if a given thing possesses
them, aaything exactly Tike the thing in question
ust possess them. Itseems to me equally obvious
that doh types of theory are false: bot { do not
know how to exclude them both except by sayin
cing wo deren. peoponons ae, bh se ey
“goodness, samely: (3) that it does depend only on
he intrinsic nature of what possesses it—which
excludes theories of the first ‘type and (2) th
though 30, it is yet not itself an iat
propeny-whith exclades those of the second. 1
‘war for this reason that I said above that, if therm
fave uny inteinsic Kinds of valve, they would
conatitute a class of predicates which is, perhaps,
unique ; for 1 cannot think of any other predicate
which resembles thers in respect of tbe fact, that
though not itself intrinsic, it yet shares with ‘trinsic
ties the characteristics of depending solely on
Be lneinwc marre of what pomentr ie So far a
V know, cercaia ten of value are the ooly
rnen-inttinsie properties which sbare with intrinsic
properties this characteristic of depending oaly oo
the imzintic oature of what possesses them,
Tf, however, we are thus to say that predicates of


174 CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE


value, though dependent solely on intrinae
‘propertica, are not themselves intrinsic properties,
There must be some characteristic belonging to
intrinsic properties which predicates of value never
possess. And it seems to me quite obvious that
there is; ooly 1 can't see wsbal itis 1k seems to
ime quite obvious that if you assert of a given state
of things that it contains « balance of pleasure over
pain, you wre asserting of it not only a diferent
predicate, from what you would be as
You sad i: as “good but a predate wh
of que a different the same way that
when you assert of puch ef clear tae i it
“yellow,” the predicate you assert is not only
diferent (com ~ beautiful,” but of quite a different
‘hind, i the same way at before. And of course
the mere fact thas many people bay thought cat
goodness and beauty were, subjective jeoce
hat there is some great dference of i ‘even
them and such predicates as being yellow oF
containing a balance of pleasure. Hut ‘mhaf the
difference is, if we suppose, as I suppose, shat
goodness and beauty are no subjective, and that
ey do share with “yellowness “ and “containing
plessure” the propery of Sepeoding sey on the
Iain amsre of ‘what ponerse wen confae|
eannot say. 1 can only vagoely express the kiod of
Alferanen 1 feel ther we by saying that intone
Properties seem to dev inesinsic ature of
what pomesses them is a sense in which predicates
of value never do. If you could enumerate ed the
intense properties a given thing possensed, you
would have given a complete eseigton of it, ond


would oot seed to mention aay 3 of value
it posteated; whereas no description of @ given
‘thing could be complete which omitted any jottinsic
property. But, in any case, owing to the fact that
predicates of intrinsic value ere not themselvos


CONCEPTION OF INTRINSIC VALUE 275


intrinsic properties, you cansot define “ intrinsle
property.” io the way which at frst sight seems
obviously the right ove. You cannot say that an
intrinsic property is a property euch that, if one
thing possesses it and another does net, the
intrinsic nature of the two things masé be different.
For this is the very thing ong
to be true of predicates of intrinsic value, while at
the same time we say that they are mot mtrigete pro.
perties, Such a dehurtion of “inrinsic property"
‘would therefore ooly be possible if, we could say that
the necessity there f that, f x andy possess different
intriesic properties, their nature must be different,
in a neceasty of a diferent dnd (rom the necessity
there i that, if x and x are of diferent intrinsic
values, their sature must be different, although both

are uncondinenal, And it seems to me


posible chat this is the true explanation. But, if
$0: itobviouly ads to the aificlty of explaining
the meaning of the waconditional “ must" sce,


this case, there would be two different meanings of
“‘raust,” both unconditional, and yet neither,
apparently, identical with the logical " rust.’


EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL
RELATIONS


Im the inden to Appearance ond Reality (First
) Mr, Bradley declares that aif relations are
‘“intrinaieal”; and the following are some of the
pirates by means of which be tries to explain what
je means by this assertion. "A relation must at
bboeh ends ofeet, and pass into, the being of its
term” (p. 364) “Every relation essentially
penetrates the being of its terms, and is, in this
seas, intrinsical” (p. 393). “To stand in a
relation and not to be relative, to support it and yet
nex be Ifatnd wa wtemine Oy i boas ft
of the question” (p. 142). And a good many of
philosophers seem inclined to take the same view
About relations which Mr. Bradley is here trying 10
express. Other phrases which seem to be
sometimes used to express it, of a part of it, are
these: "No relations are purely external”; All
relations qualify or modify or make a diference to
the terms between which they bold”; “No terms
are independent of any of the relations in which
they stand to other terms.” (See eg, Joachim, The
Natars of Trath, op. 11, 12, 46).
Te i, 1 think, by no meage easy to make out


exactly what these meen these
tren And the fain oles of ths paren tp


try 10 define tlearly coe proposition, which, even it
i does not give the cf wins they ‘enn,
neema to me to be always implied by what they


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 27


mean, and ta be certainly fale. { shall try to mai
clear ibe exact meaning of this proposition, topo
‘out 90m ‘mast important consequences,
to distinguiah it clearly from certain other propasitions
which are, | think, more or less Hable to be confused
vith it, "And 7 shall maintain thas, if we give to
the _atnertion that a scltion “internal” he
meaning which this proposition would give to it,
Ghee, though, in thet sense, some relations are
ternal,” others, no less certainly, are not, but are


purely external.”
"To begin with, we ro4y, 2 chink, clear the ground,
by putting an ‘one side two. propositions about
relations, which, though they acem sometimes to be
confused with the view we are discussing, do, 1
think, quite certaaly aot give the whole meaning
of that view.

The first is 2 proposition which is quite certainly
and obviously true of all relations, without exception,
and which, though i raises points of great
dificuky, can, 1 think, be clearly enough stated for
ies truth ‘co be obvious. It is the proposition that,
in the cme of any rulion wbuteer the kind of

ct. which we express by saying that a given term
Avbas that relation to another term 3B, of 0 4 pair
of terms B and C, or to three terms B, C, and D,
‘and $0 00, in no case simply consiate in the terms
in. question fopether wnth the relation. ‘Thus the
fact which we express by saying that Edward VIT
was father of George V, obviously does not simply
consist in Edward, Georye, aud the relation of
fatherhood, In order that the fact may be, it is
obviously fot sufficient chat there should merely be
George and Edward and the relation of fatherbood ;
it is further necessary that the relation should
rulate Edward to George, and not only s0, but also
that it should relate them in the particular way
which we express by saying that Edward was


a8 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


father of George. and not merely in the way which
we chouldexgreas by saying that George was father
is


of Edward on is, I chink, obviously
true of all relations without exception: and the only
reason why J have mentioned it is because, in am
article in which Mr. Bradley criticises Mr. Russell
(Aind, roc, 179), he seems to wget tht it is
inconsistent with the proposition that any relations
are merely external, and because, 20 for xs 1 can
take out, some other people who maintain that all
relations are internat seem sometimes to think that
their contention follows from this proposition. The
sway in which Me. Bradley puts itis that much facts
are unities which are not cammAletelp analysable: and
this is, of course, true, if it means merely that in
the case of ao such fact is there any set of
constituents of which we can truly say: This fact
ig identual enth these coostiwents. Dut whether
from this it follows thet all relations are internal
must of course depend upon what is meant by the
latter statement. "If ithe merely weed to express
tis propositioa itself, or anything which follows
from It, then, of course, there can be na doubt that
all relations are internal. But 1 think there i no
doubt that those who say this do not mean by their
words merely this obvious propesition itself; and T
fin. gong 9 point oa something which ink they
always imply, and which certainly does net follow
Fhe second ‘oponition which, 1 think, may be
second proposition which, 1 think, may
put aside at once at ceraicly not giving the whole
Of what, is meant, is the proposition which is, {
think, the natural meaning of the phrases ‘All
relations modify oe affect their terms” or, “All
relations wake a difference 1 their terms.” There
is one perfectly natural and intelligible sense in
which a given relation may be said to modify a term
which staods in that relatioa, namely. the sense In


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 279


which we should say that, if, by pottiog a stick of
sealing-wax into a flame, we’ make the sealing-wax
‘melt, {ts relationship to the fame has modified the
sealing-wax. This is » sense of the word ” modify "
in which pare of what is meant by anying of any
term thar it iy modified, is that it has actually
ndergone a change: and {think i i clear that
‘vense in which thin is past of its meaning is the
only one in which the word *" modify” can proper!
be luted. "If, however, those who say that al
teltions modify their terme were wing the word in
in its proper, sense, part of what would be meant
by this assertion would be that all terms which have
relations at all actually undergo changes. Such an
assertion would be obviously false, for the simple
reason. that there are terms which have relations
and which yet never aval) And I think 1
is quite clear that those wo assert that all relations
are internal, in the sense we are concerned with,
mean by this something which could be consistently
asserted to be true of all relations without exeeption,
grea if i were admited that some terms which
ave relations do not change When, therefore.
they use the phrase that all relatioce "modify" their
terms as equivalent to “all relations ere interaal,"
they must bo using “modify” in tome meta
horical sense other natural one. I think,
fadsed, that mote of them would be inclined 10
assert that in every case in which w term A comes
to have to another term B a relation, which it did
pot have to, Bin some immediatly preceding
interval, its having of that relation to that term
causes it to undergo some change, which it would
not have undergone if it had ot stood in precisely
hat relation to Band 1

jink that this proposition
proposition which is true of all relations, wi
‘xception, and which is what they mean by saying


alo EXTERNAL RELATIONS


that all relarions are internal, The question
whether the coming into a new relation does thus
ways cause some modification in the term which
‘comes into itis one which is often discussed, as if it
bhad something to do with the question whether all
relations are internal; as when, for instance, it is
discussed whether knowledge of a thing alters the
‘thing known. And for my part [ should maintain
that this proposition is certainly not true. But
what (am concerned with now is not the question
whether it is trun, but simply to point out that, 30
far as I can see, ic can have nothing to do. with the
eation whether all relations are internal, for the
simple reason that ic cannot possibly follow from
‘any proposition with regurd to ei! relations without
exception. It asterts with regard to all relational
Propeies ofa certain od that chey have x cera
of efect ; and n0 proposition of this sort can, T
think follow from any universal preposition with
ragged to olf relations ;
fe have, therefore, rejected as certainly not
giving the wbole meaning of the dogma that all
relations are internal: (1) the obviously tue
ition that no relational facts are
in the precise sense which I gave to that
and (2) the obviously false: proposition
ions modify their terms, in the natural
sense of the term “modify,” in which it always has
az part of its meaning’ “cause to undergo a
change.” And we have also seen that this false
that any relation which a term comes
40 have always causes it to undergo @ change is,
wholly ieelevant to the question whether ai/
felations are internal o¢ not. We have seen finally
that if the assertion that all relations modify their
terms is 10 be understood as equivalent to the
assertion that all are internal, “modify” must be


EXTERNAL RELATIONS aa
cal sense. The


ns, a given term A may have the relation in
question, not only ta ane other term, but to several
Slifferent terms. "If, for instance, we consider the
{elation of fatherhood, itis obviovs that a man may


be father, not only of one, but of several different
children.” And those who say that all relations
modify their terms always mean, think, not
merely that every different relation which a terms has
modifies it; but also that, where the relation is one
which the tere fs to several diferent other terms,


three children, B,C, and D, they mean to assert
that be is modified, not merely by being a father,
bbus by being the fasher of B. also by being the
father of Cd alo by being the father of D. The
mere assertion that all relations modify their terms
does not, of course, make it quite clear that this is
what is meant ; but 1 think there is no doubt that it
Bh always meant: and T think we ean express i
more clearly by using a term, which I have alread)
introduced, and saying the’ doctrine is that afl
relational properties wodily their terme, in a sense
which remains to be defised. 1 think there is 00
dificulty in understanding what I mean by &
rulattonal property. I Ass father of B, then what
you seme ofA when you say that he & #0 i &

ional property—naraely erry of being
fither of Brand fi quite cise Bat te propery
is not itself a redation, in the same fundamental
sense in which the relation of fatherhood is 30; and
flag that, if C i 4 different child from B, then the
property of being father of C is a different relational


ata ‘EXTERNAL RELATIONS


roperty from that of being ther of B, although
here i» only ene relation, that of fatherhood, frre
which both are derived. So far as I can make out,
Tone’ pollvopbers' who tlk of all rafts bel

internal, often actually mean by “relations

“relational properea when’ they valk of al
the “relations” of a given term, they mens all ite
relational properties, and not merely all the different
feltions of each of which ie fo tive that tho arm
Tas that relaog to something. ft wil, | thunk
condice 0 cearaeat «o tse's dierent word fot
these two guy different uses of the term


“gelation” to call ~ fathechood” a relation, and
“fathethood of B" a
the fundamental Sit


Ascertion that all relations ary intra

proposition with regard to relational properties a
Tort regard :Saons propery sccaed There
is mo doubt that those who rraintain this dogma meas
somainai tac all atonal properis arc rele fa
a peculiar way to the terms which possess them—
that they modify or are internal to them, in. some
metaphorical sense. And once we have defined
‘what this sense is ia which a relational property can
be said to be internal to a term which posseases it,
we can easily derive (rom ic a corresponding sense
in which the relations, strictly so called, from which
felational properties are derived, can be said to be
internal,

‘Our question is then : What is the metaphorical
sense of “ modify in which the proposition that
Alt relations are intereal is equivalent to the pros
position that all relational properties “modify "the
ferms which possess them ? I think it is clear that
the term ‘‘modify " would never have been used at
all to express the relation meast, unless there had
been some analogy between this relation and that
which we have een is the proper eense of “modify.”


EXTERNAL RELATIONS aay


namely, causes to change. And J think we can sce
where the analogy comes in by considering the
statement, with regard to any particular term A
nd aay ‘relational which belongs to i
that A awuld ha from tohae at bs of
it hod not tad P: the statement, for instance, that
Edward Vi1 would have been different if ke had
not been father of George V. This is a thing
mhich we can obviously truly say of A and P, in
Home sense, whenever itis truc of P that it modified
‘A in the proper sense of the word: if the being
hheld in the flame causes the sealing-wax to melt
me can truly say (ia some sense) chat the sealing
wax would not have been in a melted state if it
hhad not been in the fame, But it seems as if it
‘were a thing which might also be true of A and P,
‘where it is of true that the possession of P cansrd
A to change, since the mere assertion that A
‘would have been different, i it bad not had P, dons
not necessarily imply that the possession of P
eaused A t9 have any yy which it would not
hhave had otherwise. Aad those who say that all
relations are internal do sometimes tend to speak
ar if what they meant could be pot in the form :
In the case of every relational property which a
bay, itis always true that the ching which hax
‘would have been different if it her not had that
property ; they sometimes say even: If P be a
felational property and A a teres which has it, then
I is alway true that A would wot Aave ben A if
it had not bad P. This is 1 thik obviously, a
clumsy way of expressing anything which cou
pomibly be trap, since, taken ‘tse i, mplin
the self-coatradictory proposition that i ot
bad P, it woule not bave been true that A did not
have P. “Bor ie is neveribeles a more or lest
natural way of expressing a proposition whid
snight quite well be trve, aamely, that, supposing


a8 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


‘A bas P, thee anything which hed act had
aecesary have been diferent from A. This

the propositioa wi to suggest as givi
she open whic | wh to gee
eae m earch. 0 a proposiuon to which 1
ink a perfectly precise meaning can be given,
aod one which does not at all imply that the
Possession of P caxsed any change in A, but which
snghe onctvaby be tvs of all arma tn ll the
tional properties .ve, withavt exception.
‘Red it seems tn cae that iti not wneatural that the
ition that this is true of F and A, should

sve been expressed in the form," P modifics A.”
ince it can be more or less naturally ex in
the perverted form, “If A bad not had P it would
have been different,” —a form of words, which, as
‘we saw, can also be ysed whenever P does, in the
‘proper sense, modify A.

Tan to sugges then that one ching whlch
ahyays implicd by the doyena thas,“ All relations
are internal,” ix the case of every relational

perty, it can always be truly asserted of any


re
Bin A which Ima teat property. Unt any tere

woul! boxtusarly have been
different from A.

‘This ia the proposition to which [ want to direct
attention. And there are two phrases in it, which
Terezie fer ego,

he Gret ie the phrase “would necessarily bave
bean "And the of this can be explained
inva preliminary way, 8 —To aay of a pair
tipgperoa Bat tat any ern wth fad
fad Pwould necessarily have had Q, is equivalent
ty saying that, in every case, from the proposition
si reget fo say siren tery tat eh,
Follows taat that term falas being cides
‘stood in the sense in which le the proposition
with regard to any term, that it is a right angle, it


EXTERNAL RELATIONS ads


(fallews that It 3 an angle, and in which from the
‘proposition with regard to any verm thas itis red it
folirws that it is coloured.” There is obviously
‘vomo very important sense in which from the
ition that a ching is a right angle, it doce
How that it 1s an angle, acd from the proposition
that a thing in red it does follow chat ic is coloured.
And what" | am maimawmog is that the meta:
Phorical seose of “modify,” 10 which it is amis.
Awined that ll relational properties modify the
subjects which possess them, can be defined by
faleence to this sense of “flows” ‘The debitoa
To say of a given relational property P that
mrodities Or is internal 19 a given term A which
‘pomesses it, is to say that {rom the proposition that
thing bas not got P it follows that that thiag is
diferent (om Av Taos wor i 1 ay that
tl 5 of aot possessing P, and the property
of bing diderent frm Aare flsted to one another
in the peculiar way in which the property of being
a righeangled aegis elated to that of being 8
twiangle, or that of being red co thar o
coloured. .
To corpo the definition itis eceamry, how,
‘ever, to define the sense ia which “different fom A”
into'be understood. ‘There are two different senses
which the statement that A is different from B may
Dear. It way be meant merely that A ip mame.
ally difierent from B, ether than B, not identical
with B. Or it may be meant tbat not only in this
so cn be ss tat A alae 7 in» way
which can be roughly expressed by saying tat
Ei quality aiierent fom B.” Aad of these
‘two meanings, those who say “All relations make
difference to their terms,” always, 1 think, mean
difference in the latter sense and not merely in. the
former. That is to say, they mean, that if P be a
relational properry which belongs to A, then the


286 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


absence of P entells not only numerical diflerence
from A, but qualitative diference. Bu,

the proposition that a thing i gi
Aifecent fom Ay does follow that


os
same time They are maintaining that, i
telational property which to A, then P is


internal to A both ia the sense (1) that the nbsence
of P entails qualitative difference from A‘ and (2)
that the absence of P entails numerical difference
from A. It seems to me that neither of those
propositions is true; and ( will say something
‘Bbout each in tura.

‘Aa for the frst, T said before that 1 think some
telational properties really are “interaal to" thelr
terms, though by no means all are. But, i we
odersaad "imeroal 10" in his fst sense 1 am
ot really sure thet any are. In order to get an
‘example of one which wat, we should have, I think,
to tay that any two different qualities are always

fairly ferent from one another that for
Tomance, it fs not only the case that anytbiog which

re ved is qualitatively different from anything
which is pure blue, but that the quality “pure red)
itself is qualitatively different from the quality
“pure blue” Lam not quite sure chat we can say
thi but J think we can; and if 20, it iv casy to get
fan examiple of a relational property which is internal
in aur first sense. The quality “orange” is inter.
mediate in shade between the qualities yellow and
red. Thi is a relational property, and itis quite
lear that, of our assumption, tt is an internal one.
Since it in quite clear Ghat any quality which were
‘of intermediate between yellow and ced, would
‘necessarily be ether than orange ; aad if any quality
ther than orange must be qualtetioely diferent


from oran i
ween yellow and red” i internal to “orange.”
is to aay, the absence of the relational property “
ternedi berwem, yelon and rel ede Ge
ty “different in qualty frora orange.”
P Peers in then, think, » dificaty in being mre
that ony relational properties are internal in this
first wpone. But, if wbat we want to do ia to show
that tome are se, and that therefore the dogma
‘that all relations are internal is false, I think the
most conclusive reason for saying this is thar if alé
were internal in ths frst sense, all would necessarily
be internal in the second, and that this ie plainly
false, I think. ia fact. the most imporant conse-
uence of the dogina that all relations are internal,
is that it follows from it that all relational properties
ternal in this second sense. 1 propose, there-
fore, at once to consider this proposition, with a
vview to bringing oxt quite clearly what it means


‘The proposition in question fs that, if P be a
relational property and A a term to which it does in
fact belong, then, no matter what P and A may be,
it may always be truly asserted of them, that any
term which hed wot possessed P would necessarily
hhave been other than—numerically different from—
‘A: oe in otber words, that A would necessarily, in
all conceivable circumstances, have possessed P.
‘And with this tense of "interval," as distinguished
from that which says qualitatively diferent, it ia
quice easy to point out some relational properties
which certainly are internal in this sense. Let us
take as an example the relational property which
‘we assert to belong to a visual sense-datum when
vwe say of it tbat it has another visual sense-datum
8 a spatial part: the assertion, for instance, with
regard to & coloured patch half of which is red and


as EXTERNAL RELATIONS


‘patch contains this patch’
for the red


cy Inia bere, 1 tak gate pn that oa
hey ear Be meas, We aay


Thar any bole, which bad aot contaioed that red
3 Bould nict have been identical with the whole

fa question : that from the proposition with regard
to ny term whatever tht foes not conta that
pasticular patch it fel/oms that that term i other
than the whole ia question—though ot oecessarily
Thad par.


that ic in qualitatively diferent (rom. 4
Uoular whele could not bare existed without baving
that particular patch for a part. But it seems oo


Tess clear, at first sight, that there are many other
relational properties of which thie in not true. Ta
order to get an example, we have only to coander
the relution which the red patch has to the whole
‘patch, instead of considering as before that which
the whole bay to it. It seems quite clear thet,
woe ugh the whole could not ave es ron
ving the 4 pact, the red patch might
rfeciy well Fave existed without ie Bet of
Eur purdtcar whole Te ‘they word song
every relational property of the form “ having this
for a spatial part” is “internal” in our sense, it
seems equally clear that every property of the form
“ia a spatial part of this whole” in wof internal, but
purely external Yet this last, according to me,
fone of the things which the dogma of internal
relations denies {t implies that it is just an
freceasary that anything, which isin fact a part of a
whole, ‘be a part of that whole, ax
that any whole, which has a lar thing for a
sould Rave da hing for 3 por Inglis
fn fact, quite general term which does in
Gerke « plcialarelstonal propery coal oat
fire une sichoat Song that property. And in
saying this it obviously fea im the face of common


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 189


sense, Te seems quite obvious dit in the cae of
smeny cclational properties which things have, te
feet that they have them i « mere matter of faet=
that the things in question maphe have exited re
buttaving them. Tha: thin which seems obvious fa
true, neem 10 me to be the mont important thing
that can be eset by saying that some relations are
purely external Atd the diieuly f to toc how
Soy fhiloropier could have supposed that wat
Dot trues hag for tmtance, the Felaton of part (O
Se no tore exteen an at of whch to
sil give at once one tnaie ceanon whi
Eleme tome to eve ted to the view. chat of
raaecal properties ar terol thi ee
Pare mainaistog ie the commons
view, wich sows obvioaly tum, teat Hany bo
true that A han fo fact gor P'and yet alto tron that
gh ee eet hon evng Aad |
fey tat ts to mying We i ma
tele that Ahan Dy and yet mat ue that foes the
hing besa ge flies Sat
iin other taaa A—ouexeicaly efferent
“and one cemon why thin is nputed iT
think, scply becatse i icin fact toe sha A hs
, ond-x Bas ot, dues Golow that 3 ia orher than
A. These to Whe one which | adit
to be tee (0) Hat WA has Fy and = ba not, it coer
follow thax 2 is other shan A. and the one which [
tnaintan to be false (2) that A bas P, then from
the proposition with regard to any term x that fe
hs nor gor P, ie dior tht xin onder than A are,
Think “easly confused with ove another, And
Inn fact the cate Oot if they are not diferent, or if
(@) follows ‘fom (3) then Go relational propestics
G2 Cxteroah For (1) is sertaoly tre, Sod (a)
cerainly ‘queens to asseriog that’ no0r are
Ft in Chereloce abwclsely casenti if we. are
tiaintia exteraal rentions, fo maictaic’ tat (2)
7


ayo: EXTERNAL RELATIONS


does nat follow from (1). These two propositions
dort fle fom oh Tose ee pastes
Je sre, (2) i ae, can be gor in another may,
4 follows: (:) axsera that if A haa P, then a
teem which has not, meat be other than A. (3
asserts that if A has P, then any term which hi
not, would aecesisrdy b¢ other than A. And when
they are put in this form, it is, 1 think, easy to see
why they should be confused: you have only to
confuse “mutt” or “is necessarily" with * would
necessarily be." And their connexion with the
Wueation of external relations can. be brought out sa
{allows To maimain external relations you have 10
maintain such things as that. though Edward VII
‘was in fact father of George V, he migAt have
existed withost being father of George V- But to
amaincaia this, you Rave to maintera that itis sat
true that a person who was aot father of George
would necessarily have been other than Edward
Yet it x in face the case, that any person wha was
not the father af George, mast Bave been other than
Edward. Ucless, therefore, you can ainsi that
from thia true proposttion it does wot follow that any
person who was aot father of George monld neces:
Jarily heve been other than Edward, you will have
torgive up the view thar Edward might have exieted
without Being father of George

By far the most important point in connexion
swith the dogava of interval relations seema (0 me to
bbe simply to see clearly the difference between thexe
‘two propositions (1) and (2), and that (2) does not
follow from (t). If this is hot understood, nothing
fn connexion with the dogma, can, I think, be
understood. And perhaps the diference may seem
fo dlear, that oo more need be said abour it. But |
cannot help thinking ir not clear to everybody,
fand that {¢ does involve the rejection of certa
viows, which are sometimes held as to the meaning


EXTERNAL RELATIONS ast


of “follows” So I wll try to put the point again
ve Ue bed rdadonal aa
s P be & relational property, and A a term to
arbich it docs in ince bong, °f propose to define
‘hat ls menot by sayiog that P is tera bo A (ia
Beene we ard sow Soncerned wih as mena
from the proposition tat x thing has not got
follows” thar eis other than Are
‘Thar to aay, this proposition asserts, that
beeween the two properten “not having P" and
fother thas Ay there holds that relation which
holds between the property “being « right angle”
and the property “being an angle,’ or between the
Property "red" and the property “coloured and
Which we express by saying that i che case of any
thing whatever, from the proposidon that that thing
ise ight angle i fiona ora dedocbe, at i
ana
Let tus now adopt certain conventions for express
this proposition.
je require, fst of al, ome term to exprest the
aerern of ti eatin. wich ne at thd
fvcen a particlar proposition 7 and a. particular
propostion’f, when we aesert that follows from of
Widdecitle om. Let va use the term “entails
th exprest ibe converse of this relation,” We ahall
then be able to say truly that “p entail 9." when
land only ‘when, we are able co any trly' that "g
fellows rom "or "is Geduaible fiom J," in the
tense in which the conclusion of =. aytlg
Barbara (ollows from the two. premiste
tne, conusctive propoiicn erin wind
itlon “ Toie y
fel emai
From pis
than 8
We require, nex some short


of expressing the weih regard 10 100
properties P and Q, that any proponicon. which


393 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


amerts of a given thing that it bas the property P
‘exiails the proposition that the thing in question
in: bes ee property Oy ‘Let us express this
‘proposition int
P entails <2

That isto say “P entalls £0" is to can the came
aa * Each one of all the various propositions, which
are alike in respect of the fact that each asserts with
regard to some given thing chat chat thing has P,
entails thes one emoog the various propositions,
Fike io respect of the fact that each 'anert w

10 some given thing that vost thing hi


ing, with regard to which the

the fist cas assert tat ic has Pe other words
Ma? onal 2” i 40 eras if and only if ce
proposition “ AP entails AQ” i true, and if also all
Proportions which retemble this, in the way in
‘which " BP entails BQ” resembles it are true alo
Where “AP” menne the same ex “A has P,” "AQ
the same as “A has Q” etc, ete.

We rune, nex, tome way of expreming the

ition, with regard to two propertice P and Q,
Sat iy raponsion which deus of given hing
tas P endadds the proposition, with regard tb
the thing in question, that it has Q.

‘Lee um, in the case of any proposition, 6, express
the contradictory of that proposition by f. | The
fropoton i fot che ene tat Bad P* wil
then be expressed by AP; and it will then be
satura ig aocordanee wth ise lt convertion 9
express the proposition that any proposition whi
eof & Given thing, that ies ena the

ition, with cegard to the thing in question,
Serichas Qty :
3 emails 29.

And we requice, Enally, some short way of

expressing the proposition, with regard to two


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 193


Shing P sod (A cht B i ote 8
identical wit Let us express
with A" by “B=A*; and it will thea be eatural,
according to the last convention, to express “B it


‘not identical with A by


We have now got everything which is required
ing, ina abort sfaabollc form.


proposition, with regard toa given thing A. and a
given relational property P, which A io fact
posseasess, thet P is se/ernaf to A. The required


eupression is

P entails @=A)
which is to mena the same as “Every proposition
which asserts of any gives thing that it has aot got
P sxtaits the proposition, with regard to the thn
in" question, that ve is other chen A." And this
Proposition is, of course, logically equivalent to


(e- A) entailsx P
where we are ing “Dgislly Syialen,” i wach


& sense that to say of any proposition p that it is
loge equvnient fo snvher” proponton 9 i
10g that both p entaila aul g entale A. This lst
proposition agaia, is, 20 far as I can see, either
identical with or logically equivaleot to the
critioas expressed by “anything which were
Hestical with A’ would, in any conceivable universe,
necessarily have P™ or by “A. could not have
existed in any possible world without having P";
Jomt asthe proposition expressed by “in, a
possible world 4 right angle must be wn angle” is,
take ft, either identical with or logically equivalent
see oprion “(sf aright angle) etl (©
i an azgle)
We have now, therefore, got a short means of
symbolising, with’ regard to any particular thing A


and any particular P, the: sition that P-
IW iatenal tA In the toctad of the Geo senor


194 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


etee i n g 8 Bo co map
symbolising the ition that
Felatlooel property # incernal to any term Whi
Posieates it—the proposition, namely, which waa
referred to on p. 267. as the most important
consequence of the dogma of internal relations, and
which was called (3) oo 285,
Ta order to get this


captening wih rege to soe ove
relational’ property , vsition
Iruernal to buy term which phastwer fT
Proposition waich takes the form of asserting wth
Fagard to one particular property, namely i that
any term which possesses’ that propery’ also
povsensesanother—mumely the one ‘expressed by
Erving that Fs intemal tot. fi, dati 10 =,
a ordinary waiver proposiin, lke.“ All men


bre mera’ Dot auch a form of worde in au ha
often been pointed out, am! may stan
Paap ineaye ganipr toon Seer ag pee


stand merely for the propesition * There is nothing,
which both is a man, and is nor mortal a
proposition which may also be expressed by “If
Anything is « ran, chat thing i mortal,” and which
i iguicbed by the fact that it makes 20
amertion as to whether there are any men oF not
for it may stand for the cogjunctive proposition «If
anything is a man, tbat thing is moral, and there
"Tt will be sufficient for our purposes to
deal with propositions of the fest kind—thone
namely, which assert with regard 10 some two
roperie say Q and R that there is soting which
Boch'does passcas and does not possess R,
Yihoor aserting that anything does possest Q.
Soch a proj is cbvioudy equivalent to the
assertion that eny pair of tions whic
Fesemnbles the pair “AQ” and" AR.” in respect
‘of the fact that ope of them asserts of some particular


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 295


thing tht thas Q and theber, of the same thing,
R, stand to one znother in a certain

+ the relanoa, namely, which, in the case of
and ‘"AR," can be expressed by saying
Iv is n0t the'case both that A has Q and that
A has vot got K.” When we my There i
‘does possess Q and does not

‘we are obviously sayiag something which
ither identical with or logically equivalent t0 the
proposition “In the case of every such pair of
Propositions it is not the case both that the one
Which asserts a particular thiag to have Q is true,
and that the one which asserts ito have K 1s false.
We require, therefore, & short way of expressin
the relanon between two propositions p and
fan be expressed by “It ix not the case that
trve and g false.” And Tara
> expr he eatin by wri


is
ge ate


ae

for "iti not the case hap in trve and f
The relation in question is one which logicians
have sometimes expressed by “A implies g.”" It is,
for instance, the ope which Mr. Russell in the
Principles of Mothematics calls “material ies
lennon" and which he and Ds.
Mathematics call siaply

‘heb ive toe "im to stand for
‘elation, we, of course, got the apparently parad
results that every (aise proposition implies every
‘other proposition, both true and false, and that every
Arve proposition imphes every other true proposition :


clear also, that ff and ¢ ere
“it ig not the ease that fs true and
g fol.” And these rewlts, it seems t0 me, a

{2 be paradoxical, solely because if we use "implies
in any ordinary sense, they are quite certainly fale,


196


‘Why logic
‘word “implies” as a name for a relation, for which
it never is used by any one else, Ido act kaom. Tt
para, no dou, Dzau sb relallon fr which
they do use it—that expressed by saying “It is not
the case that 9 ie true and g false” is one for
‘which it is very important thot they should have a
short name, because it iz a relation which ia very
fundamental and about wbicd they need constantly
to talk, while (s0 far as 1 can discover) it simply
hhas no short mame in ordinary life. And it ia
arly, perhaps, for a reason which leads us back to
ut present reason for giving some mame to this
relation. It is, in fact, oatural to use “p implien
9° to meaa the same as “If p, then 9.” And
Though "IC p then ¢” is hardly ever, if ever, used
‘to mean the same as “Teis not the ense that f is true
aid flee" yet the exprssion “It enon bas
Q. has R™ may, I thiok, be naturally wed to
Express the proposition that, in. che cave of

Bair of propsitoca which resemble the pir
dnd A Rin reapect of the fact that the frst of the
pair asserts of some particular thing that it has Q
And the second, of the same thing, that it bas R, it
is not the case that the frst is true and the second


falee, That 1s 10 way. if (a8 1 propose to do) we
ccxpress “Tt in aot the case both that AQ is us
and AR false" by

AQ* AR,


and if, further (on the analogy of the similar cre
with regacd to “entails,” we expreas the propasition
that o€ ery pair of propositions which resemble
AQ and AK in the respect just memioned, it ia
tre hat heft bas the relation «othe secon by
ak
then, it és natural to 20 0 aR, by “IF ane
Thlag tea Q then that ing bar 8 hed gies
‘may, T think, have falsely inferred that since it is


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 297


natural to express “2Q + 2R" by “If anything bas
Q. thea that thing as R.” it mast be natural to
express “AQ+ AR” by “If AQ. then Al
fand therefore alio by “AQ implies AR."

hhas been their reason for expressing “p
implies ¢” thea obviously their reason is
‘And, whatever the reason may have bee
tome quite certain that "AQ + AR


ae ‘expressed esther by “AQ i


or by “If AQ, thea AR,” sithough
can be properly expressed by “If anything has
‘ho that thing bas ‘ceed
‘am gomg, then, 10 express the universal prow
positon, wh regard to two particular propenies Q
and R, which aspects that “Whatever has Q, has
R" or “If anything has Q. wt hes R,” without
asserting that anything has Q, by
aQaaR
a means of expressing it, which,
‘adopted the coavemuon that “p » 9"
amie as “tie aot the cate that it true and ¢ fle
ings out the mmportant this proposition is
either identical with or logically equivalent to the
jon that of every such pair of propositions as
‘and AR, it is trve that it is not the case that
the Brat is tras and the second false, And having
adopted this convention, we can now see how, in
ascordance with the progestion, with regard to 8
particular property P, that B is éndernal to everything
‘which possesses it, is to be expressed. We saw
(hat P is savernad to A is to be expressed by
EP eatails (=A)
‘by the logically equivalent proposition
(e= A} catails <P
‘And we bave now only to the proposition
that exydding that has P, has also the property that
P ia swternal to it. The required expression is


398“ EXTERNAL RELATIONS


obviourly az follows Just as “Anything that has
Q has Ris to be expressed by
oak
nything that haz F, bas aleo the property that
ternal to 1” wil be exprested by
aP « GP euails =)


Po {iy} entieyP).
We bave shes got in the cate of ty pacer
propery Pr a meave of expressing the proposition
that ie is inferwal to re ee
hich ir both shor “and brings out elem the
Botiona that are mvolved in itt And we. 40. 90t
Deed {thinly sey fortber special convention for
symbslag theropoaion iat ery rela
per mtr 0 gry em wich pe
oponton, rarely wh above

gn aby yo) ard whnchon prt, Tall he most
Forse eorscqunce othe dia of ema
iaioes, We can exprest i smiply enough es


What we assert of P when we may
xP + GP entails G=3)}

can be truly asserted of every relational propery
And now, for the purpose of comparing (2) with
(3), and seeing exactly what is involved in my
Btsertion that (2) does not follow from (2), let us try
to exprese (1) by means of the same conventions
Let us frst Bs the amertion mith regard 10 5
ue thing A anda pricy ional property
that, fru that A hes P it folows
that sothing which Fas not got P is identical with
AL Thir man assertion which iv quite cerainly
ince, if anything which had not yot P were
ical with A, it would foliow that AB; and
from the proposition AP, it certainly follows that
‘RP is false, and therefore also that “Something


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 299


hhas not got P is identical with Ais false, of
‘Nothing’ which has not gor P is identical with
A" istrue. And this assertion, in accordance with
the conversions we have adopted, wil be expensed


AP entails (37 + @=A))

We want, next, m order to express (1), a means

of expreing uh regan oa peru raion
ity B, the ascertion that, from the propasti
with ae to anylheng whatever, tl

WP, it floes drat woching whi
ical wuts the thing ia question. This also
{fan ttanioe whe fs gue conaily
At merely amverts (what is obviously tre} that what

JAP otal (s? « F=A))
seers of Aifete be tly tere of soph
whatever. Aid this assertion, in accordance with the
conventions we have adopced, will be expressed by
4P eaiails (yP « (7 =3)}.

Te propa, wi Teneant £0 call (1), but
ich expressed before eater clumsily, can ow
‘be expressed by
()=) “Whar we assert of P, when we say,

2P entails (VF « G==))
can be truly esserted of every relational

"This ls. proposition whichis agetn que certainly
true; and, ia onler to compare it with (2), there
thio no nee to adopt any fre convention fot
expressing it, since the questions whether it is oF
is not different from (2), and whether (2) does or
does not follow from it,’ will obviously depend on
the same questions with regard to the £¥o pro:
positions, with regard to the particular relational


property, P,
a a entails (VP « G=2)}
2 + GP entails G=2)}


po EXTERNAL RELATIONS


Now what I maincain with regard to (1) acd (2)
ia than, shereas (1) is troe, (2) alse. Y maiatarn,
that { to say, that the proposition * What we
fart of 8 when we sy
in de otek a see cae

true of ovry relaviocal property "is false, thou
U scmic that what we here ssert of P is tr of


The dogma of mcernal relations, on the other band,
implies that (2) is crue; that is to say, thet avery
relational property is inferne/, and that there are 00
éaternal relational properties. And what 1 suggest
4s that the dogma of iaternal relations bas been held
iy epame (3) bar been Gael hough w low
rom {1
Ak ind (ah docs ant Sle: sre Sham
ak be eel mem ms Bl lo rs
¢} only if from any proposition of the form
Penile (Gs)
there fellows the eorrespondiag propio of the
form


Pe gentalls ry, :
‘And that this is not the ease can, I think, be easily
teen by easidecing the following three proposition,
"All the books on this shelf are blue,"
¢= "My copy of the Principles of Mathematics
ig @ book on this abell” and fet r=" My copy of
the Principles of Mathematics is tlue." Now p
here does absolutely entas! (¢ « r}. ‘That is to say,
i, shea low, Eom tae My copy of the
Principles (s 00 this shell” and “* My copy of the
Prieciples is not blue," are act, as a matter of fact,
booth true. But it by no means follows from this
‘(9 entails r} For what chis latter pro
positon meuns is “It ix not the case, both that #
Is true and that (¢ entails 7) is false.” And, as a


EXTERNAL RELATIONS gon


ate of fc (eae) aie eetsny le
for fram the 9 the Principles
en dh ste the propadon = My sopy of te
Principles is blue” does wet follow. "It ts sicaply
fot the case that the second of these. two

scan be deduced from the frst 4y its

A airy ply nce, the eae tas ic aman to tin
relation fe’ which ft does. stand to the conjunctive
ar py af the Demis a on ths thle
‘my copy of is on this shel."
This “conjunctive proposition, really, does dail
My copy of the Pronciples is blue.” But "My.
copy of the Principles is on this shell” by iealf
he certainly does ot ental My copy of the
ricipea ia blog” Te is simpy not the case that
my copy of the Principles conde! have been on this
Shelf wathoue being bloe {¢ entail} iy therefore
false. And Renee “f (g entuls r)," can only
fallow from 7p snails (g +r) if from this latter
proposition » fellows. But ¢ quite certainly does
[aot follow fom this proposition from the fact that
‘deducible from f, it does not in the least
low that pn trees Tt ix therefore, clomly noe

the cae tt every ropaion of he a


ceatails the cog ion of the form
aN
since we have found one particular proposition of
the fir form which does mo¢ cotail the corres.
ponding proposition of the second
‘To maintain, therefore, that (2) follows from (1)
is oe ee ‘And éne source of the coofurion
ia, [ think, plain. (1) does allow you to
ert thats HAP ip trot, then the. proposition
Bo {y= A)}" mast be tre | What the
ere expresses. is merely pro:
pace flows Gore AP, no tht ic iwi tsa 6
Tiecessary proposition. But it is supposed, through


303 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


confusion, that what is asserted is that it isnot
the ease both that AP is true and that “7P «
=A)" is ote sf nezesay propecia:

yo ay HB spied hat wet emer
WAP» = A)}" since to say that
GP GA)" im te salf n naccusey properon
Ws the same thing a to say that “yP entails
GAY" is woo trae, Jn fat it seems to me

that what is. qeant by sayi
Fropaidone of om oa Teer tho
are necessary (or “apodeictic") “propositions, fs
‘corresponding


smoerely that th proposition of ‘the


ie =P ee: in in, Pant
2Q” in not ss proposition ; but if
“ZP entails 2Q" is true, “xP o2Q" ipa


necessary proposition—and e necessary truth, since
1g false propositions are necessary in. themselves,
‘Thus what is meant by saying that “" Whatever is
ight angle, is alsa an angle “is a necessary trmth,
is 2 far ba Tan see, simply hat the proposition
"Ue is a right angle) entails (¢ is an angle)"is also
trie. This seems to me to give what bas, in fact,
‘bees generally recast in philosophy by “ nocessary
hs eg. by Leibniz: and to point out the
ion besmeen them and those true univer
Popositions “which are “mere matters of fact”
And if we want 10 extend the meaning of the
fnmone “necessary truth” in such away that some
singular propositions may also. be said to be
“necessary truths” we can, | thick,
as follows, We" sam say that AB is.
necessary truth, only if the universal
postion! (eA) eak* (which, as we buve ener,
ollows from AP) is a necessary truth: that is to
fay, if and only if (em A) entails 2P. | With
ein, what the dogins of imernal, relations
aasertx is that in every case in which a given thio
Gctually haa » givea’ relational propesty, the last


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 383


that it hes that property is necessary truth ;
whereas what I ara asterting is that, if the property
in question is an ‘internal "property, thea the fact
in quenion will be a necessary truth, whereas if the
property in question is “external,” then the fact in
question will be a mere “* matter of fact.”

So much for the distinction between (1) which i
true, and (2), or the dogma of internal relations,
which [ hold’ to be false But T said above, in
Batting hat my contention tht (2) doce not low
fom {ih involves the rejection of cerain views
that have sometimes been held as to the meaaing
of “follows''; and think it is worch while to say
something about this

It is obvious that the possibility of maintaining
that (2) does not follow from (1). depends upon its
being true that from "xP +20” che propo
“aP entails 2Q” does not follow. And th
has sometmes been disputed, and i I think ft
sot clearly see.

‘To begin with, Mr. Russell, in the Principle: of
Mathemabes(o.9), ets the pase ean be

yt


deduced from p” as if it meant exactly the same
thing as "ps9" or "p materially implies gy”
aed bas repeated the sume error elsewhere, ff
ln Phlosiphreat Essays (p. 165), where he ib
discussing what de calls the wviom of internal
hte And am afr a good many people
Ihave heen led to suppose that, since Mr. Russell
has anid chis, it must be true. If it were true, then,
of course, it would be impontible co. distingu
between (1) and (3), and mt would follow that,
since (1) certainly is true. what I am calling the
dogma of interna) relations 1s true too, But I
imagine that Mr. Russell himvdf would now be
willing to admit that, so far from being true, the
statement that “g cen be deduced from A” means
the same a3 “ps9” is simply an enormous


ry EXTERNAL RELATIONS


howler"; and I do not think 1 ceed spend
‘time in crying to show that it
hoe it omy be beld that, though “p entails g”
doen ‘ot can, the came as "fre if yet never.
theese from "a e2Q" the’ propoation sP
wails 20 does follow, fore somewhat more
aubsle reason ; and, if this were s0, it would again.
follow that what 1 am calling the Gogme of internal
Felaons tas be tro. ithcmy be bel, namely,
that though “AP estails AQ” doc not mean
ly “AP + AQ* yet what it docs mean ta
simply the conjunction “AP «AQ aad this
propesition aan instance of a true formal
Bon (tbe phrase "formal plication”
tnderstood, fa Me. Roselle Sense, in Wh
ae 2° assers x formal i
iow eo 10 want “AP entale Al
for sonar { understand bim
sueted by Mr. 0. Siechey in dtnd NS, 98
‘hed the cme vigw har beck fequerly sugpessal
(though Ido not know that he has actunily sosereed
fy by Mis Rossel Eleuell (eg, Franco. Depa.
‘mative, p. 21) If this view were trot, then,
though ‘'eP entails 20" would not be identical
ieimaing wih “a+. yer it would flow


nce, if
aP 229

ere rum then every particule auction of the
form AP + AQ. would not only be true, but. would
bbe an instaner of a true formal iesplication (n

“SP ¢2Q") and this, according to the. p
defmition, is all that “2? entails £Q” amerts
Wf, therefore, it mece true, it would again follow
ti all reatonalproperdes must be ineroal
Bat that this view alo i entre appeacy to me
perfectly obvious, The proposition that Tam in
this room does “materially icaply” that I om
more than five years old, since both are true;


of a true formal implication, since it
‘rue that all the persons ia this room are more than
five years old; but nothiag appears to Mme more
obvious than that the ‘of these two pro-
positions can wot be deduced from the first—chet
the kind of elation which holds between the
Bremies and concunon of a, srllogiam in
irbora does not hold between them. —T
i in another way:
that the properties “being @ person
and “being more than five years
selated in the kind of way is which “being &
right angle” ts related 10 “being an angle,” and
which we express by saying that, in the case of
every term, the proposiuos that ‘that term is aa
angle can be deduced from the proposition that
tea right gle é f
90 are the only two suggestions 2s t0 the
union oF orale gee pa es ee
if true, would yield the result that (2) does follow
from (1), and tbat therefore all relationel properties
ave ncaa; and both of these, it seems fo,
are obviowsly ‘other suggested meanings,
a0 far as I Kaow, wosld leave it true that (2) docs
‘not follow from (1), and therefore that ( may
bly be right in maistainsg that some re-
Etional properties are exteraale Tt might, for
Jnana ‘be suggened that the lit proposed
definition should be amended as ollows—that
wo should say: “p entails g” means"? » 7 and
this proposition isan instance of a formal implica
tion, which is not merely true but seffvndent, like
the’ laws of Formal Logic” This propased
definition would avoid the paradoxes involved in
Mer, Suacheys defoitien, sce much sre formal
inoplications ax * ‘persons in this room are
more than five years oki” are certainly not self-


306 EXTERNAL RELATIONS


evident ; and, co far as I can see, it may state
something which is in fact te of p and ¢,
whenever and only when p entails g. “I do not
Imyaell think that i gives the meaning of “9 entalla
y' since the Kind of relation which 1 s¢¢ to hold
meen tbe premiuses und conclusion of a
sm seems to me to be one which is purely
objective” in the sense that no pay
term, auch ax is involved in the meaning of "selfe
evident,” in involved in its definition (if it has one).
Tam not, however, concerned 10 dispute that some
such definition of “1p entails g” as this may be
true. Since it is evident that, even if it were, my
proposition that “<P entails xQ” does nat follow
from “xP » 20" would still be true; and hence
‘also my contention that (2) does ot follow


from (2).
"So ich by way of arguing thet we ore sot
ound to hold that all relational properties are


internal in the particolar sense, with which we are
‘ow conceraed, in which to say that they are meana
that in every case in which a thing A bara celational
Willows fom the proposition thas 8 erm

ras not got that y term in question

ie other Goan A Batt have. gone farther and
aseered that some elation popes certeely
fare n0/ internal. And in defence of this proposition
Ydo not know that I have aaytbing wo say but that
BEL Tots Moen al
wl a cera y vite
Wal nor have bad ie? thas, fication fo te
feere proposition that this is this, it by'no means
follows thar thie has to other things all the relations
which it in fact bas Everybody, of course, must
‘Admit that if all che propositions which assert of it
that it bas these properties, do in fact follow from
the propotition that this is this, we cannot ace that
they da. And 20 far ax I can see, there ix no


‘EXTERNAL RELATIONS 37


reason of any kiod for asserting that they do,
except the confusion which 1 have exposed. But
i arems to me forther that we can ee in many
cases that the proposition that this has that relation
does wot follow from the fact that it is this: that, for
leatance, the proposition that Edward V1] was father
of Vis a mare matter of fact

J want now to return for » moment to that other
‘meaning of " isternal,”{p. 286) in which to say that P
is internal to A means not merely that anything which
tad ot noald ooceranly be ihe han A, bt
that it would necessarily be guaktersvely different.
Tsid fines eas the mealing of = aca in
‘which the dogma of iotemal relations holés that all
relational properties are “interval”; and that one
of the mos: important consequences which followed
from i, was that all relational properties ere
“internal” in the less extreme sense that we have


Just been considering. But, if ] am not mistaken,
there i another important consequence which also.
{follows from it, namely,


‘the Identity of Indisceraibles.
For if it be tre, in the case of every relational
property, that any term which had not tbat property
‘would necessarily be qualitatively different from any
‘which bad, it follows of courve that, in the case. of
two terms one of which basa relational property, which
the other bas not the two are qualitatively diferent,
But, from the pro that = is other than, it
dots follow that has nome relational property which
y has not; and hence, if the dogma of internal
gehen a as, Rw hay th 2s the
p23 always alto, Meret from
‘Bich is the’ principle of Identity of lndiacerniblcx
This is, of course, a further objection to the dogma
of noel rctions, sce | Sai obvi that
the principle of Idectity of Indiscernibles isnot trie,
Tnded, v0 far a9 1 can 2ee, the dogma of itera
relations essentially consists in the joint assertion of


jot.“ EXTERNAL RELATIONS


two indefensible propositions : (1) the proposition
that in the case of relational propery ai tue
of any term which bas got that property, that it migAd
not have had it and (2) the Identity of indis-
cernibies.
1 pan, Gall, to say something about de phrae
which Mr, Rusell wes in the Plungpheed Bu
tp expres che dogma of internal relations
saya it may be expressed in ra Every
relation je grounded fa the atures of the related
terms” (p. 160). And it can be easily accn, if the
account which have given be true, in what precise
senee it does hold this” Me. Russel is uncertain as
to whether by "the cature” of a term isto be under-
stood the tere: itself or something else For my
it seerss to me that by 2 term's nature iz meant,
ft tbe term tol but what may. roughly be called
its qualities as distingushed from its relation
Properiien Hut whichever meaning we tie, it
TH allow from what I have sa that the dogma
Of internal relations does imply that every zelational
property which a term has ix ia a pesfeetly prec
sents, growed sn ita satre, Jw follow that
every Such property is grounded in the farm, in the
‘ae te, the ane f evry ech propery,
yas from the mere proposition that that term is
‘hat term that it haa the property in question. “And
it willalso follow that any euch property is grounded
in the qualities which the term has, in the sense,
that if you take aif the qualities which the term baa,
1 wil gale fellow in the came, of each rlioen,
perty, from tbe term bs
Trove gales thacie bee the relational property in
question ince this in implied by the propotition
in the case of any such property, any term
which had vot bed it wocld neceasanly eve been
diferent in quality from the term ia question. In
both of these «wo senses, thes, the dogma of


tion. He


EXTERNAL RELATIONS 309


internal relations does, 1 think, iroply that every
relational property i» grounded lo the patere of
every term which ity and in this. sense
Sepals Rae ek Secret
think, thar there is another sence of “grounded "in
mbich it may quite weil be true that every relational
property 1 grounded in the nature of any term
Which pogtenee it,” Namely that, in the ease of
every such property, the term in question has some
quality wihové which it could not have bad the
Property. In other words thar the relational
property entails some quality in the term, though
no quality ia the term ewlails the relational
ropecty.


‘THE NATURE OF MORAL
PHILOSOPHY


1 snoucn Hike, if [ can, to interest you to-night in
one particlar quexion stout Moral Philosophy, Tt
is a question which resembles most philotoghical
questions, in respect of the fact that philosophers
sire by no means agreed as to what 's the ‘ight
amwer to it: some seem 10 be very strongly
coovinced that one answer is correct, while others
are equally strongly convinced of the opposite. For
my own part 1 do fee! some doubt as to. which
zur she right coe lzbough, et you wll vo,
incline rather strongly to one of the two altcraatives,
[ should like very rauch, if T could, to find some
‘considerations which seemed to me absolutely con-
Vincing on the one side or the other; for the
question seems to me in itself to be an exceedingly
Intecesting one.

Thave said that the question is a question about
Moral Phiiosophy : and it seems to me in fact to be
a very large an ‘question which affects the
whole of Moral Philosophy, In asking it, we are
doing no less than asking wht it is that people are
doing when they study Moral Philosophy at all: we


fare asking what sort of questions iris which it fs che
business of Moral Phil to discuss and try to
find the right answer to. But F intend, for the sake


of simplicity, to confine myself to asking it in two
paricdar ixiwencen, Moral Phicsophy aa, infact,


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPRY 4:1


to discuss 4 good many different ideas ; end though
Y chink this same question may be raised with
regard to them all, T intend to pick out two, which
@eem to me pasticularly fundamental, and to ask it
‘with regard to them only.

My fist business mast be to expain what these
to ideas at


‘The name Moral Philosophy naturally euggests
that what is meant is a defartoeat of Pbllrephy
bch has something todo wath morality. And we
all uedersiand roughly what is meant by morality,
‘We are accustomed to the distinction between
ioral good and evil on the one. band, and what is
sometimes called physical good and evil on the
other, We all make che distinction belween a
‘man’s moral character, on the one hand, and bis

sbleness or intellectual endowments, on the
athe, We fel that to acruse = man of immoral
conduct is quite a different thing from accasing him
sean of nd oe bernie fm
‘accusing him merely of stupidity or ignorance
‘Rod aoe ceatiy we singin bine te ee
of being under a moral obligation to do a thing, an
the idea of being merely under a legal obbgabon to
doit It is a common-place that the sphere of
‘morality is much wider than the sphere of law : that
‘we are morally bound to do and avoid many things,
hich are noe er ‘or forbidden by the laws of
our soustry sand iti alo sometimes held cha,
jeular law is vajost or immoral, it may even be
‘8 moral duty to di that is t0 say that there
may be a positive between moral and legal
obligation; aod the mere fact that this is held,
whether truly or faleely, shows, at all events, that
fhe coe fn ye Sos Sm he er
ame then, natu
muggess that it is department of ‘philosophy
concerned with morality in this common sense.


31 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


‘And itis, ia faet, tras that one lange department of
Moral Philosophy is so concerned. " But i¢ would be
‘& mistake to thisk that the whole subject is only
concerned with morality, Another important
epartment of itis, a8 1 sball try to show, concerned
with ideas which’ are sot moral ideas, in thin


ordi
Poe Ich 1 propose for di

ideas to pick out for dise
‘while one of them fa mora dea, the other belongs


to that department of Moral Philosophy, which is not
concerned solely with mocality, and ix not T chink,
properly speaking, « moval idea ev all

Let us begin with the one of che two, which in a
moral idea.


to
ve.
feu
‘of being morally bound to act in a particular wa)

‘90 8 patticlar occasion. Bot what is, 20 far as

‘ean see, precisely the sare idea is also called by
several other namea. To say that 1 am under a
moral obligation todoa certainthing is, think, clearly
to say the same thing as what we commonly express
by anying that L ooght to do it, or that it is my duty
w doh. That is tonay, the idea of moral obligation
fs identical with the idea of the moral “ought” and
with the idea of duty. And it also aces at firet
sight asi we might make yet another idenscation,

the asvertion tbat 1 ought to doa certain
seems as if jt meant each the same as the assertion


that it would be wrong of me ot to do the thing
im question: at all events it is quite clear that
whenever it is my duty to do anything, it would be


‘iuag of me not to do it, and that whenever it
would be wrong of mc to do anything, then its my
duty to refraic, ng it In the case of these
to ideas, the idea of what is wrong, and the idea
of what is my duty or what 1 ought to do, different


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 315


views may be taken 2s to whether the one is more
fanduentl thn the aber, or whether bow are
equally so; and on the question: Z/ one ol
ite two ix more fundamndntal than the otber, which
Of the two is #0? Thus some people would say,
that the idea of wrong” is the more fondamental,
fand that the idea of “duty” is to be defined in
terms of it: that in fact, the statement “It ia my


it is. my duty not to tell a bc” merely.
ipeane “It would be wrong of me to tell one
Others again would apparently sey just the opposite:
that duty i the more fuodarsceral tion, and
“wrong” isto be defined in terms ofit. While others
‘perhags would hold that aither is more fundamental
fhe the other; that both, are equally fundamental
and thar the statement “ir would be wrong ta do
30 and 30” is only equivalent to, not identical in
meaning with, “I ought rot to doit.” But whichever
Of these three views be the true one, there i, 1
think, no. doubt whatever about the equivalence
notion of the two ideas: and no douby, therefore, that
whatever answer be given to the question I am
{ing a raise about she one the ame answer man

g given to tbe corresponding question about the
othe


Is the idea of duty or moral obligation, oc, what
comes to the same thing, the idea of what is
‘wrong—morally wrong. Everybody would agree
that this idea—or, to speak more accurately, one or
both of these two ideas—is among the mot
fundamental of our moral ideas, whether or not they
‘would admit that all others, for example the ideas
‘of moral goodness, involve a reference to this one i
heir definion, cr would bold that we have come
ere which are of i, and equi
2 ate independent equally


moral idea, then, which I ete to discuss,
‘


3% NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


ets
tion ft

ia, Ia there in fact only one idea which we call by
this name? Or is it possible thar on some occasions
‘when we say that 6o and so is a duty, we mean
Hometfing.clderent by thie expression from ‘wbat
we do op others? And that similarly when we say
that 90 ard 40 is morally wrong. we sometimes use
this name “morally wrong,” for one idea and sorne-
Sines for another so that one and the same th
may be "morally wrong” io one sente of the word,
ad yet not moray wrong in another? think, in
fact, there are two diflerent senses in which we use
{nese terms; aad to point out the difference between
them, will help to bang out clearly more the nature.
ea Aa | aaa the difference can
‘be brought oot most considering the
gon of moral rues with See ea

rniliar.

Everybody knows thar coral teachers are largely
concerned in laying dowa moral rules, and in
disputing the truth of rules which have been
previously accepted. And moral ruls seem 10
Seow fo a very, lrge extent in aterons to
the effect that it is always wrong to do cenaia
actions of to refrain from doicg certain others ; of
{what comes to the same thing) that it a
your duty to refrain (rom cerain actions, and
potitively to do certain others. The Ten Com.
mandments for example, are instances of moral
roles ; and most of them are exaroples of what are


ertain povitive actions, that is is our duty to do
them and therefore wrong to refrain frons doing them.
‘The ffi commandmest, which tells us to banour


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 315


‘our father and mother, is ly an exception ;
frrocens to be 2 pousive role Te’ bow Hee toe
others, expressed Ja the segative form ~ Thou shalt
wot do 20 and 40,” and it is apparently really meant
to assert that we ought to do certain positive
factions, not merely that there are some positive
action from which we ought 10 refrain, The
difference between this one and the rest will chu
Serve as. on example of the diference between
ive and negative “moral rules, a difference
which is sometimes treated as if ic were of great
importance. And I do not wish to deny that there
1207 enon pentane tirence Eereeen seal
‘only that certain positive actions are wrong, ad
Dezing alas that, certain ane, 16 rel fom
ing cain acions fat aa wroag a8 poalively
to do cermin others. But thia distinction between
postive and nogeiiee rules i erty of much let
[importance than anather which is, 1 chink, liable


to be confused with it. So far at inction
ore ft fs only = distinction berween a8 sttrion
wt it ia wrong to do a potitive action and 0


assertion that it i wroag to refrain from doing onc:
tnd each of these assertions is equivalent i one
which asserts 2 duty—the Bret with an assertion
that it is a duty to refrain, the second with an
tussertion that a positive action is a duty, But
there is another distinction between some, moral
rules and others, which is of much greater import-
‘ance thas thia one, and which does, { think, give
1 reanon for thicking that the term ‘moral obliga-
ton ” in actually used in different senses on different
vecasions

7 haye sald that moral rules seer to consist, fo
Jorge extent, in assertions (o the efiect that f
always wroag to do certain actiens or to refrain
from doing “certain others or the equivalent
‘asertions in terma of Gury. But shere is a large


316 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


lass of moral rules, with which we are all of us
Tez, whieh de "not come “under hia
inition. They are rules which are concerned
‘not with our actions, in the natural sense of the
‘word, but with oue feelings, thoughts and desires,
Ko illsntration of this kind of rule can again be
ven from the Ten Commandments. Most of
ten, as we all know, are concerned merely with
actions; but the centh at leas is clearly an ex-
The tenth says "Thou shale not covet
hbour's house, nor bis wife, nor bis
not hia ox, nor his ass, nor anything that
and unless “cover” is merely 4 misiranslation of
‘wort which stands for some kind of action, we
Plainly have here a rule which is concerned with
c and not with our actions. And one
feason which makes the distinction between roles
of this kind and rules concerned with actions
important, is that our feelings are not, as a ru
directly within the control of oue will in the sense
jn which many of our actions are. [ cannot, for
jostance, by any single act of will directly
prevent from arising 1 my mind a desire for
Something that belongs to some one else, even
when once the desire has arsived, [ean by my
tts continuance ;
do directly bat forcing myself 10
tcl to oder coradertgca Chick may erenguinh
the desire. But though I thus cannot prevent myself
altogether from coveting my neighbour's por
I can altogether prevent myself from stealing the
‘The action of stealing, and the feeling of covetous-
sete are clearly on s very differen level jo this
respect. The sction is directly withia the contro
‘of my will, whereas the feeling is not. if I will
nat ike he hing (gh of our se people
may 6nd a great difscuky ia willing this) it does in
qoeml fae dreniy "a's ke


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 317


whereas, if I will not to desire it, it emphatically
docs net, ever in ‘follow directly tbat no
deaize for ic wil be "This distinction between
the, way in which our felings and our ations are
‘under the control of our wills is, ] think, a very real
fone indeed ; we cannot help constantly recognising
that it exist And it has an important bearing on
the distinction between thove moral rules which
deal with actions and those ‘which deal with
feelings, for the following reascn. The philosopher
Kant laid down a well-known proposition to the
effect. that “ought” implies "can: that is to say,
that ic cannot be true that you “ought” to do a
thing, unless it fs true that you could do it, (f you
stone, “Aad ae ae of the, segue, whic,
wwe commonly use the words " ought” fry.”
V think this cule is plainly true When we say
absolutely of ourselves or others, “I ought to do
fo and so” or “you ought ta we imply tink
very often that the thing in question is a thiog
which we could do, if we chase: though of course
E may often be_a thing which it is very dificult 10
choose to do. Thus i iz clear that 1 cannot truly
tay of wayoce thet be ough wo do x sera ting
if te is a thing which ic is physically impossible for
him to do, however desirable it may be that the
thing should be dose. And in this sense itis clear
thar it cannot be «rly said of me that T ought not
to have a certain feeling, or that { ought not to have
bad it, if it is a feeling which 1 could not, by any
effort of my will, prevent myself from having. Tho
‘having or the prevention of a certain feeling is not,


of course, strictly ever a impossibility, but
is Is very often in exactly the same
tengo, in which actions are physically impossible—
that is to say that I could ‘not possibly get it or


prevent it, even if I would But this betog to, it
fe plain thar such a moral rule as that I ought aot


319 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


to covet my neighbour's possessions is, if it means
to asuere that [ought nor, in that seave in which
“ought” impli ean" a cule whieh “cannot
posbly be true. What it to assert is
absolutely vniversally, of every leeling of covetous-
‘eas, that the feeling’ ia question is one which the
ppernon who fel it ougAt not to have fet, But in fact
‘a very large proportion of such feelings (1 am inclined
to say the vast majority) are feelings which the
aon who fel ther could ‘not have, prevented
ling. f he would : they were beyond the control
‘will, “And hence i is quite emphatically not
true that none of these (eelings expkt to have been
felt, if we are using" in the sense which
impli that the person who fl them cond ave
avoided them. So far fom ite being true that
absolutely sexe of them ought to have been fel,
‘only true of those among them, probably a
i muinority, which the person who felt them
sould have avoided feeling. 1, therefore, moral
ules with regard to feelings are to have a chance of
beng nearly tue, we st understand the ought”
‘which ‘oecirs ja them in some other sense. But
wih moral ule that reer to action the casein
very diferent. Take stealing for example, Here
again what the Eighch Commandment appears to
Imply is thot absolutely every theft which bas ever
cecurred was an act which the ageot ought not to
have done; and, ifthe “ought” ia the one which
finmplies “‘can,” it implies, therefore, that every
theft was an act which the agest, if he had chosen,
oul have avoided. "And ths statement that every
‘theft which bas bees committed was an act
the chief, if he had eo willed, could have avoided,
though "it may be doubted if it is, absolutely
tuniverselly true, is not a statement which is clearly
abserd, Vike the stutemeat that every coveious
desire could bave been avoided by the will of che


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 319


person who felt it It is probable that the vast
Inajority of acts of theft have been acts which it
wat ia the power of the thief to avoid, if he bad
‘whereas this ix clearly not true of
the vast majority of covetous desires, It is, there
fare, quite possible thac those who believe we ought
ever to steal, are osing “ought” in a vense which
implies that’ stealing’ always could bave been
avoided ; whereas it''s T think quite cerain that
many of those who belisve that we cught to avoid
all covetour desires, do not believe for a, moment
that every covetous desire that has ever been felt
was a desire which the person who fels it could have
avoided feeling, if he had chosen. And yet they
certainly do believe, in some sense or other, that m0
covetous desire avy ever to have been felt. The
concn iy therfore, i seems to me unavoideble
‘we do use “ought.” the mor “ought” in
two diferent senses; the one a aeore in which to
say that I ought to bave done so and 30 dots really
imply that 2 could have done it, if 1 had chosen,
and the other a sense ia which it carries with it no
eich implication. I think the difference
Tbetween the two can be i this way, IF
wre express the ming of the fist “ought” the
Ga which doce imply "ean." by saying that “1
‘Ought to have done a0 and 20” means “it actually
‘war my duty 20 do it”; we can express the meaning
of the second by saying that ag. "1 ought not 20
Ihave fele to and no” means wot “it was my diny to
avoid that feeling.” bot “it wemldhave been my duty
to avoid it, sf | bed been able.” And correspondi
to, there two meanings of ought” we should, T
ink, probably distinguish two different sorts of
moral rules, which though expressed in the same
Janguage, do in fact mean very diferent thi
‘The one ia a set of rules which assert (whether
co falaely} that it always actually é a duty 10 do or


320 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY
to refrain from certain actions, and assert therefore
that it always is in the power of che agent's wil to
do or to refrain from them ; whereas the other sort
only assert that so and so would be a duty, if it
fire within our power, without mall anetig hat
{always in within oor power.
may, perhaps, give « name to the distinction
I main, by cali the fiat kind of rales thove
wt assert that something actually is a duty—
“eules of duty.” end by calling the second kind—
thote which recommend or condemn something. not
4p the control of our wills—" ideal rules”: choosing
in laser mame becaues they can be said to in
culeate a moral “ideal "something the attainment
of which is not direcdly within the power of our
‘will. Aga further example ofthe difference between
deal rules and rules of duty we may take the famous
pamage from the New Tesament (Luke 6 27)
“Love yout enemies, do good t0 them that bale
you, bless them that curse you, pray for them that
eapitefaly use you OF these four Fules, the three
eat’ may be Files of duty, becauee they refer to
things which ae plant. a3 a rule at leas in, the
power of your will; but the first, if “love” be
understood fa its natural sense as refecring (0 your
feelings, is plainly only an “ideal” rule, since such


felings are cbviculy not dreziy under out ows
control, in the same way in which such actions ax
doing goods esing o praying fora personae a
To love certain or to feel no unger against
them, is a thing which it ix quite impossible to
auiain directly by ever to atiain


or
completely at all. Whereas javiour towards
them i rates ihn Jor ors sna: even if
u hate a person, or feel angry with him, you can
Zo" control yourself aa aot to do bim barm, sod
yea to confer benefits upon bim. To do good to
‘your enemies may, then, really be your duty; but it


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 32:


‘cannot, in the strict sense, be your duty not ro have
cevib feelings towards them: all that can possibly be
‘tue is that it would be your duty if you were able.
‘Yet I think there can be no doubt that what Christ
meant to condema was the occurrence of such
feelings altogether ; and since, if what be meent to
‘assert about them in condemning therm, would have
‘been certainly fase, if he bad meant to say that you
could ayord ever feehng thers, 1 think itis clear that
What he meant to assert was mot this, or not thir
only, but something else, which may quite possibly
bbe true. That is to say, he was asserting an ideal
rile, not merely a rule of duty.

Ji wl be anen that this distinction which £ am
making coincides, roughly at all events, with the

sisckon which Stee expreaed at the de
tinction between rules which tell you what you
‘ought 19 de and rules which tell you merely what
you ought to do; or a8 the distinction between rules
‘which are concerved with your ioner life—with your
thoughts and feelings —and those which are con-
cerned only with your external actiocs The rales
Which are eoncersed wich mbat you ought to be oF
with “your inner Kfe arc, for the most part at all
ond, inl” rac; while dnwe wher coo,
tered with what you ought to do or your exte
factions are very often, at least, rules of duty. And

‘often said that one great difference between the
New Testamect and the Old is its comparatively
(greater insistence on “ideal” rules—upon a change
Of heart—as oppored to mere rules of duty, And
that there ts a comparatively greater insisteace on
Sdeal rules 1 do not wish to decy. Bot chat there
are plenty of ideal rules in the Old Testament too
‘must not be forgotten. I have already given an
‘ample (om the Ten Commandment: nancy the
rule which says you ought not to covet anythin
which belongs to your neighbour, Aad snother
*


yaa NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


ied by the Old Testament commandment,
Tove thy ceighbour as thyself,” if by “love” is
here meant a feeling which is not within our owa
‘eontrol, and not merely that the Jew is ta Aaip other
Jews by bis external actions” Indeed, however
‘great may be the dierence between the Old Testa-
Brent and the New io respect of comparative
sistence on ideal rules rather than cules of daty, I
am inclined to think that there is at least as great a
Aifference, Mustrated by this very sue, in another,
quite different, respect—namely in the kind of rules,
doth rdeal ond of duty, which are insisted on. For
‘whereas by “thy neighbour” ia the Old Testament
there is plainly meant oly other Jews, and it is not
conceived either that itis the duty of a Jew to help
foreigners in general, or an ideat for bim t0 love
them: in the New Testament, where the same
‘words are used, “my neighbour” plainly i

to include all mankind. And this
tween the view that beneficent action and benevo-
lent feelings should be conficed to those of our own
nation, and the view that both should be extended
equally to all mankind,—a distinction which jbaa
nothing t do with the distinction between being
and doing, between inaer and outer, but affects
‘both equally is, Tam inclined to thiok, at least a
important a diderence between New Testament and
ld, as the comparstively greater insistence on
ideal” cules. However, the poiat upoa which I
want at present to insist is the distinction between.
{deal rulee and rules of doty. Both kinds are
commonly included among moral rules, and, aa my
examples have shown, are often mentioned together
as if 0 great difference were seen between them.
‘What T want to insist on is that there is @ great
difference between them : that whereas ralea of duty
do directly assert of the idea of duty, in the seave
fn which to say that something is your duty implica


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 323


that you tan do i that certain things are dation
the “ideal” roles do sof assert this, But something
dierent. Yer the ideal” rules certainly do, ino
sense, assert a “moral °” Avd hence we
hnave to recognise that the phrase “moral obfi-

tion” is not merely a name for one idea only, but
Ker two very diferent ideas; and the same will of
course, be true of the correspooding phrase “morally


"When, therefore, ay thatthe ie of mora
obligation” is one of the fundamental ideas with
‘Morel Philosophy is concerned, I think we
must admit that this one name really stands for two
different ideas. But it does not matter for my
‘pase which of the two you take Each of them
B adaubtedly 2 moral idea and whatever anemer
bbe given to the question we wre going to ri
about che one wil alo certaisly apply tothe ober,
‘But itis now time to ture to the other idea, with
‘which I said that Moral Philosophy bas been largely
Sonesrned, though itis not striely speaking, &
Imei ie, perhaps a goed way ef bring
id hil a good way of out
what this idea, ie to eter to tbe Elbe of
Arison, Everybody wl cath ches chs find
imental idea, with which Arisiotie's Ethics is con.
Seroeds ea idea which if the business of Mora
PI to discuss; and yet 1 think it is quite
fie tet sie te w wots mewsl ken al,
Jarstotle does not set out from abe idea of moral
abigatin or duty {indeed ubronghout his wets he
‘only mentions this idea quite incidestally) : noreved
fromthe idea of moral ‘or moral excellence,
though he has a good deal more to say about that,
but fom the idea of what he calls “the human good
oF "good for mas.” He sare by rasing the qaeation
‘what the good for man 1, and bis whole book is
arranged in the form of giving a detailed answer (0


324 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


‘hat question. And I thiok we can gather pretty
ell Ghat the idea is, which he calls by this rama,
By considering what be says about it” There are
fo poicts, in particular, which be insists upon frost
the outset first, that sothing can be good, in the
tense be mesa, unless it it something which is
worth baving for its own sake, acd not merely for
the sake of something else; it rovst be good i
tou; it wust nos, Fike wealth (to use one exam,
‘which he yives) be worth having merely for the
ake of what you can do wit i: it ust be a thig
‘which ia worth having even if nothing further comes
of it And secondly (what partly covers the former,
bot slo, think, says sometbing more) it math he
saya, be something that is “self-suficient”: something
ich, even if you had nothing else would make your
fe work having. And farther fight is thrown upea
1a meaning ben be comes fo tel you what he thinks
(good for man is: the good, be says, is “"ment
iiy—tthere such activity is of an excellent kind,
there are several diferent Kinds of excellent
ivity, that which has the best and orost
Perfect kind of excellence ; and also "(he significantly
Adds) “mental aetiviey which lasts through a
tfficientiy long life” The word which 1 have
here translated “excellence” ix what is commonly
translated "virtue; but it does not raean quite the
fame as we mean by “virtue,” and that in a very
Important respect. ““Virtwe” bas come to mean
exciusively moral excellence ; and if that were all
Aristoue means, you might think that what be
‘means by “good came very near being a moral
idea. But if, toms out that he includes among
‘oazellences,” intellectual excellence, and even that
hhe thioks that the best and most perfect excellence
of which be apeaks is « particular kind of intellectual
excellence, which no one would think of calling a
‘moral quality, namely, che sort of excellence whi


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 325


makes a man » good phi And as for the
sword which I have translated “activity” the evan.
ing of this can be best brought out by mencioning
reason which Anstote himeell gives for seying
thee mere cactlence itself ix not {ar some of the
Greeks had said) the good for man.” He aays, truly
yb. chat a man may possess the greatest
foes colar ‘may be a very excellent man—even
when ihe i aes, or ie doing nothing and, be
ints oot shar the poapetion of excelice, when
Jou ace asleep ia nots thi that i desirable /or dts
don sads—obviously oaly for the sake ofthe effects it
may produce when you wake op. Ix is noe there-
fore, he thinks, mere mente] excellence, but the
caters mia sect Se ft
‘man's min, wl ‘sot only prostsoct cxcellcat
faculties, moral or intellectual, but is atively
cogaged in sing thes, whic ely conmiten te
Now, when Aristotle talks of «the good for man,”
there Ty I think, as my quotation ts sufficient to
Show: 2 cousin "confintor oq bis, mind. betwees
Wriet ie geod for wean and. wiat iv Bet for man,
What héreally hoiie is teat any roemal a
which exhibits excellence and is pleasurable in #
good: and when he adds that, if there are many
Excellences, the good must be mental activity which
extibice the fea? of them, and that i most last
thro «sting ite be only nana a
thin is necessary if a man is ‘the dest be can
not that csi the ondy good be can get. And
idea which I wish toinsst on Ss oot shertore,
the, idea” of the Rutman good" ut’ the more
feadacsnal des of“ good" Ge idea, with egord
to which he holds that the working of our
some excellent fashion is the only y ae thing that
any of ue cao poseess ; and the idea of which “Detter”
{s the comparative, when he sags that sented ect


326 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


which exhibits some sorts of excellence is detler than
mental activity which exhibits others, though both
fare good, and that excellent mental activity con-
tinued over a longer time is detter chan the came
continved for a shorter. This iden of what is
“good,” in the sense in, which Aristotle uses it in
‘these cases, ig an idea which we all of us constantly
tute, and which is certainly an idea which it is the
business of Moral Phil to discuss, though it
is mot a moral iden, ‘The main dificy with
10 it is to distioguish it from ot

fetes i which ‘Seone hese renee, For whoa
we say that a thing is “good,” or one thing
Tete” ss anodion, weby wo means sluaye
ean that it is beter in this sense. Often, when

ag good we are not attributing to it any


‘which it would of existed
eee ee ee ee oe
Ee; bur are merely saying of it that it is a sort of
from which other good things do in fact come,
accompanied by other

gs. the whole thus formed is “good” in
Aristotle's sense, although, by, itself, it is not
‘Thus a man may be "good." and bis character may
be “good,” and yet neither are “good” ia this
fundamental sease, in which goodness is a charac
teristic which a thing would possess, if it existed
quite alone. For, a8 Aristoule says a good man
may exist, end may have & good character, even
when he is fast asleep; aod yet if there’ were
nothing ia the Universe bot good men, with good
shuracters, al fast asleep, there would be aothing in
it which wax “good” in the fundamental sense with
which we are concemed. Thus "moral goodness"
{in the sense of good character, as distingurshed from
the actual working of « good character in various
forms of mental activity, is certainly cot “good ” in
the sense in which good means “good for its own


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 327


sake." And even with regard to the actual exercize
‘of certain forms of moral excellence, it seems to me
that in estimating the value of such exercise
relatively to other things, we are apt to take into
account, not merely its istrinsic value—the sort of
value which it would pomess, if it existed quite
alono—but also its effects: we rate it higher than
we should do if we were considering only ite
ae roe, became we take vo seen he
‘other good things which we know are apt to flow
from ie Certain things which have intsnsie value
are distinguished from others, by the fact that
fore good consequences are upt to flow from them ;
and where thie is the ease, we are apt, [ think, quite
‘unjustly, 10 chink that their intrinsic valve must be
higher too. One thiog, 1 think, is clear about
inttinsic value—goodness in Aristotle's vense—
namely that it is only actual occurrences, actual
states of things over a certain period of time—not
uch things as men, or characters, or maternal
things, that can have any jntriasic value at all
But even this is not sufficieot to distinguish intrinsic
value, clearly from other sorts of goodness. sioce
the case of actual occurrences, we often call


promise of effects. Thus we all bope that the state
Of things in Englead, a8 a whole, will really be
Tecar some day than ius been in the pst-cat
there wil ment we hope,
thre willbe ogre snd toporcpeny pe be,
lives lived in Engiand during some year in the next
‘century, it may turn out that the state of things, 6s
4 whole, doring that year will be really better than
it ever bas been in avy past year. And when we
‘use “better” in this way—in the sense in which

ogress or improvement meaos a change to 2
Meter state of hs ‘are certainly thinking
partly of o state of things which has a greater


gal NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


intcinaie valve. And we certainly do not mean by
improvement merely” mera? improvement AR
improvement in moral conditions, other things being
ua may no doubs be a gain in intrinsic aloe;
but we should certainly bold that, moral conditions
‘being equal, there is yet room for improvement in
‘other ways—is the dimiaution of misery and purcly
hytical evils, for exarmple. But in considering the

ee of a feal change for the better in intriosie
tale, there is certainly danger of confusion between
degree ia which the actual lives lived are really

ally better, and the degree in which there is

improvement merely in the means for living a good
Kfe. Uf we want to estimate rightly what would
constitute an intrinsic improvement ia the state of
things in our imagined year ext century, and
whether it would on the whole be really good” at
all, we have to consider what value it would have if
ic were to be the lust year of life upon this planet; if
the world were going to come to an end, as 2000 ‘a8
ig'was over; and therefore to discount entirely all
the promises it might contain of future goods. This
‘emterion for distinguishing whether ‘the kind of
goodness which we are atzibuting to anything is
Realy Tnrinie value or ‘not the criterion. wEich
consists in concidecing whether itis @ charactertic
Which the thing would possess, if it were to have
absolutely no further consequences or accompani-
moesy moe to as to bene hich Bi vey
pecesiary 10 apply if we wish to distinguish clear!
Berween diferent meanings of the word “good.”
‘And it is only the idea of what is yood, where
“good” is meant a characteristic which bas this
a a enc co cee

fe two ideas, then, wit to which I want

ise & question, are first the moral idea of
igation” or “duty, secondly the
son-moral ide of "good in this special sense,


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 325


Aad the question with to them, which T
want to raise, is thin With regard to both ideas
ilosophers bave thought and still think—
not only “dink but scem to be abeclutely convinced,
that when we apply them to anything—when we
assert of any action that it ooght not to have been
done, or of any state of things thet it was of would
be good or better than another, then it mat be the
ase that al/ that we are asserting of the thiog of
things i ‘is simply and solely that some
[perton of set of persons actually does have, or bast a
Tendency to have a certain sort of feeling towards
the thing or things in question: that there is
absolutely no more in it than this, While others
seem to be convinced, no less strongly, that there é
wore fo it than this: that whea we judge that an
action is « duty or is really wrong, we are not merely
making a judgment to the effect that some person
for set of persons, have, or tend to have a certain
sort of feeling, when they witness or thik of such
actions, and that similarly when we judge that a
certain state of things was or would be better than
another, we are nat merely makiog a judgment
about the feelings which some person or set of
persons would have, in witnessing or thinking of the
{ho states of things. or in comparing them together,
The question at tsave between these two views is
often expressed in other less clear forms. It is
often expreased as the question whether the ideas of
‘duty and of good or value, are or are not, “objective”
ldeaar'as the problem se to the objecuity” of
duty aod value. ‘The first set of philoso-
phers would maintain that the notion of the
Mobjectivity” of duty and of value
chimera; ‘while the second. would aintain that
exe ideas really are “objective” And others
express it as the question whether the ideas of du
and of good are “absolute” or purely “relative,


390 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


whecher there is any such thing as an absolute duty
or an absolute good, or whetber good and duty are
Burg lative to urna fectings nd desire,” Bot
ch these ways of expressing i are, I think, apt to
Jead to confusion. And. even Jess clear way
in which itis put ie by asking the question : I the
srecrtion that auch ad auch a thlog a duty, or
‘has intrinsic valve, ever a dictate of reaion? But 20
far as 1 can gather, the question really at isave, and
‘expressed in these obscure ways, is the one which
T'Bave tied to tate. Tt ie the question whether
when we jodge (whether truly or falsely) that an
action is a duty or a state of things good, oif chat
wee ar thinking about the action, or the ete of
ings in question, is simply and solely that we our-
selves or others Eave or tend to have 1 corain
feeling towards it when we contemplate or think of
it, And the question seems to me to be of great
interest, because, if this is all, then it i evident that
ail the ideas with which Moral Philosophy
cemed are merely psychological
‘moral rules, and statements a3 to what
valuable, merely true or falue paychs
fonts ; so that the whole of Moral PBi
Ethics will be merely departments of Paychology.
“Wohereas, if the contrary is the case, tben these to
‘dear of moral obligation and inuimic val, wll be
190 more purely ptychological idess than are the
ideas of, thape or size er number; and. Moral
Philosophy will be concerned with characteristics of
actions and feelings and states of affairs, which these
ye feciogs and cates of afsca would ot
‘might have possessed, even if human peychology
Bil been quite Serene front whsc nia,
‘a.itich then of these ono views isthe tue one?
re these two i psychological ideas in
the gense which Ihave tried to explain or are they
ot


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 331


As} bave said, I feel some doubts myself whether
ht Eber ait Lt one db ovat wee
an oe aso een Poe ae
inclined to thik that they are oot merely paycholo.
gical; thac Moral Philosophy and Ethics are not
mere departments of Psychology. In favour of che
Se eens of cn roe
paychological, there is, so far as [ am aware,
nothing whatever to be said, except that so many
eh ire fe ec oy
SS eee
aucceeded in bringing forward a single argument
favour of their view. And against the view that
they are, there seem to me to be some quite definite
arguments, though 1 am not satisfied that apy of
‘these arguments are absolutely conclusive. I will

briefly and clearly what xem to me the
main arguments the view that these arr
merely psychological ideas ; although, in doing so, [
ae a ed
mn rhea, Peek wt
vinoed, that “duty” and "good" do merely stand
for paychologeal ideas they are by Do means agreed
what the, pace ic are for which they
yea ae wy
Hie era res ak St
stand; and this: fact if ‘ere paycl ie
ideas ‘at all it is 00 diffcalt to’ agree as t0 lat
Be eae ota oro ane
ment against the view that they are so.

‘Let me take each of the two idens separately, and
ty to exhibit the sort of objection there seams
be to the view that it is merely a prychological


Take frat the idea of moral obligation What
purely paychological assertion can mal
Shout an action, whea f assert that fe was “wrong
that it ought not to have beea done?


338 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


1a this case, one view, which is in some ways the
most plausible that can’be taken, is that in every
case Pam everely making an assertion about my
gown paychology. But what asserdon, about my
‘own psychology can I be making? Let us ta
ta exatole, she view of Brot Wetternarek, which
a plaunible a view of this type as any that 1 know
of. He holds that what € am judging when 1
j ction to be wrong, is merely that itis of
Kenge (euing ef word indgoaion or die
ling—the fceli indignation or dis-
approval, "He doesnot say ‘that what T am
jodging is that ihe action in_ question us octually
‘exciting this fecling in me. For it ie obviously not
true tha, when T fed ige an action to be much more
‘wrong than another, 1 am always. actually feelin
auch indigaation at the ‘of either, oF mu
more indignation at the thought of the one than at
‘that of the other ; and itis inconceivable that [ should
constantly be making 30
‘wn psychology, as to chink
feeling great iodignation when } am not But he
binks ft ia plausible to say that Cam making a
Judgment as to the tendency of such actions 19
exc indignation ia me that, for inuanes, when 1
judge that one ix much more wrong than the other,
S merely asserting the fact, taught me by my
pus experience, thay if were to witness the (wo
Actions, uoder similar circumstances, 2 sbould feel
much more intense indignation at the one than at
the other.

18 Westarwarch, The Origte and Sal foes,
yalpertaa asksowite, Oey restore, Srnoraent


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 333


But there is oae very serious objection to such a
view, which {think that thowe ‘who take it ere apt
ot fully co realise. If this view be true, then
‘when 1 judge an action to be wrong, lem merely
tmuking judgment abou: ay own feclings toward its
land when you judge it to be wrong, you are mere
maaking « judgment aboot yours. And henc
word “wrong” in my mouth, means something
entirely diferent from what i¢ does in yours; jurt
fan the word "{”" fn my mouth stands for an entirely
different person from what it does ia yours—in mine
it stands for me, in yours it stands for you That
in to may when } judge of a given action that it was
srroog, and yoo pertage of tbe very same action
that vt was ‘not, we are rot in fact differing in
‘pinion about i at all: any more then we are
digering in opinion if T the judgment “E
game from Cambridge to-day” end you make the
judgment “/ did not come (rom Cambridge to-day."

then Z say ‘That was wrong” [ am merely saying
“That 20ct_ of action exsites indignation in me
when hs Rp emd ahem yom "Noy B watt
wrong” you are saying “Tt, docs not excite
indignation in me, when J'see it."” And obviously


boul judgments may ‘well be crue together;
junuia my jedgment that Idd some from Cambridge
to-day and yours that you did aoy may perfectly


well be true together. In other words, and this
ig what 1 want to insist on, if this view be true,
ten ther i abecltay oo och thing a 2 runes
Of opinion upon 10

Shak hey Uifer in opin’ on a mort) cuetin
(and it certainly seems os if they sometimes Chae
fo), they are always, on this view, making « mistake,
saad a mistake 10 gross that it scems hardly possible
that they should make it:a mistake as grotx as that
which would be involved in thinking toat when you
say "'T'did not come fram Cambridge to-day” you


344 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


‘ace denying what Tay when my “I did” And
pa he aes
Joa't people, in fact, wometimes
differ in opinion on « mora) question? Certainly
all appenracces are in favour of the view tbat they
do: and yet, if they do, that can only be if wben T
pink hing 0 Be wrong, xod you chink it oot to
rocan by the very sam
Crancwelice wiles you mesntand inking
that the action possesses this character whi
‘you ace thial ‘not It must be the very
same istic which we both mean ; it cannot
‘be, as this view says it is, merely that 1 am thinking
that it has to my feelings the very same relation,
sphich you are thinking that i ha sot got to yours
ce if this were all, then there would
Siffcreace of opinion between us.

‘And this view thet whon we talk of wrong or
duty, we are not merely, each of us, making a state-
ment about the relation of the thing in question to
our ome fecliogs tay be reinforced by, anodber
consideration, Tis commonly belived that some
‘moral rules exhibit a Ajgker morality than others:
that, for instance a person who believes that
our duty to do good co our enemies, has a higher
‘moral belie, thea one who believes that he has no
such duty, but oaly « duty to do good to bie friends
or fellow-countrymen. And Westermarck himself
believes tbat, some moral belies, “mark a stage of
Irigher roficement in the evolution of the moral
contcousoess"* But what, on his view cn be mesot
by anyiog th one, rooral belie i, higher than
other? If'A believes that itis hin dary to do

to his enemies and B believes that it is not,

fo what sense can A’s belief be higher than B's}

Not, on thia view, ie

ia true, und what B believes ts not: for what A in

Delieving is merely that the idea of not doing good
mia nt


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 345


to your enemies tenda to excite in him a feeling of
moral indignation, and what B believes in merely
that i dogs nt tnd to excite th fel i, Ae
and both beliefs ay perfeeily well be true; it may
Seliy bs tare har atone es coo
feeling in A. and that they doo't ia B. What then,
could Westermarck mean by saying that A's
morality is igher than B's? ‘So far as I can ves,
‘what, on his owa views, he would bave to mean is
merely that, he himself, Westerrarck, shares A's
morality and does not chare Bs: that it is true of
‘him, aa of A, that neglecting to do good to enemies
his fettings of moral fon and pot true

of him as it is of B, that wat excite such
fealings in Bim, 8 short be wold bare mo
‘that what be means by calling A’s morality tbe higher
iamezely “A’smmoralityis my morality, and B’sis not.”
But it seers to me that when we say one
morality is higher than another, we do not merely
‘mean that itis our own. Weare not merely asserting
that ithas a cectaia elation toour own feelings, butare
‘asserting, if] may say 20, that he personwho bas
‘better moral taste than the person whohas not A\
whether or not this means merely, as [ think, that
wat the one believes is true, and what the other
Believes in false, itis at all events inconsistent. with
the view that in all cases we exe merely auking a
statement about our owa feelings

For these reasons it seemi to me extremely
difficult to believe that when we judge thingy to be
‘wrong, cach of us is merely makiog a judgment
above Ait cam prychology. — But if not about our
aa, then shot mhomaU beveslredy uid dat

view tl jodgmens is merely a psycho-
Joga one fai @ Judgment abot our oun

logy, is in some ways more plausible than

eral, zope ayy more pee an
any otber view ig nsf plausible, The alsernatives


436 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


fare that I should be making a judgment about the
paychology of all mankind, or about that of some

ular section of ix And that the firt aker-
ative is not true, i, I think, evident from the fact
that, when I judge an action to be wrong, 1 may
emphatically af believe that it is teue of all man.
kind that they would cogard it with feelings of
moral disapproval. I may kaow perfectly well that
tome would not. Most philosophers, therefore,
Ihave not ventured to say that this is the judgment
Tag making; they say, for instance, that 1 am
‘making a judgment about the feelings of the particular
tociety to which 1 beloag—about, for instance, the
feelings of an impartial spectator in that, society.
Bus, ifthie view be taken, it is open to the sacie


bjections as the view tat Iam merely making &
judgment about my own If we could say
That every man, wheo be judges a thing to be
wrong, was making = statement ebout the feelings
of all mankind, then when A says “This is wrong”
and B says “No, it isn'.” they would really
differing in opinion, since A would be saying that
all mankind fee! in a certain way towards tbe action,
and B would be saying that they don't, But if A
ia rfercing merely to his society and B10 his, and
their societies are dif obviourly they
may perfectly


are not differing in opiaion at all:
vrll be ure both thas an impartial ype in As
society does have a certain sort of feeling towards
actions of the sort in questioa, aad that am impartial
sreantar io B's doce oot, This view, therefore
‘imnplies tbat it is impossi ‘two men beloagiog:
ideeect suicter ere to dine io opel
‘moral question. Acd thie is a view which I find it
‘almost ‘a2 hard to accept as the view that 20 two
‘men ever differ in opinion on one.

For these reasoot 1 think there are serious


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 437


objections to the view that the idea of moral obliga
tion is merely & ical idea.

But now let us beiefy consider the idea of
good,” in Arisotle’s sense, or intrinsic val
‘As regards this idea, there is again a diflere
of opinion among those who bold chat it ie

pological idea, ax to what ides it ia, The
majority seem to hold that it is to be defined,
fometor, eterna of, See thle other ha

that what we are judging when we judge that
foe ane of thangs of Woudd be Letty
better than axother, ie rather thet the belief that
the one was going 0 be realized would, under
eertsio tances, give more pleasure to some
gman or set of men, than the belief that the other
waz But the same objections seem to me to apply
whichever of these two views be taken.

Let us take desire About whowe desies am 1
making a judgment, when I judge chat one state of
Giggs would be better tun another?

fere again, it may be said, fist of all, that T am
merely making a judgment about my own, But in
iki cae the view at ay judge i merely
about my own is L think, exposed to
an obvious objection to which Westermarck’s view
hat my judgients of moral obigation are, about
my own paychology was ust ex; ¢ obvions
ctjertion i thar" le evidently not true that | do
in fact always desire more, what I judge to be
better: T may jodge one state of things to be better
than anocher, even when I know well not
only that I don't desire it core, but that | have no
tendency to do 30. It is a notorious fact that cren’s
strongest desizes are, as s rule, for things in which
they themselves have some concern and

te doe) oct praveat dons Ben Pagag ch

40, doesnot prevent Judging that
changes, which would not affect them personally,


338 NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY


sould constitute a very much greater iaprovement
Tn the work's condition, than changes which would,
For this reason alone the view that wen T judge
one wate of things to be beter thea another I
fm merely sntkiog 3 jedgaent about my
ology, anise, I thinks be given
Gbeane thar we should’ all Ge ey
Mistakes about gue fecligs, a8, 00 this vi
thule te “dong.” Ard href
Course, besides, the same objection, as applied fo
the case of moral obligation? nemely thee if this
were true, no two men could ever difer i

Spision ato eich of rm wes wen the Ue,
Whereas ic appears that they certainly sometimes
do difer in opinion on such a2 ive

My judioment, then, ix not merely a judgment
sbosl ay Ou pyshlogy Bo i, aout whose

chology is R't judgment? It cannot be a judge
Boe da al ad Stee ti gee mee oe tee
the other because thar would include the judgrsent
that | myself do sa, which, as we bave acen, Potten
lepow to be false even while T judge chat the one
state realy i beter. And it cannot, 1 think, be a


lernative, which did not arise in the
‘caso of moral obligation. It is a notorious fact that
the satisfaction of some of our desires is iacompat-
ible with the satisfaction of others, and the satisiac-
tion of those of some mea with the satisfaction of
those of others And this fact has suggested to
some philosophers that what we mean by saying
that one state of things would be better than
another, is merely that i isa state in which more
Of the desires, of those who were in i, would be


NATURE OF MORAL PHILOSOPHY 339


satisfied at once, than would be the case with the
other, But to this view the fondamental objection
seems to me to be that whether the one state was
better than the other would depend not merely
upon the number of desires that were
‘ously satisfied in it, but upon what the de:
desires for. 1 can imagine a state of things in
sie ll dates wer stitfed, and yet an jude

ft that it would not be #0 good 4s anotlier in
whlch some wore left ansatsed. And. for thle
reason [ cannot assent to the view thet my judg-
iment, thet one state of things is better than another
ia meray a judgment about che payehology of the

PFA aopoy | fed i hard wo believe that
the idea of moral obligation or the idea of ints
value is merely a cal idea, It seems to
me that Moral Phil cannot be merely
department of y. But no doube there

yy be arguments on the other side to which I
Ihave not done justice.


‘Tre Exp


eng RAR, a wt
amt enon, 545 163
ee ones


Peacoat
Sool sod quien, tes
ies *
a a
pga:
Dy it Weg
Frtget aaa


Bae,
Pn ae
ane oy


=
Rc eats
"ps airs,


‘Sheconiy a


Feat, Ea pe
icon ape te


|


IX ISII LARS IAS CAI IS IE. SLIT ASAE I TALIS HIS
i #


The
International Library


PSYCHOLOGY, PHILOSOPHY
AND SCIENTIFIC METHOD


Babel by
© K OGDEN, ma
Magdalen Cae, Comin

te amanoa Lib, of we oe ae ind an

‘Slum tener hes she hob good py

‘ae etry a ern ere


Prblael by
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & Co, Lud
[ROADWAY HOUSE: 6974 CARTIN LANE, LONDON, BC
poy


|


Srossancs torens george: cunrage veengzesa
aut Hal HAT Sy suns
Th at rE VES ern
a fj ey iS fu


aly | i, 4
ib ” Ht lel
sa ah


onwgonesa


ae


ie


bh
wi


}
iy


a oe
Seen | |:
 usonan ae rac


pounD np covey,


Poneneenenanes vagens ant grenoatemn oa eoteeEe


aunt a Hy ie
Nit nF Wl ens 1 iy ae


SNM RE
.


yey Jes

a ead

si
a Bs


ie
cat i


HE as
eH aa2ge7eaE i | re


re
_ 2 a Stay of Bargnoa's A
‘The Mise of Mind: Seay of Barr's Auck on I


gpl, to Pon tat Oe Ha Br HB
hegre! Bel es Oe ETE! eas
tonby C8 yon, FAS oe Oo oat
«oct hem peer cement
2s ee
EE Sana


Medicine, Magis, and Religion. By W.H R. Ruers, F.RS,
"Preface by Beftror @ Eilat Siath. Sooand edton, 208, 6d,
Bis


“Tasman devon of tase enparase ond wl rem
1 Nonty sonar oF ‘Sieh Ley Sapper
ere “Aira ta we ve vt chow cota wb ed
‘ih my thkeng aoe


Sg gs ae a


juss vam te see cone se
Fee i er
pie tee eh
Fig Meworomanit Bano, B77 ht Sah MA.
Yedernprcl as, Br LM Sat
sete come sericea
Fret lanry


Stientife Thougat, By.D. Broa, LD. Lacumer a Palo
Py at Tristy Collage, Caindge.” Second edition, r6e. net.


Sze

‘pchaorereat of the ghee!
aepeacy eager pry
eee Pcie ot


Laney ge pate He's ba oemnaot and ste and on de


Change, Lave a Preeti hes
Fiat "Ein ce Lneretoans by Moma ® Coe
Some Ena by fas Beng i

nga noe zee! ge
preteen dni aaribsbaly


‘The Nature of Lamghter. By J.€.Grgery. 208. 6d. net.
eee agree ecomieaner rome


The: ny of Mii. By When Pele ER Si Do
Wuled wih Lotateicen’ by Promat £9. Bow ants
Snppimnentay Rasay by Dr: ame arog.” xo a,


{Sipe tin grea rentra as Shevoad puny Sb epee” Drcowry


Nodiyidml Poybology. By AUpel Adi Sexo ebm,


“depute use urea ome, 2s ara w etevany


‘The: Philosophy of "Aa I. ‘Aa Lf". By Hana Veshenger, 390. net
Petter eiartioed
AR Pg gpd
Soo aes oe
iS ajore eee Se


Spriegionntean “ite hed. Yrontepe sad
ea eae


6 npc nth tok oe monk Shy oat th Ahm
ies beta sewer of apo yoen sed th surat fn


Soaphum at te lrrnaner eda te atstace ot 8d orien
‘The Nature of Intelligence. By L £. Thartone, Prolene
‘of Paychology is the University of Chicago ios 66 net


Mind
TE Tapes Patera avery of ree
clits, hed ent toes age et


fiat 2 be
monary


The Meet of Ay Profenor W. Koehler, of Bere
Taira “rind rn, mansoni, ror Soe
‘Abies ate tis ST aE Z ee Shaper lan eee
echtdacagcants nese atria
peMg roe contr orp rete

an. tire ya is Se


e - By Profesor Jaime
‘Tp ayehology of Relous Mortcim. By Profan J


ry ere tere ee
SheetotS tps neo pou or
Ta

Tig pang ofa Mas Fry. y Reus Dom
i he oyopes Katee, Aerts sr 84 toe
Booger Cn ep irlely
Rpt of udonag teins wy ser’ da oer wea cimongaes of


Priacples of Literary Critcim. By 1.4 Reads, Yebowot
ieee Lace cient’ Blame ot Engh at
Paling Devers, Fouts econ aon 6 ot,

“ax gant oman ee tan of Eng

eat er peiens open shane oan

‘an wt rca anya tad et wr an asp a te Saya

‘The Metphysioa! Foundations of Modern Seien
ter Bll d. Bede ag nek re


‘Tho Prycholofy af Time, By Mary Shes, MA. 72 6d. nat.
“pista tnt reac ts ret 2 Se ree rape


enti pl wong wal py Be


ele cee baton ~


Physlqae and Character, By E Kraxter, rotor the
uinveruly of Marburg.” With 3x pts, <2
enihans prs ray mao ou,


See eee


Thee PLS ED one tt Noma


oe ee
ee
potact und tee tame enecong occas Benda
rasipemohra
sheng Prmex aor asta


iad und ita Plane ta Nature. By C.D, Bros, ut D
Gambesige


‘acearer > Palosophry at Tresty College,

impression. 36a act
ert bet ek Dr gn ma eg ae neo be on
econ essere eet
Sst Yan


Celis, MA, Pk D. Iotrodne
cloned


FA. Lang. New dion in
bec, Bone, nt Fe


sn ts
+ Aromenae sad vleabla we = same ko
apy aint ene ang kae ses a ey cnt
ra ave in wae =
Steet Fe to Bo


Pret a Saad he Bae maa ang
iy ee Bate
Apres ee ee
Se osimescsees (epee poe
eBay Naor


Eueaional Prycbeloy. By Chak, Fen Tecmo
‘Tdecanon ot the Usrrenity of Canividge Thid eiition,
ros. SL nee

or tery ed


a lmaiy, By § Than, Chl of Meda
Fea Rpntee ica” France by Proeur t Hafomg.


7 6 tat
“Migr: try tun tha canons eens pee cena
meta ton ree tec are eueaon sta er Smet
UE ama waa prose at


Perooaley., By R- Cortes, M.D, De. Second smprem


ror or ga nema
Feet fay at es prominog nf cay afte tow erent rt
Chey Seppe | K nqmttet cctvoue to tae enly ot


parcels Seoris Maal forma


Bigg, Moma ne, Profce of
teh se meeity of Mas “nw Set


at
oars Toa isgevtare at ae beak amar Oe aren
ow a rhodes of inogy Sposa


Creat eat De ee rt Be


Aigegeortnty tebe so Cae apy, ve Snk
kc eke gerry Set ene a
SMa Bae

unge und Thowh ofthe Child. By Jorn Pan
‘THctan efor tiamealy of Gear Bites by Bef
Pipe ee


stucanos,
Sue On Sea Ear it Phas
wideoay Cote cabins Geek Rane <4


Cane ant Castors oo Molinari,


ro__Iwrmasamionat Lranaxr or Prrenovocr


E_R-Riows, MD. LHD ,
Som, FIRS 15. wet.


‘tonne Pd
ST iclat So meus aden Tir Ly
‘Theoretical Biology. By J. von Unsksli. xBs. nc.


tay ev en cree of aspera Dok Fate
anata eae

“Soom ge ro he baat not

ace sad) Aner Tomson


fefhe Bri. 7 le P,P the
Teg ee Dr Br fn Pe, Pama
<a po meme Saregaine
Seip Sars eee


Eton Suppioned


Sex and Represion in Savage Society. By 8 Mebuomle,
“Fine SP anthopegy fe te Dawokty of Lantes


Seg tiene Aime Wer Oy Fate, Pte
ig its tars at,” Ese
en eer er re td
[ea aa it Sat
The Erin, of Chanter. By #4 Bee, PRD.
"Tin ean ie oat bod

«fos ata sister arom reer g
if Sees ey
SSS


Ti. Sold of Copia, 7 Tag ter

‘MD, PAD. rm. 64. tat. es
Sree eres
eS ie


Iwriaxarionaz Leunaxr oF Frrenorocr tt


‘Tue Neurotic Pecsonality. By X C Genion, MD, DSt.,
FRCPES tor Ove

* Sach towne a we fm mpc. ead with we ond
‘pute preside carey Sal otras ofoeg tote


{tcalue ou Secs rc lr ose wpe fords


Mey Sat. a
aS SS
a ae
een so, Resign he Chi, By Joe rc


12 _Iressuemtonat Liar oF Preevoncor


Dialeotia. By Merimer J. Adie, Lecterer in Prychalogy,
‘Caterbaa Utsvermty cs. 6d. et


‘Tue, Tgehoique af Controversy, By Saris B Bopsay,


(di, bot malay aay pratt and vee facet, Tang SE


ttapore gnu to Wash t Mdbagh' Joos! of Bancanen
‘The Symbolic ‘2nd st Intageatnon im Chldren. By
Jobe F Bary, "roe net

<i bs elated ce mtapang anes of patarae me mh os


aang cee eee
espera eee Byraee
peste
micas setensd oes pies "aa ale Seal vo troaaed
‘anRnuoas isnt, hen saiset dee seater 90 vlontle Soa
‘teers ifonsor Gao
aspera OS Poe
rebate tha tt
areca
a i ets ocy
Seana ae


strech ha greet ane neenres


Iwrenxarionat Lussany oF Perenococy 13,


Cegeriputems wo Andris =o
SU ans allt hepitiagl ype render
BO ee cay Bema i tt

esiaee rere cone ts
Poyrbenanyoc wore hia pedo Times Lavra ppimras


‘edi ete en


“That Dr Matyi ston har bes abies Midleton
thuotby Ans acer enya hccamueaie crest» Hehe
pia e


Emotions of Norzal People. By i¥iien Mention Mendon,
Tew Redon Chemie nse
rE
Se kos


Tis Lil's Comeion of he Weld Br Je Page
lant carey at Coton Of
Saptasibe reese seg aes oe rt
Eve wast mkewtes caaies, We mew f vocder snr
‘seh ie me pit es be eband"hemchna Cuaron


‘Colour aad Colour Theories, By Chrisie Late-Froatiin,
‘With 9 esloured pass asd net.


‘Thy Persholagy of Philopben. By Ateoner Arta,


“IE ha bm af fo asm te eee tn puta wth he pete
be ppoate ts Air eth ts at of Phas een
foo tate ein poe rence ova eed
“Sreat eon’ Time Lira


Balas ne tae os
Sp fone Domne be yeclagy the Uva


pte See Eta


sg Lemavarowat. Leanarr of Preezorocy


The Art of Interrogation, By E.R, Hamilton, MAW, BSc,
‘Cooter me ‘Unswemty Collage of North Wale
Yntredacooa ky Profane C Spearman, PES 7m. Od. Det


chameurcray hae cn. ed oho
Seomceatded ot sey fe art ras reo eof


Pipa, J Wes, 8S, ur»
Sees wa!


‘Human Speech By Ser Rickard Page, Bt, Fins P, With
‘mumerocs Uiuutaous. 955 et.


Typ Span, Googe pnp, Jan
werent Semen raters, eet
goer be reap eres eet

Eeopeiproee eo
{2 uodace pakooplty Jour f Php Shade


Seppe
Five Types of Ethical Theory. By CD Brod, Lit,
‘Lecturer a0 Teaity ae ame


Tnraanarconat Lissarr or Prrenoocr 17


Fr a tN
Fees eeecseeee my


The elogy Cate Dring ee eh ie
Me ee ae
plates and uumernas ine iksstbors, rar 6d. net

SRR SES tence
Sate sere


acon Bia ih
porta Ee


§


Sisters soos


The Di ot of the Seman! Iopaleen. By BE Mex
on anlar of Fe Wenang of Ser sek et oe


Payohotogy of Animals, Raiatioe to Human Prychology


The!
“By Frahenen, Profesor af Zosogy. Universi of Marburg
oe. et


Inmauarcovat Limaty of Prrcwotocr 19


Bibieal Relativity. By 4 Wauurmarch, PhD, HowLED,
tate iy of oman Marge 2m smi

ey mgoriant week 8c post advantage hart in

‘oma detonate Got operas ond tomeoed face ta we day st

at mat

Seatiwel


‘Tho Spire of Langage Corin. By Youle
fa, a. nat.


Some arey crer.os sistance
fom pees ez


‘The Moral Judgment ef the Cala. By Jan Pas, Prkcser

1S Nothing at ese a 6 a

Rep pt

Deheievigialnaremeie spanner

otetene Z

‘The eau Ter, 2nd the Pin of Canc. By
Yet, 2 a

Saar y oer ress

Bobet etter mt be poco mete ol tne

The Theory of Fons 2y Jeary Beth Sed wa

i Invoke ant Sten oy 2 Open Tat at


A yo ee rcs ry ach of out, sagan
‘Setandre phoepty Ar i cad any oS
tepante peter


NEARLY READY


‘hg Nature of Lnrsing. By Cong hey, M4. PLD
1 Qoma's Univertty, Kingston
Eluaa” Abeer et


Ty Preiss of Eduostion. By ida Tobe. Introducton
"Talpench, Prefer at Caizmba Univessiy About


a pein a Hiutocieal Analync
of La Mstrtty Panis Socal Contac By Wen Rew
Tato, MA, PRD: Aboat 154 net.


Inramsamionan Lianany 7 Prreitovocy


VOLUMES DY PREPARATION
a edad he aed an)


Tap ate oman : May Pach

‘Re Boycnloy ot Spo nace 3M Shnetfel
‘The Taroaton Chad wan
Peyeolopesl Open D MeL Brey
The Thery of Henry H Hard, D 56
mowooal Bxpromen ix Beds «FB fevkomae
‘The Mand au eo Ocean EMule
‘Antal Bohaneer 1 stows Poe
‘The Pyehology of amet LPO Myers
Goleuritemony CX Opler and James Wont
Geet ee  Kopre
‘Thoory of Mesa! Ouageacs FG Guokstank MD, PREP,
Laaguige a8 Syoibel snd as Exprams | B Sapte
Pryebelsey of Monat 2 Htabnoeshy, DS
Sexi Brlory = Mt Gary D Lat
The Pater oftew ‘Dt Groban
‘The Prychooey of Memenenes ER Homie
Mattenatoey fr Phscopte «G8 tty FHS
The Pryebobogy of Mytee cei Sma FS
‘The Pryeucogy of Mune ened} Dent
Bryebclogy of Pamstve Pectin. Maltnowchy DS


Development of Comeme Thesght - He Shak
