Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR
OPEN UNIVERSITY


TITLE :


Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR
OPEN UNIVERSITY

LIBRARY

HYDERABAD-500033


Dr. B. R. AMBEDKAR OPEN UNIVERSITY
LIBRARY


Call No. r Accession No.

Author:

Title :


This book should be returned on or before the d
last marked below.


EDITORS OF

THE HOME UNIVERSITY LIBRARY
OF MODERN KNOWLEDGE

PROFESSOR GILBERT MURRAY, O.M., D.C.L., F.B.A.

PROFESSOR G. N. CLARK, LL.D., F.B.A.

SIR HENRY TIZARD, K.C.B., F.R.S.


ETHICS


G. E. MOORE

Lrrr.D., LL.D., F.B.A.


HUMPHREY MILFORD

OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS

LONDON NEW YORK TORONTO


First published in 1912 and reprinted in 1925 (twice), 1927,
1928, 1930, 1936, 1939, 1944 and 1945


PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN


CONTENTS

OTAf. FA6P

I UTILITARIANISM 7

U UTILITARIANISM (concluded) .... 40

ill THE OBJECTIVITY OF MORAL JUDGMENTS . 79
IV THH OBJECTIVITY oir MORAL JUDGMENTS

(concluded) 138

V RESULTS THE TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG . 170

VI FREE WILL 196

VII INTRINSIC VALUB .... 228

NOTE ON BOOKS 258

INDEX 266


ETHICS

CHAPTER I

UTILITARIANISM

ETHICS is a subject about which there has
been and still is an immense amount of
difference of opinion, in spite of all the time
and labour which have been devoted to the
study of it. There are indeed certain matters
about which there is not much disagree-
ment. Almost everybody is agreed that
certain kinds of actions ought, as a general
rule, to be avoided ; and that under certain
circumstances, which constantly recur, it is,
as a general rule, better to act in certain
specified ways rather than in others. There
is, moreover, a pretty general agreement, with
regard to certain things which happen in
the world, that it would be better if they
never happened, or, at least, did not happen


8 ETHICS

so often as they do : and with regard to
others, that it would be better if they hap-
pened more often than they do. But on
many questions, even of this kind, there is
great diversity of opinion. Actions which
some philosophers hold to be generally
wrong, others hold to be generally right,
and occurrences which some hold to be
evils, others hold to be goods.

And when we come to more fundamental
questions the difference of opinion is even more
marked. Ethical philosophers have, in fact,
been largely concerned, not with laying down
rules to the effect that certain ways of acting
are generally or always right, and others
generally or always wrong, nor yet with
giving lists of things which are good and
others which are evil, but with trying to
answer more general and fundamental
questions such as the following. What,
after all, is it that we mean to say of an
action when we say that it is right or ought
to be done ? And what is it that we mean
to say of a state of things when we say that
it is good or bad ? Can we discover any
general characteristic, which belongs in


UTILITARIANISM

common to absolutely all right actions, no
matter how different they may be in other
respects ? and which does not belong to
any actions except those which are right ?
And can we similarly discover any char-
acteristic which belongs in common to
absolutely all " good " things, and which
does not belong to any thing except what is
a good ? Or again, can we discover any
single reason, applicable to all right actions
equally, which is, in every case, the reason
why an action is right, when it is right ?
And can we, similarly, discover any reason
which is the reason why a thing is good,
when it is good, and which also gives us
the reason why any one thing is better than
another, when it is better ? Or is there,
perhaps, no such single reason in either case ?
On questions of this sort different philo-
sophers still hold the most diverse opinions.
I think it is true that absolutely every
answer which has ever been given to them
by any one philosopher would be denied
to be true by many others. There is, at any
rate, no such consensus of opinion among
experts about these fundamental ethical


10 ETHICS

questions, as there is about many funda-
mental propositions in Mathematics and
the Natural Sciences.

Now, it is precisely questions of this sort,
about every one of which there are serious
differences of opinion, that I wish to dis-
cuss in this book. And from the fact that
so much difference of opinion exists about
them it is natural to infer that they are
questions about which it is extremely
difficult to discover the truth. This is, I
think, really the case. The probability is,
that hardly any positive proposition, which
can as yet be offered in answer to them,
will be strictly and absolutely true. With
regard to negative propositions, indeed,
propositions to the effect that certain positive
answers which have been offered, are false,
the case seems to be different. We are, I
think, justified hi being much more certain
that some of the positive suggestions which
have been made are not true, than that any
particular one among them is true ; though
even here, perhaps, we are not justified in
being absolutely certain.

But even if we cannot be justified either in


UTILITARIANISM 11

accepting or rejecting, with absolute certainty,
any of the alternative hypotheses which can be
suggested, it is, I think, well worth while to
consider carefully the most important among
these rival hypotheses. To realise and dis-
tinguish clearly from one another the most
important of the different views which may
be held about these matters is well worth
doing, even if we ought to admit that the
best of them has no more than a certain
amount of probability in its favour, and
that the worst have just a possibility of
being true. This, therefore, is what I shall
try to do. I shall try to state and dis-
tinguish clearly from one another what
seem to me to be the most important of the
different views which may be held upon a
few of the most fundamental ethical ques-
tions. Some of these views seem to me to
be much nearer the truth than others, and
I shall try to indicate which these are. But
even where it seems pretty certain that
some one view is erroneous, and that another
comes, at least, rather nearer to the truth,
it is very difficult to be sure that the latter
is strictly and absolutely true.


12 ETHICS

One great difficulty which arises in ethical
discussions is the difficulty of getting quite
clear as to exactly what question it is that
we want to answer. And in order to mini-
mise this difficulty, I propose to begin, in
these first two chapters, by stating one
particular theory, which seems to me to be
peculiarly simple and easy to understand.
It is a theory which, so far as I can see,
comes very near to the truth in some re-
spects, but is quite false in others. And
why I propose to begin with it is merely
because I think it brings out particularly
clearly the difference between several quite
distinct questions, which are liable to be
confused with one another. If, after stating
this theory, we then go on to consider the
most important objections which might be
urged against it, for various reasons, we shall,
I think, pretty well cover the main topics
of ethical discussion, so far as fundamental
principles are concerned.

This theory starts from the familiar fact
that we all very often seem to have a choice
between several different actions, any one


UTILITARIANISM 18

of which we might do, if we chose. Whether,
in such cases, we really do have a choice, in
the sense that we ever really could choose
any other action than the one which in the
end we do choose, is a question upon which
it does not pronounce and which will have* to
be considered later on. All that the theory
assumes is that, in many cases, there certainly
are a considerable number of different
actions, any one of which we could do, if
we chose, and between which, therefore, in
this sense, we have a choice ; while there are
others which we could not do, even if we
did choose to do them. It assumes, that is
to say, that in many cases, if we had chosen
differently, we should have acted differently ;
and this seems to be an unquestionable fact,
which must be admitted, even if we hold
that it is never the case that we could have
chosen differently. Our theory assumes,
then, that many of our actions are under
the control of our wills, in the sense that
if, just before we began to do them, we had
chosen not to do them, we should not have
done them ; and I propose to call all actions
of this kind voluntary actions.


14 ETHICS

It should be noticed that, if we define volun-
tary actions in this way, it is by no means
certain that all or nearly all voluntary actions
are actually themselves chosen or willed. It
seems highly probable that an immense
number of the actions which we do, and
which we could have avoided, if we had chosen
to avoid them, were not themselves willed
at all. It is only true of them that they are
*' voluntary " in the sense that a particular
act of will, just before their occurrence, would
have been sufficient to prevent them ; not
in the sense that they themselves were
brought about by being willed. And perhaps
there is some departure from common usage
in calling all such acts " voluntary. 9 ' I do
not think, however, that it is in accordance
with common usage to restrict the name
"voluntary" to actions which are quite
certainly actually willed. And the class
of actions to which I propose to give the
name all those, namely, which we could
have prevented, (/*, immediately beforehand,
we had willed to do so do, I think, certainly
require to be distinguished by some special
name. It might, perhaps, be thought that


UTILITARIANISM 15

almost all our actions, or even, in a sense,
absolutely all those, which properly deserve
to be called " ours," are " voluntary " in
this sense : so that the use of this special
name is unnecessary: we might, instead,
talk simply of " our actions." And it is,
I think, true that almost all the actions, of
which we should generally think, when we
talk of " our actions," are of this nature ;
and even that, in some contexts, when we
talk of " human actions," we do refer ex-
clusively to actions of this sort. But in
other contexts such a way of speaking would
be misleading. It is quite certain that both
our bodies and our minds constantly do
things, which we certainly could not have
prevented, by merely willing just beforehand
that they should not be done ; and some, at
least, of these things, which our bodies and
minds do, would in certain contexts be
called actions of ours. There would there-
fore be some risk of confusion if we were to
speak of " human actipns " generally, when
we mean only actions which are " voluntary "
in the sense I have defined. It is better,
therefore, to give some special name to


Id ETHICS

actions of this class ; and I cannot think of
any better name than that of " voluntary "
actions. If we require further to distinguish
from among them, those which are also
voluntary in the sense that we definitely
willed to do them, we can do so by calling
these " willed " actions.

Our theory holds, then, that a great many
of our actions are voluntary in the sense that
we could have avoided them, if, just before-
hand, we had chosen to do so. It does not
pretend to decide whether we could have
thus chosen to avoid them ; it only says
that, if we had so chosen, we should have
succeeded. And its first concern is to lay
down some absolutely universal rules as to
the conditions under which actions of this
kind are right or wrong ; under which they
ought or ought not to be done ; and under
which it is our duty to do them or not to do
them. It is quite certain that we do hold
that many voluntary actions are right and
others wrong ; that many ought to have been
done, and others ought not to have been
done ; and that it was the agent's duty to
do some of them, and his duty not to


UTILITARIANISM 17

do others. Whether any actions, except
voluntary ones, can be properly said to be
right or wrong, or to be actions which ought
or ought not to have been done, and, if so,
in what sense and under what conditions, is
again a question which our theory does not
presume to answer. It only assumes that
these things can be properly said of some
voluntary actions, whether or not they can
also be said ~ of other actions as well. It
confines itself, therefore, strictly to voluntary
actions ; and with regard to these it asks
the following questions. Can we discover any
characteristic, over and above the mere fact
that they are right, which belongs to abso-
lutely all voluntary actions which are right,
and which at the same time does not belong
to any except those which are right ? And
similarly : Can we discover any character-
istic, over and above the mere fact that
they are wrong, which belongs to absolutely
all voluntary actions which are wrong, and
which at the same time does not belong
to any except those which are wrong ?
And so, too, in the case of the words " ought "
and " duty," it wants to discover some char-


18 ETHICS

acteristic which belongs to all voluntary
actions which ought to be done or which it
is our duty to do, and which does not belong
to any except those which we ought to do ;
and similarly to discover some characteristic
which belongs to all voluntary actions which
ought not to be done and which it is our
duty not to do, and which does not belong
to any except these. To all these questions
our theory thinks that it can find a com-
paratively simple answer. And it is this
answer which forms the first part of the
theory. It is, as I say, a comparatively
simple answer ; but nevertheless it cannot
be stated accurately except at some length.
And I think it is worth while to try to state
it accurately.

To begin with, then, this theory points out
that all actions may, theoretically at least,
be arranged in a scale, according to the
proportion between the total quantities of
pleasure or pain which they cause. And
when it talks of the total quantities of pleasure
or pain which an action causes, it is extremely
important to realise that it means quite
strictly what it says. We all of us know


UTILITARIANISM 19

that many of our actions do cause pleasure
and pain not only to ourselves, but also to
other human beings, and sometimes, perhaps,
to animals as well ; and that the effects of our
actions, in this respect, are often not con-
fined to those which are comparatively direct
and immediate, but that their indirect and
remote effects are sometimes quite equally
important or even more so. But in order
to arrive at the total quantities of pleasure
or pain caused by an action, we should, of
course, have to take into account absolutely att
its effects, both near and remote, direct and
indirect ; and we should have to take into
account absolutely all the beings, capable of
feeling pleasure or pain, who were at any
time affected by it ; not only ourselves,
therefore, and our fellow-men, but also any
of the lower animals, to which the action
might cause pleasure or pain, however in-
directly ; and also any other beings in the
Universe, if there should be any, who might
be affected in the same way. Some people, for
instance, hold that there is a God and that
there are disembodied spirits, who may be
pleased or pained by our actions ; and, if


20 ETHICS

this is so, then, in order to arrive at the wtat
quantities of pleasure or pain which an
action causes, we should have, of course, to
take into account, not only the pleasures or
pains which it may cause to men and animals
upon this earth, but also those which it may
cause to God or to disembodied spirits. By
the total quantities of pleasure or pain which
an action causes, this theory means, then,
quite strictly what it says. It means the
quantities which would be arrived at, if we
could take into account absolutely all the
amounts of pleasure or pain, which result
from the action ; no matter how indirect or
remote these results may be, and no matter
what may be the nature of the beings who feel
them.

But if we understand the total quantities
of pleasure or pain caused by an action in
this strict sense, then obviously, theoretically
at least, six different cases are possible. It
is obviously theoretically possible in the first
place (I) that an action should, in its total
effects, cause some pleasure but absolutely
no pain ; and it is obviously also possible
(2) that, while it causes both pleasure and


UTILITARIANISM 21

pain, the total quantity of pleasure should
be greater than the total quantity of pain.
These are two out of the six theoretically
possible cases ; and these two may be
grouped together by saying that, in both of
them, the action in question causes an
excess of pleasure over pain, or more pleasure
than pain. This description will, of course,
if taken quite strictly, apply only to the
second of the two ; since an action which
causes no pain whatever cannot strictly be
said to cause more pleasure than pain. But
it is convenient to have some description,
which may be understood to cover both
cases ; and if we describe no pain at all as a
zero quantity of pain, then obviously we may
say that an action which causes some pleasure
and no pain, does cause a greater quantity of
pleasure than of pain, since any positive
quantity is greater than zero. I propose,
therefore, for the sake of convenience, to
speak of both these first two cases as cases in
which an action causes an excess of pleasure
over pain.

But obviously two other cases, which are
also theoretically possible, are (1) that in


22 ETHICS

which an action, in its total effects, causes
some pain but absolutely no pleasure, and
(2) that in which, while it causes both plea-
sure and pain, the total quantity of pain is
greater than the total quantity of pleasure.
And of both these two cases I propose to
speak, for the reason just explained, as cases
in which an action causes an excess of pain
over pleasure.

There remain two other cases, and two only,
which are still theoretically possible ; namely

(1) that an action should cause absolutely no
pleasure and also absolutely no pain, and

(2) that, while it causes both pleasure and
pain, the total quantities of each should be
exactly equal. And in both these two cases,
we may, of course, say that the action in
question causes no excess either of pleasure
over pain or of pain over pleasure.

Of absolutely every action, therefore, it
must be true, in the sense explained, that it
either causes an excess of pleasure over pain,
or an excess of pain over pleasure, or neither.
This threefold division covers all the six
possible cases. But, of course, of any two
actions, both of which cause an excess of


UTILITARIANISM 28

pleasure over pain, or of pain over pleasure,
it may be true that the excess caused by the
one is greater than that caused by the other.
And, this being so, all actions may, theoret-
ically at least, be arranged in a scale, starting
at the top with those which cause the greatest
excess of pleasure over pain ; passing down-
wards by degrees through cases where the
excess of pleasure over pain is continually
smaller and smaller, until we reach those
actions which cause no excess either of
pleasure over pain or of pain over pleasure :
then starting again with those which cause
an excess of pain over pleasure, but only the
smallest possible one ; going on by degrees
to cases in which the excess of pain over plea-
sure is continually larger and larger ; until we
reach, at the bottom, those cases in which the
excess of pain over pleasure is the greatest.

The principle upon which this scale
is arranged is, I think, perfectly easy to
understand, though it cannot be stated
accurately except in rather a complicated
way. The principle is : That any action
which causes an excess of pleasure over pain
will always come higher in the scale either


24 ETHICS

than an action which causes a smaller excess
of pleasure over pain, or than an action which
causes no excess either of pleasure over pain
or of pain over pleasure, or than one which
causes an excess of pain over pleasure ; That
any action which causes no excess either of
pleasure over pain or of pain over pleasure
will always come higher than any which
causes an excess of pain over pleasure ; and
finally That any, which causes an excess of
pain over pleasure, will always come higher
than one which causes a greater excess of
pain over pleasure. And obviously this
statement is rather complicated. But yet,
so far as I can see, there is no simpler way of
stating quite accurately the principle upon
which the scale is arranged. By saying
that one action comes higher in the scale than
another, we may mean any one of these five
different things ; and I can find no simple
expression which will really apply quite
accurately to all five cases.

But it has, I think, been customary,
among ethical writers, to speak loosely of
any action, which comes higher in this
scale than another, for any one of these


UTILITARIANISM 25

five reasons, as causing more pleasure than
that other, or causing a greater balance of
pleasure over pain. For instance, if we
are comparing five different actions, one of
which comes higher in the scale than any of
the rest, it has been customary to say that,
among the five, this is the one which causes
a maximum of pleasure, or a maximum
balance of pleasure over pain. To speak in
this way is obviously extremely inaccurate,
for many different reasons. It is obvious,
for instance, that an action which comes
lower in the scale may actually produce
much more pleasure than one which comes
higher, provided this effect is counteracted
by its also causing a much greater quantity
of pain. And it is obvious also that, of two
actions, one of which comes higher in the
scale than another, neither may cause a
balance of pleasure over pain, but both
actually more pain than pleasure. For these
and other reasons it is quite inaccurate to
speak as if the place of an action in the scale
were determined either by the total quantity
of pleasure that it causes, or by the total
balance of pleasure over pain. But this way


26 ETHICS

of speaking, though inaccurate, is also ex-
tremely convenient ; and of the two alter-
native expressions, the one which is the
most inaccurate is also the most convenient
It is much more convenient to be able to
refer to any action which comes higher in
the scale as simply causing more pleasure,
than to have to say, every time, that it
causes a greater balance of pleasure over pain.
I propose, therefore, in spite of its inac-
curacy, to adopt this loose way of speaking.
And I do not think the adoption of it need lead
to any confusion, provided it is clearly under-
stood, to begin with, that I am going to use
the words in this loose way. It must, there-
fore, be clearly understood that, when, in
what follows, I speak of one action as causing
more pleasure than another, I shall not mean
strictly what I say, but only that the former
action is related to the latter in one or other
of the five following ways. I shall mean that
the two actions are related to one another
either (1) by the fact that, while both cause
an excess of pleasure over pain, the former
causes a greater excess than the latter ; or
(2) by the fact that, while the former causes


UTILITARIANISM 27

an excess of pleasure over pain, the latter
causes no excess whatever either of pleasure
over pain, or of pain over pleasure ; or (8) by
the fact that, while the former causes an
excess of pleasure over pain, the latter causes
an excess of pain over pleasure ; or (4) by
the fact that, while the former causes no
excess whatever either of pleasure over pain
or of pain over pleasure, the latter does cause
an excess of pain over pleasure ; or (5) by
the fact that, while both cause an excess of
pain over pleasure, the former causes a
smaller excess than the latter. It must be
remembered, too, that in every case we shall
be speaking of the total quantities of pleasure
and pain caused by the actions, in the strictest
possible sense ; taking into account, that is
to say, absolutely all their effects, however
remote and indirect.

But now, if we understand the statement
that one action causes more pleasure than
another in the sense just explained, we may
express as follows the first principle, which
the theory I wish to state lays down with
regard to right and wrong, as applied to
voluntary actions. Tnis nrst principle is


28 ETHICS

a very simple one ; ior it merely asserts :
That a voluntary action is right, whenever
and only when the agent could not, even if
he had chosen, have done any other action
instead, which would have caused more
pleasure than the one he did do ; and that
a voluntary action is wrong, whenever and
only when the agent could, if he had chosen,
have done some other action instead, which
would have caused more pleasure than the
one he did do. It must be remembered
that our theory does not assert that any
agent ever could have chosen any other
action than the one he actually performed.
It only asserts, that, in the case of all volun-
tary actions, he could have acted differently,
if he had chosen : not that he could have
made the choice. It does not assert, there-
fore, that right and wrong depend upon
what he could choose. As to this, it makes
no assertion at all : it neither affirms nor
denies that they do so depend. It only
asserts that they do depend upon what he
could have done or could do, if he chose.
In every case of voluntary action, a man
could, if he had so chosen just before, have


UTILITARIANISM 29

done at least one other action instead, That
was the definition of a voluntary action : and
it seems quite certain that many actions are
voluntary in this sense. And what our
theory asserts is that, where among the
actions which he could thus have done
instead, if he had chosen, there is any one
which would have caused more pleasure
than the one he did do, then his action is
always wrong ; but that in all other cases
it is right. This is what our theory asserts,
if we remember that the phrase " causing
more pleasure " is to be understood in the
inaccurate sense explained above.

But it will be convenient, in what follows, to
introduce yet another inaccuracy hi our state-
ment of it. It asserts, we have seen, that the
question whether a voluntary action is right
or wrong, depends upon the question whether,
among all the other actions, which the
agent could have done instead, if he had
chosen, there is or is not any which would
have produced more pleasure than the one
he did do. But it would be highly incon-
venient, every time we have to mention the
theory, to use the whole phrase " all the


80 ETHICS

other actions which the agent could have
done instead, if he had chosen." I pro-
pose, therefore, instead to call these simply
" all the other actions which he could have
done," or "which were possible to him."
This is, of course, inaccurate, since it is, in a
sense, not true that he could have done them,
if he could not have chosen them : and our
theory does ngt pretend to say whether he
ever could have chosen them. Moreover,
even if it is true that he could sometimes
have chosen an action which he did not
choose, it is pretty certain that it is not
always so ; it is pretty certain that it is
sometimes out of his power to choose an
action, which he certainly could have done,
if he had chosen. It is not true, therefore,
that all the actions which he could have
done, if he had chosen, are actions which,
in every sense, he could have done, even if it
is true that some of them are. But never-
theless I propose, for the sake of brevity, to
speak of them all as actions which he could
have done ; and this again, I think, need
lead to no confusion, if it be clearly under-
stood that I am doing so. It must, then,


UTILITARIANISM 81

be clearly understood that, when, in what
follows, I speak of all the actions which the
agent could have done, or all those open to
him under the circumstances, I shall mean
only all those which he could have done, if
he had chosen.

Understanding this, then, we may state
the first principle which our theory lays
down quite briefly by saying : " A voluntary
action is right, whenever and only when no
other action possible to the agent under the
circumstances would have caused more
pleasure ; in all other cases, it is wrong."
This is its answer to the questions : What
characteristic is there which belongs to all
voluntary actions which are right, and only
to those among them which are right ? and
what characteristic is there which belongs to
all those which are wrong, and only to those
which are wrong ? But it also asked the
very same questions with regard to two other
classes of voluntary actions those which
ought or ought not to be done, and those
which it is our duty to do or not to do. And
its answer to the question concerning these
conceptions differs from its answer to the ques-


83 ETHICS

tion concerning right and wrong in a way,
which is, indeed, comparatively unimportant,
but which yet deserves to be noticed.

It may have been observed that our theory
does not assert that a voluntary action is
right only where it causes more pleasure than
any action which the agent could have done
instead. It confines itself to asserting that,
in order to be right, such an action must cause
at least as much pleasure as any which the
agent could have done instead. And it
confines itself in this way for the following
reason. It is obviously possible, theoretically
at least, that, among the alternatives open to
an agent at a given moment, there may be
two or more which would produce precisely
equal amounts of pleasure, while all of them
produced more than any of the other possible
alternatives ; and in such cases, our theory
would say, any one of these actions would be
perfectly right. It recognises, therefore, that
there may be cases in which no single one of
the actions open to the agent can be dis-
tinguished as ike right one to do, that in
many cases, on the contrary, several different
actions may all be equally right ; or, in other


UTILITARIANISM 88

words, that to say that a man acted rightly
does not necessarily imply that, if he had done
anything else instead, he would have acted
wrongly. And this is certainly in accordance
with common usage. We all do constantly
imply that sometimes when a man was right
in doing what he did, yet he might have been
equally right, if he had acted differently : that
there may be several different alternatives
open to him, none of which can definitely be
said to be wrong. This is why our theory
refuses to commit itself to the view that an
action is right only where it produces more
pleasure than any of the other possible alter-
natives. For, if this were so, then it would
follow that no two alternatives could ever
be equally right : some one of them would
always have to be the right one, and all
the rest wrong. But it is precisely in this
respect that it holds that the conceptions of
"ought" and of "duty" differ from the
conception of what is " right." When we
say that a man " ought " to do one par-
ticular action, or that it is his " duty " to
do it, we do imply that it would be wrong
for him to do anything else, And hence our
B


84 ETHICS

theory holds that, in the case of " ought "
and " duty " we may say, what we could not
say in the case of " right," namely, that
an action ought to be done or is our duty,
only where it produces more pleasure than
any which we could have done instead.

From this distinction several consequences
follow. It follows firstly that a voluntary
action may be " right " without being an
action which we " ought " to do or which it
is our " duty " to do. It is, of course, always
our duty to act rightly, in the sense that, if
we don't act rightly, we shall always be
doing what we ought not. It is, therefore,
true, in a sense, that whenever we act rightly,
we are always doing our duty and doing
what we ought. But what is not true is
that, whenever a particular action is right,
it is always our duty to do that particular
action and no other. This is not true,
because, theoretically at least, cases may
occur in which some other action would be
quite equally right, and in such cases, we are
obviously under no obligation whatever to
do the one rather than the other : whichever
we do, we shall be doing our duty and doing


UTILITARIANISM 85

as we ought. And it would be rash to
affirm that such cases never do practically
occur. We all commonly hold that they do :
that very often indeed we are under no posi-
tive obligation to do one action rather than
some other ; that it does not matter which we
do. We must, then, be careful not to affirm
that, because it is always our duty to act
rightly, therefore any particular action, which
is right, is always also one which it is our duty
to do. This is not so, because, even where
an action is right, it does not follow that it
would be wrong to do something else instead ;
whereas, if an action is a duty or an action
which we positively ought to do, it always
would be wrong to do anything else instead.

The first consequence, then, which follows,
from this distinction between what is right,
on the one hand, and what ought to be done
or is our duty, on the other, is that a volun-
tary action may be right, without being an
action which we ought to do or which it is
our duty to do. And from this it follows
further that the relation between " right "
and what ought to be done is not on a
par with that between *' wrong " and what
B a


86 ETHICS

ought not to be done. Every action which
is wrong is also an action which ought not
to be done and which it is our duty not to do ;
and also, conversely, every action which
ought not to be done, or which it is our duty
not to do, is wrong. These three negative
terms are precisely and absolutely coex-
tensive. To say that an action is or was
wrong, is to imply that it ought not to be,
or to have been, done ; and the converse
implication also holds. But in the case of
" right " and " ought," only one of the two
converse propositions holds. Every action
which ought to be done or which is our duty,
is certainly also right ; to say the one thing of
any action is to imply the other. But here the
converse is not true ; since, as we have seen,
to say that an action is right is not to imply
that it ought to be done or that it is our duty :
an action may be right, without either of these
two other things being true of it. In this re-
spect the relation between the positive con-
ceptions " right " and " ought to be done " is
not on a par with that between the negative
conceptions " wrong " and " ought not to be
done " The two positive conceptions are not


UTILITARIANISM 87

coextensive, whereas the two negative ones
are so.

And thirdly and finally, it also follows
that whereas every voluntary action, without
exception, must be either right or wrong,
it is by no means necessarily true of every
voluntary action that it either ought to be
done or ought not to be done, that it either
is our duty to do it, or our duty not to do
it. On the contrary, cases may occur quite
frequently where it is neither our duty to
do a particular action, nor yet our duty
not to do it. This will occur, whenever,
among the alternatives open to us, there are
two or more, any one of which would be
equally right And hence we must not
suppose that, wherever we have a choice of
actions before us, there is always some one
among them (if we could only find out
which), which is the one which we ought to
do, while all the rest are definitely wrong.
It may quite well be the case that there is
no one among them, which we are under a
positive obligation to do, although there always
must be at least one which it would be right to
do. There will be one which we definitely


88 ETHICS

ought to do, in those cases and those cases only,
where there happens to be only one which is
right under the circumstances where, that is
to say, there are not several which would all
be equally right, but some one of the alterna-
tives open to us is the only right thing to do.
And hence in many cases we cannot definitely
say of a voluntary action either that it was the
agent's duty to do it nor yet that it was his
duty not to do it. There may be cases in
which none of the alternatives open to us
is definitely prescribed by duty.

To sum up, then : The answers which this
theory gives to its first set of questions is as
follows. A characteristic which belongs to
all right voluntary actions, and only to those
which are right, is, it says, this : That they
all cause at least as much pleasure as any
action which the agent could have done
instead ; or, in other words, they all produce
a maximum of pleasure. A characteristic
which belongs to all voluntary actions,
which ought to be done or which it is our
duty to do, and only to these, is, it says,
the slightly different one : That they all
cause more pleasure than any which the


UTILITARIANISM 89

agent could have done instead ; or, in other
words, among all the possible alternatives,
it is they which produce the maximum of
pleasure. And finally, a characteristic
which belongs to all voluntary actions which
are wrong, or which ought not to be done,
or which it is our duty not to do, and which
belongs only to these, is, in all three cases
the same, namely : That they all cause less
pleasure than some other action which the
agent could have done instead. These three
statements together constitute what I will
call the first part of the theory ; and, whether
we agree with them or not, it must, I think,
at least be admitted that they are propositions
of a very fundamental nature and of a very
wide range, so that it would be worth while
to know, if possible, whether they are true.

But this first part of the theory is by
no means the whole of it. There are two
other parts of it, which are at least equally
important ; and, before we go on to consider
the objections which may be urged against
it, it will, I think, be best to state these
other parts. They may, however, conven-
iently form the subject of a new chapter.


CHAPTER II

UTILITARIANISM (concluded)

IN the last chapter I stated the first part
of an ethical theory, which I chose out for
consideration, not because I agreed with it,
but because it seemed to me to bring out
particularly clearly the distinction between
some of the most fundamental subjects of
ethical discussion. This first part consisted
in asserting that there is a certain character-
istic which belongs to absolutely all volun-
tary actions which are right, and only to
those which are right ; another closely allied
characteristic which belongs to all voluntary
actions which ought to be done or are duties,
and only to these ; a third characteristic
which belongs to all voluntary actions which
are wrong, ought not to be done, or which it
is our duty not to do, and only to those
voluntary actions of which these things are

40


UTILITARIANISM 41

true. And when the theory makes these
assertions it means the words " all " and
" only " to be understood quite strictly.
That is to say, it means its propositions
to apply to absolutely every voluntary
action, which ever has been done, or ever
will be done, no matter who did it, or when
it was or will be done ; and not only to
those which actually have been or will be
done, but also to all those which have been
or will be possible^ in a certain definite sense.
The sense in which it means its propositions
to apply to possible, as well as actual, voluntary
actions, is, it must be remembered, only if
we agree to give the name " possible " to
all those actions which an agent could have
done, if he had chosen, and to those which,
in the future, any agent will be able to do,
if he were to choose to do them. Possible
actions, in this sense, form a perfectly
definite group ; and we do, as a matter of
fact, often make judgments as to whether
they would have been or would be right, and
as to whether they ought to have been done
in the past, or ought to be done in the future,
We say, " So-and-so ought to have done this

B*


42 ETHICS

on that occasion," or "It would have been
perfectly right for him to have done this,"
although as a matter of fact, he did not do
:t ; or we say, " You ought to do this," or
" It will be quite right for you to do this,"
although it subsequently turns out, that
the action in question is one which you
do not actually perform Our theory says,
then, with regard to all actions, which were
in this sense possible in the past, that they
would have been right, if and only if they
would have produced a maximum of pleasure ;
just as it says that all actual past voluntary
actions were right, if and only if they did
produce a maximum of pleasure. And
similarly, with regard to all voluntary actions
which will be possible in the future, it says
that they will be right, if and only if they
would produce a maximum of pleasure ;
just as it says with regard to all that will
actually be done, that they will be right, if
and only if they do produce a maximum of
pleasure.

Our theory does, then, even in its first part,
deal, in a sense, with possible actions, as well
as actual ones. It professes to tell us, not


UTILITARIANISM 48

oiiiv which among actual past voluntary
actions were right, but also which among
those which were possible would have been
right if they had been done ; and not only
which among the voluntary actions which
actually will be done in the future, will be
right, but also which among those which
will be possible, would be right, if they were
to be done. And in doing this, it does, of
course, give us a criterion, or test, or stand-
ard, by means of which we could, theo-
retically at least, discover with regard to
absolutely every voluntary action, whichever
either has been or will be either actual or
possible, whether it was or will be right or
not. If we want to discover with regard
to a voluntary action which was actually
done or was possible in the past, whether it
was right or would have been right, we have
only to ask : Could the agent, on the occa-
sion in question, have done anything else
instead, which would have produced more
pleasure ? If he could, then the action in
question was or would have been wrong ;
ii he could not, then it was or would have
been aghr. Ana similarly, if we want tp


44 ETHICS

discover with regard to an action. wnicH
we are contemplating in the future, whether
it would be right for us to do it, we have only
to ask : Could I do anything else instead
which would produce more pleasure ? If
I could, it will be wrong to do the action ;
if I could not, it will be right. Our theory
does then, even in its first part, profess to
give us an absolutely universal criterion of
right and wrong ; and similarly also an
absolutely universal criterion of what ought
or ought not to be done

But though it does this, there is something
else which it does not do. It only asserts,
in this first part, that the producing of a
maximum of pleasure is a characteristic,
which did and will belong, as a matter oj
fact, to all right voluntary actions (actual or
possible), and only to right ones ; it does
not, in its first part, go on to assert that it is
because they possess this characteristic that
such actions are right. This second assertion
is the first which it goes on to make in its
second part ; and everybody can see, I think,
that there is an important difference between
the two assertions.


UTILITARIANISM 45

Many people might be inclined to admit
that, whenever a man acts wrongly, his
action always does, on the whole, result
in greater unhappiness than would have
ensued if he had acted differently ; and
that when he acts rightly this result never
ensues : that, on the contrary, right action
always does in the end bring about at least
as much happiness, on the whole, as the
agent could possibly have brought about by
any other action which was in his power.
The proposition that wrong action always
does, and (considering how the Universe is
constituted) always would, in the long-run,
lead to less pleasure than the agent could
have brought about by acting differently,
and that right action never does and never
would have this effect, is a proposition which
a great many people might be inclined to
accept ; and this is all which, in its first part,
our theory asserts. But many of those
who would be inclined to assent to this
proposition, would feel great hesitation in
going on to assert that this is why actions
are right or wrong respectively. There
seems to be a very important difference


46 ETHICS

between the two positions. We may hold,
for instance, that an act of murder, whenever
it is wrong, always does produce greater
unhappiness than would have followed if
the agent had chosen instead some one of
the other alternatives, which he could have
carried out, if he had so chosen ; and we
may hold that this is true of all other wrong
actions, actual or possible, and never of any
right ones : but it seems a very different
thing to hold that murder and all other
wrong actions are wrong, when they are
wrong, because they have this result
because they produce less than the possible
maximum of pleasure. We may hold, that
is to say, that the fact that it does produce
or would produce less than a maximum of
pleasure is absolutely always a sign that a
voluntary action is wrong, while the fact
that it does produce or would produce a
maximum of pleasure is absolutely always a
sign that it is right ; but this does not seem
to commit us to the very different pro-
position that these results, besides being
signs of right and wrong, are also the
reasons why actions are right when they


UTILITARIANISM 47

are right, and wrong when they are wrong.
Everybody can see, I think, that the distinc-
tion is important ; although I think it is
often overlooked in ethical discussions. And
it is precisely this distinction which separates
what I have called the first part of our
theory, from the first of the assertions which
it goes on to make in its second part. In
its first part it only asserts that the produc-
ing or not producing a maximum of pleasure
are, absolutely universally, signs of right
and wrong in voluntary actions ; in its
second part it goes on to assert that it is
because they produce these results that
voluntary actions are right when they are
right, and wrong when they are wrong.

There is, then, plainly some important
difference between the assertion, which our
theory made in its first part, to the effect that
all right voluntary actions, and only those
which are right, do, in fact, produce a
maximum of pleasure, and the assertion,
which it now goes on to make, that this is
why they are right, And if we ask why the
difference is important, the answer is, so far
as I can see, as follows. Namely, it we say


48 ETHICS

that actions are right, because they produce
a maximum of pleasure, we imply that,
provided they produced this result, they
would be right, no matter what other effects
they might produce as well. We imply, in
short, that their Tightness does not depend
at all upon their other effects, but only on
the quantity of pleasure that they produce.
And this is a very different thing from merely
saying that the producing a maximum of
pleasure is always, as a matter of fact, a sign
of Tightness. It is quite obvious, that, in the
Universe as it is actually constituted, pleasure
and pain are by no means the only results of
any of our actions : they all produce immense
numbers of other results as well. And so
long as we merely assert that the producing
a maximum of pleasure is a sign of rightness,
we leave open the possibility that it is so
only because this result does always, as a
matter of fact, happen to coincide with the
production of other results ; but that it is
partly upon these other results that the
rightness of the action depends. But so soon
as we assert that actions are right, because
they produce a maximum of pleasure, we cut


UTILITARIANISM 49

away this possibility ; we assert that actions
which produced such a maximum, would be
right, even if tfcey did not produce any of the
other effects, which, as a matter of fact, they
always do produce. And this, I think, is
the chief reason why many persons who would
be inclined to assent to the first proposition,
would hesitate to assent to the second.

It is, for instance, commonly held that
some pleasures are higher or better than
others, even though they may not be more
pleasant ; and that where we have a choice
between procuring for ourselves or others a
higher or a lower pleasure, it is generally
right to prefer the former, even though it
may perhaps be less pleasant. And, of
course, even those who hold that actions are
only right because of the quantity of pleasure
they produce, and not at all because of the
quality of these pleasures, might quite con-
sistently hold that it is as a matter of fad
generally right to prefer higher pleasures to
lower ones, even though they may be less
pleasant. They might hold that this is the
case, on the ground that higher pleasures,
even when less pleasant in themselves, do,


50 ETHICS

if we take into account all their further effects,
tend to produce more pleasure on the whole
than lower ones. There is a good deal to be
said for the view that this does actually
happen, as the Universe is actually con-
stituted ; and that hence an action which
causes a higher pleasure to be enjoyed
instead of a lower one, will in general cause
more pleasure in its total effects, though
it may cause less in its immediate effects.
And this is why those who hold that higher
pleasures are in general to be preferred to
lower ones, may nevertheless admit that
mere quantity of pleasure is always, in fact,
a correct sign or criterion of the rightness of
an action.

But those who hold that actions are only
right, because of the quantity of pleasure
they produce, must hold also that, if higher
pleasures did not, in their total effects, produce
more pleasure than lower ones, then there
would be no reason whatever for preferring
them, provided they were not themselves more
pleasant. // the sole effect of one action
were to be the enjoyment of a certain amount
of the most bestial or idiotic pleasure, and


UTILITARIANISM 51

the sole effect of another were to be the
enjoyment of a much more refined one, then
they must hold that there wou'd be no
reason whatever for preferring the latter to
the former, provided only that the mere
quantity of pleasure enjoyed in each case
were the same. And if the bestial pleasure
were ever so slightly more pleasant than the
other, then they must say it would be our
positive duty to do the action which would
bring it about rather than the other. This
is a conclusion which does follow from the
assertion that actions are right because they
produce a maximum of pleasure, and which
does not follow from the mere assertion that
the producing a maximum of pleasure is
always, in fact, a sign of rightness. And it is
for this, and similar reasons, that it is im-
portant to distinguish the two propositions.
To many persons it may seem clear that it
would be our duty to prefer some pleasures
to others, even if they did not entail a greater
quantity of pleasure ; and hence that though
actions which produce a maximum of pleasure
are perhaps, in fact, always right, they are
not right because of this, but only because


52 ETHICS

the producing of this result does in fact
happen to coincide with the producing of
other results. They would say that though
perhaps, in fact, actual cases never occur in
which it is or would be wrong to do an action,
which produces a maximum of pleasure, it
is easy to imagine cases in which it would
be wrong. //, for instance, we had to choose
between creating a Universe, in which all the
inhabitants were capable only of the lowest
sensual pleasures, and another in which they
were capable of the highest intellectual
and aesthetic ones, it would, they would say,
plainly be our duty to create the latter
rather than the former, even though the mere
quantity of pleasure enjoyed in it were
rather less than in the former, and still more
so if the quantities were equal Or, to put
it shortly, they would say that a world of
men is preferable to a world of pigs, even
though the pigs might enjoy as much or
more pleasure than a world of men. And
this is what our theory goes on to deny, when
it says that voluntary actions are right,
because they produce a maximum of pleasure.
It implies, by saying this, that actions which


UTILITARIANISM 58

produced a maximum of pleasure would
always be right, no matter what their effects,
in other respects, might be. And hence
that it would be right to create a world in
which there was no intelligence and none of
the higher emotions, rather than one in which
these were present in the highest degree,
provided only that the mere quantity of
pleasure enjoyed in the former were ever so
little greater than that enjoyed in the latter.

Our theory asserts, then, in its second
part, that voluntary actions are right when
they are right, because they produce a
maximum of pleasure ; and in asserting this
it takes a great step beyond what it asserted
in its first part, since it now implies that an
action which produced a maximum of plea-
sure always would be right, no matter how
its results, in other respects, might compare
with those of the other possible alternatives.

But it might be held that, even so, it does
not imply that this would be so absolutely un-
conditionally. It might be held that though,
in the Universe as actually constituted,
actions are right because they produce a
maximum of pleasure, and hence their right-


54 ETHICS

ness does not at all depend upon their other
effects, yet this is only so for some such
reason as that, in this Universe, all conscious
beings do actually happen to desire pleasure ;
but that, if we could imagine a Universe, in
which pleasure was not desired, then, in such
a Universe, actions would not be right because
they produced a maximum of pleasure ; and
hence that we cannot lay it down absolutely
unconditionally that in all conceivable
Universes any voluntary action would be
right whenever and only when it produced a
maximum of pleasure. For some such reason
as this, it might be held that we must dis-
tinguish between the mere assertion that
voluntary actions are right, when they are
right, because they produce a maximum of
pleasure, and the further assertion that this
would be so in all conceivable circumstances
and in any conceivable Universe. Those
who assert the former are by no means
necessarily bound to assert the latter also. To
assert the latter is to take a still further step.
But the theory I wish to state does, in
fact, take this further step. It asserts not
only that, in the Universe as it is, voluntary


UTILITARIANISM 55

actions are right because they produce a
maximum of pleasure, but also that this
would be so, under any conceivable circum-
stances : that if any conceivable being, in
any conceivable Universe, were faced with a
choice between an action which would cause
more pleasure and one which would cause
less, it would always be his duty to choose
the former rather than the latter, no matter
what the respects might be in which his
Universe differed from ours. It may, at
first sight, seem unduly bold to assert that
any ethical truth can be absolutely un-
conditional in this sense. But many philo-
sophers have held that some fundamental
ethical principles certainly are thus un-
conditional. And a little reflection will suffice
to show that the view that they may be so
is at all events not absurd. We have many
instances of other truths, which seem quite
plainly to be of this nature. It seems quite
clear, for instance, that it is not only true
that twice two do make four, in the Universe
as it actually is, but that they necessarily
would make four, in any conceivable Universe,
no matter how much it might differ from this


56 ETHICS

one in other respects. And our theory is
only asserting that the connection which it
believes to hold between rightness and the
production of a maximum of pleasure is, in
this respect, similar to the connection asserted
to hold between the number two and the
.numfier four, when we say that twice two
are four. It asserts that, if any being what-
ever, in any circumstances whatever, had to
choose between two actions, one of which
would produce more pleasure than the other,
it always would be his duty to choose the
former rather than the latter : that this
is absolutely unconditionally true. This as-
sertion obviously goes very much further,
both than the assertion which it made in its
first part, to the effect that the producing a
maximum of pleasure is a sign of rightness
in the case of all voluntary actions, that ever
have been or will be actual or possible, and
also than the assertion, that in the Universe,
as it is actually constituted, actions are right,
when they are right, because they produce
a maximum of pleasure. But bold as the
assertion may seem, it is, at all events, not
impossible that we should know it to be true.


UTILITARIANISM 57

Our theory asserts, therefore, in its second
part : That, if we had to choose between
two actions, one of which would have as its
sole or total effects, an effect or set of effects,
which we may call A, while the other would
have as its sole or total effects, an effect or
set of effects, which we may call B, then,
if A contained more pleasure than B, it
always would be our duty to choose the
action which caused A rather than that which
caused B. This, it asserts, would be abso-
lutely always true, no matter what A and B
might be like in other respects. And to assert
this is (it now goes on to say) equivalent to
asserting that any effect or set of effects
which contains more pleasure is always
intrinsically better than one which contains
less.

By calling one effect or set of effects in-
trinsically better than another it means that
it is better in itself, quite apart from any
accompaniments or further effects which it
may have. That is to say : To assert of
any one thing, A, that it is intrinsically better
than another, B, is to assert that if A existed
quite alone, without any accompaniments


58 ETHICS

or effects whatever if, in short, A con-
stituted the whole Universe, it would be
better that such a Universe should exist,
than that a Universe which consisted solely
of B should exist instead. In order to dis-
cover whether any one thing is intrinsically
better than another, we have always thus
to consider whether it would be better that
the one should exist quite alone than that
the other should exist quite alone. No
one thing or set of things, A, ever can be
intrinsically better than another, B, unless
it would be better that A should exist quite
alone than that B should exist quite alone.
Our theory asserts, therefore, that, wherever
it is true that it would be our duty to choose
A rather than B, if A and B were to be the
sole effects of a pair of actions between which
we had to choose, there it is always also true
that it would be better that A should exist
quite alone than that B should exist quite
alone. And it asserts also, conversely, that
wherever it is true that any one thing or
set of things, A, is intrinsically better than
another, B, there it would always also be our
duty to choose an action of which A would


UTILITARIANISM 59

be the sole effect rather than one of which
B would be the sole effect, if we had to choose
between them* But since, as we have seen,
it holds that it never could be our duty to
choose one action rather than another, unless
the total effects of the one contained more
pleasure than that of the other, it follows
that, according to it, no effect or set of
effects, A, can possibly be intrinsically better
than another, B, unless it contains more
pleasure. It holds, therefore, not only that
any one effect or set of effects, which contains
more pleasure, is always intrinsically better
than one which contains less, but also that
no effect or set of effects can be intrinsically
better than another unless it contains more
pleasure.

It is plain, then, that this theory assigns
a quite unique position to pleasure and pain
in two respects ; or possibly only in one, since
it is just possible that the two propositions
which it makes about them are not merely
equivalent, but absolutely identical that is
to say, are merely different ways of express-
ing exactly the same idea. The two pro-
positions are these. (1) That if any one had


60 ETHICS

to choose between two actions, one of which
would, in its total effects, cause more
pleasure than the other, it always would be
his duty to choose the former ; and that it
never could be any one's duty to choose
one action rather than another, unless
its total effects contained more pleasure.
(2) That any Universe, or part of a Universe,
which contains more pleasure, is always
intrinsically better than one which contains
less ; and that nothing can be intrinsically
better than anything else, unless it contains
more pleasure. It does seem to be just
possible that these two propositions are
merely two different ways of expressing
exactly the same idea. The question whether
they are so or not simply depends upon the
question whether, when we say, ** It would
be better that A should exist quite alone
than that B should exist quite alone," we
are or are not saying exactly the same thing,
as when we say, " Supposing we had to
choose between an action of which A would
be the sole effect, and one of which B
would be the sole effect, it would be our
duty to choose the former rather than the


UTILITARIANISM 1

latter." And it certainly does seem, at first
sight, as if the two propositions were not
identical ; as if we should not be saying
exactly the same thing in asserting the one,
as in asserting the other. But, even if they
are not identical, our theory asserts that
they are certainly equivalent : that, whenever
the one is true, the other is certainly also
true. And, if they are not identical, this
assertion of equivalence amounts to the
very important proposition that : An action
is right, only if no action, which the agent
could have done instead, would have had
intrinsically better results ; while an action
is wrong, only if the agent could have done
some other action instead whose total results
would have been intrinsically better. It
certainly seems as if this proposition were not
a mere tautology. And, if so, then we must
admit that our theory assigns a unique
position to pleasure and pain in two respects,
and not in one only. It asserts, first of all,
that they have a unique relation to right
and wrong ; and secondly, that they have a
unique relation to intrinsic value.
Our theory asserts, then, that any whole


62 ETHICS

which contains a greater amount of pleasure,
is always. intrinsically better than one which
contains a smaller amount, no matter what
the two may be like in other respects ; and
that no whole can be intrinsically better
than another unless it contains more pleasure
But it must be remembered that throughout
this discussion, we have, for the sake of
convenience, been using the phrase "con-
tains more pleasure" in an inaccurate
sense. I explained that I should say of one
whole, A, that it contained more pleasure
than another, B, whenever A and B were
related to one another in either of the five
following ways : namely (1) when A and B
both contain an excess of pleasure over pain,
but A contains a greater excess than B ; (2)
when A contains an excess of pleasure over
pain, while B contains no excess either of
pleasure over pain or of pain over pleasure ;
(8) when A contains an excess of pleasure
over pain, while B contains an excess of
pain over pleasure, (4) when A contains no
excess either of pleasure over pain or of
pain over pleasure, while B does contain
an excess of pain over pleasure; and (5)


UTILITARIANISM 68

when both A and B contain an excess of
pain over pleasure, but A contains a smaller
excess than B. Whenever in stating this
theory, I have spoken of one whole, or
effect, or set of effects, A, as containing more
pleasure than another, B, I have always
meant merely that A was related to B in
one or other of these five ways. And so here,
when our theory says that every whole
which contains a greater amount of pleasure
is always intrinsically better than one which
contains less, and that nothing can be
intrinsically better than anything else unless
it contains more pleasure, this must be
understood to mean that any whole, A,
which stands to another, B, in any one of
these five relations, is always intrinsically
better than B, and that no one thing can
be intrinsically better than another, unless
it stands to it in one or other of these five
relations. And it becomes important to
remember this, when we go on to take
account of another fact.

It is plain that when we talk of one thing
being " better " than another we may mean
any one of five different things. We may


64 ETHICS

mean either (1) that while both are positively
good, the first is better ; or (2) that while
the first is positively good, the second is
neither good nor bad, but indifferent ; or
(8) that while the first is positively good, the
second is positively bad ; or (4) that while
the first is indifferent, the second is positively
bad ; or (5) that while both are positively
bad, the first is less bad than the second.
We should, in common life, say that one
thing was " better " than another, whenever
it stood to that other in any one of these
five relations. Or, in other words, we hold
that among things which stand to one
another in the relation of better and worse,
some are positively good, others positively
bad, and others neither good nor bad, but
indifferent. And our theory holds that this
is, in fact, the case, with things which have
a place in the scale of intrinsic value : some
of them are intrinsically good, others intrin-
sically bad, and others indifferent. And it
would say that a whole is intrinsically good,
whenever and only when it contains an
excess of pleasure over pain ; intrinsically
bad, whenever and only when it contains


UTILITARIANISM 65

an excess of pain over pleasure ; and in-
trinsically indifferent, whenever and only
when it contains neither.

In addition, therefore, to laying down
precise rules as to what things are intrinsically
better or worse than others, our theory also
lays down equally precise ones as to what
things are intrinsically good and bad and
indifferent. By saying that a thing is in-
trinsically good it means that it would be a
good thing that the thing in question should
exist, even if it existed quite alone, without
any further accompaniments or effects what-
ever. By saying that it is intrinsically bad,
it means that it would be a bad thing or an
evil that it should exist, even if it existed
quite alone, without any further accompani-
ments or effects whatever. And by saying
that it is intrinsically indifferent, it means
that, if it existed quite alone, its existence
would be neither a good nor an evil in any
degree whatever. And just as the concep-
tions " intrinsically better " and " intrin-
sically worse " are connected in a perfectly
precise manner with the conceptions " right "
and " wrong," so, it maintains, are these
c


66 ETHICS

other conceptions also. To say of anything,
A, that it is " intrinsically good," is equivalent
to saying that, if we had to choose between
an action of which A would be the sole or
total effect, and an action, which would
have absolutely no effects at all, it would
always be our duty to choose the former, and
wrong to choose the latter. And similarly
to say of anything, A, that it is " intrinsically
bad," is equivalent to saying that, if we had
to choose between an action of which A
would be the sole effect, and an action which
would have absolutely no effects at all, it
would always be our duty to choose the
latter and wrong to choose the former. And
finally, to say of anything, A, that it is
"intrinsically indifferent," is equivalent to
saying that, if we had to choose between an
action, of which A would be the sole effect,
and an action which would have absolutely
no effects at all, it would not matter which
we chose : either choice would be equally
right.

To sum up, then, we may say that, in its
second part, our theory lays down three
principles. It asserts (1) that anything


UTILITARIANISM 67

whatever, whether it be a single effect, or a
whole set of effects, or a whole Universe, is
intrinsically good, whenever and only when
it either is or contains an excess of pleasure
over pain ; that anything whatever is in-
trinsically bad, whenever and only when it
either is or contains an excess of pain over
pleasure ; and that all other things, no
matter what their nature may be, are in-
trinsically indifferent. It asserts (2) that
any one thing, whether it be a single effect,
or a whole set of effects, or a whole Universe,
is intrinsically better than another, whenever
and only when the two are related to one
another in one or other of the five following
ways : namely, when either (a) while both
are intrinsically good, the second is not so
good as the first ; or (b) while the first is
intrinsically good, the second is intrinsically
indifferent ; or (c) while the first is intrin-
sically good, the second is intrinsically bad ;
or (d) while the first is intrinsically indifferent,
the second is intrinsically bad ; or (c) while
both are intrinsically bad, the first is not so
bad as the second. And it asserts (3) that,
if we had to choose between two actions
c 2


68 ETHICS

one of which would have intrinsically hetter
total effects than the other, it always would
be our duty to choose the former, and wrong
to choose the latter ; and that no action
ever can be right if we could have done
anything else instead which would have had
intrinsically better total effects, nor wrong,
unless we could have done something else
instead which would have had intrinsically
better total effects. From these three
principles taken together, the whole theory
follows. And whether it be true or false,
it is, I think, at least a perfectly clear and
intelligible theory. Whether it is or is not
of any practical importance, is, indeed,
another question. But, even if it were of
none whatever, it certainly lays down pro-
positions of so fundamental and so far-
reaching a character, that it seems worth
while to consider whether they are true or
false. There remain, I think, only two
points which should be noticed with regard
to it, before we go on to consider the prin-
cipal objections which may be urged
against it.

It should be noticed, first, that, though


UTILITARIANISM 69

this theory asserts that nothing is intrinsically
good, unless it is or contains an excess of
pleasure over pain, it is very far from asserting
that nothing is good, unless it fulfils this
condition. By saying that a thing is in-
trinsically good, it means, as has been ex-
plained, that the existence of the thing in
question would be a good, even if it existed
quite alone, without any accompaniments
or effects whatever ; and it is quite plain
that when we call things " good " we by
no means always mean this : we by no means
always mean that they would be good, even
if they existed quite alone. Very often, for
instance, when we say that a thing is " good,"
we mean that it is good because of its effects ;
and we should not for a moment maintain
that it would be good, even if it had no
effects at all. We are, for instance, familiar
with the idea that it is sometimes a good
thing for people to suffer pain ; and yet we
should be very loth to maintain that in all
such cases their suffering would be a good
thing, even if nothing were gained by it
if it had no further effects. We do, in
general, maintain that suffering is good,


TO ETHICS

only where and because it has further good
effects. And similarly with many other
things. Many things, therefore, which are
not " intrinsically " good, may nevertheless
be " good " in some one or other of the
senses in which we use that highly ambiguous
word. And hence our theory can and would
quite consistently maintain that, while
nothing is intrinsically good except pleasure
or wholes which contain pleasure, many
other things really are " good " ; and
similarly that, while nothing is intrinsically
bad except pain or wholes which contain
it, yet many other things are really " bad."
It would, for instance, maintain that it is
always a good thing to act rightly, and a
bad thing to act wrongly ; although it would
say at the same time that, since actions,
strictly speaking, do not contain either
pleasure or pain, but are only accompanied
by or causes of them, a right action is never
intrinsically good, nor a wrong one intrinsically
bad. And similarly it would maintain that
it is perfectly true that some men are " good,"
and others " bad," and some better than
others ; although no man can strictly be


UTILITARIANISM 71

said to contain either pleasure or pain, and
hence none can be either intrinsically good
or intrinsically bad or intrinsically better
than any other. It would even maintain
(and this also it can do quite consistently),
that events which are intrinsically good are
nevertheless very often bad, and intrinsically
bad ones good. It would, for instance, say
that it is often a very bad thing for a man
to enjoy a particular pleasure on a particular
occasion, although the event, which consists
in his enjoying it, may be intrinsically good,
since it contains an excess of pleasure over
pain. It may often be a very bad thing that
such an event should happen, because it cause*
the man himself or other beings to have less
pleasure or more pain in the future, than they
would otherwise have had. And for similar
reasons it may often be a very good thing
that an intrinsically bad event should happen.
It is important to remember all this, because
otherwise the theory may appear much more
paradoxical than it really is. It may, for
instance, appear, at first sight, as if it denied
all value to anything except pleasure and
wholes which contain it a view which


72 ETHICS

would be extremely paradoxical if it were
held. But it does not do this. It does not
deny all value to other things, but only all
intrinsic value a very different thing. It
only says that none of them would have
any value if they existed quite alone. But,
of course, as a matter of fact, none of them
do exist quite alone, and hence it may quite
consistently allow that, as it is, many of
them do have very great value. Concerning
kinds of value, other than intrinsic value,
it does not profess to lay down any general
rules at all. And its reason for confining
itself to intrinsic value is because it holds
that this and this alone is related to right
and wrong in the perfectly definite manner
explained above. Whenever an action is
right, it is right only if and because the
total effects of no action, which the agent
could have done instead, would have had
more intrinsic value ; and whenever an
action is wrong, it is wrong only if and
because the total effects of some other
action, which the agent could have done
instead, would have had more intrinsic
value This proposition, which is true of


UTILITARIANISM 78

intrinsic value, is not, it holds, true of value
of any other kind.

And a second point which should be
noticed about this theory is the following.
It is often represented as asserting that
pleasure is the only thing which is ultimately
good or desirable, and pain the only thing
which is ultimately bad or undesirable ; or
as asserting that pleasure is the only thing
which is good for its own sake, and pain
the only thing which is bad for its own sake.
And there is, I think, a sense in which it
does assert this. But these expressions are
not commonly carefully defined ; and it is
worth noticing that, if our theory does assert
these propositions, the expressions " ultim-
ately good " or " good for its bwn sake "
must be understood in a different sense from
that which has been assigned above to the
expression " intrinsically good." We must
not take *' ultimately good " or " good for
its own sake " to be synonyms for " intrin-
sically good. " For our theory most emphatic-
ally does not assert that pleasure is the only
thing intrinsically good, and pain the only
thing intrinsically evil. On the contrary,


74 ETHICS

it asserts that any whole which contains an
excess of pleasure over pain is intrinsically
good) no matter how much else it may
contain besides ; and similarly that any
whole which contains an excess of pain
over pleasure is intrinsically bad. This dis-
tinction between the conception expressed
by " ultimately good " or " good for its own
sake," on the one hand, and that expressed
by " intrinsically good," on the other, is
not commonly made ; and yet obviously we
must make it, if we are to say that our
theory does assert that pleasure is the only
ultimate good, and pain the only ultimate
evil. The two conceptions, if used in this
way, have one important point in common,
namely, that both of them will only apply
to things whose existence would be good,
even if they existed quite alone. Whether
we assert that a thing is " ultimately good "
or " good for its own sake " or " intrinsically
good," we are always asserting that it would
be good, even if it existed quite alone. But
the two conceptions differ in respect of the
fact that, whereas a whole which is " in-
trinsically good " may contain parts which


UTILITARIANISM 75

are not intrinsically good, i.e. would not be
good, if they existed quite alone ; anything
which is *' ultimately good " or '* good for
its own sake " can contain no such parts.
This, I think, is the meaning which we must
assign to the expressions " ultimately good "
or " good for its own sake," if we are to
say that our theory asserts pleasure to be
the only thing " ultimately good " or " good
for its own sake." We may, in short, divide
intrinsically good things into two classes :
namely (I) those which, while as wholes
they are intrinsically good, nevertheless
contain some parts which are not intrin-
sically good ; and (2) those, which either
have no parts at all, or, if they have any,
have none but what are themselves intrin-
sically good. And we may thus, if we
please, confine the terms " ultimately good "
or " good for their own sakes " to things
which belong to the second of these two
classes. We may, of course, make a pre-
cisely similar distinction between two classes
of intrinsically bad things And it is only
if we do this that our theory caii be truly
said to assert that nothing is " ultimately


76 ETHICS

good " or " good for its own sake,'* except
pleasure ; and nothing " ultimately bad "
or " bad for its own sake," except pain.

Such is the ethical theory which I have
chosen to state, because it seems to me
particularly simple, and hence to bring out
particularly clearly some of the main questions
which have formed the subject of ethical
discussion.

What is specially important is to distinguish
the question, which it professes to answer in
its first part, from the much more radical
questions, which it professes to answer in its
second. In its first part, it only professes
to answer the question : What characteristic
is there which does actually, as a matter of
fact, belong to all right voluntary actions,
which ever have been or will be done in this
world ? While, in its second part, it professes
to answer the much more fundamental
question : What characteristic is there which
would belong to absolutely any voluntary
action, which was right, in any conceivable
Universe, and under any conceivable circum-
stances ? These two questions are obviously
extremely different, and by the theory I have


UTILITARIANISM 77

stated I mean a theory which does profess
to give an answer to both.

Whether this theory has ever been held
in exactly the form in which I have stated
it, I should not like to say. But many
people have certainly held something very
like it ; and it seems to be what is often
meant by the familiar name " Utilitarianism,"
which is the reason why I have chosen this
name as the title of these two chapters.
It must not, however, be assumed that any-
body who talks about " Utilitarianism "
always means precisely this theory in all its
details. On the contrary, many even of
those who call themselves Utilitarians would
object to some of its most fundamental
propositions. One of the difficulties which
occurs in ethical discussions is that no single
name, which has ever been proposed as the
name of an ethical theory, has any absolutely
fixed significance. On the contrary, every
name may be, and often is^i
for several different tt
differ from one anotlj^ ^u/verv impJ
respects. Hence,
such a name, you <ftnj6^$ k "tj j ui; to


78 ETHICS

name alone, but must always look carefully
to see exactly what he means by it. For
this reason I do not propose, in what follows,
to give any name at all to this theory which
I have stated, but will refer to it simply
as the theory stated in these first two
chapters.


CHAPTER III

THE OBJECTIVITY OF MORAL JUDGMENTS

AGAINST the theory, which has been stated
in the last two chapters, an enormous variety
of different objections may be urged ; and I
cannot hope to deal with nearly all of them.
What I want to do is to choose out those,
which seem to me to be the most important,
because they are the most apt to be strongly
felt, and because they concern extremely
general questions of principle. It seems to
me that some of these objections are well
founded, and that others are not, according
as they are directed against different parts
of what our theory asserts. And I propose,
therefore, to split up the theory into parts,
and to consider separately the chief objec-
tions which might be urged against each of
these different parts.

And we may begin with an extremely


80 ETHICS

fundamental point. Our theory plainly im-
plied two things. It implied (I) that, if
it is true at any one time that a par-
ticular voluntary action is right, it must
always be true of that particular action that
it was right : or, in other words, that an
action cannot change from right to wrong,
or from wrong to right ; that it cannot
possibly be true of the very same action that
it is right at one time and wrong at another.
And it implied also (2) that the same action
cannot possibly at the same time be both right
and wrong. It plainly implied both these
two things because it asserted that a volun-
tary action can only be right, if it produces
a maximum of pleasure, and can only be
wrong, if it produces less than a maximum.
And obviously, if it is once true of any action
that it did produce a maximum of pleasure,
it must always be true of it that it did ; and
obviously also it cannot be true at one and
the same time of one and the same action
both that it did produce a maximum of
pleasure and also that it produced less than
a maximum. Our theory implied, therefore,
that any particular action cannot possibly


MORAL JUDGMENTS 81

be both right and wrong either at the same
time or at different times. At any particu-
lar time it must be either right or wrong,
and, whichever it is at any one time, it will
be the same at all times.

It must be carefully noticed, however,
that our theory only implies that this is true
of any particular voluntary action, which we
may choose to consider : it does not imply
that the same is ever true of a class of actions.
That is to say, it implies that if, at the time
when Brutus murdered Caesar, this action of
his was right, then, it must be equally true
now, and will always be true, that this par-
ticular action of Brutus was right, and it never
can have been and never will be true that
it was wrong. Brutus' action on this particu-
lar occasion cannot, it says, have been both
right and wrong ; and if it was once true that
it was right, then it must always be true that
it was right ; or if it was once true that it was
wrong, it must always be true that it was
wrong. And similarly with every other
absolutely particular action, which actually
was done or might have been done by a
particular man on a particular occasion. Of


82 ETHICS

every such action, our theory says, it is true
that it cannot at any time have been both
right and wrong ; and also that, whichever
of these two predicates it possessed at any
one time, it must possess the same at all times.
But it does not imply that the same is true of
any particular class of actions of murder,
for instance. It does not assert that if one
murder, committed at one time, was wrong,
then any other murder, committed at the
same time, must also have been wrong ; nor
that if one murder, committed at one time,
is wrong, any other murder committed at
any other time must be wrong. On the con-
trary, though it does not directly imply
that this is false, yet it does imply that it is
unlikely that any particular class of actions
will absolutely always be right or absolutely
always wrong. For, it holds, as we have
seen, that the question whether an action is
right or wrong depends upon its effects ; and
the question what effects an action will pro-
duce depends, of course, not only upon the
class to which it belongs, but also on the
particular circumstances in which it is done.
While, in one set of circumstances, a particu-


MORAL JUDGMENTS 88

lar kind of action may produce good effects,
in other circumstances a precisely similar
action may produce bad ones. And, since
the circumstances are always changing, it is
extremely unlikely (though not impossible),
that actions of any particular class, such as
murder or adultery, should absolutely always
be right or absolutely always wrong. Our
theory, therefore, does not imply that, if an
action of a particular class is right once, every
other action of the same class must always be
right : on the contrary, it follows from its
view that this is unlikely to be true. What
it does imply, is that if we consider any par-
ticular instance of any class, that particular
instance cannot ever be both right and wrong,
and if once right, must always be right. And
it is extremely important to distinguish
clearly between these two different questions,
because they are liable to be confused. When
we ask whether the same action can be both
right and wrong we may mean two entirely
different things by this question. We may
merely mean to ask : Can the same kind of
action be right at one time and wrong at
another, or right and wrong simultaneously ?


84 ETHICS

And to this question our theory would be in-
clined to answer : It can. Or else by the
same action, we may mean not merely the
same kind of action, but some single abso-
lutely particular action, which was or might
have been performed by a definite person on
a definite occasion. And it is to this question
that our theory replies : It is absolutely im-
possible that any one single, absolutely
particular action can ever be both right and
wrong, either at the same time or at different
times.

Now this question as to whether one and
the same action can ever be both right and
wrong at the same, time, or can ever be
right at one time and wrong at another, is,
I think, obviously, an extremely fundamental
one. If we decide it in the affirmative,
then a great many of the questions which
have been most discussed by ethical writers
are at once put out of court. It must, for
instance, be idle to discuss what characteristic
there is, which universally distinguishes right
actions from wrong ones, if this view be true.
If one and the same action can be both
right and wrong, then obviously there can


MORAL JUDGMENTS ' 85

be no such characteristic there can be no
characteristic which always belongs to right
actions, and never to wrong ones : since, if
so much as one single action is both right
and wrong, this action must possess any
characteristic (if there is one) which always
belongs to right actions, and, at the same
time, since the action is also wrong, this
characteristic cannot be one which never
belongs to wrong actions. Before, therefore,
we enter on any discussions as to what
characteristic there is which always belongs
to right actions and never to wrong ones,
it is extremely important that we should
satisfy ourselves, if we can, that one and
the same action cannot be both right and
wrong, either at the same time or at different
times. For, if this is not the case, then all
such discussions must be absolutely futile.
I propose, therefore, first of all, to raise the
simple issue : Can one and the same action
be both right and wrong, either at the same
time or at different times ? Is the theory
stated in the last two chapters in the right,
so far as it merely asserts that this cannot
be the case f


86 ETHICS

Now I think that most of those who hold,
as this theory does, that one and the same
action cannot be both right and wrong,
simply assume that this is the case, without
trying to prove it. It is, indeed, quite
common to find the mere fact that a theory
implies the contrary, used as a conclusive
argument against that theory. It is argued :
Since this theory implies that one and the
same action can be both right and wrong,
and since it is evident that this cannot be
so, therefore the theory in question must be
false. And, for my part, it seems to me
that such a method of argument is perfectly
justified. It does seem to me to be evident
that no voluntary action can be both right
and wrong ; and I do not see how this can
be proved by reference to any principle
which is more certain than it is itself. If,
therefore, anybody asserts that the contrary
is evident to him that it is evident to him
that one and the same action can be both
right and wrong, I do not see how it can
be proved that he is wrong. If the question
is reduced to these ultimate terms, it must
I think, simply be left to the reader's inspec-


MORAL JUDGMENTS 87

tion. Like all ultimate questions, it is
incapable of strict proof either way. But
most of those who hold that an action can
be both right and wrong are, I think, in fact
influenced by certain considerations, which
do admit of argument. They hold certain
views, from which this conclusion follows ;
and it is only because they hold these views,
that they adopt the conclusion. There are,
I think, two views, in particular, which are
very commonly held and which are specially
influential in leading people to adopt it.
And it is very important that we should
consider these two views carefully, both
because they lead to this conclusion and for
other reasons.

The first of them is as follows. It may be
held, namely, that, whenever we assert that
an action or class of actions is right or wrong,
we must be merely making an assertion
about somebody's feelings towards the action
or class of actions in question. This is a
view which seems to be very commonly held
in some form or other ; and one chief reason
why it is held is, I think, that many people
teem to find an extreme difficulty in seeing


88 ETHICS

what else we possibly can mean by the words
*' right " and " wrong," except that some
mind or set of minds has some feeling, or
some other mental attitude, towards the
actions to which we apply these predicates.
In some of its forms this view does not lead
to the consequence that one and the same
action may be both right and wrong ; and
with these forms we are not concerned just
at present. But some of the forms in which
it may be held do directly lead to this con-
sequence ; and where people do hold that
one and the same action may be both right
and wrong, it is, I think, very generally
because they hold this view in one of these
forms. There are several different forms of
it which do lead to this consequence, and
they are apt, I think, not to be clearly
distinguished from one another. People are
apt to assume that in our judgments of right
and wrong we must be making an assertion
about the feelings of some man or some group
of men, without trying definitely to make
up their minds as to who the man or group
of men can be about whose feelings we are
making it. So soon as this question is


MORAL JUDGMENTS 89

fairly faced, it becomes plain, I think, that
there are serious objections to any possible
alternative.

To begin with, it may be held that when-
ever any man asserts an action to be right
or wrong, what he is asserting is merely that
he himself has some particular feeling towards
the action in question. Each of us, according
to this view, is merely making an assertion
about his own feelings : when / assert that
an action is right, the whole of what I mean
is merely that / have some particular feeling
towards the action ; and when you make
the same assertion, the whole of what you
mean is merely that you have the feeling
in question towards the action. Different
views may, of course, be taken as to what
the feeling is which we are supposed to
assert that we have. Some people might
say that, when we call an action right, we
are merely asserting that we like it or are
pleased with it ; and that when we call one
wrong, we are merely asserting that we
dislike it or are displeased with it. Others
might say, more plausibly, that it is not
mere liking and dislike that we express by


90 ETHICS

these judgments, but a peculiar sort of
liking and dislike, which might perhaps be
called a feeling of moral approval and of moral
disapproval. Others, again, might, perhaps,
say that it is not a pair of opposite feelings
which are involved, but merely the presence
or absence of one particular feeling : that,
for instance, when we call an action wrong,
we merely mean to say that we have towards
it a feeling of disapproval, and that by
calling it right, we mean to say, not that we
have towards it a positive feeling of approval,
but merely that we have not got towards
it the feeling of disapproval. But whatever
view be taken as to the precise nature of the
feelings about which we are supposed to be
making a judgment, any view which holds
that, when we call an action right or wrong,
each of us is always merely asserting that he
himself has or has not some particular feeling
towards it, does, I think, inevitably lead to
the same conclusion namely, that quite
often one and the same action is both right
and wrong ; and any such view is also ex-
posed to one and the same fatal objection.
The argument which shows that such


MORAL JUDGMENTS 01

views inevitably lead to the conclusion that
one and the same action is quite often both
right and wrong, consists of 'two steps, each
of which deserves to be separately emphasised.
The first is this. If, whenever I judge an
action to be right, I am merely judging that
I myself have a particular feeling towards
it, then it plainly follows that, provided
I really have the feeling in question, my
judgment is true, and therefore the action
in question really is right. And what is true
of me, in this respect, will also be true of
any other man. No matter what we suppose
the feeling to be, it must be true that, when-
ever and so long as any man really has
towards any action the feeling in question,
then, and for just so long, the action in
question really is right. For what our
theory supposes is that, when a man judges
an action to be right, he is merely judging
that he has this feeling towards it ; and
hence, whenever he really has it, his judg-
ment must be true, and the action really
must be right. It strictly follows, therefore,
from this theory that whenever any man
whatever really has a particular feeling


92 ETHICS

towards an action, the action really is right ;
and whenever any man whatever really has
another particular feeling towards an action,
the action really is wrong. Or, if we take
the view that it is not a pair of feelings
which are in question, but merely the presence
or absence of a single feeling for instance,
the feeling of moral disapproval ; then,
what follows is, that whenever any man
whatever fails to have this feeling towards
an action, the action really is right, and
whenever any man whatever has got the
feeling, the action really is wrong. What-
ever view we take as to what the feelings
are, and whether we suppose that it is a
pair of feelings or merely the presence and
absence of a single one, the consequence
follows that the presence (or absence) of the
feeling in question in any man whatever is
sufficient to ensure that an action is right
or wrong, as the case may be. And it is
important to insist that this consequence
does follow, because it is not, I think, always
clearly seen. It seems sometimes to be
vaguely held that when a man judges an
action to be right, he is merely judging that


MORAL JUDGMENTS 98

he has a particular feeling towards it, but
that yet, though he really has this feeling,
the action is not necessarily really right.
But obviously this is impossible. If the
whole of what we mean to assert, when we
say that an action is right, is merely that
we have a particular feeling towards it, then
plainly, provided only we really have this
feeling, the action must really be right.

It follows, therefore, from any view of this
type, that, whenever any man has (or has
not) some particular feeling towards an
action, the action is right ; and also that,
whenever any man has (or has not) some par-
ticular feeling towards an action, the action
is wrong. And now, if we take into account
a second fact, it seems plainly to follow
that, if this be so, one and the same action
must quite often be both right and wrong.

This second fact is merely the observed
fact, which it seems difficult to deny, that,
whatever pair of feelings or single feeling we
take, cases do occur in which two different
men have opposite feelings towards the same
action, and in which, while one has a given
feeling towards an action, the other has not


94 ETHICS

got it. It might, perhaps, be thought that it
is possible to find some pair of feelings or some
single feeling, in the case of which this rule
does not hold : that, for instance, no man ever
really feels moral approval towards an action,
towards which another feels moral dis-
approval. This is a view which people are
apt to take, because, where we have a strong
feeling of moral disapproval towards an
action, we may find it very difficult to
believe that any other man really has a
feeling of moral approval towards the same
action, or even that he regards it without
some degree of moral disapproval. And
there is some excuse for this view in the
fact, that when a man says that an action
is right, and even though he sincerely
believes it to be so, it may nevertheless be
the case that he really feels towards it some
degree of moral disapproval. That is to
say, though it is certain that men's opinions
as to what is right and wrong often differ,
it is not certain that their feelings always
differ when their opinions do. But still,
if we look at the extraordinary differences
that there have been and are between


MORAL JUDGMENTS 95

different races of mankind, and in different
stages of society, in respect of the classes
of actions which have been regarded as right
and wrong, it is, I think, scarcely possible
to doubt that, in some societies, actions
have been regarded with actual feelings of
positive moral approval, towards which many
of us would feel the strongest disapproval.
And if this is so with regard to classes of
actions, it can hardly fail to be sometimes
the case with regard to particular actions.
We may, for instance, read of a particular
action, which excites in us a strong feeling
of moral disapproval ; and yet it can hardly
be doubted that sometimes this very action
will have been regarded by some of the
men among whom it was done, without any
feeling of disapproval whatever, and even
with a feeling of positive approval. But,
if this be so, then, on the view we are con-
sidering, it will absolutely follow that whereas
it was true then, when it was done, that
that action was right, it is true now that the
very same action was wrong.

And, once we admit that there have been
sucnreal differences of feeling between men in


96 ETHICS

different stages of society, we must also, I
think, admit that such differences do quite
often exist even among contemporaries, when
they are members of very different societies ;
so that one and the same action may quite
often be at the same time both right and
wrong. And, having admitted this, we ought,
I think, to go still further. Once we are
convinced that real differences of feeling
towards certain classes of actions, and not
merely differences of opinion, do exist between
men in different states of society, the prob-
ability is that when two men in the same
state of society differ in opinion as to whether
an action is right or wrong, this difference
of opinion, though it by no means always
indicates a corresponding difference of feeling,
yet sometimes really is accompanied by
such a difference : so that two members of
the same society may really sometimes have
opposite feelings towards one and the same
action, whatever feeling we take. And finally,
we must admit, I think, that even one and
the same individual may experience such a
change of feeling towards one and the same
action. A man certainly does often come


MORAL JUDGMENTS 97

to change his opinion as to whether a par-
ticular action was right or wrong ; and we
must, I think, admit that, sometimes at
least, his feelings towards it completely
change as well ; so that, for instance, an
action, which he formerly regarded with
moral disapproval, he may now regard with
positive moral approval, and vice versa. So
that, for this reason alone, and quite apart
from differences of feeling between different
men, we shall have to admit, according to our
theory, that it is often now true of an action
that it was right, although it was formerly
true of the same action that it was wrong.

This fact, on which I have been insist-
ing, that different men do feel differently
towards the same action, and that even
the same man may feel differently to-
wards it at different times, is, of course,
a mere commonplace ; and my only excuse
for insisting on it is that it might possibly
be thought that some one feeling or pair
of feelings, and those the very ones which
it is most plausible to regard as the ones
about which we are making an assertion
in our judgments of right and wrong, are
D


98 ETHICS

exceptions to the rule. I think, however,
we must recognise that no feeling or pair
of feelings, which could possibly be main-
tained to be the ones with which our judg-
ments of right and wrong are concerned,
does, in fact, form an exception. Whatever
feeling you take, it seems hardly possible
to doubt that instances have actually
occurred, in which, while one man really
had the feeling in question towards a given
action, other men have not had it, and some
of them have even had an opposite one,
towards the same action. There may, per-
haps, be some classes of actions in the case
of which this has never occurred ; but what
seems certain is that there are some classes,
with which it has occurred : and, if there
are any at all, that is sufficient to establish
our conclusion. For if this is so, and if,
when a man asserts an action to be right
or wrong, he is always merely asserting that
he himself has some particular feeling towards
it, then it absolutely follows that one and
the same action has sometimes been both
right and wrong right at one time and
wrong at another, or both simultaneously.


MORAL JUDGMENTS 99

And I think that some argument of this
sort is the chief reason why many people
are apt to hold that one and the same action
may be both right and wrong. They are
much impressed by the fact that different
men do feel quite differently towards the
same classes of action, and, holding also
that, when we judge an action to be right
or wrong, we must be merely making a
judgment about somebody's feelings, it seems
impossible to avoid the conclusion that one
and the same action often is both right and
wrong. This conclusion does not, indeed,
necessarily follow from these two doctrines
taken together. Whether it follows or not,
depends on the precise form in which we
hold the latter doctrine upon who the
somebody is about whose feelings we are
making the assertion. But it does follow
from the precise form of this doctrine which
we are now considering the form which
asserts that each man is merely making an
assertion about his own feelings. And, since
this is one of the most plausible forms in
which the doctrine can be held, it is extremely
important to consider, whether it can be true

L> 3


100 ETHICS

in this form. Can it possibly be the case,
then, that, when we judge an action to be
right or wrong, each of us is only asserting
that he himself has some particular feeling
towards it ?

It seems to me that there is an absolutely
fatal objection to the view that this is the
case. It must be remembered that the
question is merely a question of fact ; a
question as to the actual analysis of our
moral judgments as to what it is that
actually happens, when we think an action
to be right or wrong. And if we remember
that it is thus merely a question as to what
we actually think, when we think an action
to be right or wrong, neither more nor less
than this, it can, I think, be clearly seen
that the view we are considering is incon-
sistent with plain facts. This is so, because
it involves a curious consequence, which
those who hold it do not always seem to
realise that it involves ; and this conse-
quence is, I think, plainly not in accordance
with the facts. The consequence is this.
If, when one man says, " This action is right,"
and another answers, " No, it is not right,"


MORAL JUDGMENTS 101

each of them is always merely making an
assertion about his (yarn feelings, it plainly
follows that there is never really any differ-
ence of opinion between them : the one of
them is never really contradicting what the
other is asserting. They are no more con-
tradicting one another than if, when one
had said, " I like sugar," the other had
answered, " / don't like sugar." In such a
case, there is, of course, no conflict of opinion,
no contradiction of one by the other : for
it may perfectly well be the case that what
each asserts is equally true ; it may quite
well be the case that the one man really
does like sugar, and the other really does
not like it. The one, therefore, is never
denying what the other is asserting. And
what the view we are considering involves
is that when one man holds an action to be
right, and another holds it to be wrong or
not right, here also the one is never denying
what the other is asserting. It involves,
therefore, the very curious consequence
that no two men can ever differ in opinion
as to whether an action is right or wrong.
And surely the fact that it involves this


102 ETHICS

consequence is sufficient to condemn it. It
is surely plain matter of fact that when I
assert an action to be wrong, and another
man asserts it to be right, there sometimes
is a real difference of opinion between us :
he sometimes is denying the very thing
which I am asserting. But, if this is so,
then it cannot possibly be the case that each
of us is merely making a judgment about his
own feelings ; since two such judgments
never can contradict one another. We can,
therefore, reduce the question whether this
theory is true or not, to a very simple
question of fact. Is it ever the case that
when one man thinks that an action is right
and another thinks it is not right, that the
second really is thinking that the action has
not got some predicate which the first thinks
that it has got ? I think, if we look at this
question fairly, we must admit that it some-
times is the case ; that both men may use
the word " right " to denote exactly the
same predicate, and that the one may really
be thinking that the action in question really
has this predicate, while the other is thinking
that it has not got it. But if this is so, then


MORAL JUDGMENTS 108

the theory we are considering certainly is
not true. It cannot be true that every man
always denotes by the word " right '* merely
a relation to his own feelings, since, if that
were so, no two men would ever denote by
this word the same predicate ; and hence a
man who said that an action was not right
could never be denying that it had the very
predicate, which another, who said that it
was right, was asserting that it had.

It seems to me this argument proves
conclusively that, whatever we do mean,
when we say that an action is right, we
certainly do not mean merely that we our-
selves have a certain feeling towards it. But
it is important to distinguish carefully be-
tween exactly what it does prove, and what
it does not prove. It does not prove, at all,
that it may not be the case, that, whenever
any man judges an action to be right, he
always, in fact, has a certain feeling towards
it, and even that he makes the judgment only
because he has that feeling. It only proves
that, even if this be so, what he is judging is
not merely that he has the feeling. And these
two points are, I think, very liable to be con-


104 ETHICS

fused. It may be alleged to be a fact that
whenever a man judges an action to be right,
he only does so, because he has a certain feeling
towards it ; and this alleged fact may actually
be used as an argument to prove that what he
is judging is merely that he has the feeling.
But obviously, even if the alleged fact be a
fact, it does not in the least support this con-
clusion. The two points are entirely different,
and there is a most important difference be-
tween their consequences. The difference is
that, even if it be true that a man never
judges an action to be right, unless he has a
certain feeling towards it, yet, if this be all,
the mere fact that he has this feeling, will not
prove his judgment to be true ; we may quite
well hold that, even though he has the feeling
and judges the action to be right, yet some-
times his judgment is false and the action is
not really right. But if, on the other hand,
we hold that what he is judging is merely that
he has the feeling, then the mere fact that he
has it will prove his judgment to be true : if
he is only judging that he has it, then the mere
bact that he has it is, of course, sufficient to
make his judgment true. We must, there-


MORAL JUDGMENTS 105

'ore, distinguish carefully between the asser-
tion that, whenever a man judges an action
to be right, he only does so because he has
a certain feeling, and the entirely different
assertion, that, whenever he judges an action
to be right, he is merely judging that he has
this feeling. The former assertion, even if it
be true, does not prove that the latter is true
also. And we may, therefore, dispute the
latter without disputing the former. It is
only the latter which our argument proves to
be untrue ; and not a word has been said
tending to show that the former may not be
perfectly true.

Our argument, therefore, does not disprove
the assertion, if it should be made, that we
only judge actions to be right and wrong, when
and because we have certain feelings towards
them. And it is also important to insist that
it does not disprove another assertion also
It does not disprove the assertion that, when-
ever any man has a certain feeling towards
an action, the action is, as a matter of fact,
always right. Anybody is still perfectly free
to hold that this is true, as a matter of fact, and
that, therefore, as a matter of fact, one and the

D*


106 ETHICS

same action often is both right and wrong,
even if he admits what our argument does
prove ; namely, that, when a man thinks an
action to be right or wrong, he is not merely
thinking that he has some feeling towards it.
The only importance of our argument, in this
connection, is merely that it destroys one of
the main reasons for holding that this is true,
as a matter of fact. If we once clearly see
that to say that an action is right is not the
same thing as to say that we have any feeling
towards it, what reason is there left for holding
that the presence of a certain feeling is, in
fact, always a sign that it is right ? No one,
I think, would be very much tempted to assert
that the mere presence (or absence) of a cer-
tain feeling is invariably a sign of rightness,
but for the supposition that, in some way or
other, the only possible meaning of the word
44 right," as applied to actions, is that some-
body has a certain feeling towards them.
And it is this supposition, in one of its forms,
that our argument does disprove.

But even if it be admitted that, in this, pre-
cise form, the view is quite untenable, it may
still be urged that nevertheless it is true in


MORAL JUDGMENTS 107

some other form, from which the same con-
sequence will follow namely, the consequence
that one and the same action is quite often
both right and wrong. Many people have
such a strong disposition to believe that when
we judge an action to be right or wrong we
must be merely making an assertion about the
feelings of some man or set of men, that, even
if they are convinced that we are not always
merely making an assertion, each about his
own feelings, they will still be disposed to
think that we must be making one about
somebody else's. The difficulty is to find any
man or set of men about whose feelings it can
be plausibly held that we are making an
assertion, if we are not merely making one
about our own ; but still there are two alter-
natives, which may seem, at first sight, to be
just possible, namely (1) that each man, when
he asserts an action to be right or wrong, is
merely asserting that a certain feeling is
generally felt towards actions of that class
by most of the members of the society to
which he belongs, or (2) merely that some man
or other has a certain feeling towards them.
From either of these two views, it will, of


108 ETHICS

course, follow that one and the same action
is often both right and wrong, for the same
reasons as were given in the last case.
Thus, if, when / assert an action to be right,
I am merely asserting that it is generally
approved in the society to which / belong, it
follows, of course, that if it is generally ap-
proved by my society, my assertion is true,
and the action really is right. But as we saw,
it seems undeniable, that some actions which
are generally approved in my society, will have
been disapproved or will still be disapproved
in other societies. And, since any member
of one of those societies will, on this view,
when he judges an action to be wrong, be
merely judging that it is disapproved in his
society, it follows that when he judges one
of these actions, which really is disapproved
in his society, though approved in mine, to be
wrong, this judgment of his will be just as
true as my judgment that the same action
was right : and hence the same action really
will be both right and wrong. And similarly,
if we adopt the other alternative, and say
that when a man judges an action to be right
he is merely judging that some man or other


MORAL JUDGMENTS 109

has a particular feeling towards it, it will, of
course, follow that whenever any man at all
really has this feeling towards it, the action
really is right, while, whenever any man at all
has not got it or has an opposite feeling, the
action really is wrong : and, since cases will cer-
tainly occur in which one man has the required
feeling, while another has an opposite one
towards the same action, in all such cases the
same action will be both right and wrong.

From either of these two views, then, the
same consequence will follow. And, though I
do not know whether any one would definitely
hold either of them to be true, it is, I think,
worth while briefly to consider the objections
to them, because they seem to be the only
alternatives left, from which this consequence
will follow, when once we have rejected the
view that, in our judgments of right and
wrong, each of us is merely talking about his
own feelings ; and because, while the objec-
tion which did apply to that view, does not
apply equally to these, there is an objection
which does apply to these, but which does
not apply nearly so obviously to that one.

The objection which was urged against


110 ETHICS

that view does, indeed, apply, in a limited
extent, to the first of these two : since if
when a man judges an action to be right
or wrong, he is always merely making
an assertion about the feelings of his own
society, it will follow that two men, who
belong to different societies, can never possibly
differ in opinion as to whether an action is
right or wrong. But this objection does not
apply as between two men who both belong
to the same society. The view that when
any man asserts an action to be right he is
merely making an assertion about the feelings
of his own society, does allow that two men
belonging to the same society may really
differ in opinion as to whether an action is
right or wrong. Neither this view, therefore,
nor the view that we are merely asserting that
some man or other has a particular feeling to-
wards the action in question involves the absur-
dity that no two men can ever differ in opinion
as to whether an action is right or wrong.
We cannot, therefore, urge the fact that they
involve this absurdity as an objection against
them, as we could against the view that each
man is merely talking of his own feelings.


MORAL JUDGMENTS 111

But both of them are nevertheless exposed
to another objection, equally fatal, to which
that view was not so obviously exposed. The
objection is again merely one of psychological
fact, resting upon observation of what actually
happens when a man thinks an action to be
right or wrong. For, whatever feeling or feel-
ings we take as the ones about which he is
supposed to be judging, it is quite certain that
a man may think an action to be right, even
when he does not think that the members of his
society have in general the required feeling
(or absence of feeling) towards it ; and that
similarly he may doubt whether an action
is right, even when he does not doubt that
some man or other has the required feeling
towards it. Cases of this kind certainly
constantly occur, and what they prove is
that, whatever a man is thinking when he
thinks an action to be right, he is certainly
not merely thinking that his society has in
general a particular feeling towards it ; and
similarly that, when he is in doubt as to
whether an action is right, the question about
which he is in doubt is not merely as to
whether any man at all has the required


112 ETHICS

feeling towards it. Facts of this kind are,
therefore, absolutely fatal to both of these
two theories ; whereas in the case of the
theory that he is merely making a judgment
about his own feelings, it is not so obvious
that there are any facts of the same kind
inconsistent with it. For here it might be
urged with some plausibility (though, I
think, untruly) that when a man judges an
action to be right he always does think that
he himself has some particular feeling towards
it ; and similarly that when he is in doubt
as to whether an action is right he always
is in doubt as to his own feelings. But it
cannot possibly be urged, with any plausibility
at all, that when a man judges an action to
be right he always thinks, for instance, that it
is generally approved in his society ; or that
when he is in doubt, he is always in doubt as to
whether any man approvas it. He may know
quite well that somebody does approve it, and
yet be in doubt whether it is right ; and he
may be quite certain that his society does
not approve it, and yet still think that it is
right. And the same will hold, whatever
feeling we take instead of moral approval.


MORAL JUDGMENTS 118

These facts, then, seem to me to prove
conclusively that, when a man judges an
action to be right or wrong, he is not always
merely judging that his society has some
particular feeling towards actions of that
class, nor yet that some man has. But here
again it is important to insist on the limita-
tions of the argument ; and to distinguish
clearly between what it does prove and what
it does not. It does not, of course, prove
that any class of action towards which any
society has a particular feeling, may not,
as a matter of fact, always be right ; nor
even that any action, towards which any
man whatever has the feeling, may not, as a
matter of fact, always be so. Anybody, while
fully admitting the force of our argument,
is still perfectly free to hold that these things
are true, as a matter of fact ; and hence that
one and the same action often is both right
and wrong. All that our arguments, taken
together, do strictly prove, is that, when a
man asserts an action to be right or wrong,
he is not merely making an assertion either
about his own feelings nor yet about those
of the society in which he lives, nor yet


114 ETHICS

merely that some man or other has some
feeling towards it. This, and nothing more,
is what they prove. But if we once admit
that this much is proved, what reason have
we left for asserting that it is true, as a
matter of fact, that whatever any society or
any man has a particular feeling towards,
always is right ? It may, of course, be true
as a matter of fact ; but is there any reason
for supposing that it is ? If the predicate
which we mean by the word " right," and
which, therefore, must belong to every
action which really is right, is something
quite different from a mere relation to
anybody's feelings, why should we suppose
that such a relation does, in fact, always
go along with it ; and that this predicate
always belongs, in addition, to every action
which has the required relation to somebody's
feelings ? If Tightness is not the same thing
as the having a relation to the feelings of
any man or set of men, it would be a curious
coincidence, if any such relation were
invariably a sign of Tightness What we
have proved is that Tightness is not the same
thing as any such relation ; and if that be


MORAL JUDGMENTS 115

so, then, the probability is that even where
an action has the required relation to some-
body's feelings, it will not always be right.

There are, then, conclusive reasons against
the view that, when we assert an action to
be right or wrong, we are merely asserting
that somebody has a particular feeling
towards it, in any of the forms in which it
will follow from this view that one and the
same action can be both right and wrong.
And we can, I think, also see that one of the
reasons, which seems to have had most
influence in leading people to suppose that
this view must be true, *in some form or
other, is quite without weight. The reason
I mean is one drawn from certain considera-
tions as to the origin of our moral judgments.
It has been widely held that, in the history
of the human race, judgments of right and
wrong originated in the fact that primitive
men or their non-human ancestors had certain
feelings towards certain classes of actions.
That is to say, it is supposed that there was
a time, if we go far enough back, when our
ancestors did have different feelings towards
different actions, being, for instance, pleased


116 ETHICS

with some and displeased with others, but
when they did not, as yet, judge any actions
to be right or wrong ; and that it was only
because they transmitted these feelings, more
or less modified, to their descendants, that
those descendants at some later stage, began
to make judgments of right and wrong ; so
that, in a sense, our moral judgments were
developed out of mere feelings. And I can
see no objection to the supposition that this
was so. But, then, it seems also to be often
supposed that, if our moral judgments were
developed out of feelings if this was their
origin they must still at this moment be
somehow concerned with feelings : that the
developed product must resemble the germ
out of which it was developed in this particular
respect. And this is an assumption for
which there is, surely, no shadow of ground.
It is admitted, on all hands, that the developed
product does always differ, in some respects,
from its origin ; and the precise respects
in which it differs is a matter which can
only be settled by observation : we cannot
lay down a universal rule that it must always
resemble it in certain definite respects.


MORAL JUDGMENTS 117

Thus, even those who hold that our moral
judgments are merely judgments about
feelings must admit that, at some point in
the history of the human race, men, or their
ancestors, began not merely to have feelings
but to judge that they had them : and this
alone means an enormous change. If such
a change as this must have occurred at some
time or other, without our being able to say
precisely when or why, what reason is there,
why another change, which is scarcely
greater, should not also have occurred, either
before or after it ? a change consisting in
the fact that men for the first time become
conscious of another predicate, which might
attach to actions, beside the mere fact that
certain feelings were felt towards them, and
began to judge of this other predicate that
it did or did not belong to certain actions ?
It is certain that, if men have been^developed
from non-human ancestors
have been many occasi
became possessed for
new idea. And why
which we convey by
" wrong," be among


118 ETHICS

these ideas do not merely consist in the
thought that some man has a particular
feeling towards some action ? There is no
more reason why such an idea should not
have been developed out of the mere existence
of a feeling than why the judgment that we
have feelings should not have been developed
from the same origin. And hence the theory
that moral judgments originated in feelings
does not, in fact, lend any support at all
to the theory that now, as developed, they
can only be judgments about feelings. No
argument from the origin of a thing can be a
safe guide as to exactly what the nature of
the thing is now. That is a question which
must be settled by actual analysis of the
thing in its present state. And such analysis
seems plainly to show that moral judgments
are not merely judgments about feelings.

I conclude, then, that the theory that our
judgments of right and wrong are merely
judgments about somebody's feelings is quite
untenable in any of the forms in which
it will lead to the conclusion that one and
the same action is often both right and
wrong. But I said that this was only one


MORAL JUDGMENTS 119

out of two theories, which seem to be those
which have the most influence in leading
people to adopt this conclusion. And we
must now briefly consider the second of
these two theories.

This second theory is one which is often
confused with the one just considered. It
consists in asserting that when we judge an
action to be right or wrong what we are
asserting is merely that somebody or other
thinks it to be right or wrong. That is to
say, just as the last theory asserted that our
moral judgments are merely judgments about
somebody's feelings, this one asserts that
they are merely judgments about somebody's
thoughts or opinions. And they are apt to
be confused with one another because a man's
feelings with regard to an action are not
always clearly distinguished from his opinion
as to whether it is right or wrong. Thus one
and the same word is often used, sometimes
to express the fact that a man has a feeling
towards an action, and sometimes to express
the fact that he has an opinion about it.
When, for instance, we say that a man
approves an action, we may mean either that


120 ETHICS

he has a feeling towards it, or that he thinks
it to be right ; and so too, when we say that
he disapproves it, we may mean either that
he has a certain feeling towards it, or that
he thinks it to be wrong. But yet it is
quite plain that to have a feeling towards
an action, no matter what feeling we take,
is a different thing from judging it to be
right or wrong. Even if we were to adopt
one of the views just rejected and to say
that to judge an action to be right or wrong
is the same thing as to judge that we have a
feeling towards it, it would still follow that
to make the judgment is something different
from merely having the feeling ; for a man
may certainly have a feeling, without thinking
that he has it ; or think that he has it,
without having it. We must, therefore,
distinguish between the theory that to say
that an action is right or wrong is the same
thing as to say that somebody has some
kind of feeling towards it, and the theory
that it is the same thing as to say that
somebody thinks it to be right or wrong.

This latter theory, however, may be held
in the same three different forms, as the


MORAL JUDGMENTS 121

former ; and in whichever form it is held,
it will lead to the same conclusion namely,
that one and the same action is very often
both right and wrong and for the same
reasons. If, for instance, when I say that
an action is right, all that I mean is that
I think it to be right, it will follow, that, if I
do really think it to be right, my judgment
that I think so will be true ; and since this
judgment is supposed to be identical with
the judgment that it is right, it will follow
that the judgment that it is right is true
and hence that the action really is right.
And since it is even more obvious that
different men's opinions as to whether a
given action is right or wrong differ both at
the same time and at different times, than
that their feelings towards the same action
differ, it will follow that one and the same
action very often is both right and wrong.
And just as the conclusion which follows
from this theory is the same as that which
followed from the last, so also, in each of
the three different forms in which it may
be held, it is open to exactly the same
objections. Thus, in its first form, it will


122 ETHICS

involve the absurdity that no two men ever
differ in opinion as to whether an action is
right or wrong, and will thus contradict a plain
fact. While in the other two forms, it will
involve the conclusions that no man ever
thinks an action to be right, unless he thinks
that his society thinks it to be right, and that
no man ever doubts whether an action is right,
unless he doubts whether any man at all
thinks it right two conclusions which are
both of them certainly untrue.

These objections are, I think, sufficient by
themselves to dispose of this theory as of
the last ; but it is worth while to dwell on
it a little longer, because it is also exposed
to another objection, of quite a different
order, to which the last was not exposed,
and because it owes its plausibility partly,
I think, to the fact that it is liable to be
confused with another theory, which may
be expressed in exactly the same words, and
which may quite possibly be true.

The special objection to which this theory
is exposed consists in the fact that it is in
all cases totally impossible that, when we
believe a given thing, what we believe should


MORAL JUDGMENTS 128

merely be that we (or anybody else) have
the belief in question. This is impossible,
because, if it were the case, we should not
be believing anything at all. For let us
suppose it to be the case : let us suppose
that, when I believe that A is B, what I am
believing is merely that somebody believes
that A is B. What I am believing, on this
supposition, is merely that somebody (either
myself or somebody else) entertains the
belief that A is B. But what is this belief
which I am believing that somebody enter-
tains ? According to the theory it is itself,
in its turn, merely the belief that somebody
believes that A is B. So that what I am
believing turns out to be that somebody
believes that somebody believes that A is B.
But here again, we may substitute for the
phrase '* that A is B," what is supposed to
be identical with it namely, that somebody
believes, that A is B. And here again we
may make the same substitution ; and so
on absolutely ad infinitum. So that what I
am believing will turn out to be that some-
body believes, that somebody believes, that
somebody believes, that somebody believes


124 ETHICS

... ad infinitum. Always, when I try to
state, what it is that the somebody believes,
I shall find it to be again merely that somebody
believes . . . , and I shall never get to any-
thing whatever which is what is believed
But thus to believe that somebody believes,
that somebody believes, that somebody
believes . . . quite indefinitely, without ever
coming to anything which is what is believed,
is to believe nothing at all. So that, if this
were the case, there could be no such belief
as the belief that A is B. We must, there-
fore, admit that, in no case whatever, when
we believe a given thing, can the given thing
in question be merely that we ourselves (or
somebody else) believe the very same given
thing. And since this is true in all cases,
it must be true in our special case. It is
totally impossible, therefore, that to believe
an action to be right can be the same thing
as believing that we ourselves or somebody
else believe it to be right.

But the fact that this view is untenable
is, I think, liable to be obscured by the fact
that we often express, in the same words,
another view, quite different from this, which


MORAL JUDGMENTS 125

may quite well be true. When a man asserts
that an action is right or wrong, it may
quite well be true, in a sense, that all that
he is expressing by this assertion is the fact
that he thinks it to be right or wrong. The
truth is that there is an important distinction,
which is not always observed, between what
a man means by a given assertion and what
he expresses by it. Whenever we make any
assertion whatever (unless we do not mean
what we say) we are always expressing one
or other of two things namely, either that
we think the thing in question to be so or
that we know it to be so. If, for instance,
I say " A is B," and mean what I say, what
I mean is always merely that A is B ; but
those words of mine will always also express
either the fact that / think that A is B, or
the fact that 1 know it to be so ; and even
where I do not mean what I say, my words
may be said to imply either that I think
that A is B or that I know it, since they
will commonly lead people to suppose that
one or other of these two things is the case
Whenever, therefore, a man asserts that an
action is right or wrong, what he expresses


126 ETHICS

or implies by these words will be either that
he thinks it to be so or that he knows it to
be so, although neither of these two things
can possibly constitute the whole of what
he means to assert. And it is quite possible
to hold that, as between these two alternatives
which he expresses or implies, it is always
the first only, and never the second, which
is expressed or implied. That is to say, it
may be held, that we always only believe or
think that an action is right or wrong, and
never really know which it is ; that, when,
therefore, we assert one to be so, we are
always merely expressing an opinion or
belief, never expressing knowledge.

This is a view which is quite tenable, and for
which there is a great deal to be said ; and it
is, I think, certainly liable to be confused with
that other, quite untenable, view, that, when
a man asserts an action to be right or wrong,
all that he means to assert is that he thinks
it to be so. The two are, in fact, apt to be
expressed in exactly the same language.
If a man asserts " Such and such an action
was wrong," he is liable to be met by the
rejoinder, " What you really mean is that


MORAL JUDGMENTS 127

you think it was wrong " ; and the person
who makes this rejoinder will generally only
mean by it, that the man does not know the
action to be wrong, but only believes that
it is so : that he is merely expressing his
opinion, and has no absolute knowledge on
the point. In other words, a man is often
'oosely said to mean by an assertion what,
in fact, he is only expressing by it ; and for
this and other reasons the two views we are
considering are liable to be confused with
one another.

But obviously there is an immense differ-
ence between the two. If we only hold the
tenable view that no man ever knows an action
to be right or wrong, but can only think it to
be so, then, so far from implying the untenable
view that to assert an action to be right or
wrong is the same thing as to assert that we
think it to be so, we imply the direct opposite
of this. Tor nobody would maintain that I
cannot know that I think an action to be right
or wrong ; and if, therefore, I cannot know that
it is right or wrong, it follows that there is an
immense difference between the assertion that
it is right or wrong, and the assertion that /


128 ETHICS

think it to be so : the former is an assertion,
which, according to this view, I can never
know to be true, whereas the latter is an
assertion which I obviously can know to be
true. The tenable view, therefore, that we
can never know whether an action is right
or wrong, does not in the least support the
untenable view that for an action to be right
or wrong is the same thing as for it to be
thought to be so : on the contrary, it is
quite inconsistent with it, since it is obvious
that we can know that certain actions are
thought to be right and that others are thought
to be wrong. But yet, I think, it is not
uncommon to find the two views combined,
and to find one and the same person holding,
at the same time, both that we never know
whether an action is right or wrong, and
also that to say that an action is right or
wrong is the same thing as to say that it
is thought to be so. The two views ought
obviously to be clearly distinguished ; and,
if they are so distinguished, it becomes, I
think, quite plain that the latter must be
rejected, if only because, if it were true, the
former could not possibly be so.


MORAL JUDGMENTS 129

We have, then, considered in this chapter
two different views, namely (1) the view that
to say that an action is right or wrong is the
same thing as to say that somebody has some
feeling (or absence of feeling) towards it, and
(2) the view that to say that an action is right
or wrong is the same thing as to say that
somebody thinks it to be so. Both these
views, when held in certain forms, imply that
one and the same action very often is both
right and wrong, owing to the fact that differ-
ent men, and different societies, often do have
different and opposite feelings towards, and
different and opposite opinions about, the
same action. The fact that they imply this
is, in itself, an argument against these views ;
since it seems evident that one and the same
action cannot be both right and wrong. But
some people may not think that this is
evident ; and therefore independent objec-
tions have been urged against them, which
do, I think, show them to be untenable. In
the case of the first view, such arguments
were only brought against those forms of the
view, which do imply that one and the same
action is often both right and wrong. The


180 ETHICS

same view may be held in other forms, which
do not imply this consequence, and which
will therefore be dealt with in the next
chapter. But in the case of the second view
a general argument was also used, which
applies to absolutely all forms in which it may
be held.

Even apart from the fact that they lead to
the conclusion that one and the same action
is often both right and wrong, it is, I think,
very important that we should realise, to
begin with, that these views are false ; be-
cause, if they were true, it would follow that
we must take an entirely different view as to
the whole nature of Ethics, so far as it is con-
cerned with right and wrong, from what has
commonly been taken by a majority of writers.
If these views were true, the whole business
of Ethics, in this department, would merely
consist in discovering what feelings and
opinions men have actually had about differ-
ent actions, and why they have had them.
A good many writers seem actually to have
treated the subject as if this were all that it
had to investigate. And of course questions
of this sort are not without interest, and are


MORAL JUDGMENTS 131

subjects of legitimate curiosity, But such
questions only form one special branch of
Psychology or Anthropology ; and most
writers have certainly proceeded on the
assumption that the special business of Ethics,
and the questions which it has to try to
answer, are something quite different from
this. They have assumed that the question
whether an action is right cannot be com-
pletely settled by showing that any man or
set of men have certain feelings or opinions
about it. They would admit that the feelings
and opinions of men may, in various ways,
have a bearing on the question ; but the mere
fact that a given man or set of men has a
given feeling or opinion can, they would say,
never be sufficient, by itself, to show that an
action is right or wrong.

But the views, which have been considered
in this chapter, imply the direct contrary of
this : they imply that, when once we have
discovered, what men's feelings or opinions
actually are, the whole question is finally
settled ; that there is, in fact, no further
question to discuss. I have tried to show
that these views are untenable, and I shall,
B a


182 ETHICS

in future, proceed upon the assumption that
they are so ; as also I shall proceed on the
assumption that one and the same action
cannot be both right and wrong. And the
very fact that we can proceed upon these
assumptions is an indirect argument in favour
of their correctness. For if, whenever we
assert an action to be right or wrong, we
were merely making an assertion about some
man's feelings or opinions, it would be in-
credible we should be so mistaken as to our
own meaning, as to think that a question of
right or wrong cannot be absolutely settled
by showing what men feel and think, and to
think that an action cannot be both right and
wrong. It will be seen that, on these assump-
tions, we can raise many questions about
right and wrong, which seem obviously not
to be absurd ; and which yet would be quite
absurd would be questions about which we
could not hesitate for a moment if assertions
about right and wrong were merely assertions
about men's feelings and opinions, or if the
same action could be both right and wrong.


CHAPTER IV

TITE OBJECTIVITY OF MORAL JUDGMENTS

(concluded)

IT was stated, at the beginning of the last
chapter, that the ethical theory we are con-
sidering the theory stated in the first two
chapters does not maintain with regard to
any class of voluntary actions, that, if an
action of the class in question is once right,
any other action of the same class must
always be right. And this is true, in the
sense in which the statement would, I think,
be naturally understood. But it is now
important to emphasise that, in a certain
sense, the statement is untrue. Our theory
does assert that, if any voluntary action is
once right, then any other voluntary action
which resembled it in one particular respect
(or rather in a combination of two respects)
must always also be right ; and since, if we


184 ETHICS

take the word class in the widest possible
sense, any set of actions which resemble
one another in any respect whatever may
be said to form a class, it follows that, in
this wide sense, our theory does maintain
that there are many classes of action, such
that, if an action belonging to one of them
is once right, any action belonging to the
same class would always be right.

Exactly what our theory does assert under
this head cannot, I think, be stated accurately
except in rather a complicated way ; but
it is important to state it as precisely as
possible. The precise point is this. This
theory asserted, as we saw, that the question
whether a voluntary action is right or wrong
always depends upon what its total effects
are, as compared with the total effects of all
the alternative actions, which we could have
done instead. Let us suppose, then, that
we have an action X, which is right, and
whose total effects are A ; and let us suppose
that the total effects of all the possible
alternative actions would have been re-
spectively B, C, D and E. The precise
principle with which we are now concerned


MORAL JUDGMENTS 185

may then be stated as follows. Our theory
implies, namely, that any action Y which
resembled X in both the two respects (1) that
its total effects were precisely similar to A
and (2) that the total effects of all the possible
alternatives were precisely similar to B, C,
D and E, would necessarily also be right,
if X was right, and would necessarily also
be wrong, if X was wrong. It is important
to emphasise the point that this will only
be true of actions which resemble X in both
these two respects at once. We cannot say
that any action Y, whose total effects are
precisely similar to those of X, will also be
right if X is right. It is absolutely essential
that the other condition should also be
satisfied ; namely, that the total effects of
all the possible alternatives should also be
precisely similar in both the two cases. For
if they were not if in the case of Y, some
alternative was possible, which would have
quite different effects, from any that would
have been produced by any alternative that
was possible in the case of X then, according
to our theory, it is possible that the total
effects of this other alternative would be


186 ETHICS

intrinsically better than those of Y, and in
that case Y will be wrong, even though its
total effects are precisely similar to those
of X and X was right. Both conditions must,
therefore, he satisfied simultaneously. But
our theory does imply that any action which
does resemble another in both these two
respects at once, must be right if the first
be right, and wrong if the first be wrong.
This is the precise principle with which we
are now concerned. It may perhaps be
stated more conveniently in the form in
which it was stated in the second chapter :
namely, that if it is ever right to do an action
whose total effects are A in preference to
one whose total effects are B, it must always
be right to do any action whose total effects
are precisely similar to A in preference to one
whose total effects are precisely similar to B.
It is also, I think, what is commonly meant
by saying, simply, that the question whether
an action is right or wrong always depends
upon its total effects or consequences ; but
this will not do as an accurate statement of
it, because, as we shall see, it may be held
that right and wrong do, in a sense, always


MORAL JUDGMENTS 187

depend upon an action's total consequences
and yet that this principle is untrue. It is
also sometimes expressed by saying that if
an action is once right, any precisely similar
action, done in circumstances which are also
precisely similar in all respects, must be
right too. But this is both too narrow and
too wide. It is too narrow, because our
principle does not confine itself to an assertion
about precisely similar actions. Our principle
asserts that any action Y, whose effects are
precisely similar to those of another X, will
be right, if X is right, provided the effects
of all the alternatives possible in the two
cases are also precisely similar, even though
Y itself is not precisely similar to X, but
utterly different from it. And it is too wide,
because it does not follow from the fact
that two actions are both precisely similar
in themselves and also done in precisely
similar circumstances, that their effects must
also be precisely similar. This does, of
course, follow, so long as the laws of nature
remain the same. But if we suppose the
laws of nature to change, or if we conceive a
Universe in which different laws of nature


188 ETHICS

hold from those which hold in this one,
then plainly a precisely similar action done
in precisely similar circumstances might yet
have different total effects. According to
our principle, therefore, the statement that
any two precisely similar actions, done in
precisely similar circumstances, must both be
right, if one is right, though true as applied
to this Universe, provided (as is commonly
supposed) the laws of nature cannot change,
is not true absolutely unconditionally. But
our principle asserts absolutely unconditionally
that if it is once right to prefer a set of total
effects A to another set B, it must always,
in any conceivable Universe, be right to
prefer a set precisely similar to A to a set
precisely similar to B.

This, then, is a second very fundamental
principle, which our theory asserts a prin-
ciple which is, in a sense, concerned with
classes of actions, and not merely with
particular actions. And in asserting this
principle also it seems to me that our theory
is right. But many different views have
been held, which, while admitting that one
and the same action cannot be both right


MORAL JUDGMENTS 189

and wrong, yet assert or imply that this
second principle is untrue And I propose
in this chapter to deal with those among
them which resemble the theories dealt with
in the last chapter in one particular respect
namely, that they depend upon some view
as to the meaning of the word " right " or
as to the meaning of the word " good."

And, first of all, we may briefly mention
a theory, which is very similar to some of
those dealt with in the last chapter and
which is, I think, often confused with them,
but which yet differs from them in one very
important respect. This is the theory that
to say that an action is right or wrong is
the same thing as to say that a majority
of all mankind have, more often than not,
some particular feeling (or absence of feeling)
towards actions of the class to which it
belongs. This theory differs from those
considered in the last chapter, because it
does not imply that one and the same action
ever actually is both right and wrong. For,
however much the feelings of different men
and different societies may differ at different
times, yet, if we take strictly a majority of


140 ETHICS

all mankind at all times past, present and
future, any class of action which is, for
instance, generally approved by such an
absolute majority of all mankind, will not
also be disapproved by an absolute majority
of all mankind, although it may be dis-
approved by a majority of any one society,
or by a majority of all the men living at any
one period. This proposal, therefore, to say
that, when we assert an action to be right
or wrong, we are making an assertion about
the feelings of an absolute majority of all
mankind does not conflict with the principle
that one and the same action cannot be
both right and wrong. It allows us to say
that any particular action always is either
right or wrong, in spite of the fact that
different men and different societies may
feel differently towards actions of that class
at the same or different times. What it does
conflict with is the principle we are now
considering. Since it implies that if a
majority of mankind did not happen to have
a particular feeling towards actions of one
class A, it would not be right to prefer actions
of this class to those of another class B,


MORAL JUDGMENTS 141

even though the effects of A and B, re-
spectively, might be precisely similar to
what they now are. It implies, that is to say,
that in a Universe in which there were no men,
or in which the feelings of the majority were
different from what they are in this one, it
might not be right to prefer one total set of
effects A to another B, even though in this
Universe it is always right to prefer them.

Now I do not know if this theory has ever
been expressly held ; but some philosophers
have certainly argued as if it were true.
Great pains have, for instance, been taken
to show that mankind are, in general, pleased
with actions which lead to a maximum of
pleasure, and displeased with those which
lead to less than a maximum ; and the
proof that this is so has been treated as if
it were, at the same time, a proof that it is
always right to do what leads to a maximum
of pleasure, and wrong to do what leads to
less than a maximum. But obviously, unless
to show that mankind are generally pleased
with a particular sort of action is the same
thing as to show that that sort of action is
always right, some independent proof is


142 ETHICS

needed to show that what mankind are
generally pleased with is always right. And
some of those who have used this argument
do not seem to have seen that any such
proof is needed. So soon as we recognise
quite clearly that to say that an action is
right is not the same thing as to say that
mankind are generally pleased with it, it
becomes obvious that to show that mankind
are generally pleased with a particular sort of
action is not sufficient to show that it is right.
And hence it is, I think, fair to say that those
who have argued as if it were sufficient, have
argued as if to say that an action is right were
the same thing as saying that mankind are
generally pleased with it ; although, perhaps,
if this assumption had been expressly put
before them, they would have rejected it.

We may therefore say, I think, that the
theory that to call an action right or wrong
is the same thing as to say that an absolute
majority of all mankind have some particular
feeling (or absence of feeling) towards actions
of that kind, has often been assumed, even
if it has not been expressly held. And it
is, therefore, perhaps worth while to point


MORAL JUDGMENTS 148

out that it is exposed to exactly the same
objection as two of the theories dealt with
in the last chapter. The objection is that
it is quite certain, as a matter of fact, that
a man may have no doubt that an action
is right, even where he does doubt whether
an absolute majority of all mankind have
a particular feeling (or absence of feeling)
towards it, no matter what feeling we take.
And what this shows is that, whatever he
is thinking, when he thinks the actipn to be
right, he is not merely thinking that a majority
of mankind have any particular feeling
towards it. Even, therefore, if it be true
that what is approved or liked by an absolute
majority of mankind is, as a matter of fact,
always right (and this we are not disputing),
it is quite certain that to say that it is right
is not the same thing as to say that it is thus
approved. And with this we come to the
end of a certain type of theories with regard
to the meaning of the words " right " and
" wrong." We are now entitled to the con-
clusion that, whatever the meaning of these
words may be, it is not identical with any
assertion whatever about either the feelings or


144 ETHICS

the thoughts of men neither those of any par-
ticular man, northose of any particular society,
nor those of some man or other, nor those of
mankind as a whole. To predicate of an action
that it is right or wrong is to predicate of it
something quite different from the mere fact
that any man or set of men have any par-
ticular feeling towards, or opinion about, it.

But there are some philosophers who, while
feeling the strongest objection to the view that
one and the same action can ever be both right
and wrong, and also to any view which implies
that the question whether an action is right
or wrong depends in any way upon what men
even the majority of men actually feel or
think about it, yet seem to be so strongly
convinced that to call an action right mn-st be
merely to make an assertion about the attitude
of some being towards it, that they have adopted
the view that there is some being other than
any man or set of men, whose attitude towards
the same action or class of actions never
changes, and that, when we assert actions to
be right or wrong, what we are doing is merely
to make an assertion about the attitude of
this non-human being. And theories of


MORAL JUDGMENTS 145

this type are the next which I wish to
consider.

Those who have held some theory of this
type have, I think, generally held that what
we mean by calling an action right or wrong
is not that the non-human being in question
has or has not some feeling towards actions
of the class to which it belongs, but that it
has or has not towards them one of the mental
attitudes which we call willing or commanding
or forbidding ; a kind of mental attitude with
which we are all familiar, and which is not
generally classed under the head of feelings,
but under a quite separate head. To forbid
actions of a certain class is the same thing as
to will or command that they should not be
done. And the view generally held is, I
think, that to say that an action ought to be
done, is the same thing as to say that it belongs
to a class which the non-human being wills
or commands ; to say that it is right, is to say
that it belongs to a class which the non-human
being does not forbid ; and to say that it is
wrong or ought not to be done is to say that
it belongs to a class which the non-human
being does forbid. All assertions about right


146 ETHICS

and wrong are, accordingly, by theories of
this type, identified with assertions about the
will of some non-human being. And there
are two obvious reasons why we should hold
that, if judgments of right and wrong are
judgments about any mental attitude at all,
they are judgments about the mental attitude
which we call willing, rather than about any
of those which we call feelings.

The first is that the notion which we express
by the word " right " seems to be obviously
closely connected with that which we express
by the word ** ought," in the manner ex-
plained in Chapter I (pp. 81-39) ; and that there
are many usages of language which seem to
suggest that the word " ought " expresses a
command. The very name of the Ten Com-
mandments is a familiar instance, and so is
the language in which they are expressed
Everybody understands these Command-
ments as assertions to the effect that certain
actions ought, and that others ought not to be
done. But yet they are called " Command"
ments," and if we look at what they actually
say we find such expressions as " Thou shaU
do no murder," " Thou shatt not steal "


MORAL JUDGMENTS 147

expressions which are obviously equivalent
to the imperatives, " Do no murder," " Do
not steal," and which strictly, therefore,
should express commands. For this reason
alone it is very natural to suppose that the
word " ought " always expresses a command.
And there is yet another reason in favour of
the same supposition namely, that the fact
that actions of a certain class ought or ought
not to he done is often called " a moral law"
a name which naturally suggests that such
facts are in some way analogous to " laws,"
in the legal sense the sense in which we talk
of the laws of England or of any other country.
But if we look to see what is meant by saying
that any given thing is, in this sense, " part
of the law " of a given community, there are
a good many facts in favour of the view that
nothing can be part of the law of any com-
munity, unless it has either itself been willed
by some person or persons having the neces-
sary authority over that community, or can
be deduced from something which has been
so willed. It is, indeed, not at all an easy
thing to define what is meant by " having the
necessary authority" or, hi other words, to say


148 ETHICS

in what relation a person or set of persons
must stand to a community, if it is to be true
that nothing can be a law of that community
except what these persons have willed, or what
can be deduced from something which they
have willed. But still it may be true that
there always is some person or set of persons
whose will or consent is necessary to make a
law a law. And whether this is so or not, it
does seem to be the case that every law,
which is the law of any community, is, in
a certain sense, dependent upon the human
will. This is true in the sense that, in the
case of every law whatever, there always are
some men, who, by performing certain acts
of will, could make it cease to be the law ;
and also that, in the case of anything what-
ever which is not the law, there always are
some men, who, by performing certain acts
of will, could make it be the law : though, of
course, any given set of men who could effect
the change in the case of some laws, could
very often not effect it in the case of others,
but in their case another set of men would be
required : and, of course, in some cases the
number ol men whose co-operation would be


MORAL JUDGMENTS 149

required would be very large. It does seem,
therefore, as if laws, in the legal sense, were
essentially dependent on the human will ; and
this fact naturally suggests that moral laws
also are dependent on the will of some being.
These are, I think, the two chief reasons
which have led people to suppose that moral
judgments are judgments about the will,
rather than about the feelings, of some being
or beings. And there are, of course, the same
objections to supposing, in the case of moral
laws, that the being or beings in question can
be any man or set of men, as there are to the
supposition that judgments about right and
wrong can be merely judgments about men's
feelings and opinions. In this way, there-
fore, there has naturally arisen the view we
are now considering the view that to say of
an action that it ought to be done, or is right,
or ought not to be done, is the same thing
as to say that it belongs to a class of actions
which has been commanded, or permitted,
or forbidden by some non-human being.
Different views have, of course, been taken
as to who or what the non-human being is.
One of the simplest is that it is God : that


150 ETHICS

is to say, that, when we call an action wrong,
we mean to say that God has forbidden it.
But other philosophers have supposed that
it is a being which may be called " Reason,"
or one called " The Practical Reason," or one
called " The Pure Will," or one called " The
Universal Will," or one called "The True
Self." In some cases, the beings called by
these names have been supposed to be merely
" faculties " of the human mind, or some
other entity, resident in, or forming a part of,
the minds of all men. And, where this is
the case, it may seem unfair to call these
supposed entities " non-human." But all
that I mean by calling them this is to em-
phasise the fact that even if they are faculties
of, or entities resident in, the human mind,
they are, at least, not human beings that is
to say, they are not men either any one
particular man or any set of men. For
ex hypothesi they are beings which can never
will what is wrong, whereas it is admitted
that all men can, and sometimes do, will what
is wrong, No doubt sometimes, when philo-
sophers speak as if they believed in the
existence of beings of this kind, they are


MORAL JUDGMENTS 151

speaking metaphorically and do not really
hold any such belief. Thus a philosopher
may often speak of an ethical truth as "a
dictate of Reason," without really meaning
to imply that there is any faculty or part of
our mind which invariably leads us right and
never leads us wrong. But I think there is
no doubt that such language is not always
metaphorical. The view is held that when-
ever I judge truly or will rightly, there really
is a something in me which does these things
the same something on every different
occasion ; and that this something never judges
falsely or wills wrongly : so that, when I judge
falsely and will wrongly, it is a different
something in me which does so.

Now it may seem to many people that
the most serious objection to views of this
kind is that it is, to say the least, extremely
doubtful whether there is any being, such
as they suppose to exist any being, who
never wills what is wrong but always only
what is right ; and I think myself that, in all
probability, there is no such being neither
a God, nor any being such as philosophers
nave called by the names I have mentioned.


152 ETHICS

But adequately to discuss the reasons for
and against supposing that there is one would
take us far too long. And fortunately it
is unnecessary for our present purpose ;
since the only question we need to answer
is whether, even supposing there is such a
being, who commands all that ought to be
done and only what ought to be done, and
forbids all that is wrong and only what is
wrong, what we mean by saying that an
action ought or ought not to be done can
possibly be merely that this being commands
it or forbids it. And it seems to me there
is a conclusive argument against supposing
that this can be all that we mean, even if
there really is, in fact, such a being.

The argument is simply that, whether
there is such a being or not, there certainly
are many people who do not believe that
there is one, and that such people, in spite
of not believing in its existence, can never-
theless continue to believe that actions are
right and wrong. But this would be quite
impossible if the view we are considering
were true. According to that view, to
believe that an action is wrong is the same


MORAL JUDGMENTS 158

thing as to believe that it is forbidden by
one of these non-human beings ; so that
any one whatever who ever does believe that
an action is wrong is, ipso facto, believing hi
the existence of such a being. It maintains,
therefore, that everybody who believes that
actions are right or wrong does, as a matter
of fact, believe in the existence of one of
these beings. And this contention seems
to be plainly contrary to fact. It might,
indeed, be urged that when we say there are
some people who do not believe in any of
these beings, all that is really true is that
there are some people who think they do not
believe in them ; while, in fact, everybody
really does. But it is surely impossible
seriously to maintain that, in all cases, they
are so mistaken as to the nature of their own
beliefs. But if so, then it follows absolutely
that even if wrong actions always are in fact
forbidden by some non-human being, yet
to say that they are wrong is not identical
with saying that they are so forbidden.

And it is important also, as an argument
against views of this class, to insist upon the
reason why they contradict the principle


154 ETHICS

which we are considering in this chapter.
They contradict this principle, because they
imply that there is absolutely no class of
actions of which we can say that it always
would, in any conceivable Universe, be right
or wrong. They imply this because they
imply that if the non-human being, whom
they suppose to exist, did not exist, nothing
would be right or wrong. Thus, for instance,
if it is held that to call an action wrong is
the same thing as to say that it is forbidden
by God, it will follow that, if God did not
exist, nothing would be wrong; and hence
that we cannot possibly hold that God forbids
what is wrong, because it is wrong. We
must hold, on the contrary, that the wrong-
ness of what is wrong consists simply and
solely in the fact that God does forbid it
a view to which many even of those, who
believe that what is wrong is in fact forbidden
by God, will justly feel an objection.

For these reasons, it seems to me, we may
finally conclude that, when we assert any
action to be right or wrong, we are not
merely making an assertion about the
attitude of mind towards it of any being or


MORAL JUDGMENTS 155

set of beings whatever no matter what
attitude of mind we take to be the one in
question, whether one of feeling or thinking
or willing, and no matter what being or
beings we take, whether human or non-
human : and that hence no proof to the
effect that any particular being or set of
beings has or has not a particular attitude
of mind towards an action is sufficient to
prove that the action really is right or wrong.
But there are many philosophers who fully
admit this who admit that the predicates
which we denote by the words " right " and
" wrong " do not consist in the having of
any relation whatever to any being's feelings
or thoughts or will ; and who will even go
further than this and admit that the question
whether an action is right or wrong does
depend, in a sense, solely upon its con-
sequences, namely, in the sense, that no
action ever can be right, if it was possible
for the agent to do something else which
would have had better total consequences ;
but who, while admitting all this, nevertheless
maintain that to call one set of consequences
better than another is the same thing as to


156 ETHICS

say that the one set is related to some mind
or minds in a way in which the other is not
related. That is to say, while admitting
that to call an action right or wrong is not
merely to assert that some particular mental
attitude is taken up towards it, they hold
that to call a thing " good " or " bad " is
merely to assert this. And of course, if it
be true that no action ever can be right
unless its total effects are as good as possible,
then this view as to the meaning of the words
"good" and "bad" will contradict the
principle we are considering in this chapter
as effectively as if the corresponding view
be held about the meaning of the words
" right " and " wrong." For if, in saying
that one set of effects A is better than another
B we merely mean to say that A has a relation
to some mind or minds which B has not got,
then it will follow that a set of effects pre-
cisely similar to A will not be better than a
set precisely similar to B, if they do not happen
to have the required relations to any mind.
And hence it will follow that even though, on
one occasion or in one Universe, it is right to
prefer A to B, yet, on another occasion or


MORAL JUDGMENTS 157

in another Universe, it may quite easily not
be right to prefer a set of effects precisely
similar to A to a set precisely similar to B.

For this reason, the view that the meaning
of the words " good " and " bad " is merely
that some being has some mental attitude
towards the thing so called, may constitute
a fatal objection to the principle which we
are considering. It will, indeed, only do so,
if we admit that it must always be right to
do what has the best possible total effects.
But it may be held that this is self -evident,
and many persons, who hold this view with
regard to the meaning of " good " and
" bad " would, I think, be inclined to admit
that it is so. Hence it becomes important
to consider this new objection to our principle.

This view that by calling a thing " good "
or " bad " we merely mean that some being
or beings have a certain mental attitude
towards it, has been even more commonly
held than the corresponding view with
regard to " right " and " wrong " ; and it
may be held in as many different forms.
Thus it may be held that to say that a thing
is " good " is the same thing as to say that


158 ETHICS

somebody thinks it is good a view which
may be refuted by the same general argu-
ment which was used in the case of the
corresponding view about " right " and
" wrong." Again it may be held that each
man when he calls a thing " good " or " bad n
merely means that he himself thinks it to
be so or has some feeling towards it ; a
view from which it will follow, as in the
case of right and wrong, that no two men
can ever differ in opinion as to whether a
thing is good or bad. Again, also, in most
of the forms, in which it can be held, it
will certainly follow that one and the same
thing can be both good and bad ; since,
whatever pair of mental attitudes or single
mental attitude we take, it seems as certain
here, as in the case of right and wrong, that
different men will sometimes have different
mental attitudes towards the same thing.
This has, however, been very often disputed
in the case of one particular mental attitude,
which deserves to be specially mentioned.

One of the chief differences between the
views which have been held with regard to
the meaning of " good " and " bad," and


MORAL JUDGMENTS 159

those which have been held with regard to
the meaning of " right " and " wrong," is
that in the former case it has been very
often held that what we mean by calling
a thing " good " is that it is desired, or
desired in some particular way ; and this
attitude of " desire " is one that I did not
mention in the case of ** right " and " wrong "
because, so far as I know, nobody has ever
held that to call an action " right " is the
same thing as to say that it is desired. But
the commonest of all views with regard to
the meaning of the word " good," is that
to call a thing good is to say that it is
desired, or desired for its own sake ; and
curiously enough this view has been used as
an argument in favour of the very theory
stated in our first two chapters, on the
ground that no man ever desires (or desires
for its own sake) anything at all except
pleasure (or his own pleasure), and that
hence, since " good " means " desired," any
set of effects which contains more pleasure
must always be better than one which
contains less. Of course, even if it were true
that no man ever desires anything except


160 ETHICS

pleasure, it would not really follow, as
this argument assumes, that a whole which
contains more pleasure must always be
better than one which contains less. On
the contrary, the very opposite would
follow ; since it would follow that if any
beings did happen to desire something
other than pleasure (and we can easily
conceive that some might) then wholes
which contained more pleasure might easily
not always be better than those which
contained less. But it is now generally
recognised that it is a complete mistake to
suppose even that men desire nothing but
pleasure, or even that they desire nothing
else for its own sake. And, whether it is so or
not, the question is irrelevant to our present
purpose, which is to find some quite general
arguments to show that to call a thing " good "
is, in any case, not the same thing as merely
to say that it is desired or desired for its own
sake, nor yet that any other mental attitude
whatever is taken up towards it. What
arguments can we find to show this ?

One point should be carefully noticed to
begin with ; namely, that we have no need


MORAL JUDGMENTS 161

to show that when we call a thing ** good "
we never mean simply that somebody has
some mental attitude towards it. There are
many reasons for thinking that the word
" good " is ambiguous that we use it in
different senses on different occasions ; and,
if so, it is quite possible that, in some of its
uses, it should stand merely for the assertion
that somebody has some feeling or some
other mental attitude towards the thing
called " good," although, in other uses, it
does not. We are not, therefore, concerned
to show that it may not sometimes merely
stand for this ; all that we need to show is
that sometimes it does not. For what we
have to do is merely to meet the argument
that, if we assert, " It would always be
wrong to prefer a worse set of total conse-
quences to a better," we must, in this pro-
position, mean merely by " worse " and
" better," consequences to which a certain
mental attitude is taken up a conclusion
from which it would follow that, even
though a set of consequences A was once
better than a set B, a set precisely similar
to A would not always necessarily be better


162 ETHICS

than a set precisely similar to B. And
obviously all that we need to do, to show
this, is to show that some sense can be given to
the words " better " and " worse," quite other
than this; or, in other words, that to call a thing
"good" does not always mean merely that
some mental attitude is taken up towards it.
It will be best, therefore, in order to make
the problem definite, to concentrate attention
upon one particular usage of the word, in
which it seems clearly not to mean this. And
I will take as an example that usage in which
we make judgments of what was called in
Chapter II " intrinsic value " ; that is to say,
where we judge, concerning a particular state
of things that it would be worth while would
be " a good thing " that that state of
things should exist, even if nothing else were
to exist besides, either at the same time or
afterwards. We do not, of course, so con-
stantly make judgments of this kind, as we
do some other judgments about the goodness
of things. But we certainly can make them,
and it seems quite clear that we mean some-
thing by them. We can consider with regard
to any particular, state of things whether it


MORAL JUDGMENTS 168

would be worth while that it shoukl exist,
even if there were absolutely nothing else in
the Universe besides ; whether, for instance,
it would have been worth while that the Uni-
verse, as it has existed up till now, should
have existed, even if absolutely nothing were to
follow, but its existence were to be cut short at
the present moment : we can consider whether
the existence of such a Universe would have
been better than nothing, or whether it would
have been just as good that nothing at all
should ever have existed. In the case of such
judgments as these it seems to me there are
strong reasons for holding that we are not
merely making an assertion cither about our
own or about anybody else's attitude of mind
towards the state of things in question. And
if we can show this, in this one case, that is
sufficient for our purpose.

What, then, are the reasons for holding it ?

I think we should distinguish :
cases, according to the
mind about which it is ^jffSt&^cT that
making an assertion.

If it is held that
is merely that the


164 ETHICS

is one that we or somebody else is pleased
at the idea of, or one that is or would be
desired or desired for its own sake (and these
are the views that seem to be most com-
monly held), the following argument seems
to me to be conclusive against all views of
this type. Namely, a man certainly can
believe with regard to a given thing or state
of things, that the idea of it does please
somebody, and is desired, and even desired
for its own sake, and yet not believe that it
would be at all worth while that it should
exist, if it existed quite alone. He may
even believe that it would be a positively
bad thing worse than nothing that it
should exist quite alone, in spite of the fact
that he knows that it is desired and strongly
desired for its own sake, even by himself.
That some men can and do make such
judgments that they can and do judge that
things which they themselves desire or are
pleased with, are nevertheless intrinsically
bad (that is to say would be bad, quite apart
from their consequences, and even if they
existed quite alone) is, I think, undeniable ;
and no doubt men make this judgment even


MORAL JUDGMENTS 165

more frequently with regard to things which
are desired by others. And if this is so,
then it shows conclusively that to judge that
a thing is intrinsically good is not the same
thing as to judge that some man is pleased
with it or desires it or desires it for its own
sake. Of course, it may be held that any-
body who makes such a judgment is wrong :
that, as a matter of fact, anything whatever
which is desired, always is intrinsically good.
But that is not the question. We are not
disputing for the moment that this may be so
as a matter of fact. All that we are trying to
show is that, even if it is so, yet, to say that
a thing is intrinsically good is not the same
thing as to say that it is desired : and this
follows absolutely, if even in a single case,
a man believes that a thing is desired and yet
does not believe that it is intrinsically good.

But I am not sure that this argument will
hold against all forms in which the view might
be held, although it does hold against those
in which it is most commonly held. There
are, I think, feelings with regard to which it
is much more plausible to hold that to believe
that they are felt towards a given thing is the


166 ETHICS

same thing as to believe that the thing is in-
trinsically good, than it is to hold this with
regard to the mere feeling of pleasure, or
desire, or desire of a thing " for its own sake."
For instance, it may, so far as I can see, be
true that there really is some very special
feeling of such a nature that any man who
knows that he himself or anybody else really
feels it towards any state of things cannot
doubt that the state of things in question is
intrinsically good. If this be so, then the
last argument will not hold against the view
that when we call a thing intrinsically good
we may mean merely that this special feeling
is felt towards it. And against any such view,
if it were held, the only obvious argument I
can find is that it is surely plain that, even if
the special feeling in question had not been
felt by any one towards the given state of
things, yet the state of things would have
been intrinsically good.

But, hi order fully to make plain the force of
this argument, it is necessary to guard against
one misunderstanding, which is very com-
monly made and which is apt to obscure the
whole question which we are now discussing.


MORAL JUDGMENTS J67

That is to say, we are not now urging that any-
thing would be any good at all, unless some-
body had some feeling towards something ; nor
are we urging that there are not many things,
which are good, in one sense of the word, and
which yet would not be any good at all unless
somebody had some feeling towards them. On
the contrary, both these propositions, which
are very commonly held, seem to me to be
perfectly true. I think it is true that no
whole can be intrinsically good, unless it con-
tains some feeling towards something as a
part of itself ; and true also that, in a very
important sense of the word " good " (though
not in the sense to which I have given the
name " intrinsically good "), many things
which are good would not be good, unless
somebody had some feeling towards them.
We must, therefore, clearly distinguish the
question whether these things are so, from the
question which we are now discussing. The
question we are now discussing is merely
whether, granted that nothing can be in-
trinsically good unless it contains some
feeling, a thing which is thus good and does
contain this feeling cannot be good without


168 ETHICS

anybody's needing to have another feeling
towards it. The point may be simply illus-
trated by taking the case of pleasure. Let
us suppose, for the moment, that nothing
can be intrinsically good unless it contains
some pleasure, and that every whole which
contains more pleasure than pain is intrin-
sically good. The question we are now dis-
cussing is merely whether, supposing this to
be so, any whole which did contain more
pleasure than pain, would not be good, even
if nobody had any further feeling towards it.
It seems to me quite plain that it would be
so. But if so, then, to say that a state of
things is intrinsically good cannot possibly
be the same thing as to say that anybody has
any kind of feeling towards it, even though no
state of things can be intrinsically good unless
it contains some feeling towards something.

But, after all, I do not know whether the
strongest argument against any view which
asserts that to call a thing " good " is the
same thing as to say that some mental attitude
is taken up towards it, does not merely con-
sist in the fact that two propositions about
" right " and " wrong " are self-evident :


MORAL JUDGMENTS 169

namely (1) that, if it were once the duty of any
being, who knew that the total effects of one
action would be A, and those of another B,
to choose the action which produced A rather
than that which produced B, it must always
be the duty of any being who had to choose
between two actions, one of which he knew
would have total effects precisely similar to
A and the other total effects precisely similar
to B, to choose the former rather than the
latter, and (2) that it must always be the duty
of any being who had to choose between two
actions, one of which he knew would have
better total effects than the other, to choose
the former. From these two propositions
taken together it absolutely follows that if
one set of total effects A is once better than
another B, any set precisely. similar to A must
always be better than any set precisely similar
to B. And, if so, then " better " and " worse "
cannot stand for any relation to any attitude
of mind ; since we cannot be entitled to say
that if a given attitude is once taken up
towards A and B, the same attitude would
always necessarily be taken up towards any
pair of wholes precisely similar to A and B.

F*


CHAPTER V

RESULTS THE TEST OF RIGHT AND WEONO

IN our last chapter we began considering
objections to one very fundamental prin-
ciple, which is presupposed by the theory
stated in the first two chapters a principle
which may be summed up in the two pro-
positions (1) that the question whether an
action is right or wrong always depends upon
its total consequences, and (2) that if it is
once right to prefer one set of total con-
sequences, A, to another set, B, it must
always be right to prefer any set precisely
similar to A to any set precisely similar to B.
The objections to this principle, which we
considered in the last chapter, rested on
certain views with regard to the meaning
of the words "right" and "good." But
there remain several other quite independent
objections, which may be urged against it


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 171

even if we reject those views. That is to
say, there are objections which may and
would be urged against it by many people who
accept both of the two propositions which 1
was trying to establish in the last chapter,
namely (1) that to call an action " right " or
44 wrong " is not the same thing as to say that
any being whatever has towards it any mental
attitude whatever ; and (2) that if any given
whole is once intrinsically good or bad, any
whole precisely similar to it must always be
intrinsically good or bad in precisely the same
degree. And in the present chapter I wish
briefly to consider what seem to me to be the
most important of these remaining objections.

All of them are directed against the view
that right and wrong do always depend upon
an action's actual consequences or results.
This may be denied for several different
reasons ; and I shall try to state fairly the
chief among these reasons, and to point out
why they do not seem to be conclusive.

In the first place, it may be said that, by
laying down the principle that right and
wrong depend upon consequences, we are
doing away with the distinction between


. 172 ETHICS

what is a duty and what is merely expedient ;
and between what is wrong and what is
merely inexpedient. People certainly do
commonly make a distinction between duty
and expediency. And it may be said that
the very meaning of calling an action
" expedient " is to say that it will produce
the best consequences possible under the
circumstances. If, therefore, we also say
that an action is a duty, whenever and only
when it produces the best possible con-
sequences, it may seem that nothing is left
to distinguish duty from expediency.

Now, as against this objection, it is
important to point out, first of all, that,
even if we admit that to call an action ex-
pedient is the same thing as to say that it
produces the best possible consequences, our
principle still does not compel us to hold
that to call an action expedient is the same
thing as to call it a duty. All that it does
compel us to hold is that whatever is ex-
pedient is always also a duty, and that
whatever is a duty is always also expedient.
That is to say, it does maintain that duty
and expediency coincide ; but it does not


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 178

maintain that the meaning of the two words
is the same. It is, indeed, quite plain, I
think, that the meaning of the two words is
not the same ; for, if it were, then it would
be a mere tautology to say that it is always
our duty to do what will have the best
possible consequences. Our theory does not,
therefore, do away with the distinction
between the meaning of the words " duty "
and " expediency " ; it only maintains that
both will always apply to the same actions.

But, no doubt, what is meant by many
who urge this objection is to deny this.
What they mean to say is not merely that
to call an action expedient is a different
thing from calling it a duty, but also that
sometimes what is expedient is wrong, and
what is a duty is inexpedient. This is a
view which is undoubtedly often held;
people often speak as if there often were an
actual conflict between duty and expediency.
But many of the cases in which it would be
commonly held that there is such a conflict
may, I think, be explained by supposing
that when we call an action " expedient "
we do not always mean quite strictly that


174 ETHICS

its total consequences, taking absolutely
everything into account, are the best possible.
It is by no means clear that we do always
mean this. We may, perhaps, sometimes
mean merely that the action is expedient for
some particular purpose ; and sometimes
that it is expedient in the interests of the
agent, though not so on the whole. But if
we only mean this, our theory, of course,
does not compel us to maintain that the
expedient is always a duty, and duty always
expedient. It only compels us to maintain
this, if " expedient " be understood in the
strictest and fullest sense, as meaning that,
when absolutely all the consequences are
taken into account, they will be found to be
the best possible. And if this be clearly
understood, then most people, I think, will
be reluctant to admit that it can ever be
really inexpedient to do our duty, or that
what is really and truly expedient, in this strict
sense, can ever be wrong,

But, no doubt, some people may still
maintain that it is or may be sometimes our
duty to do actions which will not have the
best possible consequences, and sometimes


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 175

also positively wrong, to do actions which
will. And the chief reason why this is held
is, I think, the following.

It is, in fact, very commonly held indeed
that there are certain specific kinds of action
which are absolutely always right, and others
which are absolutely always wrong. Dif-
ferent people will, indeed, take different
views as to exactly what kinds of action
have this character. A rule which will be
offered by one set of persons as a rule to
which there is absolutely no exception will
be rejected by others, as obviously admitting
of exceptions ; but these will generally, in
their turn, maintain that some other rule,
which they can mention, really has no
exceptions. Thus there are enormous
numbers of people who would agree that
some rule or other (and generally more than
one) ought absolutely always to be obeyed ;
although probably there is not one single
rule which all the persons who maintain
this would agree upon. Thus, for instance,
some people might maintain that murder
(defined in some particular way) is an act
which ought absolutely never to be com-


176 ETHICS

mitted ; or that to act justly is a rule which
ought absolutely always to be obeyed ; and
similarly it might be suggested with regard
to many other kinds of action, that they
are actions, which it is either always our
duty, or always wrong to do

But once we assert with regard to any rule
of this kind that it is absolutely always our
duty to obey it, it is easy and natural to take
onefurther step and to say that it would always
be our duty to obey it, whatever the conse-
quences might be. Of course, this further step
does not necessarily and logically follow from
the mere position that there are some kinds of
action which ought, in fact, absolutely always
to be done or avoided. For it is just possible
that there are some kinds which do, as a
matter of fact, absolutely always produce
the best possible consequences, and other
kinds which absolutely never do so. And
there is a strong tendency among persons
who hold the first position to hold that, as
a matter of fact, this is the case : that right
actions always do, as a matter of fact,
produce the best possible results, and wrong
actions never. Thus even those who would


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 177

assent to the maxim that ** Justice should
always be done, though the heavens should
fall," will generally be disposed to believe
that justice never will, in fact, cause the
heavens to fall, but will rather be always
the best means of upholding them. And
similarly those who say that ** you should
never do evil that good may come," though
their maxim seems to imply that good may
sometimes come from doing wrong, would
yet be very loth to admit that, by doing
wrong, you ever would really produce better
consequences on the whole than if you had
acted rightly instead. Or again, those who
say " that the end will never justify the
means," though they certainly imply that
certain ways of acting would be always
wrong, whatever advantages might be secured
by them, yet, I think, would be inclined to
deny that the advantages to be obtained
by acting wrongly ever do really outweigh
those to be obtained by acting rightly, if
we take into account absolutely all the con-
sequences of each course.

. Those, therefore, who hold that certain
specific ways of acting are absolutely always


178 ETHICS

right, and others absolutely always wrong, do,
1 think, generally hold that the former do also,
as a matter of fact, absolutely always pro-
duce the best results, and the latter never.
But, for the reasons given at the beginning of
Chapter III, it is, I think, very unlikely that
this belief can be justified. The total results
of an action always depend, not merely on
the specific nature of the action, but on the
circumstances in which it is done ; and the
circumstances vary so greatly that it is, in
most cases, extremely unlikely that any
particular kind of action will absolutely
always, in absolutely all circumstances,
either produce or fail to produce the best
possible results. For this reason, if we do
take the view that right and wrong depend
upon consequences, we must, I think, be
prepared to doubt whether any particular
kind of action whatever is absolutely always
right or absolutely always wrong. For in-
stance, however we define " murder," it is
unlikely that absolutely no case will ever
occur in which it would be right to commit
a murder ; and, however we define " justice,"
it is unlikely that no case will ever occur


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 179

in which it would be right to do an injustice.
No doubt it may be possible to define actions
of which it is true that, in an immense
majority of cases, it is right or wrong to
perform them ; and perhaps some rules of
this kind might be found to which there are
really no exceptions. But in the case of
most of the ordinary moral rules, it seems
extremely unlikely that obedience to them
will absolutely always produce the best
possible results. And most persons who
realise this would, I think, be disposed to
give up the view that they ought absolutelv
always to be obeyed. They would be content
to accept them as general rules, to which
there are very few exceptions, without pre-
tending that they are absolutely universal

But, no doubt, there may be some persons
who will hold, in the case of some particular
rule or set of rules, that even if obedience to
it does in some cases not produce the best
possible consequences, yet we ought even
in these cases to obey it. It may seem to
them that they really do know certain rules,
which ought absolutely always to be obeyed.
whatever the consequences may be, and even,


180 ETHICS

therefore, if the total consequences are not
the best possible. They may, for instance,
take quite seriously the assertion that justice
ought to be done, even though the heavens
should fall, as meaning that, however bad
the consequences of doing an act of justice
might in some circumstances be, yet it
always would be our duty to do it. And
such a view does necessarily contradict our
principle ; since, whether it be true or not
that an act of injustice ever actually could
in this world produce the best possible con-
sequences, it is certainly possible to conceive
circumstances in which it would do so. I
doubt whether those who believe in the
absolute universality of certain moral rules
do generally thus distinguish quite clearly
between the question whether disobedience
to the rule ever could produce the best
possible consequences, and the question
whether, if it did, then disobedience would
be wrong. They would generally be disposed
to argue that it never really could But
some persons might perhaps hold that, even
if it did, yet disobedience would be wrong.
And if this view be quite clearly held, there


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 181

is, so far as I can see, absolutely no way of
refuting it except by appealing to the self-
evidence of the principle that if we knew
that the effect of a given action really would
be to make the world, as a whole, worse than
it would have been if we had acted differently,
it certainly would be wrong for us to do
that action. Those who say that certain
rules ought absolutely always to be obeyed,
whatever the consequences may be, are
logically bound to deny this ; for by saying
" whatever the consequences may be," they
do imply " even if the world as a whole were
the worse because of our action." It seems
to me to be self-evident that knowingly to
do an action which would make the world,
on the whole, really and truly worse than if
we had acted differently, must always be
wrong And if this be admitted, then it
absolutely disposes of the view that there
are any kinds of action whatever, which it
would always be our duty to do or to avoid,
whatever the consequences might be.

For this reason it seems to me we must
reject this particular objection to the view
that right and wrong always depend upon


182 ETHICS

consequences ; namely, the objection that
there are certain kinds of action which ought
absolutely always mid quite unconditionally
to be done or avoided. But there still remain
two other objections, which are so commonly
held, that it is worth while to consider them.

The first is the objection that right and
wrong depend neither upon the nature of the
action, nor upon its consequences, but partly,
or even entirely, upon the motive or motives
from which it is done. By the view that it
depends partly upon the motives, I mean the
view that no action can be really right,
unless it be done from some one motive, or
some one of a set of motives, which are
supposed to be good ; but that the being
done from such a motive is not sufficient,
by itself 9 to make an action right : that the
action, if it is to be right, must always also
either produce the best possible consequences,
or be distinguished by some other character-
istic. And this view, therefore^ will not
necessaiily contradict our principle so far
as it asserts that no action can be right,
unless it produces the best possible con-
sequences : it only contradicts that part of


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 188

it which asserts that every action which does
produce them is right. But the view has
sometimes been held, I think, that right and
wrong depend entirely upon motives : that
is to say, that not. only is no action right,
unless it be done from a good motive, but also
that any action which is done from some one
motive or some one of a set of motives is always
right, whatever its consequences may be and
whatever it may be like in other respects.
And this view, of course, will contradict both
parts of our principle ; since it not only
implies that an action, which produces the
best possible consequences may be wrong,
but also that an action may be right, in spite
of failing to produce them.

In favour of both these views it may be
urged that in our moral judgments we actually
do, and ought to, take account of motives ;
and indeed that it marks a great advance in
morality when men do begin to attach im-
portance to motives and are not guided
exclusively in their praise or blame, by the
* 4 external " nature of the act done or by its
consequences. And all this may be fully
admitted. It is quite certain that when a


184 ETHICS

man does an action which has bad conse-
quences from a good motive, we do tend to
judge him differently from a man who does a
similar action from a bad one ; and also that
when a man does an action which has good
consequences from a bad motive, we may
nevertheless think badly of him for it. And
it may be admitted that, in some cases at least,
it is right and proper that a man's motives
should thus influence our judgment. But
the question is : What sort of moral judgment is
it right and proper that they should influence ?
Should it influence our view as to whether the
action in question is right or wrong ? It
seems very doubtful whether, as a rule, it
actually does affect our judgment on this
particular point, for we are quite accustomed
to judge that a man sometimes acts wrongly
from the best of motives ; and though we
should admit that the good motive forms
some excuse, and that the whole state of
things is better than if he had done the same
thing from a bad motive, it yet does not lead
us to deny that the action is wrong. There
is, therefore, reason to think that the kind
of moral judgments which a consideration of


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 185

motives actually does affect do not consist of
judgments as to whether the action done from
the motive is right or wrong ; but are moral
Judgments of some different kind ; and there
is still more reason to think that it is only
judgments of some different kind which ought
to be influenced by it.

The fact is that judgments as to the Tightness
and wrongness of actions are by no means the
only kind of moral judgments which we make ;
and it is, I think, solely because some of these
other judgments are confused with judgments
of right and wrong that the latter are ever held
to depend upon the motive. There are three
other kinds of judgments which are chiefly
concerned in this case. In the first place it
may be held that some motives are intrin-
sically good and others intrinsically bad ; and
though this is a view which is inconsistent
with the theory of our first two chapters, it is
not a view which we are at present concerned
to dispute : for it is not at all inconsistent
with the principle which we are at present
considering namely, that right and wrong
always depend solely upon consequences. If
we held this view, we might still hold that a


186 ETHICS

man may act wrongly from a good motive,
and rightly from a bad one, and that the
motive would make no difference whatever to
the Tightness or wrongn ess of the action. What
it would make a difference to is the goodness
or badness of the whole state of affairs : for,
if we suppose the same action to be done in
one case from a good motive and in the other
from a bad one, then, so far as the conse-
quences of the action are concerned, the good-
ness of the whole state of things will be the
same, while the presence of the good motive
will mean the presence of an additional good
in the one case which is absent in the other.
For this reason alone, therefore, we might
justify the view that motives are relevant to
some kinds of moral judgments, though not
to judgments of right and wrong.

And there is yet another reason for this view,
and this a reason which may be consistently
held even by those who hold the theory of our
first two chapters. It may be held, namely,
that good motives have a general tendency to
produce right conduct, though they do not
always do so, and bad motives to produce
wrong conduct ; and this would be another


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 187

reason which would justify us in regarding
right actions done from a good motive
differently from right actions done from a bad
one. For though, in the case supposed, the
bad motive would not actually have led to
wrong action, yet, if it is true that motives of
that kind do generally lead to wrong action,
we should be right in passing this judgment
upon it ; and judgments to the effect that a
motive is of a kind which generally leads to
wrong action are undoubtedly moral judg-
ments of a sort, and an important sort, though
they do not prove that every action done from
such a motive is wrong.

And finally motives seem also to be relevant
to a third kind of moral judgment of great im-
portance namely, judgments as to whether,
and in what degree, the agent deserves moral
praise or blame for acting as he did. This ques-
tion as to what is deserving of moral praise or
blame is, I think, often confused with the ques-
tion as to what is right or wrong. It is very
natural, at first sight, to assume that to call an
action morally praiseworthy is the same thing
as to say that it is right, and to call it morally
blameworthy the same thing as to say that it is


188 ETHICS

wrong. But yet a very little reflection suffices
to show that the two things are certainly dis-
tinct. When we say that an action deserves
praise or blame, we imply that it is right to
praise or blame it ; that is to say, we are mak-
ing a judgment not about the rightness of the
original action, but about the rightness of the
further action which we should take, if we
praised or blamed it. And these two judgments
are certainly not identical ; nor is there any
reason to think that what is right always also
deserves to be praised, and what is wrong always
also deserves to be blamed. Even, therefore, if
the motive is relevant to the question whether
an action deserves praise or blame, it by no
means follows that it is also relevant to the
question whether it is right or wrong. And
there is some reason to think that the motive
is relevant to judgments of the former kind :
that we really ought sometimes to praise an
action done from a bad motive less than if it
had been done from a good one, and to blame
an action done from a good motive less than
if it had been done from a bad one. For one
of the considerations upon which the question
whether it is right to blame an action depends,


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 189

is that our blame may tend to prevent the
agent from doing similar wrong actions in
future ; and obviously, if the agent only acted
wrongly from a motive which is not likely to
lead him wrong in the future, there is less need
to try to deter him by blame than if he had
acted from a motive which was likely to lead
him to act wrongly again. This is, I think, a
very real reason why we sometimes ought to
blame a man less when he does wrong from
a good motive. But I do not mean to say that
the question whether a man deserves moral
praise or blame, or the degree to which he
deserves it, depends entirely or always upon
his motive. I think it certainly does not.
My point is only that this question does some-
times depend on the motive in some degree ;
whereas the question whether his action was
right or wrong never depends upon it at all.

There are, therefore, at least three different
kinds of moral judgments, in making which
it is at least plausible to hold that we ought
to take account of motives ; and if all these
judgments are carefully distinguished from
that particular kind which is solely concerned
with Che question whether an action is ngnt


190 ETHICS

or wrong, there ceases, I think, to be any
reason to suppose that this last question
ever depends upon the motive at all. At
all events the mere fact that motives are
and ought to be taken account of in some
moral judgments does not constitute such
a reason. And hence this fact cannot be
urged as an objection to the view that right
and wrong depend solely on consequences.

But there remains one last objection to
this view, which is, I am inclined to think,
the most serious of all. This is an objection
which will be urged by people who strongly
maintain that right and wrong do not depend
either upon the nature of the action or upon
its motive, and who will even go so far as
to admit as self-evident the hypothetical
proposition that if any being absolutely
knew that one action would have better
total consequences than another, then it
would always be his duty to choose the
former rather than the latter. But what
such people would point out is that this
hypothetical case is hardly ever, if ever,
realised among us men. We hardly ever,
if ever, know for certain which among the


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 191

courses open to us will produce the best
consequences. Some accident, which we
could not possibly have foreseen, may always
falsify the most careful calculations, and
make an action, which we had every reason
to think would have the best results, actually
have worse ones than some alternative
would have had. Suppose, then, that a man
has taken all possible care to assure himself
that a given course will be the best, and has
adopted it for that reason, but that owing
to some subsequent event, which he could
not possibly have foreseen, it turns out not
to be the best : are we for that reason to
say that his action was wrong ? It may
seem outrageous to say so ; and yet this
is what we must say, if we are to hold that
right and wrong depend upon the actual
consequences. Or suppose that a man has
deliberately chosen a course, which he has
every reason to suppose will not produce the
best consequences, but that some unforeseen
accident defeats his purpose and makes it
actually turn out to be the best : are we to
say that such a man, because of this unfore-
seen accident, has acted rightly ? This also


192 ETHICS

rnay seem an outrageous thing to say ; and
yet we must say it, if we are to hold that
right and wrong depend upon the actual
consequences. For these reasons many people
are strongly inclined to hold that they do
not depend upon the actual consequences,
but only upon those which were antecedently
probable, or which the agent had reason to
expect, or which it was possible for him to
foresee. They are inclined to say that an
action is always right, whatever its actual
consequences may be, provided the agent
had reason to expect that they would be
the best possible ; and always wrong, if he
had reason to expect that they would not.

This, I think, is the most serious objection
to the view that right and wrong depend
upon the actual consequences. But yet 1
am inclined to think that even this objection
can be got over by reference to the distinction
between what is right or wrong, on the one
hand, and what is morally praiseworthy or
blameworthy on the other. What we should
naturally say of a man whose action turns
out badly owing to some unforeseen accident
when he had every reason to expect thau it


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 198

would turn out well, is not that his action
was right, but rather that he is not to blame.
And it may be fully admitted that in such
a case he really ought not to be blamed ;
since blame cannot possibly serve any good
purpose, and would be likely to do harm.
But, even if we admit that he was not to
blame, is that any reason for asserting also
that he acted rightly? I cannot see that
it is ; and therefore I am inclined to think
that in all such cases the man really did act
wrongly, although he is not to blame, and
although, perhaps, he even deserves praise
for acting as he did.

But the same difficulty may be put in
another form, in which there may seem an
even stronger case against the view that
right and wrong depend on the actual con-
sequences. Instead of considering what
judgment we ought to pass on an action
after it has been done, and when many of
its results are already known, let us consider
what judgment we ought to pass on it before-
hand, and when the question is which among
several courses still open to a man he ought
to choose. It is admitted that he cannot
G


194 ETHICS

know for certain beforehand which of them
will actually have the best results ; but let
us suppose that he has every reason to think
that one of them will produce decidedly
better results than any of the others that
all probability is in favour of this view.
Can we not say, in such a case, that he
absolutely ought to choose that one ? that
he will be acting very wrongly if he chooses
any other ? We certainly should actually
say so ; and many people may be inclined
to think that we should be right in saying
so, no matter what the results may sub-
sequently prove to be. There does seem to
be a certain paradox in maintaining the
opposite : in maintaining that, in such a
case, it can possibly be true that he ought
to choose a course, which he has every reason
to think will not be the best.- But yet I am
inclined to think that even this difficulty
is not fatal to our view. It may be admitted
that we should say, and should be justified
in saying, that he absolutely ought to choose
the course, which he has reason to think
will be the best. But we may be justified
in saying many things, which we do not


TEST OF RIGHT AND WRONG 195

know to be true, and which in fact are not
so, provided there is a strong probability
that they are. And so in this case I do not
see why we should not hold, that though we
should be justified in saying that he ought
to choose one course, yet it may not be
really true that he ought. What certainly
will be true is that he will deserve the strongest
moral blame if he does not choose the course
in question, even though it may be wrong.
And we are thus committed to the paradox
that a man may really deserve the strongest
moral condemnation for choosing an action,
which actually is right. But I do not see
why we should not accept this paradox.

I conclude, then, that there is no con-
clusive reason against the view that our
theory is right, so far as it maintains that
the question whether an action is right or
wrong always depends on its actual conse-
quences. There seems no sufficient reason
for holding either that it depends on the
intrinsic nature of the action, or that it
depends upon the motive, or even that it
depends on the probable consequences.


CHAPTER VI

FREE WILL

THROUGHOUT the last three chapters we
have been considering various objections
which might be urged against the theory
stated in Chapters I and II. And the very
last objection which we considered was one
which consisted in asserting that the question
whether an action is right or wrong does not
depend upon its actual consequences, because
whenever the consequences, so far as the agent
can foresee, are likely to be the best possible,
the action is always right, even if they are not
actually the best possible. In other words, this
objection rested on the view that right and
wrong depend, in a sense, upon what the agent
can know. And in the present chapter I pro-
pose to consider objections, which rest, instead
of this, upon the view that right and wrong
depend upon what the agent can do.


FREE WILL 197

Now it must be remembered that, in a
sense, our original theory does hold and even
insists that this is the case. We have, for
instance, frequently referred to it in the
last chapter as holding that an action is
only right, if it produces the best possible
consequences ; and by " the best possible
consequences " was meant " consequences at
least as good as would have followed from
any action which the agent could have done
instead." It does, therefore, hold that the
question whether an action is right or wrong
does always depend upon a comparison of
its consequences with those of all the other
actions which the agent could have done
instead. It assumes, therefore, that wherever
a voluntary action is right or wrong (and
we have throughout only been talking of
voluntary actions), it is true that the agent
could, in a sense, have done something else
instead. This is an absolutely essential part
of the theory.

But the reader must now be reminded that
all along we have been using the words " can,"
44 could," and fct possible " in a special sense.
It was explained in Chapter I (pp. 29-81), that


198 ETHICS

we proposed, purely for the sake of brevity, to
say that an agent could have done a given
action, which he didn't do, wherever it is true
that he could have done it, if he had chosen ;
and similarly by what he can do, or what
is possible, we have always meant merely
what is possible, if he chooses. Our theory,
therefore, has not been maintaining, after
all, that right and wrong depend upon what
the agent absolutely can do, but only on
what he can do, if he chooses. And this
makes an immense difference. For, by con-
fining itself in this way, our theory avoids
a controversy, which cannot be avoided by
those who assert that right and wrong
depend upon what the agent absolutely can
do. There are few, if any, people who will
expressly deny that we very often really
could, if we had chosen, have done some-
thing different from what we actually did
do. But the moment it is asserted that
any man ever absolutely could have done
anything other than what he did do, there
are many people who would deny this.
The view, therefore, which we are to consider
in this chapter the view that right and


FREE WILL 199

wrong depend upon what the agent absolutely
can do at once involves us in an extremely
difficult controversy the controversy con-
cerning Free Will. There are many people
who strenuously deny that any man ever
could have done anything other than what
he actually did do, or ever can do anything
other than what he will do ; and there are
others who assert the opposite equally
strenuously And whichever view be held
is, if combined with the view that right and
wrong depend upon what the agent absolutely
can do, liable to contradict our theory very
seriously. Those who hold that no man
ever could have done anything other than
what he did do, are, if they also hold that
right and wrong depend upon what we can
do, logically bound to hold that no action
of ours is ever right and none is ever wrong ;
and this is a view which is, I think, often
actually held, and which, of course, con-
stitutes an extremely serious and funda-
mental objection to our theory : since our
theory implies, on the contrary, that we
very often do act wrongly, if never quite
rightly. Those, on the other hand, who


200 ETHICS

hold that we absolutely can do things, which
we don't do, and that right and wrong
depend upon what we thus can do, are also
liable to be led to contradict our theory,
though for a different reason. Our theory
holds that, provided a man could have done
something else, if he had chosen, that is
sufficient to entitle us to say that his action
really is either right or wrong. But those
who hold the view we are considering will
be liable to reply that this is by no means
sufficient : that to say that it is sufficient,
is entirely to misconceive the nature of
right and wrong. They will say that, in
order that an action may be really either
right or wrong, it is absolutely essential
that the agent should have been really able
to act differently, able in some sense quite
other than that of merely being able, if he
had chosen. If all that were really ever
true of us were merely that we could have
acted differently, if we had chosen, then,
these people would say, it really would be
true that none of our actions are ever right
and that none are ever wrong. They will
say, therefore, that our theory entirely


FREE WILL 201

misses out one absolutely essential condition
of right and wrong the condition that, for
an action to be right or wrong, it must be
freely done. And moreover, many of them
will hold also that the class of actions which
we absolutely can do is often not identical
with those which we can do, if we choose.
They may say, for instance, that very often
an action, which we could have done, if we
had chosen, is nevertheless an action which
we could not have done ; and that an action
is always right, if it produces as good con-
sequences as any other action which we
really could have done instead. From which
it will follow that many actions which our
theory declares to be wrong, will, according
to them, be right, because these actions
really are the best of all that we could have
done, though not the best of all that we
could have done, if we had chosen.

Now these objections seem to me to be
the most serious which we have yet had to
consider. They seem to me to be serious
because (1) it is very difficult to be sure
that right and wrong do not really depend,
as they assert, upon what we can do and

G*


202 ETHICS

not merely on what we can do, if we choose ;
and because (2) it is very difficult to be sure
in what sense it is true that we ever could
have done anything different from what we
actually did do. I do not profess to be
sure about either of these points. And all
that I can hope to do is to point out certain
facts which do seem to me to be clear,
though they are often overlooked ; and
thus to isolate clearly for the reader's de-
cision, those questions which seem to me to
be really doubtful and difficult.

Let us begin with the question : Is it ever
true that a man could have done anything else,
except what he actually did do ? And, first
of all, I think I had better explain exactly
how this question seems to me to be related to
the question of Free Will. For it is a fact
that, in many discussions about Free Will,
this precise question is never mentioned at
all ; so that it might be thought that the two
have really nothing whatever to do with one
another. And indeed some philosophers do,
I think, definitely imply that they have nothing
to do with one another : they seem to hold
that our wills can properly be said to be free


FREE WILL 208

even if we never can, in any sense at all, do
anything else except what, in the end, we
actually do do. But this view, if it is held,
seems to me to be plainly a mere abuse of
language. The statement that we have Free
Will is certainly ordinarily understood to
imply that we really sometimes have the power
of acting differently from the way in which
we actually do act ; and hence, if anybody
tells us that we have Free Will, while at the
same time he means to deny that we ever have
such a power, he is simply misleading us. We
certainly have not got Free Will, in the
ordinary sense of the word, if we never really
could, in any sense at all, have done anything
else than what we did do ; so that, in this
respect, the two questions certainly are con-
nected. But, on the other hand, the mere fact
(if it is a fact) that we sometimes can, in some
sense, do what we don't do, does not neces-
sarily entitle us to say that
We certainly haven't got
but it doesn't follow that
if we can. Whether we 1
upon the precise sense :
we can. So that even I


204 ETHICS

we really can often, in some sense, do what we
don't do, this decision by itself does not entitle
us to say that we have Free Will.

And the first point about which we can and
should be quite clear is, I think, this : namely,
that we certainly often can, in some sense, do
what we don't do. It is, I think, quite clear
that this is so ; and also very important that
we should realise that it is so. For many
people are inclined to assert, quite without
qualification : No man ever could, on any
occasion, have done anything else than what
he actually did do on that occasion. By
asserting this quite simply, without qualifica-
tion, they imply, of course (even if they do
not mean to imply), that there is no proper
sense of the word " could," in which it is true
that a man could have acted differently. And
it is this implication which is, I think, quite
certainly absolutely false. For this reason,
anybody who asserts, without qualification,
" Nothing ever could have happened, except
what actually did happen," is making an
assertion which is quite unjustifiable, and
which he himself cannot help constantly
contradicting. And it is important to insist


FREE WILL 205

on this, because many people do make this
unqualified assertion, without seeing how
violently it contradicts what they themselves,
and all of us, believe, and rightly believe, at
other times. If, indeed, they insert a quali-
fication if they merely say, " In one sense of
the word * could ' nothing ever could have
happened, except what did happen," then,
they may perhaps be perfectly right : we are
not disputing that they may. All that we are
maintaining is that, in one perfectly proper
and legitimate sense of the word " could," and
that one of the very commonest senses in which
it is used, it is quite certain that some things
which didn't happen could have happened.
And the proof that this is so, is simply as
follows.

It is impossible to exaggerate the frequency
of the occasions on which we all of us make
a distinction between two things, neither of
which did happen, a distinction which we
express by saying, that whereas the one could
have happened, the other could not. No dis-
tinction is commoner than this. And no one,
I think, who fairly examines the instances in
which we make it, can doubt about three


206 ETHICS

things : namely (1) that very often there
really is some distinction between the two
things, corresponding to the language which
we use ; (2) that this distinction, which really
does subsist between the things, is the one
which we mean to express by saying that the
one was possible and the other impossible;
and (3) that this way of expressing it is a
perfectly proper and legitimate way. But if
so, it absolutely follows that one of the com-
monest and most legitimate usages of the
phrases " could " and " could not " is to
express a difference, which often really does
hold between two things neither of which did
actually happen. Only a few instances need
be given. I could have walked a mile in
twenty minutes this morning, but I certainly
could not have run two miles in five minutes.
I did not, in fact, do either of these two
things ; but it is pure nonsense to say that
the mere fact that I did not, does away with
the distinction between them, which I express
by saying that the one was within my powers,
whereas the other was not. Although I did
neither, yet the one was certainly possible to
me in a sense in which the other was totally


FREE WILL 207

impossible. Or, to take another instance :
It is true, as a rule, that cats can climb trees,
whereas dogs can'/. Suppose that on a parti*
cular afternoon neither A's cat nor B's dog do
climb a tree. It is quite absurd to say that
this mere fact proves that we must be wrong
if we say (as we certainly often should say)
that the cat could have climbed a tree, though
she didn't, whereas the dog couldn't. Or, to
take an instance which concerns an inanimate
object. Some ships can steam 20 knots,
whereas others can't steam more than 15.
And the mere fact that, on a particular occa-
sion, a 20-knot steamer did not actually run
at this speed certainly does not entitle us to
say that she could not have done so, in the
sense in which a 15 -knot one could not. On
the contrary, we all can and should distin-
guish between cases in which (as, for instance,
owing to an accident to her propeller) she did
not, because she could not, and cases in which
she did not, although she could. Instances
of this sort might be multiplied quite inde-
finitely ; and it is surely quite plain that we
ah of us do continually use such language :
we continually, when considering two events,


208 ETHICS

neither of which did happen, distinguish be-
tween them by saying that whereas the one
was possible, though it didn't happen, the
other was impossible. And it is surely quite
plain that what we mean by this (whatever
it may be) is something which is often per-
fectly true. But, if so, then anybody who
asserts, without qualification, " Nothing
ever could have happened, except what did
happen," is simply asserting what is false.

It is, therefore, quite certain that we often
could (in some sense) have done what we
did not do. And now let us see how this fact
is related to the argument by which people
try to persuade us that it is not a fact.

The argument is well known : it is simply
this. It is assumed (for reasons which I need
not discuss) that absolutely everything that
happens has a cause in what precedes it.
But to say this is to say that it follows
necessarily from something that preceded it ;
or, in other words, that, once the preceding
events which are its cause had happened,
it was absolutely bound to happen. But to
say that it was bound to happen, is to say
that nothing else could have happened


FREE WILL 209

instead ; so that, if everything has a cause,
nothing ever could have happened except
what did happen.

And now let us assume that the premise
of this argument is correct : that every-
thing really has a cause. What really
follows from it ? Obviously all that follows
is that, in one sense of the word "could,"
nothing ever could have happened, except
what did happen. This really does follow.
But, if the word " could " is ambigu-
ous if, that is to say, it is used in
different senses on different occasions it
is obviously quite possible that though, in
one sense, nothing ever could have happened
except what did happen, yet in another
sense, it may at the same time be perfectly
true that some things which did not happen
could have happened. And can anybody
undertake to assert with certainty that the
word " could " is not ambiguous ? that it
may not have more than one legitimate
sense ? Possibly it is not ambiguous ; and,
if it is not, then the fact that some things,
which did not happen, could have happened,
really would contradict the principle that


210 ETHICS

everything has a cause ; and, in that case,
we should, I think, have to give up this
principle, because the fact that we often
could have done what we did not do, is so
certain. But the assumption that the word
" could " is not ambiguous is an assumption
which certainly should not be made without
the clearest proof. And yet I think it often
is made, without any proof at all ; simply
because it does not occur to people that
words often are ambiguous. It is, for
instance, often assumed, in the Free Will
controversy, that the question at issue is
solely as to whether everything is caused,
or whether acts of will are sometimes un-
caused. Those who hold that we have Free
Will, think themselves bound to maintain
that acts of will sometimes have no cause ;
and those who hold that everything is
caused think that this proves completely
that we have not Free Will. But, in fact,
it is extremely doubtful whether Free Will
is at all inconsistent with the principle that
everything is caused. Whether it is or not,
all depends on a very difficult question as
to the meaning of the word " could/' All


FREE WILL 211

that is certain about the matter is (1) that,
if we have Free Will, it must be true, in
some sense, that we sometimes could have
done, what we did not do ; and (2) that, if
everything is caused, it must be true, in
some sense, that we never could have done,
what we did not do. What is very uncertain,
and what certainly needs to be investigated,
is whether these two meanings of the word
" could " are the same.

Let us begin by asking : What is the
sense of the word " could," in which it is so
certain that we often could have done, what
we did not do ? What, for instance, is the
sense in which I could have walked a mile
in twenty minutes this morning, though I
did not ? There is one suggestion, which
is very obvious : namely, that what I mean
is simply after all that I could, if I had
chosen ; or (to avoid a possible complication)
perhaps we had better say " that I should,
if I had chosen." In other words, the
suggestion is that we often use the phrase
" / could " simply and solely as a short way
of saying " I should, if I had chosen." And
in all cases, where it is certainly true that


212 ETHICS

we could have done, what we did not do, it
is, I think, very difficult to be quite sure
that this (or something similar) is not what
we mean by the word " could.*' The case
of the ship may seem to be an exception,
because it is certainly not true that she
would have steamed twenty knots if she
had chosen ; but even here it seems possible
that what we mean is simply that she
would, if the men on board of her had chosen.
There are certainly good reasons for thinking
that we very often mean by " could " merely
" would, if so and so had chosen." And if
so, then we have a sense of the word " could "
in which the fact that we often could have
done what we did not do, is perfectly com-
patible with the principle that everything
has a cause : for to say that, if I had per-
formed a certain act of will, I should have
done something which I did not do, in no
way contradicts this principle.

And an additional reason for supposing that
this is what we often mean by " could," and
one which is also a reason why it is important
to insist on the obvious fact that we very
often really should have acted differently, if


FREE WILL 218

we had willed differently, is that those who
deny that we ever could have done anything,
which we did not do, often speak and think
as if this really did involve the conclusion
that we never should have acted differently,
even if we had willed differently. This
occurs, I think, in two chief instances one
in reference to the future, the other in
reference to the past. The first occurs when,
because they hold that nothing can happen,
except what will happen, people are led to
adopt the view called Fatalism the view
that whatever we will, the result will always
be the same ; that it is, therefore, never any
use to make one choice rather than another.
And this conclusion will really follow if by
" can " we mean " would happen, even if
we were to will it." But it is certainly
untrue, and it certainly does not follow
from the principle of causality. On the
contrary, reasons of exactly the same sort
and exactly as strong as those which lead
us to suppose that everything has a cause,
lead to the conclusion that if we choose one
course, the result will always be different in
some respect from what it would have been,


214 ETHICS

if we had chosen another ; and we know
also that the difference would sometimes
consist in the fact that what we chose would
come to pass It is certainly often true of
the future, therefore, that whichever of two
actions we were to choose, would actually
be done, although it is quite certain that
only one of the two will be done.

And the second instance, in which people are
apt to speak and think, as if, because no man
ever could have done anything but what he
did do, it follows that he would not, even
if he had chosen, is as follows. Many people
seem, in fact, to conclude directly from the
first of these two propositions, that we can
never be justified in praising or blaming a
man for anything that he does, or indeed
for making any distinction between what is
right or wrong, on the one hand, and what
is lucky or unfortunate on the other. They
conclude, for instance, that there is never
any reason to treat or to regard the voluntary
commission of a crime in any different way
from that in which we treat or regard the
involuntary catching of a disease, The man
who committed the crime could not, they


FREE WILL 215

say, have helped committing it any more
than the other man could have helped
catching the disease ; both events were
equally inevitable; and though both may
of course be great misfortunes, though both
may have very bad consequences and equally
bad ones there is no justification whatever,
they say, for the distinction we make between
them when we say that the commission of
the crime was wrong, or that the man was
morally to blame for it, whereas the catching
of the disease was not wrong and the man
was not to blame for it. And this conclusion, .
again, will really follow if by " could not,"
we mean " would not, even if he had willed
to avoid it." But the point I want to make
is, that it follows only if we make this
assumption. That is to say, the mere fact
that the man would have succeeded in
avoiding the crime, if he had chosen (which
is certainly often true), whereas the other
man would not have succeeded in avoiding
the disease, even if he had chosen (which is
certainly also often true) gives an ample
justification for regarding and treating the
two cases differently. It gives such a


216 ETHICS

justification, because, where the occurrence
of an event did depend upon the will, there,
by acting on the will (as we may do by
blame or punishment) we have often a
reasonable chance of preventing similar
events from recurring in the future ; whereas,
where it did not depend upon the will, we
have no such chance. We may, therefore,
fairly say that those who speak and think,
as if a man who brings about a misfortune
voluntarily ought to be treated and regarded
in exactly the same way as one who brings
about an equally great misfortune in-
voluntarily, are speaking and thinking as if
it were not true that we ever should have
acted differently, even if we had willed to
do so. And that is why it is extremely
important to insist on the absolute certainty
of the fact that we often really should have
acted differently, if we had willed differently.
There is, therefore, much reason to think
that when we say that we could have done
a thing which we did not do, we often mean
merely that we should have done it, if we
had chosen. And if so, then it is quite
certain that, in this sense, we often really


FREE WILL 217

could have done what we did not do, and
that this fact is in no way inconsistent with
the principle that everything has a cause.
And for my part I must confess that I cannot
feel certain that this may not be all that
we usually mean and understand by the
assertion that we have Free Will ; so that
those who deny that we have it are really
denying (though, no doubt, often uncon-
sciously) that we ever should have acted
differently, even if we had willed differently.
It has been sometimes held that this is what
we mean ; and I cannot find any conclusive
argument to the contrary. And if it is what
we mean, then it absolutely follows that we
really have Free Will, and also that this fact
is quite consistent with the principle that
everything has a cause ; and it follows also
that our theory will be perfectly right, when
it makes right and wrong depend on what
we could have done, if we had chosen.

But, no doubt, there are many people who
will say that this is not sufficient to entitle
us to say that we have Free Will ; and
they will say this for a reason, which certainly
has some plausibility, though I cannot


218 ETHICS

satisfy myself that it is conclusive. They
will say, namely : Granted that we often
should have acted differently, if we had
chosen differently, yet it is not true that
we have Free Will, unless it is also often
true in such cases that we could have chosen
differently. The question of Free Will has
been thus represented as being merely the
question whether we ever could have chosen,
what we did not choose, or ever can choose,
what, in fact, we shall not choose. And
since there is some plausibility in this con-
tention, it is, I think, worth while to point
out that here again it is absolutely certain
that, in two different senses, at least, we
often could have chosen, what, in fact, we
did not choose ; and that in neither sense
does this fact contradict the principle of
causality.

The first is simply the old sense over
again. If by saying that we could have
done, what we did not do, we often mean
merely that we should have done it, if we
had chosen to do it, then obviously, by
saying that we could have chosen to do
it, we may mean merely that we should


FREE WILL 219

have so chosen, if we had chosen to make
the choice. And I think there is no doubt
it is often true that we should have chosen
to do a particular thing if we had chosen
to make the choice ; and that this is a very
important sense in which it is often in our
power to make a choice. There certainly
is such a thing as making an effort to induce
ourselves to choose a particular course ; and
I think there is no doubt that often if we
had made such an effort, we should have made
a choice, which we did not in fact make.

And besides this, there is another sense in
which, whenever we have several different
courses of action in view, it is possible for
us to choose any one of them ; and a sense
which is certainly of some practical import-
ance, even if it goes no way to justify us
in saying that we have Free Will. This
sense arises from the fact that in such cases
we can hardly ever know for certain before-
hand, which choice we actually shall make ;
and one of the commonest senses of the
word " possible " is that in which we call
an event " possible " when no man can
know for certain that it will not happen. It


220 ETHICS

follows that almost, if not quite always,
when we make a choice, after considering
alternatives, it was possible that we should
have chosen one of these alternatives, which
we did not actually choose ; and often, of
course, it was not only possible, but highly
probable, that we should have done so.
And this fact is certainly of practical import-
ance, because many people are apt much
too easily to assume that it is quite certain
that they will not make a given choice,
which they know they ought to make, if it
were possible ; and their belief that they
will not make it tends, of course, to prevent
them from making it. For this reason it is
important to insist that they can hardly
ever know for certain with regard to any
given choice that they will not make it.

It is, therefore, quite certain (1) that we
often should have acted differently, if we had
chosen to ; (2) that similarly we often should
have chosen differently, if we had chosen so
to choose ; and (8) that it was almost always
possible that we should have chosen differ-
ently, in the sense that no man could know
tor certain that we should not so choose.


FREE WILL 221

All these three things are farts, and all of
them are quite consistent with the principle
of causality. Can anybody undertake to
say for certain that none of these three facts
and no combination of them will justify us
in saying that we have Free Will ? Or,
suppose it granted that we have riot Free
Will, unless it is often true that we could
have chosen, what we did not choose : Can
any defender of Free Will, or any opponent
of it, show conclusively that what he means
by " could have chosen " in this proposition,
is anything different from the two certain
facts, which I have numbered (2) and (3),
or some combination of the two ? Many
people, no doubt, will still insist that these
two facts alone are by no means sufficient
to entitle us to say that we have Free Will :
that it must be true that we were able to
choose, in some quite other sense. But
nobody, so far as I know, has ever been
able to tell us exactly what that sense is.
For my part, I can find no conclusive argu-
ment to show either that some such other
sense of " can " is necessary, or that it is
not. And, therefore, this chapter must


222 ETHICS

conclude with a doubt. It is, I think,
possible that, instead of saying, as our
theory said, that an action is only right,
when it produces consequences as good as
any which would have followed from any other
action which the agent would have done, if
he had chosen, we should say instead that
it is right whenever and only when the agent
could not have done anything which would
have produced better consequences: and
that this " could not have done " is not
equivalent to " would not have done, if he
had chosen," but is to be understood in the
sense, whatever it may be, which is sufficient
to entitle us to say that we have Free Will.
If so, then our theory would be wrong, just
to this extent.


CHAPTER VII

INTRINSIC VALUE

THE main conclusions, at which we have
arrived so far with regard to the theory
stated in Chapters I and II, may be briefly
summed up as follows. I tried to show,
first of all, (1) that to say that a voluntary
action is right, or ought to be done, or is
wrong, is not the same thing as to say that
any being or set of beings whatever, either
human or non-human, has towards it any
mental attitude whatever either an attitude
of feeling, or of willing, or of thinking some-
thing about it ; and that hence no proof
to the effect that any beings, human or non-
human, have any such attitude towards an
action is sufficient to show that it is right,
or ought to be done, or is wrong; and
(2) similarly, that to say that any one thing
or state of things is intrinsically good, or


224 ETHICS

intrinsically bad, or that one is intrinsically
better than another, is also not the same
thing as to say that any being or set of
beings has towards it any mental attitude
whatever either an attitude of feeling, or
of desiring, or of thinking something about
it : and hence that here again no proof to
the effect that any being or set of beings
has some such mental attitude towards a
given thing or state of things is ever sufficient
to show that it is intrinsically good or bad.
These two points are extremely important,
because the contrary view is very commonly
held, in some form or other, and because
(though this is not always seen), whatever
form it be held in, it is absolutely fatal to
one or both of two very fundamental prin-
ciples, which our theory implies. In many
of their forms such views are fatal to the
principle (1) that no action is ever both right
and wrong; and hence also to the view
that there is any characteristic whatever
which always belongs to right actions and
never to wrong ones ; and in all their forms
they are fatal to the principle, (2) that if
it is once the duty of any being to do an


INTRINSIC VALUE 225

action whose total effects will be A
rather than one whose total effects will
be B, it must always be the duty of any
being to do an action whose total effects
will be precisely similar to A rather than
one whose total effects will be precisely
similar to B, if he has to choose between
them.

I tried to show, then, first of all, that
these two principles may be successfully
defended against this first line of attack
the line of attack which consists in saying
(to put it shortly) that " right " and " good "
are merely subjective predicates. But we
found next that even those who admit and
insist (as many do) that " right " and " in-
trinsically good " are not subjective pre-
dicates, may yet attack the second principle
on another ground. For this second principle
implies that the question whether an action
is right or wrong must always depend upon
its actual consequences ; and this view is
very commonly disputed on one or other of
three grounds, namely, (1) that it sometimes
depends merely on the intrinsic nature of
the action, or, hi other words, that certain
H


226 ETHICS

kinds of actions would be absolutely always
right, and others absolutely always wrong,
whatever their consequences might be, or
(2) that it depends, partly or wholly, on the
motive from which the action is done, or
(8) that it depends on the question whether
the agent had reason to expect that its con-
sequences would be the best possible. I
tried, accordingly, to show next that each of
these three views is untrue.

But, finally, we raised, in the last chapter,
a question as to the precise sense in which
right and wrong do depend upon the actual
consequences. And here for the first time
we came upon a point as to which it seemed
very doubtful whether our theory was right.
All that could be agreed upon was that a
voluntary action is right whenever and only
when its total consequences are as good,
intrinsically, as any that would have followed
from any action which the agent could have
done instead. But we were unable to arrive
at any certain conclusion as to the precise
sense in which the phrase " could have "
must be understood if this proposition is to
be true ; and whether, therefore, it is true,


INTRINSIC VALUE 227

if we give to these words the precise sense
which our theory gave to them.

I conclude, then, that the theory stated
in Chapters I and II is right so far as it
merely asserts the three principles (1) That
there is some characteristic which belongs
and must belong to absolutely all right
voluntary actions and to no wrong ones ;
(2) That one such characteristic consists in
the fact that the total consequences of right
actions must always be as good, intrinsically,
as any which it was possible for the agent
to produce under the circumstances (it being
uncertain, however, in what sense precisely
the word " possible " is to be understood),
whereas this can never be true of wrong
ones ; and (8) That if any set of conse-
quences A is once intrinsically better than
another set B, any set precisely similar to
A must always be intrinsically better than
a set precisely similar to B. We have,
indeed, not considered all the objections
which might be urged against these three
principles ; but we have, I think, considered
all those which are most commonly urged,
with one single exception. And I must now

H 3


228 ETHICS

briefly state what this one remaining objec-
tion is, before I go on to point out the respect
in which this theory which was stated in
Chapters I and II, seems to me to be utterly
wrong, in spite of being right as to all these
three points.

This one last objection may be called the
objection of Egoism ; and it consists in
asserting that no agent can ever be under any
obligation to do the action, whose total con-
sequences will be the best possible, if its total
effects upon him, personally, are not the best
possible ; or in other words that it always
would be right for an agent to choose the
action whose total effects upon himself would
be the best, even if absolutely all its effects
(taking into account its effects on other beings
as well) would not be the best. It asserts in
short that it can never be the duty of any
agent to sacrifice his own good to the general
good. And most people, who take this view,
are, I think, content to assert this, without
asserting further that it must always be his
positive duty to prefer his own good to the
general good That is to say, they will admit
that a man may be acting rightly, even if


INTRINSIC VALUE 229

he does sacrifice his own good to the general
good ; they only hold that he will be acting
equally rightly, if he does not. But there are
some philosophers who seem to hold that it
must always be an agent's positive duty to
do what is best for himself always, for in-
stance, to do what will conduce most to his
own " perfection," or his own salvation, or
his own " self-realisation " ; who imply,
therefore, that it would be his duty so to act,
even if the action in question did not have the
best possible consequences upon the whole.

Now the question, whether this view is true,
in either of these two different forms, would,
of course, be of no practical importance, if it
were true that, as a matter of fact, every
action which most promotes the general good
always also most promotes the agent's own
good, and vice versa. And many philosophers
have taken great pains to try to show that
this is the case : some have even tried to show
that it must necessarily be the case. But it
seems to me that none of the arguments which
have been used to prove this proposition really
do show that it is by any means universally
true. A case, for instance, may arise in


230 ETHICS

which, if a man is to secure the best conse-
quences for the world as a whole, it may be
absolutely necessary that he should sacrifice
his own life. And those who maintain that,
even in such a case, he will absolutely always
be securing the greatest possible amount of
good for himself, must either maintain that
in some future life he will receive goods suffi-
cient to compensate him for all that he might
have had during many years of continued life
in this world a view to which there is the
objection that it may be doubted, whether
we shall have any future life at all, and that
it is even more doubtful, what, if we shall,
that life will be like ; or else they must
maintain the following paradox.

Suppose there are two men, A and B, who up
to the age of thirty have lived lives of equal
intrinsic value; and that at that age it becomes
the duty of each of them to sacrifice his life for
the general good. Suppose A does his duty
and sacrifices his life, but B does not, and
continues to live for thirty years more. Those
who hold that the agent's own good always
coincides with the general good, must then
hold that B's sixty years of life, no matter how


INTRINSIC VALUE 231

well the remaining thirty years of it may be
spent, cannot possibly have so much in-
trinsic value as A's thirty years. And surely
this is an extravagant paradox, however
much intrinsic value we may attribute to
those final moments of A's life in which he
does his duty at the expense of his life ; and
however high we put the loss in intrinsic value
to B's life, which arises from the fact that, in
this one instance, he failed to do his duty.
B may, for instance, repent of this one act
and the whole of the remainder of his life
may be full of the highest goods ; and it seems
extravagant to maintain that all the goods
there may be in this last thirty years of it
cannot possibly be enough to make his life
more valuable, intrinsically, than that of A.
I think, therefore, we must conclude that
a maximum of true good, for ourselves, is by
no means always secured by those actions
which are necessary to secure a maximum of
true good for the world as a whole ; and
hence that it is a question of practical im-
portance, whether, in such cases of conflict, it
is always a duty, or rignt, tor us to prefer
our own good to tne general good. And this


282 ETHICS

is a question wbien, so tar as 1 can see, it is
impossible to decide by argument one way or
the other. 11 any person, after clearly con-
sidering the question, comes to the conclusion
that he can never be under any obligation to
sacrifice his own good to the general good,
if they were to conflict, or even that it would
be wrong for him to do so, it is, I think, im-
possible to prove that he is mistaken. But
it is certainly equally impossible for him to
prove that he is not mistaken. And, for my
part, it seems to me quite self-evident that
he is mistaken. It seems to me quite self-
evident that it must always be our duty to do
what will produce the best effects upon the
whole, no matter how bad the effects upon
ourselves may be and no matter how much
good we ourselves may lose by it.

I think, therefore, we may safely reject this
last objection to the principle that it must
always be the duty of every agent to do that
one, among all the actions which he can do
on any given occasion, whose total conse-
quences will have the greatest intrinsic value ;
and we may conclude, therefore, that the
theory stated in Chapters I and II is right as


INTRINSIC VALUE 288

to all the three points yet considered, except
for the doubt as to the precise sense in which
the words " can do " are to be understood
in this proposition. But obviously on any
theory which maintains, as this one does, that
right and wrong depend on the intrinsic value
of the consequences of our actions, it is ex-
tremely important to decide rightly what
kinds of consequences are intrinsically better
or worse than others. And it is on this im-
portant point that the theory in question
seems to me to take an utterly wrong view.
It maintains, as we saw in Chapter II, that
any whole which contains more pleasure is
always intrinsically better than one which
contains less, and that none can be intrinsically
better, unless it contains more pleasure ; it
being remembered that the phrase " more
pleasure," in this statement, is not to be
understood as meaning strictly what it says,
but as standing for any one of five different
alternatives, the nature of which was fully
explained in our first two chapters. And the
last question we have to raise, is, therefore :
Is this proposition true or nof ? and if not,
what is the right answer to the question :
H*


284 ETHICS

What kinds of things are intrinsically better
or worse than others ?

And first of all it is important to be quite
clear as to how this question is related to
another question, which is very liable to be
confused with it : namely the question
whether the proposition which was dis-
tinguished in Chapter I, as forming the first
part of the theory there stated, is true or
not : I mean, the proposition that quantity
of pleasure is a correct criterion of right and
wrong, or that, in this world, it always is,
as a matter of fact, our duty to do the action
which will produce a maximum of pleasure,
or (for this is, perhaps, more commonly held)
to do the action which, so far as we can see,
will produce such a maximum. This latter
proposition has been far more often expressly
held than the proposition that what contains
more pleasure is always intrinsically better
than what contains less , and many people
may be inclined to think they are free to
maintain it, even if they deny that the
intrinsic value of every whole is always in
proportion to the quantity of pleasure it
contains. And so, in a sense, they are;


INTRINSIC VALUE 235

for it is quite possible, theoretically, that
quantity of pleasure should always be a
correct criterion of right and wrong, here
in this world, even if intrinsic value is not
always in exact proportion to quantity of
pleasure. But though this is theoretically
possible, it is, I think, easy to see that it is
extremely unlikely to be the case. For if
it were the case, what it would involve is
this. It would involve our maintaining that,
where the total consequences of any actual
voluntary action have more intrinsic value
than those of the possible alternatives, it
absolutely always happens to be true that
they also contain more pleasure, although,
in other cases, we know that degree of
intrinsic value is by no means always in
proportion to quantity of pleasure contained.
And, of course, it is theoretically possible
that this should be so : it is possible that
the total consequences of actual voluntary
actions should form a complete exception to
the general rule : that, in their case, what
has more intrinsic value should absolutely
always also contain more pleasure, although,
in other cases, this is by no means always


286 ETHICS

true : but anybody can see, 1 think, that,
in the absence of strict proof that it is so,
the probabilities are all the other way. It
is, indeed, so far as I can see, quite impossible
absolutely to prove either that it is so or
that it is not so ; because actual actions in
this world are liable to have such an immense
number of indirect and remote consequences,
which we cannot trace, that it is impossible
to be quite certain how the total consequences
of any two actions will compare either in
respect of intrinsic value, or in respect of
the quantity of pleasure they contain. It
may, therefore, possibly be the case that
quantity of pleasure is, as a matter of fact,
a correct criterion of right and wrong, even
if intrinsic value is not always in proportion
to quantity of pleasure contained. But it
is impossible to prove that it is a correct
criterion, except by assuming that intrinsic
value always w in proportion to quantity of
pleasure. And most of those who have held
the former view have, I think, in fact made
this assumption, even if they have not
definitely realised that they were making it.
Is this assumption true, then ? Is it true


INTRINSIC VALUE 287

that one whole will be intrinsically better
than another, whenever and only when it
contains more pleasure, no matter what the
two may be like in gther respects ? It seems
to me almost impossible that any one, who
fully realises the consequences of such a
view, can possibly hold that it is true. It
involves our saying, for instance, that a
world in which absolutely nothing except
pleasure existed no knowledge, no love, no
enjoyment of beauty, no moral qualities
must yet be intrinsically better better ^vorth
creating provided only the total quantity
of pleasure in it were the least bit greater,
than one in which all these things existed
as well as pleasure. It involves our saying
that, even if the total quantity of pleasure
in each was exactly equal, yet the fact that
all the beings in the one possessed in addition
knowledge of many different kinds and a
full appreciation of all that was beautiful or
worthy of love in their world, whereas none
of the beings in the other possessed any of
these things, would give us no reason what-
ever for preferring the former to the latter.
It involves our saying that, for instance, the


238 ETHICS

state of mind of a drunkard, when he is
intensely pleased with breaking crockery, is
just as valuable, in itself just as well worth
having, as that of a man who is fully realising
all that is exquisite in the tragedy of King
Lear, provided only the mere quantity of
pleasure in both cases is the same. Such
instances might be multiplied indefinitely,
and it seems to me that they constitute a
reductio ad absurdum of the view that intrinsic
value is always in proportion to quantity
of pleasure. Of course, here again, the
question is quite incapable of proof either
way. And if anybody, after clearly con-
sidering the issue, does come to the conclusion
that no one kind of enjoyment is ever in-
trinsically better than another, provided
only that the pleasure in both is equally
intense, and that, if we could get as much
pleasure in the world, without needing to
have any knowledge, or any moral qualities,
or any sense of beauty, as we can get with
them, then all these things would be entirely
superfluous, there is no way of proving that
he is wrong. But it seems to me almost
impossible that anybody, who does really


INTRINSIC VALUE 289

get the question clear, should take such a
view ; and, if anybody were to, 1 think it
is self-evident that he would be wrong.

It may, however, be asked : If the matter
is as plain as this, how has it come about
that anybody ever has adopted the view
that intrinsic value is always in proportion
to quantity of pleasure, or has ever argued,
as if it were so ? And I think one chief
answer to this question is that those who
have done so have not clearly realised all
the consequences of their view, partly because
they have been too exclusively occupied
with the particular question as to whether,
in the case of the total consequences of actual
voluntary actions, degree of intrinsic value
is not always in proportion to quantity of
pleasure a question, which, as has been
admitted, is, in itself, much more obscure.
But there is, I think, another reason, which
is worth mentioning, because it introduces
us to a principle of great importance. It
may, in fact, be held, with great plausibility,
that no whole can ever have any intrinsic
value unless it contains some pleasure ; and
it might be thought, at first sight, that this


240 ETHICS

reasonable, and perhaps true, view could
not possibly lead to the wholly unreasonable
one that intrinsic value is always in propor-
tion to quantity of pleasure : it might seem
obvious that to say that nothing can be
valuable without pleasure is a very different
thing from saying that intrinsic value is
always in proportion to pleasure. And it is,
I think, in fact true that the two views are
really as different as they seem, and that
the latter does not at all follow from the
former. But, if we look a little closer, we
may, I think, see a reason why the latter
should very naturally have been thought to
follow from the former.

The reason is as follows. If we say that
no whole can ever be intrinsically good,
unless it contains some pleasure, we are, of
course, saying that if from any whole, which
is intrinsically good, we were to subtract
all the pleasure it contains, the remainder,
whatever it might be, would have no in-
trinsic goodness at all, but must always be
either intrinsically bad, or else intrinsically
indifferent : and this (if we remember our
definition of intrinsic value) is the same


INTRINSIC VALUE 241

thing as to say that this remainder actually
has no intrinsic goodness at all, but always
is either positively bad or indifferent. Let
us call the pleasure which such a whole
contains, A, and the whole remainder, what-
ever it may be, B. We are then saying
that the whole A+B is intrinsically good,
but that B is not intrinsically good at all.
Surely it seems to follow that the intrinsic
value of A+B cannot possibly be greater
than that of A by itself ? How, it may be
asked, could it possibly be otherwise ? How,
by adding to A something, namely B, which
has no intrinsic goodness at all, could we
possibly get a whole which has more intrinsic
value than A ? It may naturally seem to
be self-evident that we could not. But, if
so, then it absolutely follows that we can
never increase the value of any whole what-
ever except by adding pleasure to it : we
may, of course, lessen its value, by adding
other things, e.g. by adding pain ; but we
can never increase it except by adding
pleasure.

Now from this it does not, of course,
follow strictly that the intrinsic value of a


242 ETHICS

whole is always in proportion to the quan-
tity of pleasure it contains in the special
sense in which we have throughout been
using this expression that is to say, as
meaning that it is in proportion to the
excess of pleasure over pain, in one of the
five senses explained in Chapter I. But it
is surely very natural to think that it does.
And it does follow that we must be wrong
in the reasons we gave for disputing this
proposition. It does follow that we must
be wrong in thinking that by adding such
things as knowledge or a sense of beauty
to a world which contained a certain amount
of pleasure, without adding any more pleasure,
we could increase the intrinsic value of that
world. If, therefore, we are to dispute the
proposition that intrinsic* value t* always
in proportion to quantity of pleasure we
must dispute this argument. But the argu-
ment may seem to be almost indisputable.
It has, in fact, been used as an argument in
favour of the proposition that intrinsic value
is always in proportion to quantity of
pleasure, and I think it has probably had
much influence in inducing people to adopt


INTRINSIC VALUE 248

that view, even if they have not expressly
put it in this form.

How, then, can we dispute this argument ?
We might, of course, do so, by rejecting the
proposition that no whole can ever be
intrinsically good, unless it contains some
pleasure; but, for my part, though I don't
feel certain that this proposition is true, I
also don't feel at all certain that it is not
true. The part of the argument which it
seems to me certainly can and ought to be
disputed is another part namely,the assump-
tion that, where a whole contains two factors,
A and B, and one of these, B, has no intrinsic
goodness at all, the intrinsic value of the
whole cannot be greater than that of the
other factor, A. This assumption, I think,
obviously rests on a still more general assump-
tion, of which it is only a special case. The
general assumption is : That where a whole
consists of two factors A and B, the amount
by which its intrinsic value exceeds that of
one of these two factors must always be
equal to that of the other factor. Our
special case will follow from this general
assumption : because it will follow that if


244 ETHICS

B be intrinsically indifferent, that is to say,
if its intrinsic value = 0, then the amount
by which the value of the whole A-fB
exceeds the value of A must also=0, that
is to say, the value of the whole must be
precisely equal to that of A ; while if B be
intrinsically bad, that is to say, if its intrinsic
value is less than 0, then the amount by
which the value of A-fB will exceed that of
A will also be less than 0, that is to say,
the value of the whole will be less than that
of A. Our special case does then follow
from the general assumption ; and nobody,
I think, would maintain that the special
case was true without maintaining that the
general assumption was also true. The
general assumption may, indeed, very natur-
ally seem to be self-evident : it has, I think,
been generally assumed that it is so : and
it may seem to be a mere deduction from
the laws of arithmetic. But, so far as I can
see, it is not a mere deduction from the laws
of arithmetic, and, so far from being self-
evident, is certainly untrue.

Let us see exactly what we are saying, if we
deny it. We are saying that the fact that A


INTRINSIC VALUE 245

and B both exist together, together with the
fact that they have to one another any relation
which they do happen to have (when they
exist together, they always must have some
relation to one another ; and the precise
nature of the relation certainly may in some
cases make a great difference to the value
of the whole state of things, though, perhaps,
it need not in all cases) that these two
facts together must have a certain amount
of intrinsic value, that is to say must he
either intrinsically good, or intrinsically bad,
or intrinsically indifferent, and that the
amount by which this value exceeds the
value which the existence of A would have,
if A existed quite alone, need not be equal
to the value which the existence of B would
have, if B existed quite alone. This is all
that we are saying. And can any one
pretend that such a view necessarily con-
tradicts the laws of arithmetic ? or that it
is self-evident that it cannot be true ? I
cannot see any ground for saying so ; and
if there is no ground, then the argument
which sought to show that we can never
add to the value of any whole except


246 ETHICS*

by adding pleasure to it, is entirely base-


If, therefore, we reject the theory that
intrinsic value is always in proportion to
quantity of pleasure, it does seem as if we
may be compelled to accept the principle
that the amount by which the value of a whole
exceeds that of one of its factors is not neces-
sarily equal to that of the remaining factor
a principle which, if true, is very important
in many other cases. But, though at first
sight this principle may seem paradoxical,
there seems to be no reason why we should
not accept it ; while there are other inde-
pendent reasons why we should accept it
And, in any case, it seems quite clear that
the degree of intrinsic value of a whole is
not always in proportion to the quantity of
pleasure it contains. *

But, if we do reject this theory, what, it
may be asked, can we substitute for it ?
How can we answer the question, what kinds
of consequences are intrinsically better or
worse than others ?

We may, I think, say, first of all, that
fox the same reason for which we have


INTRINSIC VALUE 247

rejected the view that intrinsic value is
always in proportion to quantity of pleasure,
we must also reject the view that it is always
in proportion to the quantity of any other
single factor whatever. Whatever single
kind of thing may be proposed as a measure
of intrinsic value, instead of pleasure
whether knowledge, or virtue, or wisdom,
or love it is, I think, quite plain that it
is not such a measure ; because it is quite
plain that, however valuable any one of
these things may be, we may always add to
the value of a whole which contains any one
of them, not only by adding more of that
one, but also by adding something else instead.
Indeed, so far as I can see, there is no
characteristic whatever which always dis-
tinguishes every whole which has greater
intrinsic value from every whole which has
less, except the fundamental one that it
would always be the duty of every agent
to prefer the better to the worse, if he had
to choose between a pair of actions, of which
they would be the sole effects. And similarly*
so far as I can see, there is no characteristic
whatever which belongs to ail things that


248 ETHICS

are intrinsically good and only to them
except simply the one that they all are
intrinsically good and ought always to be
preferred to nothing at all, if we had to
choose between an action whose sole effect
would be one of them and one which would
have no effects whatever. The fact is that
the view which seems to me to be true is
the one which, apart from theories, I think
every one would naturally take, namely,
that there are an immense variety of different
things, all of which are intrinsically good;
and that though all these things may perhaps
have some characteristic in common, their
variety is so great that they have none,
which, besides being common to them all,
is also peculiar to them that is to say,
which never belongs to anything which is
intrinsically bad or indifferent. All that
can, I think, be done by way of making
plain what kinds of things are intrinsically
good or bad, and what are better or worse
than others, is to classify some of the chief
kinds of each, pointing out what the factors
are upon which their goodness or badness
depends. . And I think this is one of the


INTRINSIC VALUE 249

most profitable things which can be done
in Ethics, and one which has been too much
neglected hitherto. But I have not space
to attempt it here.

I have only space for two final remarks.
The first is that there do seem to be two
important characteristics, which are common
to absolutely all intrinsic goods, though not
peculiar to them. Namely (1) it does seem
as if nothing can be an intrinsic good unless
it contains both some feeling and also some
other form of consciousness ; and, as we have
said before, it seems possible that amongst
the feelings contained must always be some
amount of pleasure. And (2) it does also
seem as if every intrinsic good must be a com-
plex whole containing a considerable variety
of different factors as if, for instance, nothing
so simple as pleasure by itself, however intense,
could ever be any good. But it is important
to insist (though it is obvious) that neither of
these characteristics is peculiar to intrinsic
goods : they may obviously also belong to
things bad and indifferent. Indeed, as regards
the first, it is not only true that many wholes
which contain both feeling and some other


250 ETHICS

form of consciousness are intrinsically bad ;
but it seems also to be true that nothing can
be intrinsically bad, unless it contains some
feeling.

The other final remark is that we must be
very careful to distinguish the two questions
(1) whether, and in what degree, a thing is
intrinsically good and bad, and (2) whether,
and in what degree, it is capable of adding to
or subtracting from the intrinsic value of a
whole of which it forms a part, from a third,
entirely different question, namely (8) whether,
and in what degree, a thing is useful and has
good effects, or harmful and has bad effects.
All three questions are very liable to be con-
fused, because, in common life, we apply the
names " good " and " bad " to things of all
three kinds indifferently : when we say that
a thing is " good " we may mean either (1)
that it is intrinsically good or (2) that it adds
to the value of many intrinsically good wholes
or (8) that it is useful or has good effects ; and
similarly when we say that a thing is bad we
may mean any one of the three corresponding
things. And such confusion is very liable to
lead to mistakes, of which the following are,


INTRINSIC VALUE 251

I think, the commonest. In the first place,
people are apt to assume with regard to
things, which really are very good indeed in
senses (1) or (2), that they are scarcely any
good at all, simply because they do not seem
to be of much use that is to say, to lead to
further good effects ; and similarly, with
regard to things which really are very bad in
senses (1) or (2), it is very commonly assumed
that there cannot be much, if any, harm in
them, simply because they do not seem to
lead to further bad results. Nothing is com-
moner than to find people asking of a good
thing : What use is it ? and concluding that,
if it is no use, it cannot be any good ; or
asking of a bad thing : What harm does it do ?
and concluding that if it does no harm, there
cannot be any harm in it. Or, again, by a
converse mistake, of things which really are
very useful, but are not good at all in senses
(1) and (2), it is very commonly assumed that
they must be good in one or both of these two
senses. Or again, of things, which really are
very good in senses (1) and (2), it is assumed
that, because they are good, they cannot
possibly do harm. Or finally, of things,


252 ETHICS

which are neither intrinsically good nor useful,
it is assumed that they cannot be any good
at all, although in fact they are very good in
sense (2). All these mistakes are liable to
occur, because, in fact, the degree of goodness
or badness of a thing in any one of these three
senses is by no means always in proportion
to the degree of its goodness or badness in
either of the other two ; but if we are careful
to distinguish the three different questions,
they can, I think, all be avoided.


NOTE ON BOOKS

IF the reader wishes to form an impartial judgment
as to what the fundamental problems of Ethics really
are, and what is the true answer to them, it is of the
first importance that he should not confine himself to
reading works of any one single type, but should realise
what extremely different sorts of things have seemed
to different writers, of acknowledged reputation, to be
the most important things to be said about the subject.
For this purpose he should, I think, read, if possible, and
compare with one another, aU of the following works :

1. Some of the dialogues of Plato (translated by
Jowett). Among the shorter dialogues the Protagoras,
the Qorgias, and the Philebus deal almost exclusively
with fundamental ethical questions, and may be taken
as typical examples of Plato's method of dealing with
Ethics ; but the reader should, if possible, read also
the whole of the Republic, because, though, in the main,
it is concerned with points of comparative detail, it
contains, in various places, discussions which are of
great importance for understanding Plato's general view.

2. Aristotle's Nicomachean Ethics. (There are several
English translations.)

3. Hume's Enquiry concerning the Principles of Moral*.

4. Kant's Fundamental Principles of the MetaphysiG
of Morals. (Translated, along with other works, under
the title Kan?* Theory of Ethics, by T. K. Abbott:
Longmans, Green & Go.)

5. John Stuart Mill's Utilitarianism.

6. Henry Sidgwick's Methods of Ethics (Miiomillan
& Co.).


254 ETHICS

*

7. Herbert Spencer's Data of Ethics (forming the first
part of his two volumes on The Principles of Ethics,
but also published separately).

8. T. H. Green's Prolegomena to Ethics (Clarendon
Press).

I have selected these works as being enough, but not
more than enough, to give a sufficient idea of the
extremely different way in which writers, who are still
considered by many people to be among the best worth
reading on the subject, nave dealt with it. No doubt,
in some cases, other works, equally well worth reading,
and equally typical of the sort of differences I want to
emphasise, might be substituted for some of those I
have mentioned ; but these are, I think, as good an any
for the purposes of illustration, and hardly one of them
could be omitted without serious loss, unless some other
work, typical of the same method of treatment, were
substituted for it.

For guidance in his further reading, so far as writers
no longer living are concerned, the reader may be referred
to Sidgwick's Outlines of the History of Ethics (Mac in ill an
& Co.), from which he will be able to judge what other
writers it is likely to be most profitable for him to study,
and which is also well worth reading on its own account.
And, if he wishes to become acquainted with the
principal works on Ethics, which have been written by
writers still living, I think I can hardly do better than
recommend him to read, first of all, Dr. Hastings Hash-
dall's Theory of Good and Evil (Clarendon Press, 1907).
This book will, I think, give a fair idea of the sort of
questions which are still being discussed at the present
day, and it also contains references to the most important
works of other living writers, sufficient to enable the
reader to make his own choice of further reading.

For further explanation of the views advocated in the
present work the reader may be referred to the author's
Principia Ethlca (Cambridge University Press, 1903),
which presents the same general view in a rather different
form, and which also contains discussions on various
points entirely omitted here from lack of space.


INDEX


Adultery, 83

Approval, ambiguity of, 119-20
feeling of, 90, 94

Balance of pleasure, 25
Beauty, 23?

Better, ambiguity of, 63-4
14 intrinsically," 57-8

Can, meanings of. 197-222
Causality, 208-11
CUss of actions, 82-4, 133-4
Command, 146
Commandments, Ten, 146
Could, 30

meanings of, 197-222
Crime and disease, 215-8
Criterion, 43, 234-6

Desire, and good, 159-60, 164-5

and pleasure, 159-60
Disease and crime, 215-16
Duty. 16

and expediency, 172-4

and good, 169

and right, 31-8

Egoism. 228-32
Equivalence, 61
Ethics, fundamental questions of,

8-9

and Psychology, 130-2
Expediency, 172-4
Expression and meaning, 125


Fatalism, 213

Feeling, and good, 167-8, 249

and opinion, 94, 119-20
Forbid, 145
Free Will, 202-4, 210-11

, 19, 20, 149, 151, 154
" ambiguity of, 69-71, 181,
250-2

and desire. 159-tiO, 164-5
and feeling, 157-69
" for its own sake," 73-6
" general " and " private," 229-

32

** intrinsically," 65-6
and pleasure, 233-46
and right, 65-6, 72-3, 168-9
" ultimate," 73-6
Goods, variety of intrinsic, 248

Intrinsic. Set Better, Good,
Value


Justice, 1'
Know!


adfcuntlbaiani* otyieour*,


250


INDEX


Meaning and expression, 125
Moral judgments, different kinds
of, 185-90

origin of, 115-3

umrrtainty of, 128-8, 190-1
Moral rules, unconditional, 53-6,

universal and general, 175-9
Motive*, 182-90
Murder, 82-3, 175, 178

Opinion, and feeling, 94, 119-20

and knowledge, 125-8
Ought, and commands, 146-155

and rigbt, 31-8

Pain, excesft of, over rjeasure, 22

Perfection, 229

PIa<ure, as criterion of right,

and desire, 159-60
excess of, over pain, 21
maximum of, 25
value of, 233-246
Possibility, meanings of, 197-222

Reason, 150, 151

Right, and actual consequences,
190-5


Right, criterion of, 43-4, 234-ft
and duty 31-8
equally, 33
and flood, 72, 168-9
and motives, 182-90
and ought, 31-8
and wrong, 31-8,80-1

Salvation, 229
Self, " True," 150
Self-roalmtion, 229
Subjective, 225

Useful, 250-2
Utilitarianism, 77-8

Value, ambiguity of. 72

"intrinsic," 57-8, 64, 72, 161
Virtue, 247
Voluntary, denned, 13-6

Will, Free, defined, 202-4

and ought, 145, 155

" Pure," 150

" Universal," 150
Wisdom, 247
Wrong. 5 Rigbt.


i'riiited io Great Britain by The Hiverclde f rt, Edinburgh


o
